                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    PRODUCT RECALLS, IMPERFECT INFORMATION, AND SPILLOVER EFFECTS:
      LESSONS FROM THE CONSUMER RESPONSE TO THE 2007 TOY RECALLS

                                        Seth M. Freedman
                                     Melissa Schettini Kearney
                                         Mara Lederman

                                        Working Paper 15183
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15183


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2009




We gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments of Severin Borenstein, Jonathan Guryan, Judy Hellerstein,
Ginger Jin, Arik Levinson, Soohyung Lee, Nuno Limao, and Abigail Wozniak as well as seminar participants
at the University of Maryland, Rotman School of Management, the Energy Institute at U.C. Berkeley,
Georgetown, UC-Davis, UC-Irvine, and University of Michigan. We thank Danny Kim at NPD for
answering our questions about the toy sales data and Kevin Mak at the Rotman Finance Lab for his
assistance with assembling the stock price data. Molly Reckson provided capable research assistance.
Financial support from the AIC Institute for Corporate Citizenship at the Rotman School of Management
is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Seth M. Freedman, Melissa Schettini Kearney, and Mara Lederman. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Product Recalls, Imperfect Information, and Spillover Effects: ¸˛Lessons from the Consumer
Response to the 2007 Toy Recalls
Seth M. Freedman, Melissa Schettini Kearney, and Mara Lederman
NBER Working Paper No. 15183
July 2009
JEL No. D12,D18,D8,H1,K0,L15,L2,L81

                                               ABSTRACT

In 2007, the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) issued 276 recalls of toys and other children's
products, a sizeable increase from previous years. The overwhelming majority of the 2007 toy recalls
were due to high levels of lead content and almost all of these toys were manufactured in China. This
period of recalls was characterized by substantial media attention to the issue of consumer product
safety and eventually led to the passage of the Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act of 2008.
This paper examines consumer demand for toys following this wave of dangerous toy recalls. The
data reveal four key findings. First, the types of toys that were involved in recalls in 2007 experienced
above average losses in Christmas season sales. Second, Christmas sales of infant/preschool toys produced
by manufacturers who did not experience any recalls were about 25 percent lower in 2007 as compared
to earlier years, suggesting industry-wide spillovers. Third, a manufacturer’s recall of one type of toy
did not lead to a disproportionate loss in sales of their other types of toys. And, finally, recalls of toys
that are part of a brand had either positive or negative effects on the demand for other toys in the property,
depending on the nature of the toys involved. Our examination of the stock market performance of
toy firms over this period also reveals industry wide spillovers. The finding of sizable spillover effects
of product recalls to non-recalled products and non-recalled manufacturers has important implications
for regulation policy.


Seth M. Freedman                                      Mara Lederman
Department of Economics                               Joseph L. Rotman School of Management
University of Maryland                                University of Toronto
3105 Tydings Hall                                     105 St. George Street
College Park, MD 20742                                Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E6 Canada
freedman-s@econ.umd.edu                               Mara.Lederman@Rotman.Utoronto.Ca

Melissa Schettini Kearney
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
kearney@econ.umd.edu
I. Introduction

       In the presence of asymmetric information, markets may allocate goods in a less than

optimal way. Concern that consumers are imperfectly informed about certain product attributes – in

particular, the level of risk posed by a product - has lead to government intervention in the

consumer product market in the form of product safety regulation. In this context, government

regulation is designed to both remove dangerous products from stores and homes as well as provide

firms with incentives to invest in product safety. In the U.S., the majority of consumer products are

regulated by the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC). The CPSC relies almost exclusively

on a process of standards and recalls - as opposed to other policy options, such as information

disclosure requirements or fines. 1 Although both the CPSC as well as other regulatory agencies rely

on the recall process, there is very little direct or detailed evidence about whether and how

consumers react to recall announcements. Such evidence is important because the extent to which

the recall mechanism provides firms with incentives to invest in risk reduction depends, in large part,

on the nature of the consumer response. 2

       In this paper, we investigate how consumers responded to a recent wave of toy industry

recalls. In 2007, the CPSC issued 276 recalls of toys and other children's products, as compared to

152 such recalls in 2006, 171 in 2005, and 121 in 2004. This series of product recalls is noteworthy

for several reasons. First, it represents a greater than 80 percent increase in the number of recalled

children's items from 2006 to 2007 and a much larger increase than that which is observed in other


1        Viscussi (1984) provides an institutional overview of the CPSC within the conceptual
framework of the economics of product safety regulation.
2        Jarrell and Peltzman (1985) describe the multiple ways in which a product recall can lead to
capital market losses. These include the direct costs of the recall in terms of inventory losses and
refunds; costs of potential litigation; costs of changes in practices to improve quality/repair
consumer goodwill; and lost profits due to decreases in consumer demand. All of these can provide
incentives for firms to make costly investments in product safety.

                                                                                                     2
product categories over this period. 3 Second, it ultimately resulted in the passage of new federal

legislation – the Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act – in early 2008. Finally, in surveys and

interviews conducted at the time of the recalls, consumers clearly indicated that they intended to

change their buying behavior in response to these recalls. 4

        Using the most comprehensive data available for this industry, we document how these

recalls affected toy sales in the months following the recall announcements. It is important to note

that in contrast to, say, product ratings, recalls do not provide consumers with direct information

about the safety of the products available in the market since any products that are actively selling

when they are recalled are immediately removed from retailers’ shelves. Moreover, in many cases,

recalls are issued for products that are no longer active in the marketplace. 5 To the extent that there

is a consumer response to a recall, this response will indicate that consumers are using the

information contained in the recall to update their expectations of the safety of other products in the

market. Thus, any demand response that we measure can be considered a “spillover effect”. The

goal of our empirical analysis is to document the level at which these spillover effects are observed

in order to learn about how consumers appear to draw inferences about product safety. 6


3        For example, the number of recalled household products and sports and recreation items in
2007 both remained similar to their levels in previous years. The number of recalled household
products was 121, 122, 121, and 132 in 2004, 2005, 2006, and 2007, respectively. The number of
recalled sports and recreation items in these four years were 50, 76, 58, and 64.
4       In a Harris Poll of 2,565 adults in the United States conducted in October 2007, 33 percent
of respondents said that they would buy fewer toys during the 2007 holiday season due to recent
safety recalls and 45 percent said they would avoid toys from China. The poll also found a high
awareness of recent toy recalls in the U.S., with 91 percent reporting that they had heard about the
issue.
5        This is true in our setting. Information contained in the CPSC recall announcements
indicates that 78% of the toys that were recalled in 2007 were not actively selling at the time of their
recall.
6       We would have liked to undertake an analysis of consumers’ willingness to pay for a
reduction in lead exposure risk, conducting a study similar in spirit to Davis (2004). In this paper,
Davis estimates a hedonic home price function with respect to pediatric leukemia risk. In response
to the revelation of lead paint in children’s toys manufactured in China, a potential consumer
                                                                                                      3
        Two features of our setting make an examination of spillover effects in this context

particularly interesting. First, the majority of the 2007 toy recalls involved risks associated with a

common industry practice of producing in China and related specifically to the use of paint with

high concentrations of lead. This raises the possibility that consumers took these announcements as

information about the safety of an industry-wide practice (rather than as information about the

safety of any particular manufacturer’s toys) and increases the likelihood that non-recalling firms

might also experience demand losses. Second, licensing and branding are extremely common in the

toy industry, with licensed products accounting for approximately one quarter of toys in the industry

(Clark, 2007). Brands (such as Fisher-Price’s “Laugh and Learn” line) and trademarked characters

(such as “Dora the Explorer”) are often shared across different types of toys as well as across toys

produced by different manufacturers. Not only does the prevalence of branding and licensing create

another level at which consumers may draw inferences but they also raise the possibility that

imperfect information may prevent consumers from accurately acting upon the inferences that they

draw. For example, following a recall of certain toys produced by Mattel, consumers may infer that

all Mattel toys are less safe. However, if consumers do not know that toys produced under the

Fisher-Price brand are, in fact, produced by Mattel, they will not be able to accurately act upon that

inference. While we will not be able to test between imperfect information and various levels of

inferences as explanations for the patterns we observe, we discuss the implications of each for both

policy formulation and firm strategy.




response is to shift purchases to toys made outside of China, perhaps with a price premium.
Unfortunately we do not observe enough toys made outside of China to conduct such an analysis in
this paper. It is also possible that consumers shifted purchases to toys that they incorrectly believe to
be made outside of China – e.g., toys sold at expensive, boutique-style stores. We are not able to
identify such toys in our data.
                                                                                                       4
        Our empirical analysis uses data on monthly Infant/Preschool toy sales from January 2005

to December 2007 inclusive. 7 Our empirical approach attempts to account for several important

institutional features of the toy industry. In particular, the fact that toy sales are highly seasonal

means that any demand response to a recall at any point in the year is most likely to occur at

Christmas. However, the fact that the popularity of any particular toy or type of toy may be short-

lived means that what is popular one Christmas may not be popular the following year. It is thus

very difficult to establish a single appropriate counterfactual level of sales that is clearly superior to

alternative counterfactual estimates. We therefore carry out several complementary analysis which,

taken together, describe the patterns in the data.        We begin by non-parametrically estimating

differences between the monthly pattern of sales in 2007 and in 2006. Then, we investigate the

relationship between having a recall during 2007 and Christmas 2007 sales. We follow standard

industry practice and classify individual toys into “categories” (groupings of similar toys) and

“properties” (groupings of toys that share a common brand or trademark) and estimate how recalls

affected sales at the level of the manufacturer-category as well as the level of the property-category.

Finally, we conclude by carrying out in-depth studies of the largest and most widely publicized

recalls from 2007.

        Several key findings emerge from our analysis. First, the types of toys that were involved in

recalls in 2007 experienced lower 2007 Christmas season sales. The results of our OLS regressions

indicate that conditional sales of toys in a manufacturer-category group that had a recall were lower

by about 30 percent. In addition, in the three high profile recalls that we investigate in detail, the

manufacturer’s Christmas season sales in the affected property-category -- where a property is

defined as a brand or license -- fell substantially. Thus, consumers appear to be using the


7      As we explain in greater detail in Section III, toys are divided into 13 “supercategories”
which broadly group similar types of toys together. Infant/Preschool is the largest supercategory
                                                                                                        5
information contained in recall announcements to draw inferences about the safety of similar toys

produced by the manufacturer. We consider the role of media coverage and find that newspaper

coverage of recalls plays an important role in eliciting a demand response.

        Second, conditional Christmas sales of Infant/Preschool toys produced by manufacturers

who did not experience any recalls were about 25 percent lower in 2007 than in 2005. 8 Thus, the

recalls appear to have had negative spillovers to the industry as a whole. Consistent with consumers’

claims in surveys and in the media, this suggests that the specific recalls that took place led

consumers to draw inferences about the overall safety of toys in the market.

        Third, a manufacturer’s recall of one type of toy did not disproportionately decrease its sales

of other types of toys. In fact, relative to manufacturers who had no recalls at all, manufacturers

who experienced recalls had higher sales in their unaffected categories. This suggests that either

consumers do not draw inferences from a manufacturer’s recall of one type of toy about the safety

of unrelated toys produced by that manufacturer or that they do not know which toys are produced

by which manufacturer. Alternatively, consumers might not correctly identify or remember the

manufacturer named in a recall. The fact that sales appear to increase in a manufacturer’s unaffected

categories might indicate that large diversified toy manufacturers are making investments in

rebuilding their overall reputation (and thereby offsetting any negative inferences consumers may

draw) or taking steps to shift demand to their brands or product lines that were not involved in

recalls (and thereby exploiting consumer’s imperfect information). We present some descriptive

evidence on firm diversification in relation to this conjecture.



and it experienced the most recalls.
8        Contrasting this to changes in other industries – for example, video game sales which
increased about 43 percent between 2006 and 2007 and book sales which were essentially flat -
suggests that much of this observed decrease in sales reflects an industry-wide decease in demand in
response to these recalls and not simply a response to macroeconomic conditions.
                                                                                                     6
        Finally, with respect to the role of licensing, we find that recalls of toys that are part of a

property may have positive or negative effects on the demand for other toys in the property. We

hypothesize that the degree of similarity between the recalled toys and other toys in the property

may affect the direction of the response. Specifically, when toys are very similar, consumers are

both more likely to draw inferences about the safety of other toys in the property as well as more

likely to be imperfectly informed about which toys were actually involved in the recall. In contrast,

when the toys are less similar, strong tastes for a particular brand may lead to positive shifting within

the property.

        Our findings have implications for both policy design as well as firm strategy. The fact that

manufacturers experience above average sales losses in the category or category-property that

experienced a recall indicates that recalls do impose costs on firms in the form of reduced demand.

These costs will provide some incentive for firms to invest in product safety. 9 However, the fact that

large diversified manufacturers appear to be able offset demand losses in affected categories with

demand increases in other categories suggests that for sufficiently large firms, the demand

consequences of a recall may not be very large. The incentives provided by potential demand losses

will depend on the extent to which firms have to undertake costly investments to prevent losses on

unaffected categories. In addition, the prevalence of branding and licensing may result in consumers

being imperfectly informed about which toys are produced by which manufacturer and may

attenuate spillover effects at the manufacturer level. This suggests that the current process of recalls

may need to be supplemented with additional information provision that enables consumers to

better identify which toys are produced by whom. This also suggests that manufacturers may have


9       Note that it would be extremely difficult, if not impossible, to empirically demonstrate that
market incentives are sufficient to insure the optimal level of quality. Furthermore, once one allows
for heterogeneous willingness to pay for risk across consumers, a consideration of what would be

                                                                                                       7
incentives to limit association between their brands and publicize any recalls that do occur under a

particular brand rather than the manufacturer name.

        This paper contributes to two related literatures. First, it is closely related to an existing –

though mostly 20 year old - literature that measures the stock market response to recalls. 10 The

stock market response reflects the total costs that recalls impose on firms. Much, though not all, of

this literature focuses on drug and automobile recalls due to the high frequency of recalls in these

industries. This literature includes Jarrell and Peltzman (1985), Pruitt and Peterson (1986), Hoffer,

Pruitt and Reilly (1988), Dranove and Olsen (1994), Barber and Darrough (1996), and Chu, Lin and

Prather (2005). With the exception of Hoffer, Pruitt and Reilly (1988), all of the papers find

statistically significant negative stock price reactions to the recalls. Several of the papers compare

the drop in shareholder wealth in response to the recalls to estimates of the direct costs of the recalls

and find that the former exceeds the latter. They speculate that this excess loss is due to a loss of

“goodwill”; this provides indirect evidence that the consumer response to recalls may be significant.

Crafton, Hoffer and Reilly (1981) and and Reilly and Hoffer (1983) directly measure the demand

response to automobile recalls. 11

        Second, this paper is related to a growing empirical literature that investigates the effects of

government-mandated information disclosure programs. Information disclosure policies represent


the optimal level of product safety becomes even more complicated. We explicitly avoid making any
such claims.
10       There is also a closely related literature that estimates the stock market to airline crashes.
This literature includes Chalk (1987), Chance and Ferris (1987), Mitchell and Maloney (1988)
Borenstein and Zimmerman (1988), and Bosch, Eckard and Singal (1998). Borenstein and
Zimmerman (1988) also investigate the impact of crashes on demand and find little or no effect of
an accident on demand.
11       Their findings are similar to ours in that they find that following a recall, there is a reduction
in demand for the model type subject to the recall as well as to similar sized cars produced by other
manufacturers. They do not find evidence of negative demand spillovers to other cars produced by
the same manufacturer.

                                                                                                         8
an alternative way to address the problems that arise from informational asymmetries and they take a

variety of forms. Economists have studied the impact of information disclosure policies on

consumer and firm behavior in a variety of contexts, including restaurant hygiene grade cards (Jin

and Leslie, 2003); nutritional labeling requirements (Mathios, 2000); mercury and fish consumption

advisories (Shimshack et al. 2007); SEC financial disclosure requirements (Greenstone, Oyer, and

Vissing-Jorensen, 2006); and environmental safety contexts, such as requirements on community

water suppliers to disclose information on chemicals in drinking water (Bennear and Olmstead,

2008). Fung, Graham, and Weil (2007)and Winston (2008) review and synthesize this research and

the conditions under which information disclosure programs affect consumer and/or firm behavior

in ways that achieve the underlying policy objectives. 12

        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.           Section II provides relevant

background information on the toy industry and the recall process. Section III describes the data.

In Section IV, we carry out our empirical analysis of the consumer response to the recalls. In Section

V we present additional considerations. Specifically, we present an empirical examination of the

stock market response to the 2007 toy recalls. We also take up the question of whether consumers

responded to the “Made in China” aspect of the recalled toys. We conclude in Section VI with a

discussion of the implications of our findings for both policy formulation and firm strategy.



II. Institutional background

A. Toy Industry Basics




12        There is a separate literature on quality certification, both voluntary and mandatory. This
mechanism is used to alleviate informational deficiencies in such contexts as educational facilities
and child care facilities. Hotz and Xiao (2008) and Xiao (2008) are recent examples from this
literature.
                                                                                                    9
          In 2005, the U.S. toy industry generated $21.3 billion in retail sales. 13 At both the

manufacturer and retailer levels, the industry is dominated by a small number of large firms. At the

manufacturer level, Mattel and Hasbro together account for roughly 30 percent of the market. 14

The remaining firms are considerably smaller, with the third largest firm accounting for less than

four percent of the market and the tenth largest firm accounting for just over one percent of the

market.

          For analysis purposes, the toy industry is classified into 11 “supercategories” which are

broad groupings of toys with similar uses or purposes. Examples of these supercategories include

”Action Figures and Accessories”, “Arts and Crafts”, “Infant/Preschool” and “Youth electronics”.

Supercategories are further subdivided into finer categories. The Infant/Preschool supercateogry

which we focus on is the largest supercategory in the industry, accounting for slightly more than 14

percent of total industry sales in 2005 (about $3.2 billion). Appendix Table 1 lists the top 30

manufacturers in the Infant/Preschool supercategory based on tabulations of our data (described

below), ranked by 2005 unit market share. Appendix Table 2 lists the 13 categories that make up the

Infant/Preschool group of toys.

          Branding and licensing is quite common in the toy industry. A “property” refers to a set of

toys that share a common brand. The property includes all toys produced by the owner of the brand

as well as all toys produced by firms who have licensed the rights to use the brand.            Broadly

speaking, one can distinguish between two types of properties. The first type encompasses a brand


13       For the sake of comparison, in 2005, the U.S. book industry generated $34.59 billion in sales
while the apparel industry generated $181 billion. Video game hardware and software, which are not
included within the definition of the “traditional” toy industry, generated $10.5 billion in retail sales
(Clark, 2007).
14       Our study does not focus on retailers. But for the curious reader, we note that Wal-Mart,
the largest toy retailer, accounts for almost 30 percent of toy sales. The top three retailers - Wal-
Mart, Toys R Us, and Target - together account for almost 60 percent of sales. As in the case of

                                                                                                      10
that is owned by a toy manufacturer and used on some set of that manufacturer’s toys. The

manufacturer may license that brand to other toy manufacturers -- but often does not -- and/or may

license that brand to firms producing other types of consumer products (for example, bicycles,

children’s’ furniture, or video games). Mattel’s “Laugh & Learn” brand is an example of this type of

property. Mattel’s Fisher-Price division produces approximately 20 different infant toys under the

“Laugh & Learn” brand.        Mattel does not license the “Laugh & Learn” brand to other toy

manufacturers nor does it license it for use on non-toy products. The second type of property

encompasses a brand this is owned by a firm outside of the toy industry and that is licensed to one or

more toy manufacturers. In this case, the property would include all toys which use the licensed

brand or trademark and may include products from several different manufacturers. Examples

include “Spiderman”, owned by Marvel Entertainment and “Dora the Explorer”, owned by

Nickelodeon.

        Toy manufacturers license the rights to use these brands on their products. In some cases, a

single toy manufacturer may obtain the exclusive rights to a brand; in other cases, the brand will be

licensed to several different manufacturers, though the terms of the agreement may stipulate that a

manufacturer has the exclusive rights to use the brand on a particular type of toy. The top properties

in Infant/Preschool toys – based on 2005 unit market shares – are Leappad, Thomas and Friends,

Playskool, Little People, and Little Tykes. Appendix Table 3 shows the top 30 Infant/Preschool toy

properties and their unit and dollar shares of total industry sales, based on tabulations of our data.



B. Toy Recalls from 2004 to 2007




manufacturers, the remaining top 10 retailers are quite small in terms of their contributions to
industry sales, together accounting for only another 8.5 percent.
                                                                                                         11
        The recall process is initiated through one of three channels: a complaint made to the CPSC;

a complaint made to the company whose product is in question; or a field sample or investigation. 15

When the CPSC receives a consumer complaint or is notified of a complaint made to a

manufacturer, they immediately launch an investigation; if the content of the complaint is

confirmed, the agency sends a letter to the company initiating a recall process. Manufacturers,

importers, distributors, and retailers are required to report to the CPSC under Section 15 (b) of the

Consumer Product Safety Act (CPSA) “within 24 hours of obtaining information which reasonably

supports the conclusion that a product does not comply with a safety rule issued under the CPSA, or

contains a defect which could create a substantial risk of injury to the public or presents an

unreasonable risk of serious injury or death, 15 U.S.C. § 2064(b).” 16

        The large increase in the number of recalled toy and children’s products in 2007, as

compared to earlier years, is unique to this category of products. Table 1 reports the number of

recalls per year in major categories of consumer products from 2004 through 2007. The number of

toy recalls was 30, 31, and 38, respectively, for 2004, 2005, and 2006. That number jumped to 82 in

2007. For children’s products the numbers are 42, 64, and 56, with a jump up to 130 in 2007. The

other categories do not show such a discrete increase in 2007.

        We collect details about the toy recalls that took place between 2004 and 2007 from the

CPSC website. For each recall, the CPSC website lists the date of the recall, the product name, the

number of units recalled, the importer, manufacturer, and/or distributor, a description of the


15       This description of the recall process is based heavily on a description provided to us by a
representative of the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) in a telephone conversation in
April 2008.
16       All of the CPSC toy recalls that we examined are listed on the CPSC website as “voluntary”.
Recalls that proceed along the channels described above are considered voluntary. A non-voluntary
recall would mean that the agency has to go through the legal system. The CPSC agent we spoke
with could think of no such example in the past year of toy recalls. Furthermore, she could think of

                                                                                                  12
hazard, details about any reported incidents or injuries, a description of the product to assist in

identifying recalled items, details about where and when the item has been sold, the typical price of

the item, where the item was manufactured, what action individuals who have purchased the item

should take, contact information for further information about the recall, and a picture of the item.

We calculate the “value” of the recall as the price listed times the number of units recalled. In the

event a price range is listed, we take the midpoint in determining the recall value. Finally, we

categorize hazards as choking, entrapment, fire/burn/explosion, impact, laceration or puncture,

lead, magnets, severing, strangulation or suffocation, or toxic (other than lead). Appendix Table 4

lists all of the 2007 recalls and their major features.

        Figure 1 depicts the percent of toy recalls in years 2004 through 2007 due to particular safety

hazards. About 30 percent of recalls in the full sample are due to a lead hazard and 36 percent are

due to a choking hazard. Comparing the earlier and later samples, it is clear that there was a change

in this composition in 2007. Prior to 2007 13 percent of recalls were due to lead and 49 percent

were due to choking; in 2007, these numbers were 52 percent and 20 percent, respectively. 17 Figure

2 depicts the percent of toy recalls that involved a toy manufactured in China. As the large majority

of toys in the U.S. are made in China, it is not surprising that in each year the majority of recalls

involve toys made in China. But there is a noticeable increase in the year 2007, when 95 percent of

recalls involved toys manufactured in China.

        The concern about lead paint in children's toys is in part driven by the concern that young

children put toys in their mouth and are thereby exposed to the lead content of paint. Lead is a

powerful neurotoxin that interferes with the development of the brain and central nervous system as


no instance in which a manufacturer initiated a recall of a product for which a violation had not
been confirmed.


                                                                                                    13
well as the kidney and blood-forming organs. Young children, including developing fetuses, are

considered to be at the greatest risk of adverse health consequences of lead exposure because they

absorb more lead from their environment and because their brain and central nervous system are

still forming. Lead poisoning in children is generally associated with behavioral problems, learning

disabilities, hearing problems and growth retardation. 18 The two primary sources of lead exposure

for the average child are leaded gasoline and lead-based paint. The federal legislation enacted in 2008

requires that surface lead, as in paint, must drop below 90 parts per million by August 2009,

compared to the existing statutory level of 600 parts per million. 19 A statutory limit is also imposed

on internal lead, at 600 ppm by February 2009 and 300 ppm by summer 2009.



III. Data

       To investigate the consumer market response to the 2007 toy recalls, we use sales data for

toys in the Infant/Preschool toy supercategory over the period January 2005 through December

2007. We purchased this data from the NPD Group, self-described as the “single source for toy

market research in the U.S., Europe, and Australia.” The NPD data from the U.S. is based on a

panel of more than three million consumers. 20 The panel is comprised of two sets of consumers: (1)


17       One important difference between a lead hazard and a choking hazard is that a choking
hazard may be discovered through the normal use of the toy while a lead hazard will only be
discovered through testing since the effects of lead on children are observed later in life.
18       Information on the health risks of lead exposure for children are detailed on the National
Safety Commission's webpage, http://www.nsc.org/resources/issues/lead.aspx, most recently accessed on
March 9, 2009.
19       The lead related recalls in 2007 varied in the extent to which they violated this standard.
For example, Mattel’s lead related recalls in August and September of 2007 involved toys with lead
levels that ranged from just over the 600 ppm limit to 110,000 ppms (almost 200 times the
applicable limit).
20       The ideal type of data for this project would be scanner or point-of-sale data collected
directly from retailers. However, that type of data is no longer collected for the U.S. toy industry.
The NPD group previously collected point-of-sale data for the toy industry, but reported to us that
in 2001, Wal-Mart and Toys-R-Us stopped participating in this data collection. The loss of the two
                                                                                                    14
an online panel of consumers who are instructed to record all of their purchases; (2) a panel of

consumers who have scanners in their homes who are supposed to scan everything they buy. From

these two panels, NPD generates a toy level dataset with both actual data from the panels (e.g. the

number of transactions observed for each toy each month, the average price paid) as well as

projected monthly unit and dollar sales figures (for the country). It is the latter measures that we use

in our empirical analysis. After dropping observations for which no manufacturer information is

available, our dataset includes data from a total of 156,524 transactions and 10,847 unique items

over the full period.

        There are three important features of our data. First, the data are generally not reliable at the

item level. Because the data are based on a sample of consumer purchases and because the toy

industry is highly fragmented at the product level, most of the toys in the dataset are only involved

in a small number of transactions (NPD cautions against drawing inferences from cells with fewer

than 35 transactions). In fact, the majority of toys have zero transactions in any given month. 21

Because NPD does not keep records of market exit, we are unable to determine whether zero

transactions indicates that no consumers chose to purchase that toy in a given month or if the toy

was no longer supplied. 22 In the toy industry, new toys are introduced frequently and current toys

are either replaced or updated with new features so exit may be an important consideration in this

data. For these reasons, we have no choice but to aggregate the item level data over time and/or

groups of items. In particular, we focus our empirical investigation on sales at the level of the


biggest retailers essentially negated the usefulness of the scanner data. NPD subsequently switched
to a system of collecting data directly from consumers.
21       In the raw data, 84% of toy-month observations have zero recorded transactions. 75% of
the toys in the data have zero transactions in the final month of our sample suggesting a significant
amount of attrition at the item level.
22       Note that if a toy is recalled due to a faulty design and pulled completely from store shelves,
sales of that particular toy would drop to zero. But in many of the 2007 recalls, only a particular

                                                                                                      15
manufacturer, category, property, and interactions thereof. We examine how the recall of a particular

firm’s toy affects own-manufacturer sales within and outside the category and property of the

recalled toy as well as other manufacturers’ sales within and outside the category and property of the

recalled toy.

        Second, our data does not include consumer level variables. Therefore, though it would be

interesting to explore consumer responses by retailer type or consumer demographics, we are unable

to do so in this paper. Third, toy sales are highly seasonal. Figure 3 shows the percent of annual

sales in dollars in a given month. Roughly half of toy sales occur in the form of Christmas season

purchases. An event-study type methodology is thus inappropriate for analyzing this data because

the demand response to a recall will not occur immediately. We thus focus our analysis on fourth

quarter sales, which include purchases made in October, November, and December of a given year.

We consider both Christmas season to Christmas season changes as well as changes in “adjusted”

Christmas season sales, where the adjustment is a scaling by sales in earlier quarters of the year. We

discuss the advantages and disadvantages of these alternative measures.



IV. How Do Consumers Respond to a Toy Recall?

A. Differences in Seasonal Patterns Across Years

        Given the highly seasonal nature of toy sales, the existence of toy fads, and the time-varying

popularity of particular properties, it is very difficult to establish a single appropriate counterfactual

for the sales that a given manufacturer, category, or property would have experienced at Christmas

in 2007 in the absence of the wave of highly publicized lead recalls. We therefore carry out several

complementary analysis which, taken together, describe the patterns in the data vis a vis the recalls.


production batch of the toy was recalled for having contained elevated levels of lead. Other batches
of the toy would continue to be available to consumers.
                                                                                                       16
We begin by non-parametrically estimating differences between the monthly pattern of sales in 2007

and in 2006.

        Table 2 presents the results of a simple OLS regression of monthly sales at the manufacturer

level as a function of calendar month binary indicators, and interactions between the 2005 and 2007

binary year indicators with the calendar month indicators (January 2006 is the excluded group). This

straightforward analysis is designed to show the seasonality of sales across months of the year and

how that seasonality compares across the three years of data. The regression coefficients show the

same patterns as plotted in Figure 3 above. The coefficients reported in column 1, labeled “main

month effects”, capture the seasonality of year 2006. They indicate a sizeable and statistically

significant increase in sales in March, presumably corresponding to Easter and “spring

break/vacation” purchases, and an even greater increase in the months of Christmas shopping,

November and December in particular. December sales are 164 log points greater than baseline sales

(captured by January 2006).

        The coefficients on the interaction terms between the 2005 year indicator and the calendar

month variables are reported in the second column of Table 2. None of these coefficient estimates is

statistically significant. This indicates that the seasonality of toy sales across months is not

observably different between 2005 and 2006. In sharp contrast, sales followed a different pattern

over the year in 2007. Starting in the spring of 2007, which corresponds to the beginning of the

heightened media attention to prominent lead recalls, sales are lower relative to the baseline than in

earlier years. Most strikingly, in December 2007, relative sales are down by 37.1 log points, or 45

percent.

        We view this as clear evidence of a general, sizable decrease in Infant/Preschool toy sales

during Christmas 2007. Our data to not permit us to determine the extent to which this general

decrease reflects a causal response to the wave of highly-publicized lead recalls. The fact that sales of
                                                                                                      17
other consumer products such as books and video games did not decrease suggests to us that there

is something more than just macroeconomic conditions at play. Furthermore, given that 33 percent

of consumers in the Harris Poll cited above reported that they intended to reduce their toy sales

during the Christmas season as a result of the lead recalls, we find it interesting to know that the data

do reveal a substantial reduction in infant/preschool toy sales.



B. Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX)

        The most comprehensive data on annual household-level expenditures in the United States

is collected by the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX), which is conducted annually by the United

States Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). We utilize data from the 2006 and 2007 Interview Survey

files to examine household expenditures on children’s items during Christmas season 2007 as

compared to fourth quarter expenditures in 2006 and 2005. (The 2006 CEX file contains

information about spending in the fourth quarter of 2005.) The CEX interview survey is designed to

collect data on major items of expense, household characteristics, and income. Each consumer unit

in the sample is interviewed about their previous quarter’s expenditures, reported by month, over a

12-month period. We keep as our analysis sample for a given quarter households that have a

complete calendar quarter (three months) of expenditures recorded.

        The CEX detailed expenditure files include the category “toys, games, arts and crafts, trikes,

and battery powered riders”. Because expenditure amounts are not separately recorded for toys, as

distinct from games, arts and crafts, riders, etc., we can not use this data to look for possible

evidence of a shift from toys to these alternative children’s products. It is also important to

recognize that the CEX provides information about household expenditures on particular categories

of goods. Note that this implies that we observe total household spending on products, or categories

of products, unadjusted for the number of units purchased or product quality.
                                                                                                      18
        Table 3 tabulates mean quarterly expenditures on select categories of spending. Keeping the

aforementioned caveats in mind, it is interesting to note that spending on the category Toys, games, etc.

increases between 2006 quarter 4 and 2007 quarter 4. An increase in expenditures in this category

would be consistent with consumers shifting toward more expensive products, while maintaining or

even decreasing the total number of toys they purchased. One might conjecture that a shift to more

expensive children’s products would be more likely among more educated (or higher income)

households. To consider this possibility, we look separately at households headed by a college

graduate versus an individual with a high school degree or less. Among households with children

that are headed by a non-college graduate (not reported), mean quarterly expenditures in the Toys,

games, etc. category increased 27 percent; among households with children headed by a college

graduate, there was a 38 percent increase, from $122 to $168.


        Another possibility is that children were gifted more clothing or books during Christmas

season 2007 in response to that year’s wave of toy recalls. The CEX data do not show an increase in

expenditures on children’s clothing or a broad reading measure. (The data do not separately identify

children’s books.) Finally, motivated by the above-cited increase in video game sales over this

period, we look at expenditures on television and video equipment. Indeed, the CEX data indicate

an increase in spending on this category of goods. This again suggests that the reduction in the

number of toy purchases we previously observed in the toy sales data is not driven simply by a

reduction in purchases of consumer products during Christmas season 2007.


C. The Impact of the Recalls on Christmas Season Sales

        We continue our data investigation by looking at changes in Christmas season sales between

2006 and 2007. Table 4 reports various measures of changes in Christmas season sales for the total

Infant/Preschool toy market, the top 10 firms, and the two firms in our data that manufacture
                                                                                                      19
outside of China and have a sufficient number of transactions. In both Table 4 and our regression

analysis below, we focus on changes in the equilibrium number of toys purchased rather than

changes in equilibrium spending on toys. We choose to focus on unit changes because this allows us

to directly investigate whether consumers purchased fewer toys (or fewer toys of a particular type) in

Christmas 2007 as was predicted in consumer surveys and in the media. However, because we are

also interested in whether consumers explicitly shifted to higher priced toys (perhaps because of a

perception of greater safety), in Appendix tables we report sales figures as measured in dollars.

       To account for idiosyncratic time trends, Table 4 scales quarter four sales by quarter one

sales. We refer to this measure as “adjusted Christmas season sales”. This measure is appealing in

that certain toys, manufacturers, and/or properties might have been on an upward trend and would

have, in the absence of the wave of toy recalls, experienced higher sales in Christmas 2007 as

compared to Christmas season 2006. 23 Not allowing for this adjustment implicitly assumes flat year-

to-year sales. On the other hand, some readers might be concerned that our estimated losses using

adjusted Christmas season sales are driven by a spurious increase in quarter one sales. We thus also

present unadjusted quarter four to quarter four differences across years.

       The sales figures show several interesting things. First, adjusted 2007 Christmas season sales

in the overall Infant/Preschool toy market were down 25 percent as compared to 2006 (unadjusted

sales were down almost 13%). 24 Second, firms that did not experience any recalls of their own also

sold fewer toys. Third, there is no clear relationship between the number of toy recalls experienced



23       For example, news stories report that RC2 was expecting a strong Christmas season in sales
before its highly publicized recall in June 2007. Data on quarter one sales indeed show a strong early
year performance in RC2 sales.
24       Adjusted dollar sales were down about 17 percent while unadjusted dollar sales were down
about 12 percent. The fact that adjusted unit sales fell by more than adjusted dollar sales suggests
that while consumers reduced the number of toys they purchased at Christmas 2007, there was also
some substitution towards higher priced toys.
                                                                                                    20
and a firm’s change in Infant/Preschool sales. 25        Mattel, by far the largest producer in the

Infant/Preschool supercategory, had 12 recalls in 2007; yet their 2007 Christmas season sales

decreased only 18 percent relative to Christmas season 2006, adjusting for quarter 1 sales. In fact, of

the four Top 10 firms that had recalls -- Mattel, Hasbro, RC2, and Jakks Pacific – only RC2

experienced a loss in sales larger than the general loss for the total market. And some of the

companies that did not have any of their own toys recalled – including Tomy, Poof Toy Products,

and Russ Berrie – had larger than average losses.

        One possible explanation for this lack of a relationship between recalls and a named

manufacturer's total level of Infant/Preschool sales is that firms are diversified across categories to

varying degrees. So, if consumers infer that a particular category of toys poses a lead-related safety

risk, consumers may substitute from that category to other categories of toys. Firms that are highly

concentrated in the affected category will experience large sales losses while firms that are diversified

across categories may experience non-losses or even increases in sales in other categories. To be

clear, recalls can have both a negative industry spillover effect -- by which consumers reduce their

purchases of all toys because of an updated expectation of risk -- and a positive substitution effect,

by   which    consumers     substitute   away   from    recalled   items/categories    to     non-recalled

items/categories. Put differently, consumers may buy fewer toys altogether, but, when they do buy,

shift their purchases to avoid toys or categories that have experienced recalls.            If substitution

happens at the level of the category and not the manufacturer, then manufacturers who experience

recalls but who are diversified across categories may actually experience smaller than average sales

losses. Manufacturers may also be able to encourage this substitution by offering lower prices


25       Note that our sales data are for the infant/preschool supercategory of toys, but the CPSC
recall announcements do not specify the category of the recalled toy. We therefore count all recalls
in this exercise.

                                                                                                        21
and/or promotions in unaffected categories or by making fixed cost investments in rebuilding their

brand name.

        We investigate this speculative explanation informally by documenting the diversification

across categories among the top producing firms. Table 5 reports the share of a manufacturer's sales

across the 13 infant/preschool categories. The bottom row reports the calculated Herfindahl-

Hirschman Index, defined as the sum of the squares of shares over categories. The most diversified

firms are Mattel (HHI of 1,863), Hasbro (HHI of 1,809), and MGA (HHI of 1,776). Playmobil only

produces in the figures and playsets cateogry, yielding an HHI of 10,000. Relevant to the patterns in

Table 4, as compared to Mattel, RC2 and Tomy are heavily concentrated in one particular category:

preschool vehicles. A potential implication of this is that a shift away from purchases of preschool

vehicles (say, following the recall of RC2 Thomas and Friends trains) would mean heavy sales losses

for RC2 and Tomy, with no positive substitution into alternative categories to offset these losses.

        Appendix Table 5 reproduces Table 4 using dollars rather than units as the sales measure.

This table shows a decrease of 12 percent in adjusted quarter 4 sales of infant/preschool toys. This

reduction is nearly half the magnitude of the units reduction reported in Table 4. This would be

consistent with consumers buying fewer toys, but substituting remaining toy purchases toward more

expensive toys. Recall that the CEX data described above showed an increase in household

expenditures on the broader category of children’s toys, games, arts and crafts products, etc.

Together these two findings suggest that consumers reduced the number of infant/preschool toys

they purchased, but shifted their maintained purchases to more expensive products.


E. Regression Analysis

        To investigate these issues more precisely, we estimate a standard difference-in-difference

regression at the level of manufacturer-category. We again focus on Christmas season sales as

                                                                                                      22
measured by quarter 4 (q4) sales. We keep a manufacturer-category in the regression sample if the

manufacturer has at least 35 transactions in the fourth quarter of 2005. We additionally require that

the manufacturer-category has positive fourth quarter sales in all three years. We make this second

restriction because, as mentioned above, we have no way to determine if zero sales in the NPD data

reflect no such items being purchased in the NPD sample or item exit from the market.

        We estimate the following regression equation, at the level of manufacturer-category:

            Log(UnitsQ4) mct = β 0 + β1 (Recall mct * yr07 t ) + β 2 (Recall mt * yr07 t ) +
        (4) β 3 (Recall mct * yr06 t ) + β 4 (Recall mt * yr06 t ) + β 5 (Recall mct * yr05t ) +
            β 6 (Recall mt * yr05t ) + β 7 (yr07 t ) + β 8 (yr06 t ) + μ mc + ε mct

        The equation includes indicators for whether the manufacturer-category experienced a recall

during the calendar year –Recallmct,-- and for whether the manufacturer experienced any recall during

the calendar year (in any category) –Recallmt,. We interact the recall indicators with year dummy

variables so that the effect of having a recall during the calendar year is allowed to vary by year. We

identify a recall as belonging to one of the 13 Infant/Preschool categories if the item in a CPSC

recall announcement appears in our sales data. In other words, if a particular item does not appear

in the NPD sales data, we make the assumption that it is outside one of these categories. Note that

such a recall would still be reflected in the indicator variable for a recall to the manufacturer. The

regression controls for mean differences in sales across years with year main effects and mean

differences across manufacturer-categories with manufacturer-category fixed effects.

        Table 6, panel (a) reports the results. The estimated coefficient on the year 2007 indicator

suggests that quarter four sales in 2007 are down 27 percent compared to year 2005. The point

estimate on the indicator variable for having a recall at the level of manufacturer-category in 2007 is

negative, suggesting that relative to other categories of toys produced by the manufacturer,

consumers shift purchases away from the type of toy produced by a manufacturer involved in a

                                                                                                         23
recall. The estimated effects are statistically significant at the 10 percent level. The conditional effect

on having a manufacturer recall outside the category is positive. Consistent with our observation

above, this suggests that consumers may be shifting purchases from affected to unaffected

categories within a manufacturer. In a similar analysis not reported, we replace the recall indicator

variables with counts of the number of recalls to a firm. The count variables are not statistically

significant.

        The fact that we do not find a negative coefficient on the manufacturer-level recall indicator

suggests that consumers are not “punishing” manufacturers who experience recalls by reducing

purchases of the manufacturer’s items in unaffected categories. 26 This may be because consumers

do not infer additional information about dissimilar toys produced by a named manufacturer,

beyond what they infer for all toys, or because consumers are simply not aware of which toys are

produced by which manufacturer.      27   Indeed, the prevalence of properties increases the likelihood

that brand or trademark association may be stronger than manufacturer association in this

industry. 28



26       In our baseline specification we do not include an indicator for recalls at the category level
because recalls occur in 12 out of 13 of the categories in our data, with infant/plush being the
unnamed category; the indicator is thus highly collinear with the 2007 year dummy.
27        It is also possible that this variable is picking up the large diversified manufacturers such as
Mattel and Hasbro and capturing the fact that their categories that did not experience recalls
followed different patterns than categories of manufacturers who had no recalls at all (captured by
the 2007 dummy). We consider this possibility when we carry out our in-depth analysis of two of
Mattel’s recalls.
28        One might worry that are results are confounding demand and supply responses. However,
the timing of manufacturers’ supply decisions suggests that this is unlikely to be the case. Based on
several industry sources, it is apparent that, at least for the large toy manufacturers, development
decisions for Christmas season offerings usually begin about one and half years in advance (i.e.:
decisions about what toys to offer for Christmas 2007 would have begun in Spring 2006) and retailer
orders are usually placed about a year in advance. Actual production of the toys (most of which
takes place in China) begins several months later. As a result, it is unlikely that manufacturers could
significantly alter their product offerings at Christmas 2007 in response to recalls experienced earlier
in the year. While retailers might be able to do some modifications to their offerings in response to
                                                                                                        24
        To investigate how consumers respond to recalls that involve items that are branded or

trademarked, we estimate property level regressions. We identify recalls that are part of properties if

the CPSC recall announcement mentions the property’s name in its description of recalled toys. We

first estimate the following regression:

               Log(UnitsQ4) pct = β 0 + β 1 (Recall pct * yr07 t ) + β 2 (Recall pt * yr07 t ) +
        (5)    β 3 (Recall pct * yr06 t ) + β 4 (Recall pt * yr06 t ) + β 5 (Recall pct * yr05t ) +
               β 6 (Recall pt * yr05t ) + β 7 (yr07 t ) + β 8 (yr06 t ) + μ pt + ε pct

We keep a property-category in the regression sample if the property-category has positive fourth

quarter sales in all three years and the property has at least 35 transactions in quarter 4. There are no

recalls of licensed toys in 2005, so those indicators drop out of the estimated regression model.

        Table 6, panel (b) reports results at the property-category level. Again the data show a

decrease in 2007 quarter four sales as compared to year 2005, although the effect is not statistically

significant. The estimated coefficients on the indicator variables for having any recall in the property

and in the particular category suggest similar patterns to the manufacturer-category regressions,

though the estimates are smaller in magnitude and not precisely estimated. The point estimate on the

indicator variable for having a recall in the property-category is negative and the point estimate for

having any recall in the property is positive. This would be consistent with consumers shifting away

from a particular type of toy (i.e. in the category) in the property after such a toy was recalled, and

shifting toward dissimilar toys within the property.

        Table 7 considers the role of media coverage in eliciting a consumer response to recalls. We

measure news coverage using the LexisNexis database of Major U.S. and World Publications. We

count the number of news articles mentioning the name of the company and the words “toy” and



recent recalls (for example, change how they allocate shelf space across products), this would reflect
their expectations of consumer demand and hence be a demand rather than supply response.
                                                                                                      25
“recall” in the 30 days immediately following the occurrence of the recall. We run OLS regressions

similar to those described in equation (4) above, but instead of allowing the effect of a recall to vary

across years, the specification includes interaction terms of the recall indicator with the level of

coverage. Our aim with this specification is to determine whether the manufacturer-category sales

reduction associated with a 2007 manufacturer-category recall – seen in Table 6 – is related to the

amount of news coverage. Coverage is categorized as low (fewer than 10 news stories), medium (10

to 100 news stories), and high (more than 100). The coefficient on the high coverage indicator is -

0.429, with a standard error of 0.182. When the recall indicator is restricted to lead recalls, the

estimated coefficient on a high coverage recall is -0.705, with a standard error of 0.217. The

reduction in sales at the manufacturer-category level is statistically significant at the 10 percent level

for medium coverage recalls. The data do not indicate an effect on sales of low coverage recalls.

           The results in this table provide suggestive evidence that the media attention to these lead

recalls of 2007 was important in driving the observed consumer response. The bottom of Table 7

indicates cell sizes and reports that there are 8 manufacturer-category observations with a high

coverage manufacturer-category recall and 13 manufacturer-category observations with a high

coverage manufacturer recall (outside its particular category). As it turns out, these are all Mattel

observations. The manufacturer-category observations with medium coverage news stories are all

Mattel and RC2 observations. The fact that the observed sales reductions in Table 6 panel (a) seem

to be driven in large measure by the high profile recalls to Mattel and RC2 motivates the following

section.



F. An In-Depth Examination of Three High Profile Recalls

           In this section we complement our regression analyses with a detailed examination of the

demand response to the three highest profile recalls of 2007. Honing in on particular cases in this
                                                                                                       26
way allows us to consider impacts at the level of manufacturer-category-property. Data limitations

preclude us from using regression techniques to estimate with statistical precision impacts at this

triple-interaction level. 29

        On June 13, 2007 and September 26, 2007 RC2 announced two separate recalls of Thomas

the Tank Engine wooden trains, buildings, and other train set items. The first recall involved 1.5

million toys and the second involved an additional 200,000 toys. Both recalls were a result of

excessive levels of lead paint. On August 2, 2007 Mattel recalled 967,000 various figures and other

toys sold under the Fisher-Price brand because of excessive lead in the surface paint. Most of the

toys involved in the recall were part of the Sesame Street and Dora the Explorer properties. These

recalls received significant media attention, as noted in Appendix Table 4. Furthermore, each of

these recalls involved an extremely popular property. As Appendix Table 3 indicates, Thomas the

Tank Engine is the second largest Infant/Preschool property and Sesame Street and Dora the

Explorer are, respectively, the seventh and eighth largest properties in the supercategory.

        Table 8 considers the RC2 recalls of toy trains and accessories in the Thomas the Tank

Engine railroad property. We start by examining what happened to RC2’s sales in the affected

category-property: “Vehicles” produced under the “Thomas & Friends” brand. The first column of

the table shows that RC2’s adjusted Christmas season sales of Thomas vehicles decreased by 58.5

percent in 2007. RC2’s non-Thomas vehicles experienced a similar sales decline (column 3) which


29       Appendix Table 4 lists all of the 2007 CPSC toy recalls and indicates which involve toys
observed in our NPD infant/preschool data. There are a total of six properties that are named in at
least one lead recall in 2007: Thomas and Friends (RC2 recalls, 6/07 and 9/07); Dora the Explorer,
Sesame Street, and Go Diego Go! (Mattel recall, 8/07); GeoTrax (Mattel recall, 9/07); and Baby
Einstein (Kids II recall, 10/07). In this section, we focus on three of these. We do not include
detailed examinations of the other three property recalls for the following reasons: (1) The Go
Diego Go! property did not exist in the first half of 2006; (2) Our Lexus-Nexis search finds only
three articles mentioning the Kids II Baby Einstein recall; and (3) the GeoTrax property is an
exclusive Mattel brand and therefore is not produced by other manufacturers. In addition, the

                                                                                                27
suggests that consumers substituted away from the RC2 vehicle category and the sales loss in this

category is not property specific. 30 In contrast, RC2’s sales outside the affected category and affected

property (column 4) increased slightly over this period. This is consistent with our findings above

that firms are not experiencing sales losses in unaffected categories and may even be experiencing

sales increases.

        Next we examine how RC2’s recalls affected sales to competitors’ products within the

property and within the category. Column five of the table indicates that adjusted Christmas season

sales of Thomas vehicles produced by firms other than RC2 were down 42.9 percent. Sales of

Thomas items outside the vehicles category were also down by more than 40 percent. (This

contrasts with what we find below following the Mattel recall of Dora products.) Sales of items

outside of the manufacturer, category and property (column 8) decrease by 21 percent, which is

similar to our findings in our regressions. The data do not show a larger loss in sales for non-

RC2/non-Thomas vehicles as compared to non-RC2/non-Thomas sales outside the category

(column 7 versus column 8) which suggests consumers are substituting away from toys in the

category that are neither produced by RC2 nor produced under the Thomas brand. To summarize,

in the case of RC2’s recalls, in addition to the direct effect of the recall on the affected

manufacturer-category-property, we also see negative effects on sales in the manufacturer-category

(outside the property) and on the property (outside the manufacturer, within and outside the

category).

        This finding that consumers moved away from non-RC2 Thomas items at twice the rate of

non-Thomas items suggests that either consumers used RC2’s recalls to update their expectations


GeoTrax recall involved fewer than 100, 000 units. Comparable case study tables for these events
are available from the authors upon request.
30       There are too few RC2 non-vehicles Thomas toys in the data to permit an examination of
spillover effects within the manufacturer and property but outside the category.
                                                                                                      28
about the safety of all Thomas toys or consumers were confused about which Thomas items were

included in the recall. While we cannot formally test between these hypotheses, we point out that

the RC2 recall is a case where consumer confusion could easily arise because the Thomas items

produced by the various different manufacturers sharing the Thomas license are quite similar.

       Table 9 conducts a similar exercise for Mattel’s recall of Dora the Explorer items. The first

column of the table shows that Mattel’s adjusted sales of Dora Figures and Playsets decreased by 53

percent.   This again provides evidence of a large direct effect of a recall on the affected

manufacturer-category-property. As in the RC2 case, Mattel’s adjusted sales in the category but

outside the property also decrease, in this case by about 38 percent (column 3). Both of these

numbers are substantially larger than the overall 17 percent sales decrease that Mattel experienced

(from Table 4). However, Mattel’s adjusted sales outside the category and outside the property

(column 4) fell by only 12 percent. Consistent with what we have found earlier, this again suggests

that there is no net negative spillover to the manufacturer’s sales outside the category and property.

       Perhaps the most interesting patterns in Table 9 appear in columns two and six. These

columns look at the change in sales of Dora items outside the Figures and Playsets category, so

spillovers across categories within the property. 31 Column two indicates that Mattel’s sales of Dora

items in unaffected categories did not decrease and actually increased slightly. Column six indicates

that rivals’ sales of Dora items in unaffected categories increased by more than 40 percent.

       These numbers suggest that after Mattel’s recall of various Dora Figures and Playsets,

consumers did not decrease their purchases of other Dora products, but instead substituted

specifically towards other types of Dora toys. Furthermore, this suggests that consumers did not

interpret Mattel’s recall as providing information about the safety of all Dora items. Nor were they


31     It appears that Mattel has exclusive licensing rights to produce figures and playsets in the
Dora brand, as there are no sales of Dora figures and playsets made by other manufacturers.
                                                                                                     29
confused by Mattel’s Dora recall; rather, they interpreted as providing information about the safety

of specific Dora items. Note that these effects contrast with what we found in the case of RC2’s

recall where we observed that rivals’ sales of Thomas items (within and outside the affected

category) decreased. Note, however, that there is less heterogeneity in the types of toys produced

under the Thomas brand than under the Dora brand. Most Thomas items are trains or train-related

accessories. In contrast, the Dora items that were not in the affected Figures and Playsets category

included things as diverse as umbrellas, a Dora kitchen, and Dora electronic learning toys. The

patterns in this table are not consistent with broad confusion about recall details – i.e., remembering

the brand, but not the specific toy -- but they are consistent with (arguably) reasonable inferences

about product safety.

       Finally, Table 10 considers Mattel’s recall of Mattel Sesame Street figures. As in Table 10, the

data indicate that sales of toys by Mattel in the affected category-property fell by 52.4 percent,

roughly twice as much as the general decrease in toys and three times as much as Mattel’s overall

decrease. Mattel has exclusive licensing rights to much of the Sesame Street brand, so there is not

much scope to explore broader effects on the property. The data again fail to show any evidence of

a net negative spillover to Mattel sales outside the category and property. To the contrary, there is a

27.5 percent increase in Mattel’s adjusted infant/preschool toy sales outside the affected categories

and property. This observation is consistent with consumers substituting from affected to

unaffected categories in a way that favors more diversified firms. The last two columns of the table

indicate sales decreases for other manufacturers outside the property that are quite similar to the 25

percent that we have found above.

       In summary, these focused case studies show that; (a) in all three cases, there was a large

decrease in adjusted sales in the affected manufacturer-category-property; (b) there were negative


                                                                                                    30
spillovers to the manufacturer’s sales within the category, but no apparent negative spillover to the

manufacturer’s sales outside the category or property; and (c) there were negative spillovers to rivals’

sales in the affected property when the types of items included in the property are very similar (the

Thomas case) but positive spillovers to rivals’ sales in the property when the types of items inside

the property are dissimilar. These patterns are broadly consistent with consumers drawing

reasonable inferences about toy safety.



V. Additional Considerations

A. The Stock Market Response to Toy Recalls

        In this section, we investigate the impact of the recalls on the stock market performance of

toy manufacturers. We use data on daily stock market prices from the Center for Research in

Security Prices (CRSP) accessed through Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS). This database

is the standard in the event study literature, providing the most comprehensive information on all

US stocks listed on the NYSE, AMEX, and the NASDAQ. We obtain daily end-of-day stock

quotes between 2004 and 2007 for all firms identified as toy manufacturers that are listed on any of

the three exchanges. 32 To identify toy manufacturers, we use Mergent Online, a database of business

characteristics, to collect primary and secondary Standard Industry Classification (SIC) codes for

firms. We identify firms as toy manufacturers if any of their SIC codes fall in categories 3942 (Dolls

and Stuffed Toys) or 3944 (Games, Toys, and Children’s Vehicles, Except Dolls and Bicycles). We

identify 18 such firms. Many of the recalls named firms that are not publicly traded, so we cannot

conduct our analysis on the full set of toy recalls. Our resulting event sample includes 25 events


32      A few of the publicly traded firms named in the CPSC toy recalls are outside this set of toy
manufacturers. These tend to be retailers who exclusively sell a recalled toy, for example, J.C.
Penney. In one instance Eveready Battery Co. was named in a recall of a child’s toy flashlight. We

                                                                                                     31
involving 8 firms; 13 of these recall events occur in 2007. Note that these recalls are not limited to

infant/preschool toys; thus, this sample of events and firms does not overlap entirely with our

sample of recalls and toys considered in our analysis of sales.

        Appendix Table 7 lists the 25 events, the characteristics of the recall announcement, and the

named firm in the recall event. We use data on the remaining 11 toy manufacturers who were not

named in recalls over this period when we consider spillover effects. With a sample size of only 25

events, we are severely limited in our ability to estimate cross sectional patterns in the stock market

effects, such as the average difference in the response to a lead paint related recall and a choking

hazard recall.

        We begin by plotting the stock market prices of toy producing firms that did and did

experience a recall in 2007 along with other stock market indices. Figure 4 plots trends in four stock

market indices, two of which are created by Fama and French. These include a market index of all

NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ firms and an index of firms producing consumer goods. The other

two indices we create for toy producers. They are value-weighted indices of the 18 toy

manufacturers traded on the three major U.S. exchanges in our data. We separate these into separate

indices for the 7 firms that had at least once recall in 2007 and 11 firms that did not. All indices are

normalized to one on January 1, 2006. 33

        These raw data show that toy firms that experienced recalls outperformed relative to the

market index until mid 2007, and then greatly underperformed relative to the market index, with toy

firm stock prices falling drastically while the market showed no break in trend. The index of toy

firms with recalls increased 19.6 percent from 1/3/07 to 5/22/07 – the peak – and then fell 25.6

percent from 5/22/07 to 12/31/07. The index of firms without recalls increased 31.1 percent from


focus on toy manufacturers because the equity value of non-toy manufacturers is unlikely to be
affected by a toy recall.
                                                                                                       32
1/3/07 to 5/22/07 and then fell 7.6 percent from 5/22/07 to 12/31/07. In comparison, the stock

market performance of consumer good firms moved very closely to the market.

        This decline in market performance of toy firms over the third quarter of 2007 coincides

with the increasing frequency of toy recalls and two other patterns seen in the description of the

recalls in Appendix Table 7. First, eight of the ten recall events in the second half of 2007 were lead

related, whereas only one had been prior to this period. Second, this period was characterized by

much higher press coverage of recalls. The table reports the number of news articles mentioning the

name of the company and the words “toy” and “recall” in the LexisNexis database of Major US and

World Publications over the thirty days prior to the recall announcement and the thirty days

following the announcement. There had been very few news articles covering earlier recalls, but the

2007 lead paint recalls received large amounts of media coverage. For example, there were 551

articles within 30 days of Mattel’s August 14, 2007 recall.

        We view the stock price patterns as prima facie evidence that toy firms in general

experienced a drop in stock value relative to other sectors during the wave of 2007 toy recalls. Event

study analysis will allow us to identify if this decline can be linked to specific recall announcements.

We conduct an event study in the spirit of Jarrell and Peltzman (1985) following the methodology

laid out by MacKinlay (1997) to quantify how the announcement of a toy recall affects the stock

return of the firm named as the manufacturer of the recalled product. To the extent that the

information provided by a recall is “news” – that is, not fully expected – then the capital market

should respond to that information, and the firm’s stock price should adjust to reflect the market’s

expectations about how the “news” contained in the recall announcement will affect the firm’s

future cash flows. This has its theoretical foundation in the efficient market hypothesis (Fama 1970).



33      All indices are built from returns that have been adjusted for stock splits and dividends.
                                                                                                     33
        The basic strategy of an event study is to estimate the relationship between the affected

firm’s daily stock return and an index (or set of indices) of market performance over an estimation

window, which is a period of time preceding the event. These parameters are used to calculate the

predicted returns to the affected firm during the event window, which is a period of time

surrounding the event. Abnormal returns are then calculated as the difference between the actual

returns and the predicted returns over the event window. Thus, abnormal returns can be thought of

as the portion of the affected firm’s return that is in excess of its usual relationship with the market.

These abnormal returns represent the impact of the event, or the news, on the firm’s market value.

Summing abnormal returns over a given interval for event i provides an estimate of cumulative

abnormal returns (CAR) for that event. We can also average abnormal returns for a given day or

cumulative abnormal returns for a given interval across events. This allows us to explore the average

effect of a recall and understand how it accumulates over time, both before and after the actual

recall, if information about the recall leaked prior to the actual announcement or was accumulated

slowly after the announcement. The details of our estimation approach are contained in Appendix

8.

        Figure 5 plots average abnormal returns associated with 2007 recalls and their 95%

confidence intervals by event day over the period ranging from event day -10 to 10. There are

statistically significant negative average abnormal returns on the day of the event but not any other

days, consistent with the efficient market hypothesis that all information is immediately incorporated

into a firm’s market value.

        Table 11 presents mean cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) for 2007 recalls and 2004-2006

recalls separately. We do this to allow for a differential effect in 2007, in light of the different nature

of these recalls and the heightened media attention. For both sets we report mean CARs for a two

day period -- which includes abnormal returns cumulated over the day of the announcement and the
                                                                                                        34
following day -- and a three day period, which includes the day prior to the announcement through

the day following the announcement. We include the day following the announcement to account

for the possibility that information about the announcement is not incorporated immediately on the

announcement date. We include the day prior to the announcement to account for the possibility

that information about the recall is leaked prior to the official announcement. Because some recall

events occurred close in time to others, we present results from short event windows to minimize

confounding effects of nearby recalls. 34

        For 2007, over a two day window, the mean CAR indicates a 0.09 percentage point lower

return as a result of a recall announcement; adding the day prior to the recall changes the estimated

CAR to a 0.37 percentage point lower return. Neither estimate is statistically significant at the 5%

percent level. The point estimates of the two day CARs associated with the thirteen 2007 recalls are

more negative than those associated with the twelve recalls between 2004 and 2006. The final

column of the table illustrates that more events produced negative CARs in 2007, with 69 percent

and 46 percent of events resulting in negative CARs in 2007, depending on the event window, and

50 percent of the 2004-2006 recalls producing negative CARs.

        Table 12 reports the estimated abnormal returns separately for each of the 13 firm-recall

events in 2007. (For the sake of space, we do not list the 12 firm-recall events in 2006, but none of

the 2006 recalls are associated with statistically significant abnormal return estimates.) Looking

separately by firm-event, it becomes clear that the mean negative abnormal return shown in Figure 5

is driven by the stock market response to RC2’s September 26 recall of Thomas and Friends trains.

This event is associated with an estimated abnormal return of -0.091, standard error of 0.023.

However, the data suggest some recovery, and the 11 day CAR associated with this event is -0.032,


34       Excluding events with other events occurring in their 2 or 3 day window does not change
the qualitative results.
                                                                                                  35
standard error of 0.077. This table also reveals that two events – Hasbro’s July 19 recall of Easy-

Bake ovens and Mattell’s multiple recalls on August 14 both were followed by statistically significant

negative CARs, though the estimated day 0 abnormal returns are not statistically significantly

different from zero.

       It is interesting to consider the possibility of differences in the stock market response to

successive recall(s). Consider the following possibility: once Mattel recalls a product, consumers and

investors update their belief on the probability that Mattel will announce future recalls.           If

subsequent recalls are less of a surprise, the stock market response to these subsequent recalls would

be smaller. Another possibility is that the stock market response to a particular firm’s recall depends

on the cumulative number of recent recalls in the industry. Later recalls would lead to a smaller

stock market response if consumers and investors had already updated their expectations about

product safety and the profit consequences thereof. We attempted both of these things and the

analysis was unable to detect statistically significant differences in estimated abnormal return by

calendar time.

       Another interesting consideration is the spillover effects of one firm’s recall on the stock

returns of other firms in the toy industry. If a recall announcement negatively impacts investor

expectations for general industry profit – due either to a loss in consumer demand for toys (because

of a broad perception of heightened risk) or an expected increase in regulation compliance costs –

there will be a negative spillover to other firms’ equity value. On the other hand, any expected loss

of future profits through these channels could be offset by an expected increase in consumer

demand for competing firms’ products. Unfortunately, the clustering of toy recalls in 2007 prohibits

us from separately identifying the direct effect of an own firm’s recall from the spillover effect from

another firm’s recall. Of the 25 events, 23 have another recall occurring at some point during the 21


                                                                                                    36
day window; 11 have recalls occurring during the 3 day window; and five have events occurring

during the 2 day window. 35

       We conclude from our analysis of stock returns that the relative decline in the stock market

performance of toy manufacturers over the second half of 2007 is most appropriately characterized

as a gradual investor response to a perceived industry wide problem. We cannot discern in this paper

whether the investor response reflects expectations about general consumer demand for toys or

expectations of higher costs of regulation compliance for the industry as a whole. We can conclude

that the loss in shareholder wealth in the toy industry over the second half of 2007 is not

characterized by a series of negative abnormal returns to a particular firm following its own recall

announcements. 36



B. "Made in China"

       A final consideration is the possibility that there was a market response specifically targeted

at toy firms producing in China. The above-cited Harris Poll found that 45 percent of respondents


35        For the interested reader, we conduct an analysis of spillovers, despite the identification
challenges to interpretation. We construct a value-weighted index of the 18 publicly traded toy
producers excluding the firm named in the recall event. We run an event study examining the returns
to this index of competitors in response to recalls to top 15 toy producers (based on total 2005 unit
sales.) The only event that leads to a statistically significant CAR among competitors is Mattel’s
August 2 recall of Sesame Street, Dora the Explorer, and other children’s toys. This is at least
partially driven by a large drop in RC2’s stock price on the day of the recall announcement.
However, we cannot attribute this entire effect to Mattel’s recall, because on the same day RC2
announced lower than expected second-quarter earnings.
36        An interesting method for studying the effect of a gradual revelation of information on
stock prices is employed by Ellison and Mullin (2001). These authors use isotonic regression
methods to examine the effect of the evolution of President Clinton’s health care reform proposal
over January 1992 to October 1993 on pharmaceutical stock prices. They use isotonic regression to
jointly estimate dates of information incorporation and the impact of this information on prices.
Our goal in this paper is a bit different in that we have the dates of pertinent information revelation
– i.e., the dates of announced recalls – and we are interested in determining the effect of these
particular pieces of information on firm stock returns. An interesting issue for future research is to

                                                                                                    37
indicated they would avoid buying toys manufactured in China. As it turns out, almost all

infant/preschool toys in the United States are manufactured in China. So what did consumers

actually do when it came to making toy purchases? We could potentially quantify the consumer

reaction in three ways: (1) What happened to the percent of toys imported from China?; (2) Was

there a stock market reaction in terms of weakening stock returns for toy companies who

manufacture in China?; and (3) Did the consumer demand for toys made in China decrease, as

evidenced by a reduction in equilibrium price and/or quantity?

        With regard to the question of imports, a straightforward analysis conducted by the Federal

Reserve Board of San Francisco addresses the question of what happened to imports from China

(FRBSF, 2008). Their analysis finds that imports in the toy industry actually increased relative to

forecasted levels. This suggests that imports of toys from China did not immediately fall in response

to the wave of 2007 recalls. Of course, it is too early to determine whether the industry will

experience long term changes away from Chinese imports. As to the question of the stock market,

one could consider whether investors shifted assets away from toy manufacturers who produce in

China. It turns out that all of the top 10 and all but two of the top 30 toy manufacturers produce

toys in China. It is thus not a fruitful analysis to pursue.

        We attempt a simple investigation of whether consumers shifted toy purchases to toys made

outside of China. We look at our toy sales data from 2005 quarter 1 to 2007 quarter 4 to see if there

is an increase in the share of toys that are manufactured outside of China. By way of background, in

the infant/preschool category of toys, there are a handful of notable toy manufacturers producing

outside China, including Playmobil 1-2-3 (Malta, Germany); Haba (Germany); PlanToys (Thailand);

Siku (Germany); Vikingtoys (Thailand); and Geomag (Switzerland). Some other manufacturers that


consider the stock market performance in terms of the gradual revelation of information about toys
from China having elevated levels of lead through newspaper and media stories.
                                                                                                  38
produce mainly in China advertise specific toy items that are Made in the U.S. We had an

undergraduate research assistant explore the websites of the top 50 manufacturers producing toys in

our NPD sample of toys to identify toys that are noted as being produced outside China. Under the

assumption that when not otherwise noted, a toy was manufactured in China, we calculate that the

share of infant/PS toys (measured in units) manufactured outside of China. Figure 6a plots these

shares for our sample time period from 2005 quarter 1 to 2007 quarter 7. The share ranges from 2.5

percent to 4.9 percent. In 2007, the share is actually at the lowest end of the range. We also examine

directly the share of toy sales to the two biggest non-Chinese producers in our data: American

Plastic Toys and Playmobil.   20F20F
                                       37   As shown in Figure 6b, there is no obvious upward tick in their sales

trend. Of course, over a longer term horizon, the picture might prove to be different.



VI. Final Discussion

       This paper has provided an examination of the consumer response to the highly publicized

wave of 2007 toy recalls, almost all of which involved lead in toys made in China. Our analysis of

sales data reveals several interesting patterns. First, consumers responded to this wave of recalls by

substituting specifically away from a manufacturer’s category of toys that were involved in a recall.

This indicates that consumers understood and acted upon the information in these announcements.

This finding is important because it speaks to whether the costs of information gathering in

potentially confusing contexts are prohibitive to consumer action. We document that in the case of

the highly-publicized toy recalls in 2007, the costs of information gathering were not prohibitive to

eliciting a consumer response. Our results suggest that newspaper coverage of recalls plays an

important role in eliciting a demand response.


37      These are the only two manufacturers producing outside China that have substantial sales in
our data. Haba has only 22 toys in our data; Plan Toys has 13; Viking Toys, part of International
                                                                                                              39
       Second, we find no evidence that consumers specifically shifted away from other types of

toys produced by manufacturers’ who were involved in a recall. This may be because consumers did

not interpret a manufacturer’s recall of a particular toy as providing information about the safety of

that manufacturer’s other toys, relative to toys in general, or because manufacturer association in this

industry is particularly weak. Alternatively, it may be because large, diversified manufacturers took

measures to bolster sales of unaffected toy categories. Understanding precisely the mechanism

preventing a manufacture-wide above-average loss in sales is important to understanding the

incentive effects inherent in the recall process. This is another interesting question for future

research.

       Third, we observe that recalls involving toys that are part of a property can have positive or

negative spillovers to sales of rivals’ toys in the same property. This suggests that the existence of

shared brands generates externalities much like that which exists between franchisees. Each licensee

will have suboptimal incentives to invest in protecting the brand. This has implications for the types

of protections that licensees may seek to include in their licensing agreements. In addition, this

creates the potential for brands to create confusion about manufacturer identification. Such

considerations might suggest that the current process of recalls may need to be supplemented with

additional information provision that enables consumers to better identify which toys are produced

by which firms. This also suggests that manufacturers may have incentives to limit association

between their brands and publicize any recalls that do occur under a particular brand rather than the

manufacturer name. Furthermore, manufacturers who produce under a brand that is involved in a

recall by another firm clearly have an incentive to inform consumers that it was not their branded

products that were recalled.



Playthings, has only two toys in our data; and Siku and Geomag do not appear in our data.
                                                                                                     40
        Finally, we find that consumers reduced overall Infant/Preschool toy purchases in Christmas

of 2007. This is consistent with consumers responding to the recalls by updating their beliefs about

the safety of toys in general. Our examination of the investor response to a subset of these recalls

also reveals industry-wide negative spillovers. At a broad level, the finding that a relatively small

number of recalls by a few large manufacturers appears to result in decreased sales – and capital

market losses -- for the segment as a whole means that, from an industry perspective, investments in

safety are too low. When a shared industry practice is involved, such as production in China in the

case of the toy recalls, the potential for spillover effects appears to be especially large. Small

manufacturers in particular are likely to bear disproportionate spillover losses in such a context. One

implication of this is that manufacturers should have incentives to invest in a set of common

industry standards since each is at risk of being “punished” for their rivals’ mistakes. The lessons

from the toy recalls of 2007 suggest that the institutional features of an industry can influence the

extent to which the recall mechanism reduces informational asymmetries and creates incentives for

firms to invest in safety.




                                                                                                    41
References

Barber, Brad M. and Masako N. Darrough, “Product Reliability and Firm Value: The Experience of
       American and Japanese Automakers, 1973-1992,” The Journal of Political Economy, 104(5)
       (October 1996): 1084-1099.

Bennear, Lori S. and Sheila M. Olmstead, “The Impacts of the “Right to Know”: Information
      Disclosure and the Violation of Drinking Water Standards,” Journal of Environmental Economics
      and Management, 56(2) (2008): 117-130.

Borenstein, Severin and Martin B. Zimmerman, "Market Incentives for Safe Commercial Airline
       Operation," American Economic Review 78 (5) (December 1988), 913-935.

Bosch, Jean-Claude, E. Woodrow Eckard, and Vijay Singal, “The Competitive Impact of Air
       Crashes: Stock Market Evidence,” Journal of Law and Economics 41(2) (1998): 503-519.

Candelaria, Christopher and Galina Hale. "Did Large Recalls of Chinese Consumer Goods Lower
       U.S. Imports from China?" FRBSF Economic Letter No 2008-17 (June 13, 2008): 1-3.

Chalk, Andrew, "Market Forces and Commercial Aircraft Safety," Journal of Industrial Economics 36
       (September 1987): 61-81.

Chance, Don M. and Ferris, Stephen P., "The Effect of Aviation Disasters on the Air Transport
      Industry," Journal of Transport Economics and Policy 21 (May 1987): 151-65.

Chu, Ting-Heng, Che-Chun Lin and Larry J. Prather, “An Extension of Security Price Reactions
       Around Product Recall Announcements,” Quarterly Journal of Business and Economics, 44 (2005):
       33-48.

Clark, Eric, The Real Toy Story, Free Press, New York, NY, 2007.

Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act of 2008, Pub. L. No. 110-314 (2008).

Davis, Lucas, "The Effect of Health Risk on Housing Values: Evidence from a Cancer Cluster."
       American Economic Review, 94(5) (2004): 1693-1704.

Dranove, David and Chris Olsen, "The Economic Side Effects of Dangerous Drug
      Announcements," Journal of Law and Economics, 37(2) (1994): 323-348.

Ellison, Sara Fisher and Wallace P. Mullin, "Gradual Incorporation of Information: Pharmaceutical
        Stocks and the Evolution of President Clinton's Health Care Reform," Journal of Law and
        Economics 44(1) (2001): 89-129.

Fama, Eugene, "Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work," Journal of
      Finance 25 (1994): 383-417.

Fama, Eugene, "Efficient Capital Markets: II," Journal of Finance, 46(5) (1991): 1575-1617.
                                                                                                 42
Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French, “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and Bonds,”
       Journal of Financial Economics, 33(1) (1993): 3-56.

Fung, Archon, Mary Graham, and David Weil, Full Disclosure: The Perils and Promise of Transparency,
       Cambridge University Press: 2007.

Greenstone, Michael, Paul Oyer, and Annette Vissing-Jorensen, “Mandated Disclosure, Stock
       Returns and the 1964 Securities Act,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (2006): 399–460.

Grossman, Gene M. and James A. Levinsohn, “Import Competition and the Stock Market Return to
      Capital,” American Economic Review, 79 (1989): 1065-87.

Harris Interactive, “Recent Toy Recalls Threaten Sales of Chinese Products This Holiday Season”,
        The Harris Poll #114, November 14, 2007.

Hoffer, George E., Stephen W. Pruitt, and Robert J. Reilly, "The Impact of Product Recalls on the
       Wealth of Sellers: A Reexamination," Journal of Political Economy 96(3) (1988), 663-760.

Hotz, V. J., & M. Xiao, “Strategic Information Disclosure: the Case of Multi-Attribute Products
       with Heterogeneous Consumers,” NBER Working Paper 11937, (2005).

Jarrell, Gregg and Sam Peltzman, "The Impact of Product Recalls on the Wealth of Sellers," Journal
         of Political Economy 93 (June 1985): 512-36.

Jin, Ginger Z. and Phillip Leslie, "The Effects of Information on Product Quality: Evidence from
        Restaurant Hygiene Grade Cards," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2) (2003): 409-51.

Karafiath, Imre, “Using Dummy Variables in the Event Methodology" The Financial Review, 23(3)
        (1988): 351-357.

Mathios, Alan D., “The Impact of Mandatory Disclosure Laws on Product Choices: An Analysis of
       the Salad Dressing Market,” Journal of Law and Economics 43 (October 2000): 651-677.

Mitchell, Mark L., and Michael T. Maloney, "Crisis in the Cockpit? The Role of Market Forces in
       Promoting Air Travel Safety," Journal of Law and Economics 32 (October 1989): 329-55.

MacKinlay, A. Craig, "Event Studies in Economics and Finance," Journal of Economic Literature, 35(1)
      (1997): 13-39.

Pruitt, Stephen W., and David R. Peterson, “Security Price Reactions Around Product Recall
        Announcements,” The Journal of Financial Research, 9(2) (Summer 1986): 113-122.

Shimshack JP, Ward MB, Beatty TKM. “Mercury Advisories: Information, Education and Fish
      Consumption.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 53 (March 2007), 158–179.


                                                                                                 43
Viscussi, W. Kip, Regulating Consumer Product Safety. American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy
       Research: Washington, DC. 1984.

Viscusi, W. Kip and Joni Hersch, "The Market Response to Product Safety Litigation," Journal of
        Regulatory Economics, 2 (1990): 215-230.

Winston, Clifford, “The Efficacy of Information Policy: A Review of Archon Fung, Mary Graham,
      and David Weil’s ‘Full Disclosure: The Perils and Promise of Transparency’,” Journal of
      Economic Literature 46 (3) (2008): 704-717.

Xiao, Mo, “"Is Quality Certification Effective? Evidence from the Childcare Market," (January 2007)
University of Arizona, mimeo.




                                                                                                  44
Figure 1: Percent of Toy Recalls due to a Particular Hazard




Source: Authors’ tabulations of information in recall announcements listed on CPSC website.



Figure 2: Percent of Toy Recalls Involving a Toy Made in China




Source: Authors’ tabulations of information in recall announcements listed on CPSC website.



                                                                                              45
Figure 3: Seasonality of Infant/PS Toys




Source: Authors’ tabulations of NPD Infant/Preschool toy sales data.




                                                                       46
Figure 4: Stock Market Indices of Major Toy Producers Compared to Market Indices




Notes: Toy Producers with and without 2007 recalls are value weighted indices of the 18 firms traded
on the NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ that have primary or secondary SIC codes indicating toy
production. 7 of these firms had a 2007 recall and 11 did not. All other indices are from Kenneth
French’s website (http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html, last
accessed on February 13, 2009). FF Market includes all firms on the three major US exchanges. FF
Consumer Goods include firms producing various consumer products.

Figure 5: Average Abnormal Returns in Response to 2007 Recall Announcements, Event
Day -10 through 10




Notes: Solid line represents average abnormal returns to the thirteen 2007 recalls to publicly traded
toy manufacturers on day t. Dashed lines represent 95% confidence intervals.
                                                                                                  47
Figure 6a: Share of Infant/PS Toys Manufactured Outside of China




Source: Authors’ tabulations on NPD sales data linked to authors’ compilation of information on
country of production
Notes: Vertical Lines indicate June 13, 2007 RC2 Thomas and August 2 & August 14, 2007 Mattel
(including Dora, Sesame Street, etc.), September 4, 2007 Mattel and September 26, 2007 RC2
Thomas, respectively
Figure 6b: Share of Infant/PS Toys by Large Non-Chinese Manufacturers




Source: Authors’ tabulations on NPD sales data linked to authors’ compilation of information on
country of production
Notes: Vertical Lines indicate June 13, 2007 RC2 Thomas and August 2 & August 14, 2007 Mattel
(including Dora, Sesame Street, etc.), September 4, 2007 Mattel and September 26, 2007 RC2
Thomas, respectively.
                                                                                            48
Table 1: Number of Recalls in Consumer Products, 2004 - 2007
                                               Sports &
          Children's     Household Outdoor Recreation
Year       Products       Products    Products Products   Toys
2004          42             121         32       50       30
2005          64             122         28       76       31
2006          56             121         47       58       38
2007         130             132         38       64       82
Source: Authors’ tabulation from CPSC website




                                                                 49
       Table 2: Monthly Patterns of Sales, 2005-2007
Dependent Variable:                    (A) Log Units                                     (B) Log Dollars
                      Main Month           Month           Month           Main Month        Month        Month
                        Effects         EffectsX2005    EffectsX2007         Effects      EffectsX2005 EffectsX2007
January                    --               -0.080         0.270**                            -0.017       0.153
                                           (0.127)         (0.124)                           (0.151)      (0.150)
February                  0.022              0.172          -0.052             0.029           0.051       -0.044
                         (0.124)           (0.179)         (0.187)            (0.143)        (0.207)      (0.215)
March                    0.511**             0.126        -0.376**            0.446**          0.056      -0.334*
                         (0.115)           (0.180)         (0.171)            (0.137)        (0.207)      (0.201)
April                      0.034            -0.024        -0.477**             -0.102          0.037     -0.466**
                         (0.136)           (0.190)         (0.193)            (0.158)        (0.220)      (0.224)
May                       -0.132             0.216        -0.429**             -0.245          0.165      -0.400*
                         (0.132)           (0.191)         (0.195)            (0.150)        (0.214)      (0.228)
June                      0.149              0.098          -0.093             -0.003          0.102       -0.035
                         (0.123)           (0.177)         (0.185)            (0.154)        (0.215)      (0.222)
July                      -0.109           0.373**          -0.069             -0.249          0.261       -0.027
                         (0.131)           (0.184)         (0.196)            (0.162)        (0.223)      (0.231)
August                    0.171             -0.102         -0.310*             0.088          -0.158       -0.335
                         (0.129)           (0.189)         (0.188)            (0.152)        (0.217)      (0.224)
September                0.435**            -0.017          -0.281            0.362**         -0.054       -0.152
                         (0.115)           (0.175)         (0.180)            (0.142)        (0.209)      (0.212)
October                    0.075             0.230          -0.221              0.043          0.254       -0.078
                         (0.132)           (0.183)         (0.190)            (0.156)        (0.212)      (0.221)
November                 0.687**             0.232          -0.032            0.833**          0.228       0.132
                         (0.119)           (0.175)         (0.176)            (0.145)        (0.204)      (0.206)
December                 1.644**             0.075        -0.371**            1.761**          0.130       -0.194
                         (0.116)           (0.167)         (0.167)            (0.138)        (0.194)      (0.195)

Constant                 1.096**                                              3.105**
                         (0.083)                                              (0.103)
N                         3,496                                                3,505
       Notes: Sample includes observations at the manufacturer-month level. Manufacturers with fewer than 35 total
       transactions in a given year are excluded from the sample. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Regressions
       include manufacturer fixed effects. Coefficients refer to recalls during the calendar year indicated. *
       Statistically significant at 10% level. ** Statistically significant at 5% level.




                                                                                                                 50
Table 3: Quarterly Household Expenditures on Select Categories of Goods:
Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX), Interview Survey data
           All consumer units (CUs)    CUs with child(ren)<18        CUs with child(ren)<18
                                       yrs                           yrs, household head
                                                                     college grad

              2005q4     2006q4    2007q4       2005q4 2006q4        2007q4    2005q4     2006q4     2007q4

Toys, games, etc.
               54.0      57.1       72.6        110.6      105.0      139.3    123.5      121.9      167.9
               (155.3)   (163.3)   (183.9)      (222.9)    (219.3)   (246.6)   (205.6)    (224.3)    (247.8)

Clothing: children and infants
               87.0        75.5    74.1         194.7      164.3     158.2     280.5      197.0      187.2
               (306.0) (177.6)     (167.8)      (475.2)    (235.9)   (209.8)   (794.6)    (270.1)    (228.4)

Reading
              35.5       31.7      32.8         35.7       28.9      28.9      69.5       56.8       53.8
              (71.4)     (62.3)    (68.9)       (74.7)     (59.6)    (63.0)    (111.2)    (87.3)     (92.5)

TV, video hardware & software, and related equipment
             273.1      262.1      275.8         344.8     317.8     344.0      437.0      410.1     436.5
             (501.5) (402.4) (470.7)             (465.3)   (430.1)   (519.2)   (550.3)    (513.9)    (663.2)

Sample size 2,571        5,579      5,403       871       2,020    1,883        254       557        572
Notes: This table reports mean quarterly expenditures based on authors’ tabulations of data from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) Interview Survey files from
2006 and 2007, accessed through ICPSR. Data are aggregated from monthly expenditure data at the
UCC level on the MTAB files. The Toys, games, etc category is defined to be the UCC code for “toys,
games, arts and crafts, trikes, and battery powered riders”. Monthly expenditures are CPI adjusted to
2007 dollars using the BLS all urban consumers, all-items series.




                                                                                                    51
         Table 4: Unit Sales (000s) for Total Market, Top 10 Firms, and Top 2 Firms Manufacturing Outside China
                                                                                                                                      American
                       Total                                                                 Poof Toy             Jakks     Russ       Plastic
                      Market    Mattel    Leapfrog   Hasbro     RC2      Vtech     MGA Ent   Products   Tomy      Pacific   Berrie      Toys     Playmobil
2006 q1 Units Sold    43,176    10,727     4,091      2,342     2,824     1,465     1,081      548       1,089      553       864       577           372
2006 q4 Units Sold    116,356   32,579     11,495     9,888     6,441     7,194     3,670     2,280      2,594     2,448     1,337      578           986
2007 q1 Units Sold    49,937    10,819     4,827      3,037     4,867     2,017     1,267     1,021      1,710     1,225     1,019      468           369
2007 q4 Units Sold    101,640   27,014     8,999      9,632     5,707     7,272     3,319     2,384      1,050     3,378      889       732           717


2007 q4 – 2006 q4     -14,716   -5,565     -2,496     -256      -734       78        -351      104      -1,544     930       -448       154           -269
% Change:
2007 q4 vs. 2006 q4   -12.65%   -17.08%   -21.71%    -2.59%    -11.40%   1.08%      -9.56%    4.56%     -59.52%   37.99%    -33.51%    26.64%     -27.28%
Adjusted % Change:
2007 q4/q1 vs.
2006 q4/q1            -24.47%   -17.79%   -33.65%    -24.88%   -48.59%   -26.58%   -22.84%   -43.88%    -74.22%   -37.71%   -43.62%    56.14%     -26.69%


Transactions 2006q4   22,826     6,623     2,370      1,924     1,411     1,403      701       561       532       465       259         68           175
2007 Recalls                      12         0         2         3         0          0         0         0         1         0          0             0
     Notes: Based on authors’ tabulations of NPD infant/preschool sales data on units sold. The total market column includes total
     infant/preschool sales based on NPD data.




                                                                                                                                                 52
       Table 5: Unit Share by Category for Major Infant/Preschool Toy Producers
                                                                                                                                                           American
                                                                                                    Poof Toy                    Jakks        Russ           Plastic
Category                    Mattel    Leapfrog      Hasbro     RC2      Vtech     MGA Ent.          Products      Tomy          Pacific      Berrie          Toys         Playmobil
Other Infant                 27.0%       22.9%       17.5%       8.8%    20.8%        20.7%             0.0%            1.3%       2.8%       25.8%            0.0%              0.0%
Other PS                      2.1%        0.0%       29.5%       1.9%     0.0%        14.1%            99.4%            5.4%       0.9%        0.2%            0.2%              0.0%
Bath                          3.4%        0.0%        1.0%       4.0%     0.0%         5.3%             0.6%            2.3%       0.0%       47.6%            0.0%              0.0%
Infant Plush                  3.7%        4.4%        4.1%       2.3%     0.0%         0.0%             0.0%            0.0%       0.0%        0.6%            0.0%              0.0%
Mobiles                       0.1%        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%     0.0%         0.0%             0.0%            0.0%       0.0%        0.5%            0.0%              0.0%
PS Electronic Learning        6.2%       72.6%        7.2%       0.0%    79.2%         0.0%             0.0%            0.0%       1.0%        0.0%            0.0%              0.0%
PS Figures & Playsets        28.9%        0.0%       12.4%       0.1%     0.0%         2.1%             0.0%            0.0%       0.0%        0.0%            0.0%            100.0%
PS Learning                   1.0%        0.1%        2.0%       1.2%     0.0%         0.1%             0.0%            0.0%       0.0%        0.0%            0.0%              0.0%
PS Musical Instruments        1.2%        0.0%        0.1%       0.0%     0.0%        12.9%             0.0%            0.0%       0.0%        0.0%            0.0%              0.0%
PS Role Playing               6.0%        0.1%        5.1%       2.8%     0.0%        15.2%             0.0%            0.0%      84.0%        0.0%           67.0%              0.0%
PS Talking & Sound            9.3%        0.0%        1.7%       2.8%     0.0%         2.9%             0.0%            0.4%      10.9%        0.0%            0.0%              0.0%
PS Vehicles                  10.2%        0.0%       19.3%      72.2%     0.0%        26.6%             0.0%           90.5%       0.4%        0.0%           32.9%              0.0%
Rattles/Toy Teethers          0.9%        0.0%        0.0%       4.0%     0.0%         0.0%             0.0%            0.0%       0.0%       25.2%            0.0%              0.0%
HHI                           1,863         5,811     1,809     5,347     6,701           1,776         9,878          8,230      7,182        3,572              5,564        10,000
       Note:     Authors’     tabulations      of    NPD      Infant/Preschool    sales      data     on       units     sold     in      quarter      4     of      2006.




                                                                                                                                                                          53
Table 6: OLS Difference-in-Difference Analysis of the Impact of a Recall during the Year on
Manufacturer-Category and Property-Category Quarter 4 Units Sold
          (A) Manufacturer-Category Sample                          (B) Property-Category Sample
                                              Top 15                                       All     Top 15
Dependent Variable: Log(Units)   All Firms     Firms    Dependent Variable: Log(Units) Properties Properties
I(07 Recall to Man/Cat)            -0.328*    -0.385*   I(07 Recall to Prop/Cat)         -0.131     -0.183
                                   (0.189)    (0.212)                                    (0.249)    (0.272)
I(07 Recall to Manuf)              0.326*     0.432*    I(07 Recall to Prop)              0.066      0.005
                                   (0.182)    (0.239)                                    (0.212)    (0.272)
I(06 Recall to Man/Cat)             -0.118     0.073    I(06 Recall to Prop/Cat)         -0.130     -0.155
                                   (0.281)    (0.239)                                    (0.358)    (0.380)
I(06 Recall to Manuf)               -0.058     -0.004   I(06 Recall to Prop)             -0.158     -0.184
                                   (0.160)    (0.224)                                    (0.255)    (0.280)
I(05 Recall to Man/Cat)            0.529**    0.539**   I(05 Recall to Prop/Cat)            -          -
                                   (0.202)    (0.117)
I(05 Recall to Manuf)              -0.257*     -0.051   I(05 Recall to Prop)              -           -
                                   (0.145)    (0.171)
I(2007)                           -0.269**     -0.227   I(2007)                        -0.110       0.095
                                   (0.099)    (0.144)                                  (0.129)     (0.204)
I(2006)                             -0.080     -0.008   I(2006)                         0.088       0.213
                                   (0.097)    (0.169)                                  (0.104)     (0.132)
Constant                         11.447**    12.296**   Constant                      11.559**    12.081***
                                   (0.066)    (0.089)                                  (0.075)     (0.094)
N                                    609        258     N                                483         201
r2                                  0.879      0.914    r2                              0.838       0.906


# of Manuf/Categories              203         86       # of Props or Prop/Cats         161          67
# I(07 Recall to Man/Cat)           13         11       # I(07 Recall to Prop/Cat)       12          11
# I(07 Recall to Manuf)             56         45       # I(07 Recall to Prop)           44          34
# I(06 Recall to Man/Cat)           6          5        # I(06 Recall to Prop/Cat)       2           2
# I(06 Recall to Manuf)             59         52       # I(06 Recall to Prop)           23          23
# I(05 Recall to Man/Cat)           2          1        # I(05 Recall to Prop/Cat)        0           0
# I(05 Recall to Manuf)             26         13       # I(05 Recall to Prop)            0           0
Notes: Firm and property ranks determined by total units sold in 2005. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. Regressions include manufacturer-category fixed effects in Panel A and property-
category fixed effects in Panel B. Coefficients refer to recalls during the calendar year indicated. *
Statistically significant at 10% level. ** Statistically significant at 5% level.




                                                                                                          54
Table 7: OLS Difference-in-Difference Analysis of the Impact of a Recall during the Year on
Manufacturer-Category Quarter 4 Units Sold by Level of News Coverage
                                                                         Exclude
                                                               All      Non-Lead
                        Dependent Variable: Log(Units)                   Recalls
                        I(Low Coverage Man/Cat)               0.178        0.496
                                                             (0.179)      (0.319)
                        I(Low Coverage Man)                   -0.089      -0.030
                                                             (0.130)      (0.278)
                        I(Medium Coverage Man/Cat)           -0.533*      -0.141
                                                             (0.282)      (0.476)
                        I(Medium Coverage Man)                0.429*       0.637
                                                             (0.261)      (0.488)
                        I(High Coverage Man/Cat)            -0.429**     -0.705**
                                                             (0.182)      (0.217)
                        I(High Coverage Man)                0.835**      1.208**
                                                             (0.345)      (0.542)
                        I(2007)                             -0.220**     -0.300**
                                                             (0.089)      (0.106)
                        I(2006)                               -0.093      -0.128
                                                             (0.081)      (0.103)
                        Constant                            11.396**     11.297**
                                                             (0.061)      (0.073)
                        N                                      609          517
                        r2                                    0.879        0.874

                        # I(Low Coverage Man/Cat)              11           2
                        # I(Low Coverage Man)                  68           15
                        # I(Medium Coverage Man/Cat)            2            1
                        # I(Medium Coverage Man)               60           22
                        # I(High Coverage Man/Cat)              8            8
                        # I(High Coverage Man)                 13           13
Notes: News coverage measured by counting the number of articles mentioning the name of the
company and the words “toy” and “recall” in the LexisNexis database of Major US and World
Publications in the 30 days following the recall. Low news coverage corresponds to recalls with less
than 10 articles, medium to recalls with 11 to 100 articles, and high coverage to recalls with more
than 100 articles. If a manufacturer-category is effected by more than one recall in the preceding
year, the number of articles are summed over all recalls. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Regressions include manufacturer-category fixed effects. Coefficients refer to recalls during the
calendar year indicated. * Statistically significant at 10% level. ** Statistically significant at 5% level.




                                                                                                         55
Table 8: RC2 Recall of “Thomas and Friends” - June 2007 & September 2007
Quantity Changes (000s of units)
                                                RC2                                        Non-RC2
                                                      Non-Thomas &
                             Thomas & Friends             Friends          Thomas & Friends    Non-Thomas & Friends
                                        Non-                    Non-                  Non-                  Non-
                            Vehicles   Vehicles Vehicles       Vehicles  Vehicles   Vehicles    Vehicles  Vehicles
                                (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)
2006 q1 Units Sold            1,452        -          377         989      1,213       160        2,622     36,357
2006 q2 Units Sold            1,319        -          358         785      1,242       122        2,577     31,214
2006 q3 Units Sold            1,785        -          320         718      1,034       163        3,111     35,877
2006 q4 Units Sold            3,860        -          790        1,726     2,738       603        9,230     97,344
2007 q1 Units Sold            3,097        -          900         861      1,787       290        3,099     39,894
2007 q2 Units Sold            2,291        -          645         819      1,063       363        2,566     29,814
2007 q3 Units Sold            2,005        -          554        1,039     1,200       158        2,305     34,210
2007 q4 Units Sold            3,420        -          736        1,535     2,303       566        8,705     84,359
2007 q4 – 2006 q4              -440        -          -54        -191      -435        -37        -525     -12,985
% Change:
2007 q4 vs. 2006 q4         -11.40%        -        -6.84%     -11.07%   -15.89%     -6.14%      -5.69%   -13.34%
Adjusted % Change:
2007 q4/q1 vs. 2006 q4/q1   -58.46%        -       -60.97%      2.16%    -42.91%    -48.21%     -20.20%   -21.02%

Transactions 2006q4              866            6           182           357           520             141          1,881          18,873
June 13, 2007 & September 26, 2007: Lead related recall of “Various Thomas and Friends™ Wooden Railway Toys”; 1,500,000 units worth
$60,000,000 and 200,000 units worth $5,000,000, respectively. Figures are not calculated for cells with fewer than 35 transactions.




                                                                                                                            56
    Table 9: Mattel’s Dora Recall (August 2007)
    Quantity Changes (000s of units)
                                                    Mattel                                                   Non-Mattel
                                  Dora the Explorer     Non-Dora the Explorer                Dora the Explorer     Non-Dora the Explorer
                                              Non-                    Non-                               Non-                   Non-
                                Figures & Figures & Figures & Figures &                   Figures &    Figures & Figures & Figures &
                                 Playsets    Playsets    Playsets    Playsets              Playsets     Playsets   Playsets    Playsets
                                    (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)                   (5)          (6)         (7)        (8)
2006 q1 Units Sold                  872        431          2,430      6,994                   -          225         1,217     31,007
2006 q2 Units Sold                  856        288          1,951      5,413                   -          178          732      28,201
2006 q3 Units Sold                  425        280          2,459      7,565                   -          150          791      31,339
2006 q4 Units Sold                1,246       1,071         8,163     22,099                   -          820         3,217     79,740
2007 q1 Units Sold                  486        470          2,576      7,287                   -          216         1,365     37,537
2007 q2 Units Sold                  243        357          1,298      6,400                   -          146          575      28,542
2007 q3 Units Sold                  344        301          1,511      6,849                   -          317          800      31,353
2007 q4 Units Sold                  329       1,192         5,336     20,157                   -         1,113        1,898     71,615
2007 q4 – 2006 q4                  -917        121         -2,827     -1,942                   -          293        -1,319     -8,125
% Change:
2007 q4 vs. 2006 q4              -73.60%        11.30%        -34.63%        -8.79%            -           35.73%        -41.00%   -10.19%
Adjusted % Change:
2007 q4/q1 vs. 2006 q4/q1        -52.62%         2.06%        -38.34%       -12.46%            -           41.39%        -47.40%   -25.81%

Transactions 2006q4                 215             198          1,800          4,410         0               135           579    15,489
   August 2, 2007: Lead related recall of “Sesame Street, Dora the Explorer, and other children's toys”; 967,000 units worth
   $21,800,000. Figures are not calculated for cells with fewer than 35 transactions.




                                                                                                                                      57
    Table 10: Mattel’s Sesame Street Recall (August 2007)
    Quantity Changes (000s of units)
                                                    Mattel                                                  Non-Mattel
                                  Sesame Street             Non-Sesame Street                Sesame Street           Non-Sesame Street
                                              Non-                      Non-                           Non-                     Non-
                              Recalled       Recalled     Recalled   Recalled           Recalled      Recalled    Recalled    Recalled
                             Categories Categories Categories Categories               Categories   Categories Categories Categories
                                 (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)               (5)           (6)          (7)        (8)
2006 q1 Units Sold               965            -            8,557      1,115              88             -         26,377      5,982
2006 q2 Units Sold               805            -            6,874       775               38             -         22,805      6,264
2006 q3 Units Sold               762            -            8,752      1,179              63             -         25,862      6,332
2006 q4 Units Sold              3,141           -           26,829      2,511             232             -         66,984     16,309
2007 q1 Units Sold              1,298           -            8,680       809               68             -         31,105      7,890
2007 q2 Units Sold               794            -            6,627       851               43             -         22,836      6,365
2007 q3 Units Sold               851            -            7,334       810               53             -         25,155      7,237
2007 q4 Units Sold              2,011           -           22,636      2,322             195             -         58,159     16,208
2007 q4 – 2006 q4              -1,130           -           -4,193      -189              -37             -         -8,825      -101
% Change:
2007 q4 vs. 2006 q4           -35.98%           -          -15.63%     -7.53%            -15.95%           -          -13.17%        -0.62%
Adjusted % Change:
2007 q4/q1 vs. 2006 q4/q1     -52.40%           -          -16.82%    27.45%              8.77%            -          -26.37%       -24.65%

Transactions 2006q4               562            30          5,468          563            52              35           12,412        3,704
    August 2, 2007: Lead related recall of “Sesame Street, Dora the Explorer, and other children's toys”; 967,000 units worth $21,800,000.
    Recalled Categories include All Other Infant Toys, Bath Toys, Electronic Learning, Figures & Playsets, Learning Toys, Role Playing,
    Talking & Sound, and VehiclesFigures are not calculated for cells with fewer than 35 transactions.




                                                                                                                                       58
Table 11: Average CARs in Response to Toy Recall Announcements
                                              %
   Sample       Window     Mean CAR     N     <0
 2004 - 2006   [0,1]         0.0014     12 50%
                            (0.0057)
 2004 - 2006   [-1,1]        -0.0069    12 50%
                            (0.0070)

 2007            [0,1]              -0.0089       13 69%
                                   (0.0070)
 2007             [-1,1]            -0.0037       13 46%
                                   (0.0086)
Notes: This table presents average cumulative abnormal returns for 2-Day and 3-Day windows for
recalls to publicly traded toy producers. Standard errors are in parentheses. * Statistically significant
at 10% level. ** Statistically significant at 5% level.




                                                                                                      59
Table 12: Abnormal and Cumulative Abnormal Returns by Toy Recall Announcement
                                              Abnormal Return                CAR
                          Event
Firm                      Date       Day -1        Day 0         Day 1      (0, 10)
Hasbro (Easy-Bake)        2/6/07      0.0016       -0.0047       0.0052     0.0010
                                     (0.0107)      (0.0108)     (0.0108)   (0.0358)
Jakks Pacific             2/13/07     0.0099        0.0196       0.0197    0.1679*
                                     (0.0257)      (0.0258)     (0.0260)   (0.0860)
Mattel (Fisher-Price)     2/15/07     0.0019       -0.0033      -0.0155    -0.0140
                                     (0.0146)      (0.0145)     (0.0144)   (0.0484)
RC2                       6/13/07    -0.0114       -0.0097      -0.0242    -0.0636
                                     (0.0184)      (0.0186)     (0.0183)   (0.0610)
Hasbro (Easy-Bake)        7/19/07    -0.0053       -0.0061       0.0014    -0.1125**
                                     (0.0131)      (0.0132)     (0.0132)    (0.0439)
Mattel (Fisher-Price)     8/2/07     0.0256*      -0.0234*      -0.0025    -0.0534
                                     (0.0135)     (0.0135)      (0.0142)   (0.0465)
Mattel#                   8/14/07    0.0263**      -0.0099      -0.0085    -0.0910**
                                     (0.0116)      (0.0116)     (0.0116)    (0.0385)
Mattel (Fisher-Price)#ψ   9/4/07     -0.0126        0.0056       0.0090     0.0471
                                     (0.0120)      (0.0120)     (0.0120)   (0.0399)
RC2#                      9/26/07    -0.0199      -0.0910**     0.0469**   -0.0320
                                     (0.0232)      (0.0230)     (0.0231)   (0.0767)
Mattel (Fisher-Price)     10/25/07   -0.0197       -0.0051       0.0024    -0.0194
                                     (0.0125)      (0.0124)     (0.0125)   (0.0418)
Henry Gordy               10/31/07    0.0057        0.0142      -0.0072    -0.0806
                                     (0.0325)      (0.0326)     (0.0333)   (0.1097)
Mattel (Fisher-Price)     11/6/07    0.0430**      -0.0106      -0.0051    -0.0049
                                     (0.0124)      (0.0125)     (0.0127)   (0.0420)
Marvel                    11/8/07     0.0233       -0.0157       0.0026     0.0350
                                     (0.0154)      (0.0160)     (0.0157)   (0.0510)
Notes: This table presents Abnormal Returns and Cumulative Abnormal Returns for each 2007 toy
recall announcement to a publicly traded firm. Standard errors are in parentheses. No recall
announcements prior to 2007 are associated with statistically significant losses. # These events
involved multiple recalls by the same firm on the same date. ψ Two recalls named Fisher-Price and
one named Mattel directly on this day. * Statistically significant at 10% level. ** Statistically
significant at 5% level.




                                                                                              60
Appendix Table 1: Top 30 Infant/PS Toy Manufacturers by Units and Dollars Sold in 2005
                                               Units                           Dollars
Manufacturer                          Units      Share Rank            Dollars     Share Rank
MATTEL                              63,681,000 27.33%           1    836,217,397 29.37%     1
LEAPFROG                            23,930,000 10.27%           2    502,905,600 17.66%     2
HASBRO                              15,302,000    6.57%         3    189,462,406    6.66%   4
RC2                                 12,853,000    5.52%         4    128,961,996    4.53%   5
VTECH                                8,005,000    3.44%         5    219,253,221    7.70%   3
MGA ENT                              7,502,000    3.22%         6    105,304,050    3.70%   6
POOF TOY PRODUCTS                    4,639,000    1.99%         7      8,929,509    0.31%  30
TOMY                                 3,718,000    1.60%         8     42,732,899    1.50%   7
JAKKS PACIF                          3,510,000    1.51%         9     42,147,529    1.48%   8
RUSS BERRIE                          3,383,000    1.45%       10      18,518,206    0.65%  14
KIDS II                              3,315,000    1.42%       11      23,111,444    0.81%  11
POP ROCKET                           3,218,000    1.38%       12      16,093,219    0.57%  20
SHELCORE                             2,479,000    1.06%       13      21,561,458    0.76%  13
KEENWAY INDUSTRIES                   2,137,000    0.92%       14      16,436,665    0.58%  19
AMERICAN PLASTIC TOYS                2,085,000    0.89%       15      16,499,829    0.58%  18
BATTAT                               2,077,000    0.89%       16      15,251,688    0.54%  21
DISCOVERY TOYS                       1,728,000    0.74%       17      17,414,861    0.61%  15
PLAYMOBIL                            1,649,000    0.71%       18      22,632,581    0.79%  12
KID DESIGNS                          1,605,000    0.69%       19      35,076,591    1.23%   9
BRIO                                 1,554,000    0.67%       20      17,158,077    0.60%  16
BLUE BOX                             1,544,000    0.66%       21      12,544,836    0.44%  24
INTERNATIONAL                        1,435,000    0.62%       22       9,718,014    0.34%  29
PLAYTHINGS
LIGHTS CAMERA                        1,383,000    0.59%       23      16,578,241    0.58%  17
INTERACTION
PLAY HUT                             1,371,000    0.59%       24      23,907,704    0.84%  10
PROCESSED PLASTIC                    1,318,000    0.57%       25      12,575,435    0.44%  23
JAK PAK                              1,317,000    0.57%       26       2,850,310    0.10%  77
PLAYWELL TOYS                        1,231,000    0.53%       27       7,162,105    0.25%  35
MUNCHKIN                             1,211,000    0.52%       28       6,567,005    0.23%  36
LEARNING RESOURCES                   1,132,000    0.49%       29       8,192,881    0.29%  33
BABYKING/REGENT BABY                 1,117,000    0.48%       30       2,688,862    0.09%  81
PROD
Source: Authors’ tabulations of NPD Infant/Preschool toy sales data.




                                                                                        61
 Appendix Table 2: Infant/PS Toy Categories by Units and Dollars Sold in 2005

                                                Units                             Dollars
Category                            Units        Share     Rank         Dollars     Share    Rank
ALL OTHER INFANT TOYS               41,046,000 17.62%           1       546,430,267 19.19%      2
PS ELECTRONIC LEARNING 33,346,000 14.31%                        2       722,107,347 25.36%      1
PS VEHICLES                         30,381,000 13.04%           3       356,286,556 12.51%      3
PS FIGURES & PLAYSETS               26,035,000 11.17%           4       301,424,560 10.59%      4
PS ROLE PLAYING                     22,581,000     9.69%        5       286,944,410 10.08%      5
ALL OTHER PS TOYS                   21,873,000     9.39%        6       190,159,517    6.68%    6
BATH TOYS                           16,650,000     7.15%        7        82,159,384    2.89%    8
PS LEARNING TOYS                    11,420,000     4.90%        8        78,008,172    2.74%   10
PS TALKING & SOUND                  10,437,000     4.48%        9        91,937,048    3.23%    7
INFANT PLUSH                          7,315,000   3.14%       10         82,137,614    2.89%    9
RATTLES/TOY TEETHERS                  6,768,000    2.90%      11         27,393,000    0.96%   12
PS MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                4,113,000    1.77%      12         62,552,445    2.20%   11
MOBILES                               1,047,000   0.45%       13         19,371,853    0.68%   13
 Source: Authors’ tabulations of NPD Infant/Preschool toy sales data.




                                                                                              62
Appendix Table 3: Top 30 Infant/PS Properties by Units and Dollars Sold in 2005

                                     Units                  Dollars
Property                      Units        Rank      Dollars         Rank
LEAPPAD                         12,136,000    1        217,502,842      1
THOMAS AND FRIENDS              11,954,000    2        142,400,779      4
PLAYSKOOL                       10,722,000    3        139,057,960      5
LITTLE PEOPLE                    8,790,000    4        119,561,012      6
LITTLE TIKES                     7,640,000    5        106,935,615      7
V SMILE                          6,065,000    6        187,978,671      2
SESAME STREET                    5,453,000    7         60,295,147     10
DORA THE EXPLORER                5,238,000    8         72,189,046      9
LEAPSTER                         4,919,000    9        153,090,041      3
LAUGH & LEARN                    3,674,000   10         75,907,197      8
IMAGINEXT                        3,621,000   11         38,746,552     15
BRILLIANT BASICS                 3,518,000   12         30,983,486     21
WINNIE THE POOH & FRIENDS        3,449,000   13         40,206,644     14
PEEK-A-BLOCKS                    3,369,000   14         47,563,663     11
GEOTRAX                          3,325,000   15         44,790,508     12
RESCUE HEROES                    3,186,000   16         33,460,107     19
CRAYOLA                          2,924,000   17         12,393,700     38
POWERTOUCH                       2,875,000   18         37,245,521     17
TONKA                            2,855,000   19         38,697,565     16
MR. POTATO HEAD                  2,688,000   20         22,785,995     22
ROLL-A-ROUNDS                    2,280,000   21         32,133,266     20
DISNEY PRINCESS                  2,259,000   22         35,971,208     18
SEE N SAY                        2,041,000   23         18,659,423     28
LINK-A-DOOS                      1,771,000   24         19,208,461     27
STAR WARS                        1,756,000   25         15,910,056     29
PLAYMOBIL                        1,649,000   26         22,632,581     23
BARBIE                           1,632,000   27         41,097,587     13
FISHER PRICE                     1,383,000   28         14,139,997     36
MICKEY & FRIENDS                 1,349,000   29         15,336,553     32
SPIDERMAN                        1,321,000   30         19,434,526     26
Source:  Authors’ tabulations of    NPD     Infant/Preschool     toy    sales     data.




                                                                                    63
Appendix Table 4: Characteristics of 2007 Toy Recalls
                                                                                                                   Manuf      Manuf     Item in
                                                                                                       News
                        Announce.                                    Product        Units             Articles:   in Stock   in Sales    Sales
    Manufacturer          Date                 Product                Price        Recalled    Lead   Day 1-30      Data       Data      Data
 Geometrix                          MagneBlocks™ Magnetic
 International LLC        1/18/07   Construction Toys                 $20 - $120     40,000              1
                                    Plush Baby Rattles and Photo
 Target                   1/18/07   Frame Ornaments                          $1     450,000              0                      X
 Hasbro (Easy-Bake)        2/6/07   Easy-Bake Ovens                         $25     985,000              5           X          X
 JAKKS Pacific Inc.       2/13/07   Battery Packs for Toy Vehicles     $30 - $90    245,000              1           X          X
 Mattel Inc. (Fisher-
 Price Inc.)              2/15/07   Learning Bunny Toys                     $15     500,000              19          X          X         X
                                    Link-N-Lite™ Magnetic Light-
 Jazwares, Inc.           2/15/07   Up Puzzles                              $15      30,000              0
 Sportcraft Ltd.          2/27/07   Bounce Houses                    $200 - $300      2,600              0
 Toys R Us Inc.           3/13/07   Toy Sets                           $15 - $30    128,700     X        5                      X


                                    Radio Control Model Airplanes
 Estes-Cox Corp.          3/27/07   with Lithium Polymer Batteries     $30 - $35     66,000              0
 Regent Products
 Corp.                    3/28/07   Stuffed Fun Balls                        $1       7,200     X        0                      X
 OKK Trading Inc.          4/4/07   dolls                                    $1       3,500              1
                                    Little Tree Wood Activity Cart
 Target                    4/4/07   Toys                                    $20      18,500              0                      X
 Small World Toys         4/11/07   Puzzle                                  $16      78,500              1                      X
 Mega Brands
 America, Inc.
 (Magnetix)               4/19/07   Magnetix Recall Expanded           $20 - $60   4,000,000             17                     X




                                                                                                                                              64
                                                                                                                    Manuf      Manuf     Item in
                                                                                                        News
                         Announce.                                     Product       Units             Articles:   in Stock   in Sales    Sales
   Manufacturer            Date                  Product                Price       Recalled    Lead   Day 1-30      Data       Data      Data
                                     Soft Blocks Tower Toys (on
                                     Graco® Baby Einstein®
Graco Children's                     discover and play™ Activity
Products Inc.               5/2/07   Centers)                                $80      40,000              1                      X
HaPe International                   Anima - Bamboo Collection
Ltd.                        5/2/07   Games                                   $10       5,000     X        0
                                     Parents® Magazine Record-A-
Battat Inc.                 5/3/07   Voice Toy Cell Phones                    $8      14,000              1                      X         X
                                     IQ Preschool™ Take-Apart
Small World Toys            5/3/07   Townhouse                               $21       8,800              1                      X
Bookspan                   5/17/07   Discovery Bunny Books               $8 - $16     16,000              1
Bookspan                   5/17/07   Baby Buddy Clip-on Books           $17 - $27      9,500              1
                                     Invincibles Transport
AAFES                      5/23/07   Converters Toy Sets                     $20       3,000     X        1
Tri-Star International               Ball Rattles, Wrist Rattles,
Inc.                       5/23/07   Wind-Up Toys                             $1       2,000              0                      X
The Boyds                            Eli's Small Drums and Liberty's
Collections Ltd.           5/30/07   Large Drums                             $15       4,500     X        1
Gemmy Industries
Corp.                       6/7/07   Floating Eyeballs                        $3         500              1
                                     Various Thomas and Friends™
RC2 Corp.                  6/13/07   Wooden Railway Toys                $10 - $70   1,500,000    X        28          X          X         X
                                     Play Wonder Toy Barbeque
Target                     6/28/07   Grills                                  $20       2,300              0                      X
Dorel (Infantino)           7/3/07   Shape Sorting Toy Castles               $12      68,000              0                      X         X


Kipp Brothers               7/5/07   Mag Stix Magnetic Building Sets          $3         800              2
                                                                                                                                               65
                                                                                                                 Manuf      Manuf     Item in
                                                                                                     News
                       Announce.                                    Product       Units             Articles:   in Stock   in Sales    Sales
   Manufacturer          Date                  Product               Price       Recalled    Lead   Day 1-30      Data       Data      Data
AAFES                    7/18/07   Soldier Bear Brand Toy Sets        $5 - $15     13,000     X        2
Hasbro (Easy-Bake)       7/19/07   Easy-Bake Ovens                        $25    1,000,000             25          X          X
                                   Sky Rangers Park Flyer Radio
Estes-Cox Corp.          7/24/07   Control Airplanes                 $20 - $40     21,000              1                      X
                                   Sesame Street, Dora the
Mattel Inc. (Fisher-               Explorer, and other children's
Price Inc.)               8/2/07   toys                               $5 - $40    967,000     X       513          X          X         X
                                   Stuffed Plush Horse/Pillows
The Orvis Company         8/3/07   and Fairy Dolls                        $70       1,520              1
                                   Various Polly Pocket dolls and
Mattel Inc.              8/14/07   accessories with magnets          $15 - $30   7,300,000            551          X          X
Mattel Inc.              8/14/07   Doggie Day Care™ play sets         $4 - $20   1,000,000            551          X          X
Mattel Inc.              8/14/07   Barbie and Tanner™ play sets           $16     683,000             551          X          X
Mattel Inc.              8/14/07   die cast toy cars                  $7 - $20    253,000     X       551          X          X
                                   Batman™ and One Piece™
Mattel Inc.              8/14/07   magnetic action figure sets            $11     345,000             551          X          X
Hampton Direct           8/21/07   Magnetic Toy Train Sets                $30      27,000     X        2
Schylling Associates
Inc.                     8/22/07   Spinning Tops and Tin Pails        $6 - $13     70,700     X        7                      X
Mattel Inc. (Fisher-               Big Big World 6-in-1 Bongo
Price Inc.)               9/4/07   Band toys                              $20       8,900     X       254          X          X
Mattel Inc. (Fisher-
Price Inc.)               9/4/07   Geo Trax Locomotive Toys           $3 - $16     90,000     X       254          X          X         X
Mattel Inc.               9/4/07   Various Barbie Accessory Toys          $10     675,000     X       254          X          X
Guidecraft Inc.          9/26/07   Floor Puppet Theaters                  $90      10,000     X        3                      X
Jo-Ann Stores Inc.       9/26/07   Children's Toy Rake                     $7      16,000     X        3
RC2 Corp.                9/26/07   Series Toys                             $8         800     X        20          X          X
                                                                                                                                            66
                                                                                                                 Manuf      Manuf     Item in
                                                                                                     News
                       Announce.                                    Product       Units             Articles:   in Stock   in Sales    Sales
   Manufacturer          Date                Product                 Price       Recalled    Lead   Day 1-30      Data       Data      Data
                                   Various Thomas and Friends™
RC2 Corp.                9/26/07   Wooden Railway Toys               $10 - $40    200,000     X        20          X          X         X
                                   Happy Giddy Gardening Tools
                                   and Children's Sunny Patch
Target                   9/26/07   Chairs                             $3 - $10    350,000     X        0                      X
Lan Enterprises          9/28/07   Mini Zooper Doll Strollers             $50      21,000              0
CKI Toys                 10/4/07   Children's Toy Decorating Set          $10      15,000     X        29
                                   “Pirates of the Caribbean”
Eveready Battery Co.     10/4/07   Medallion Squeeze Lights                $6      79,000     X        3                      X

                                   Wooden Pull-Along Alphabet &
                                   Math Blocks Wagons, Wooden
                                   Pull-Along Learning Blocks
                                   Wagons, 10-in-1 Activity
                                   Learning Carts, and Flip-Flop
Mykids                   10/4/07   Alphabet Blocks                    $7 - $30     10,000     X        4                      X         X
                                   Baby Einstein Discover & Play
Kids II Inc.             10/4/07   Color Blocks                      $10 - $13     35,000     X        3                      X         X
                                   Disney™ Deluxe Winnie-the-
JCPenney                10/11/07   Pooh 23-Piece Play Sets                $40      49,000     X        2                      X
Kipp Brothers           10/11/07   Bendable Dinosaur Toys                 $10      10,000     X        2
                                   Pink and Orange Glow Sticks
Dunkin’ Donuts LLC      10/17/07   (free giveaway w/ donuts)             Free    1,000,000             1
The Gymboree Corp.      10/18/07   Toy Pirate Swords                      $15       6,000              1
Mattel Inc. (Fisher-               Go Diego Go Animal Rescue
Price Inc.)             10/25/07   Boats                                  $15      38,000     X       116          X          X         X


Jo-Ann Stores Inc.      10/25/07   Children's Toy Gardening Tools          $7      97,000     X        2
                                                                                                                                            67
                                                                                                                 Manuf      Manuf     Item in
                                                                                                     News
                       Announce.                                    Product       Units             Articles:   in Stock   in Sales    Sales
    Manufacturer         Date                   Product              Price       Recalled    Lead   Day 1-30      Data       Data      Data
Henry Gordy
International Inc.      10/31/07   “Galaxy Warriors” Toy Figures           $1     380,000     X        1           X
SimplyFun LLC           10/31/07   Ribbit Board Games                     $18       1,500     X        1
Toys R Us Inc.          10/31/07   Elite Operations Toys             $10 - $30     16,000     X        41                     X
Mattel Inc. (Fisher-               Laugh & Learn™ Learning
Price Inc.)              11/6/07   Kitchen™ Toys                          $70     155,000             101          X          X         X
Swimways Corp.           11/6/07   “Skippy” Pool Toys                     $10      31,000              1                      X
Dollar General           11/7/07   Pull-Back Action Toy Cars               $1     380,000     X        7
International
Sourcing Ltd.            11/7/07   Dragster and Funny Car                           7,500     X        0
Schylling Associates
Inc.                     11/7/07   Robot 2000                             $25       2,600     X        1                      X
Schylling Associates
Inc.                     11/7/07   Dizzy Ducks Music Box                  $12       1,300     X        1                      X
Schylling Associates
Inc.                     11/7/07   Winnie-the-Pooh Spinning Top           $12       3,600     X        1                      X
Schylling Associates               Duck Family Collectable Wind-
Inc.                     11/7/07   Up Toy                                  $8       3,500     X        1                      X
Spin Master Toys         11/7/07   Aqua Dots                         $17 - $30   4,200,000             17                     X
Marvel Toys              11/8/07   Curious George Plush Dolls             $15     175,000     X        3           X
Paricon Inc.            11/21/07   Snow and Sand Castle Kit               $30         800              0
Bell Racing              12/5/07   Collectible Mini Helmets               $40       1,400     X        0
Far East Brokers and
Consulting Inc.         12/12/07   Fishing Games                          $10      14,000     X        1
                                   Baby Toys Baby Bead & Wire
                                   Toys and Speed Racer Pull Back
Dollar Tree             12/13/07   & Go Action! Cars                       $1     300,000     X        1

                                                                                                                                            68
                                                                                                                  Manuf      Manuf     Item in
                                                                                                      News
                       Announce.                                   Product      Units                Articles:   in Stock   in Sales    Sales
    Manufacturer         Date                 Product               Price      Recalled     Lead     Day 1-30      Data       Data      Data
                                   Children's Robbie Ducky
 Jo-Ann Stores Inc.     12/13/07   Holiday Water Globes                   $5          60      X          2
 AAFES                  12/19/07   Soldier Bear Toys                  $5-$20      11,400      X          1
                                   Holiday Cosmetics Stuffer
 Victoria's Secret      12/19/07   Bears                                  $8          80                 1
 Man's Trading
 Company                12/21/07   Super Magnets                          $1       2,800                 0
 eeBoo Corp.            12/27/07   Tot Tower toy blocks                  $20     170,000                 2                     X         X
Source: Recall announcements listed on CPSC website. Parentheses indicate division or subsidiary directly named in recall announcement.
Lead indicates that the recall was due to the finding of lead in the item. Shaded rows indicate recalls analyzed in case studies (Tables 8-10).
News articles indicate the number of articles mentioning the name of the company and the words “toy” and “recall” in the LexisNexis
database of Major US and World Publications.




                                                                                                                                             69
         Appendix Table 5: Dollar Sales (000s) for Total Market, Top 10 Firms, and Top 2 Firms Manufacturing Outside China
                                                                                                  Poof                                   American
                       Total                                                                      Toy                Jakks     Russ       Plastic
                      Market       Mattel    Leapfrog   Hasbro     RC2      Vtech     MGA Ent   Products   Tomy      Pacific   Berrie      Toys     Playmobil
2006 q1 Units Sold    474,128     135,382     80,446    27,698    27,713    30,810     15,990     1,164    10,043     4,502     4,038      3,218          3,879
2006 q4 Units Sold    1,610,731   479,136    244,539    130,786   72,380    166,765    53,418     2,804    34,685    26,238     6,087     10,083         12,425
2007 q1 Units Sold    499,771     129,156     75,319    32,483    40,343    37,225     17,701     1,241    15,191     8,078     5,420      2,566          5,017
2007 q4 Units Sold    1,416,610   426,201    182,973    118,526   68,544    150,724    63,093     4,803    10,897    39,559     7,043     10,167         11,800


2007 q4 – 2006 q4     -194,120     -52,935    -61,566   -12,261   -3,836    -16,041    9,675      1,999    -23,788   13,321     956         84            -625
% Change:
2007 q4 vs. 2006 q4   -12.05%     -11.05%    -25.18%    -9.37%    -5.30%    -9.62%     18.11%    71.30%    -68.58%   50.77%    15.71%     0.83%          -5.03%
Adjusted % Change:
2007 q4/q1 vs.
2006 q4/q1            -16.56%      -6.76%    -20.08%    -22.73%   -34.95%   -25.19%    6.70%     60.59%    -79.23%   -15.98%   -13.79%    26.44%         -26.57%


Transactions 2006q4    22,826      6,623      2,370      1,924     1,411     1,403      701       561       532       465       259         68            175
2007 Recalls                         12         0         2         3         0          0         0         0         1         0          0              0
      Notes: Based on authors’ tabulations of NPD infant/preschool sales data on dollars sold. The total market column includes total
      infant/preschool sales based on NPD data.




                                                                                                                                                    70
Appendix Table 6: OLS difference-in-difference analysis of the impact of a recall during the
year on manufacturer-category and property-category quarter 4 sales

         (A) Manufacturer-Category Sample                        (B) Property-Category Sample
Dependent Variable: Log(Dollar            Top 15     Dependent Variable: Log(Dollar     All     Top 15
Sales)                         All Firms  Firms      Sales)                         Properties Properties
I(07 Recall to Man/Cat)           -0.342   -0.372    I(07 Recall to Prop/Cat)          0.202      0.120
                                 (0.225)  (0.231)                                     (0.398)    (0.434)
I(07 Recall to Manuf)            0.464**  0.451*     I(07 Recall to Prop)              0.055      0.070
                                 (0.199)  (0.251)                                     (0.224)    (0.296)
I(06 Recall to Man/Cat)            0.109    0.315    I(06 Recall to Prop/Cat)          0.373      0.358
                                 (0.299)  (0.276)                                     (0.436)    (0.462)
I(06 Recall to Manuf)             -0.028    0.017    I(06 Recall to Prop)             -0.280     -0.385
                                 (0.186)  (0.251)                                     (0.279)    (0.335)
I(05 Recall to Man/Cat)          0.447*   0.595**    I(05 Recall to Prop/Cat)            -          -
                                 (0.244)  (0.249)
I(05 Recall to Manuf)             -0.144   -0.005    I(05 Recall to Prop)              -           -
                                 (0.195)  (0.210)
I(2007)                         -0.272**   -0.230    I(2007)                        -0.183       -0.005
                                 (0.114)  (0.160)                                   (0.134)     (0.214)
I(2006)                           -0.058   -0.047    I(2006)                         0.098       0.291
                                 (0.117)  (0.189)                                   (0.118)     (0.200)
Constant                       13.579**  14.575**    Constant                      14.003**    14.562***
                                 (0.080)  (0.107)                                   (0.085)     (0.127)
N                                   615      261     N                                492         207
r2                                 0.872   0.911     r2                              0.843       0.880


# of Manuf/Categories          203          86       # of Props or Prop/Cats         164          69
# I(07 Recall to Man/Cat)       13          11       # I(07 Recall to Prop/Cat)       13          12
# I(07 Recall to Manuf)         57          46       # I(07 Recall to Prop)           46          36
# I(06 Recall to Man/Cat)       6           5        # I(06 Recall to Prop/Cat)       2           2
# I(06 Recall to Manuf)         60          53       # I(06 Recall to Prop)           23          23
# I(05 Recall to Man/Cat)       2           1        # I(05 Recall to Prop/Cat)       0           0
# I(05 Recall to Manuf)         26          13       # I(05 Recall to Prop)            0           0
Notes: Firm and property ranks determined by total units sold in 2005. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. Regressions include manufacturer-category fixed effects in Panel A and property-
category fixed effects in Panel B. Coefficients refer to recalls during the calendar year indicated. *
Statistically significant at 10% level. ** Statistically significant at 5% level.




                                                                                                       71
         Appendix Table 7: Recalls to Publicly Traded Toy Producers, 2004 – 2007

                                                                                        News        News       Market
                                                                                       Articles:   Articles:   Cap on
 Event                             Event       Recall                        Made in     Day         Day       1/2/04
  #                Firm            Date       Value ($)     Lead   Magnets    China     -30-0        1-30      ($1,000)
   1      Hasbro                   1/30/04      2,940,000                      X          1           4         3,667,633
   2      Mattel                   4/14/04      8,478,000                      X          0           5         8,296,800
   3      Hasbro                    9/9/04      6,900,000                      X          0           4         3,667,633
   4      Mattel (Fisher-Price)#   5/10/05      5,322,000                      X          0           0         8,296,800
   5      Sony                     9/13/05    126,450,000                      X          5           13        4,144,605
   6      Mattel (Fisher-Price)    1/18/06     16,578,000                      X          5           3         8,296,800
          Hasbro (Milton
   7      Bradley)                 2/23/06     11,525,000                      X          1           3         3,667,633
          Mattel (American
   8      Girl)                    3/30/06      1,800,000    X                            2           4         8,296,800
   9      LeapFrog                  9/7/06     11,160,000                      X          0           4             813,226
  10      Hasbro                   9/22/06      8,925,000                                 1           12        3,667,633
  11      RC2                       11/2/06     1,650,000                      X          0           1             364,306
  12      Mattel                   11/21/06    54,000,000            X         X          2           16        8,296,800
  13      Hasbro (Easy-Bake)        2/6/07     24,625,000                      X          0           5         3,667,633
  14      Jakks Pacific            2/13/07     14,700,000                      X          0           1             324,514
  15      Mattel (Fisher-Price)    2/15/07      7,500,000                      X          2           19        8,296,800
  16      RC2                       6/13/07    60,000,000    X                 X          0           28            364,306
  17      Hasbro (Easy-Bake)       7/19/07     25,000,000                      X          5           25        3,667,633
  18      Mattel (Fisher-Price)     8/2/07     21,757,500    X                 X          9          513        8,296,800
  19      Mattel#                   8/14/07   194,388,500    X       X         X         119         551        8,296,800
          Mattel (Fisher-
  20      Price)#ψ                  9/4/07      7,783,000    X                 X         455         254        8,296,800
  21      RC2#                      9/26/07     5,006,400    X                 X          16          20            364,306
  22      Mattel (Fisher-Price)    10/25/07      570,000     X                 X         131         116        8,296,800
  23      Henry Gordy              10/31/07      380,000     X                 X          0           1              40,086
  24      Mattel (Fisher-Price)    11/6/07     10,850,000                                130         101        8,296,800
  25      Marvel                   11/8/07      2,625,000    X                 X          0           3         2,082,783
Notes: Recall Value refers to the price of the item recalled times the number of units recalled (summed if multiple
recalls on same date); Lead indicates that the recall was due to the finding of lead in the item; Made in China
indicates that the recalled items were produced in China. News articles indicate the number of articles mentioning
the name of the company and the words “toy” and “recall” in the LexisNexis database of Major US and World
Publications. Market cap refers to the stock price times the number of outstanding shares on January 2, 2004.
Parentheses indicate division or subsidiary directly named in recall announcement. # These events involved
multiple recalls by the same firm on the same date. ψ Two recalls named Fisher-Price and one named Mattel
directly on this day.

                                                                                                               72
Appendix 8: Details of the Event Study Estimation
        The basic strategy of an event study is to estimate the relationship between the affected
firm’s daily stock return and an index (or set of indices) of market performance over an estimation
window, which is a period of time preceding the event. These parameters are used to calculate the
predicted returns to the affected firm during the event window, which is a period of time
surrounding the event. Abnormal returns are then calculated as the difference between the actual
returns and the predicted returns over the event window. Thus, abnormal returns can be thought of
as the portion of the affected firm’s return that is in excess of its usual relationship with the market.
These abnormal returns represent the impact of the “news” on the firm’s market value.

         More formally, over the estimation window we estimate the following market model for each
event:
                 (1)                     Rit = α i + β i Rmt + ε it
Rit represents the return to the stock involved in event i on day t minus the risk-free rate on day t. 38
Rmt is a vector of market returns on day t. In our baseline specification we use the three factor
model suggested by Fama and French (1993). These three market factors include the market
portfolio which is the value-weighted return to all NYSE, NASDAQ, and AMEX stocks minus the
risk-free rate, the High-Minus-Low portfolio and the Small-Minus-Big portfolio. 39 In our baseline
specification, we use the 255 trading days (one year) leading up to 10 days prior to the recall date as
our estimation window. In other words, in event time, our estimation window is estimated over the
interval t in [-265, -11].

        Over the event window we use the parameter estimates from equation 1 to calculate the
abnormal return to the firm involved in event i at time t as:
                (2)                     ARit = Rit − αˆ i − βˆi Rmt
These abnormal returns can be aggregated over time and across events. Summing abnormal returns
over a given interval for event i provides an estimate of cumulative abnormal returns (CAR) for that
event. We can also average abnormal returns for a given day or cumulative abnormal returns for a
given interval across events. This allows us to explore the average effect of a recall and understand
how it accumulates over time, both before and after the actual recall, if information about the recall
leaked prior to the actual announcement or was accumulated slowly after the announcement. We
derive estimates for the standard errors for abnormal, cumulative abnormal, mean abnormal, and
mean cumulative abnormal returns based on the variance of the error term in equation 1, assuming
independence of returns and a long event window, following the procedures outlined in MacKinlay
(1997).

        In practice we use the dummy variable method to estimate abnormal returns and their
standard errors. This method provides identical estimates to the method outlined above (Karafiath
1988). We estimate a single regression for each event i over the time period starting 265 days prior
to the recall announcement and ending 10 days after the announcement. This regression looks
similar to equation 1, but we also include dummy variables for each day during the event window.


38      Daily returns collected from CRSP are adjusted for dividends and splits
39      Data on these three indexes are obtained from Kenneth French’s website:
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html (last accessed on February 13, 2009)
                                                                                                                73
The coefficients of these 21 dummy variables reflect the abnormal returns on each of these 21 days,
and their standard errors represent the standard errors of the abnormal returns.




                                                                                                74
