                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF THE CORPORATE
                  INCOME TAX: CHANGING REVENUES
                        AND CHANGING VIEWS


                         Alan J. Auerbach



                      Working Paper No. 1519




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                         December 198)4




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. This paper was pre
sented at a conference held in Williamsburg, Virginia, on September
20 — 21, 198)4, as part of the NBER's project on Corporate Capital
Structures in the United States which is sponsored by the American
Council of Life Insurance. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not necessarily those of the NBER or the ACLI.
                                               NBER Working Paper 1/1519
                                               December 1984




              The Economic Effects of the Corporate Income Tax:
                     Changing Revenues and Changing Views



                                  ABSTRACT

      This paper reviews recent empirical research studying the impact of the
U.S. corporate income tax on the behavior of firms. Four areas are discussed:

      (1) The extent to which dividend taxation imposes a "double tax" on
           corporate source earnings;

     (2) The historical impact of tax incentives on the incentives to invest
          and the value of corporate equity;

     (3) The effects of limited loss offset provisions on the incentives to
          invest in risky assets; and

     (4) The determinants of corporate leverage.




                                                   Alan J. Auerbach
                                                   Department of Economics
                                                   University of Pennsylvania
                                                   3718 Locust Walk/CR
                                                   Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                                   (215) 898—1503
I.    Introduction

      Corporate income tax revenues have declined steadily as a fraction of

U.S. GNP   over   the past three decades, from 5.3 percent in 1953 to 4.1 percent,

3.3 percent and 1.8 percent in 1963, 1973 and 1983, respectively.1 Indeed,

this decline is even more striking if one subtracts from corporate revenues

the remittances by the Federal Reserve System of their seignorage. In fiscal

year 1983, corporation income tax receipts net of these payments were only

37.0 billion dollars,2 or just over six percent of federal revenues.

      This trend might appear to have clear implicatIons both for the

distribution of after—tax income in the United States and for the incentives

that corporations have to invest in plant and equipment. But such aggregate

tax measures can be very misleading because they are, at the same time, too

comprehensive and yet incomplete. They do not relay the different incentives

and burdens imposed on different investors and different assets, nor do they

account for other taxes which, in combination with the corporate tax,

determine the tax burden on owners of corporate capital and the incentives

that such individuals have to invest via the corporation.

      In this paper, we discuss four related issues that must be considered

before the economic effects of the corporate tax can be understood. These are

the additional taxes on corporate source income levied on dividends, capital

gains and interest payments, the presence in the tax code of investment

incentives such as accelerated depreciation, the corporate tax treatment of

risky income, and the determinants and implications of corporate borrowing.

We conclude with a review of this discussion.



II.   Shareholders' Taxes and    "Double" Taxation
      Many who favor a reduction in taxes paid by corporations see such a



                                          1
reduction as an off8et to the "double" taxation occurring when corporate

profits are taxed at the corporate level and then, if distributed, at the

shareholder level. Compared to investment income from an unincorporated

business, there is, indeed, a second layer of taxation.     Even for earnings

that are retained, associated increases in the corporation's value may

eventually be subject to individual capital gains taxes.

      Traditional economic analysis3 suggests that such a pattern of taxation

discourages corporate investment and, by doing so, causes part of the extra

tax burden to be shifted from corporate shareholders to others in the economy:

other investors, who find their returns diminished by the flood of capital

from the corporate sector; purchasers of corporate commodities, who must pay

higher prices for goods that have become more expensive to produce; and,

potentially) wage earners, if the demand for labor is less intensive in the

expending areas outside the corporate sector than within it.

      Associated also with this hypothesized shift in resources is an economic

distortion, in that investors are being encouraged by the tax system to forego

relatively more profitable corporate sector projects to avoid the extra

taxation.

      But the taxation of dividends does not necessarily lead to this type of

outcome. The question is best put in the following way: does the taxation of

dividends mean that corporations must earn a higher rate of return, before

 tax, to satisfy their shareholders' required after—tax return? The answer may

very well be that they need not do so.       Consider an investment financed by the

 method most commonly used to raise equity capital, the retention of

 earnings. Suppose the potential project will earn 10 percent a year after

 corporate taxes, all of which will be distributed as dividends. These

 dividends will then be subject to additional taxes, unless the shareholders



                                         2
are exempt from taxation.      But this does not mean a lower rate of return than

10 percent for individual investors. For consider the initial investment

these investors made when the firm retained its earnings. The cost to

investors was the foregone dividends, less the taxes that would have been due

on such dividends. For the sake of concreteness, suppose the typical

investor's marginal tax rate is 40 percent. Then, per dollar of retained

earnings, the investor had   to   give up 60 cents out of pocket to get this

stream of 10 percent returns, which will also be taxed at 40 percent to yield

a net return of 6 percent per gross invested dollar, but 10 percent of

foregone, after—tax dollars.

      Lest this result be dismissed as anomalous, the reader should note its

equivalence to the treatment accorded individual savings under a consumption

tax, which is recognized to leave the return to savings effectively untaxed.

Under a consumption tax scheme, savers would receive a reduction in their tax

base for amounts saved through the corporation and add to the tax base amounts

received and not saved.

      This argument suggests that while taxes on dividends may be paid, they

need not contitute a disincentive to save via the corporation. In this

sense, there is no double taxation: only the corporate income tax lowers the

saver's rate of return. As with a consumption tax, taxes on dividends

currently received represent the payment, with interest, of a tax liability

deferred by the previous retention of earnings.

      A corollary of this view is that corporations face a higher marginal tax

burden when they must raise equity capital through the issuance of new shares,

because there is no initial reduction in stockholders' taxes when the shares

are issued.

      Empirical evidence offers some support for this position. In Auerbach



                                          3
(1984), I attempted to measure how the rates of return required by

corporations on their investments differed according to a number of factors,

including how these investments were financed. Using data from the period

1963 to 1977 for 274 major American corporations (most listed on the New York

Stock Exchange, the remainder on the American Exchange), I first corrected

income statement information to give a truer measure of annual earnings, and

then estimated equations to determine the effects of a number of firm

characteristics on future earnings. One significant finding was that, for

given levels of investment, firms issuing new shares in a particular year

experienced higher increases in earnings in subsequent years than those that

invested solely through retentions and debt issues. The results suggested

that this sample of firms required, on average, about 4.8 percent more, after

tax, when financing investments through new issues.   Additional evidence

suggested that this phenomenon is associated with individual taxation, rather

than other potential reasons for an aversion to new issues.

      This finding has several interesting implications. First, corporate

stock will normally trade at a discount relative to the intrinsic value of the

firm's assets. Ts is not due to any irrationality on the part of investors,

but to the fact that firms have the incentive to retain earnings as long as

the market value of new projects undertaken is at least equal to their net

cost to investors. Hence, a retentions—financed project costing one million

dollars has a net cost of 600 thousand dollars to investors in the 40 percent

tax bracket. The management of the firm will increase its shareholders'

assets by undertaking the project as long as the firm's value increase by at

least 600 thousand dollars, not a million.

      Second, this discount means that there is an incentive for corporations

 to invest in corporate stock, either their own, through repurchases, or that



                                       4
of others; through acquisitions. This provides a direct way of obtaining

assets at a price below their intrinsic worth. The puzzle is why firms do not

engage in more of this kind of activity.

     Third, a general reduction in the taxation of dividend income would have

very different consequences than reduced corporate taxation. Since the

dividend tax does not influence the marginal tax rate for investment financed

through retention, its reduction will not affect these investment decisions,

despite the decline in corporate revenue.



III. The Ipact of Inv'estaent Incentives

     One reason for the decline in corporate tax collections since 1953 has

been a decline in corporate profitability. Another has been the reduction

(from 52 percent to 46 percent) in the corporate tax rate. However, the most

important factor has been the introduction of several investment incentives,

culminating in the Accelerated Cost Recovery System instituted in 1981. For a

number of reasons, the effects of these programs on the incentive to invest

cannot be judged from trends in corporate tax revenues.

      First, these programs were generally not retroactive. As a result,

there could be relatively small change in actual tax payments in the years

immediately following a new investment incentive, particularly for

corporations with slower growth. However, even several years after such a

program's enactment, concurrent tax payments offer little guidance about the

corporation's incentive to invest. This is because investment incentives such

as the investment tax credit or the shortening of depreciation lives work by

reducing income taxes in the years immediately following an investment. In

later years, the corporation will actually pay more taxes on the income from

the investment, since depreciation allowances will have been exhausted. The



                                      5
net effect to the corporation is positive, but is overstated by the tax

reduction in the earliest years. Hence, a fast growing corporation with a

very "young" capital stock might offset all its current tax liability, but

this will not be true in the future. A stagnant corporation with a very "old"

capital stock might have no tax credits or depreciation deductions at all, but

this overstates the tax burden on investment by failing to account for the tax

benefits that were received in the years soon after the firm's capital goods

were purchased.

      In a sense, each investment faces a different tax rate on its income in

each year, with this rate increasing as the asset ages. What matters for the

investment decision is the present value of taxes paid over the asset's entire

life, not the taxes paid in a given year.

      This point may be illustrated by a numerical example. Imagine an asset

purchased for 1000 dollars, yielding twenty percent per year before

depreciation, and receiving a ten percent investment tax credit and a standard

five—year ACRS write—off. Suppose that the asset actually depreciates at ten

percent per year. That is, each year its income is ten percent lower than in

the previous year. Also suppose, for the sake of simplicity, that there is no

inflation. Then the asset's income and tax payments over time are as given in

Table 1. Shown in parentheses below actual depreciation allowances are those

that would correspond to the real or "economic" depreciation of the asset, of

ten percent per year. This figure is deducted from gross income to obtain a

measure of actual economic income, against which taxes are compared to obtain

each year's tax rate for the asset.

      Because of the investment incentives, this tax rate is negative for the

first five years but very positive thereafter. It would be no more correct to

say that firms with three year old assets have a tax rate of —21 percent



                                       6
                                 Table 1

                    Tax Rates for a Rypothetical Asset



                                           Year

                -
Gross           200       180      162      146      131     118    106
Inco
Dnritinn        143       20       200      200      200      C)     C)

               (100)     (90)      (81)     (73)     (66)    (59)   (53)
Investment      100        0        0        0           0    0      0
Credit
Taxes          —74        —13      —17      —25      —32     +54    +49

Rconoic         100       90       81       73       65      59     53
Income
Tax R.ate(Z)   —74        —14      —21      —34      —49     +92    +92




                                    7
(never mind how they manage to obtain these refunds — we return to this below)

than that firms with six year old assets face one of +92 percent.    The overall

impact is somewhere in between.

     This impact can be measured by taking the present value of taxes paid

and finding the constant tax rate on economic income that would yield the same

value. Table 2, taken from Auerbach (1983), gives these calculations for two

types of assets, general industrial equipment and industrial structures, and

for all corporate fixed assets as a whole, for the years 1953—82. They are

based under the assumptions that corporations used the most generous available

tax treatment in each year, that they required a return of four percent after

tax and that they projected inflation based on past inflation behavior. Aside

from the general decline in tax rates, except for a few years during the

1970's, there has been a shift in the tax burden from equipment to

structures. This would appear to present the incentive for corporations to

invest more in equipment, relative to structures, than is socially desirable,

but there is an important qualification to this conclusion that will be

discussed below in the section dealing with corporate borrowing.

      The negative tax rate for equipment in 1981 means that the negative tax

liabilities of the early years (as illustrated in Table 1) outweighed the

positive ones of later year8. Such investments led to a net tax refund for

investing corporations.
      Aside from the distinction between these effective tax rates and those

 tax rates calculated by comparing current taxes to current income, there are

 other important implications of the presence of incentives in the tax

 structure. First is the increased possibility of negative tax liabilities,

 even for profitable firms. Because of the corporate tax treatment of losses,

 this may have a very unpredictable impact on the incentives for firms to



                                        8
                          Table 2

Effective Tai Rates   for Equipment and Structures,   1953—82

                          (Percent)



             General
             Industrial       Industrial
 Year        Equipsent        Structures     All assets

 1953           64.1             55.6           58.8
 1)'+           O1.U             DZ.i           D).)
 1955           58.2             50.6           53.5
 1956           59.3             51.3           54.3
 1957           60.2             51.9           55.0
 1958           60.9             52.3           55.6
 1959           59.7             51.5           54.6
 1960           60.4             52.0           55.1
 1961           58.8             51.0           53.9
 1962           40.3             49.1           43.3
 1963           41.5             49.6           44.0
 1964           27.4             47.1           37.2
 1965           26.1             45.5           35.7
 1966           27.4             45,8           36.5
 1967           49.4             46.6           45.5
 1968           37.0             51.5           43.5
 1969           41.0             52.7           45.8
 1970           53.5             52.0           49.7
 1971           53.2             51.2           49.1
 1972           16.4             51.2           32.9
 1973           14.4             50.9           31.8
 1974           18.3             51.5           33.9
 1975           24.1             52.6           37.0
 1976           26.4             53.1           35.1
 1977           21.2             52.1           32.0
 1978           23.2             52.4           33.2
 1979           19.0             50.3           30.1
 1980           22.0             50.8           31.9
 1981           —6.8             41.7           17.7
 1982            8.4             42.1           24.6




                             9
invest. Second, because new assets have yet to receive their investment

incentives, they will be worth more to corporations than otherwise identical

but older assets already in place. Refer again to Table 1, and imagine a

company with two pieces of equipment of comparable productive capacity. One

was just purchased, while the other is six years old. The first is clearly

more valuable, because it has the prospect of five years of refunds before it

must start paying taxes. All the older asset has in its future is years with

no depreciation deductions at all. Not only does it receive no investment

incentIves, but It xist repay the deferred taxes associated with the forward

shifting of depreciation allowances.

        What this means is that, per dollar of capital, existing assets will

generally be worth less than new assets. The estimated extent of this

discount is shown in Table 3, again taken from my 1983 paper. The number

shown is the ratio of the total value of the aggregate corporate fixed capital

stock, taking accounts of these tax differentials, to the value these assets

would have if all were equally productive but treated as new assets by the tax

law. Based on the size of the corporate capital stock, I calculated this gap

between actual value and replacement cost to be 427 billion dollars in 1982.

This was the present value then of taxes due on old assets in excess of the

taxes on comparable new assets. Combined with the capitalization effect

associated with dividends, discussed in the previous section, this has the

potential to explain a large gap between the intrinsic value of assets owned

by corporations and their stock market values.



IV.     The Corporate Tax   and Riak—Taking

        There are   several ways in which the corporate tax affects the decision
to    invest in risky assets. In each case, a corporatiOn'8 tax payments as a



                                          10
                 Table 3

Ratio of arket Value to Replacement Cost:
       The Impact of Deferred Taxes


     Year                   Ratio

     1953                   0.921
     1954                   0.898
     1955                   0.908
     1956                   0.924
     1957                   0.935
     1958                   0.940
     1959                   0.940

     1960                   0.946
     1961                   0.945
     1962                   0.894
     1963                   0.900
     1964                   0.893
     1965                   0.898
     1966                   0.899
     1967                   0.927
     1968                   0.889
     1969                   0.890

     1970                   0.928
     1971                   0.926
     1972                   0.867
     1973                   0.864
     1974                   0.865
     1975                   0.867
     1976                   0.845
     1977                   0.834
     1978                   0.835
     1979                   0.838

     1980                   0.838
     1981                   0.781
     1982                   0.792




                   11
percentage of income offer little guidance about the incentives actually

faced.

         Perhaps the most important of these effects is associated with the

corporate income tax's asymmetric treatment of a corporation's gains and

los8es. Income is fully taxable, but losses do not lead to a refund at the

corporate rate. Instead, taxpayers must either carry the losses back for an

immediate refund, or if recent income is insufficient, carry the losses

forward to await deduction against future income or expiration. Further,

similar restrictions exist on the use of tax credits, such as the investment

tax credit.

         This asymmetry means that a corporation with risky income will, in

present value, pay more taxes in the future than if the income had the same

expected return but were always positive. Hence, risk taking is affected.

But to know how it is affected, one must know the firm's current tax status as

well as the types of projects it is considering. Indeed, it is possible that

firms with taxable income, paying taxes', are at an advantage relative to firms

that are not. This is more likely given the recently increased acceleration

of depreciation allowances discussed in the previous section.

         While the prospect of not being able to get a refund for potential

losses may discourage the undertaking of risky projects, firms that already

have incurred such losses may carry forward a tax shield to reduce taxes on

future income, thereby lowering taxes in the future. If, on average, the firm

expected its current investments to yield additional tax liability, this

shield would provide an added incentive to invest. However, as shown by the

example in Table 1, many investments now will generate negative tax

liabilities in their early years, even if they earn a normal rate of return.

Hence, a tax shield carried forward may       actually   make such investments less



                                         12
attractive, by making the deduction of these additional lo8ses impossible.

This is offset by the fact that in subsequent years when the a8SetS generate

positive tax liabilities, these are more likely to be shielded from taxation.

      To measure the net impact of these effects, I considered in Auerbacl-t

(1983) how the expected present value of taxes associated with different

assets would be affected by a firm's initial tax status and the probability of

this tax status changing from year to year. Using data from 1959 to 1978 for

several hundred major U.S. corporations, I estimated the probability of having

a net tax loss carryforward in any given year and the probability that this

loss would be exhausted in the next and subsequent years. I then measured the

taxes that representative firms, purchasing an asset with a riskless, six

percent return annually after depreciation, would expect to pay in each year

over the asset's life. Each calculation proceeded in two steps. First, the

annual accrued tax liability for each year, such as those shown in Table 1,

was calculated. Then, estimates were made of when, statistically, each of

these liabilities would actually result in a tax payment. Since a firm might

have a tax loss carryforward (from other parts of its operations) in each

year, there is some probability that each year's tax payment would be

deferred, more so for firms beginning with a large tax loss carryforward in

the year of the investment.

      To test the effect of different conditions on the results, I performed

these calculations for both industrial equipment and industrial structures,

for zero, medium and high rates of inflation, and under depreciation

provisions that existed in 1965, 1972 and 1982. For each assumption of asset

types, inflation rate, and tax law, the calculation was done for two

representative corporations: one starting off with a substantial current tax

liability and the potential for a tax loss carryback, and one beginning with a



                                       13
large tax 1088 carryforward. These firms are labeled "high tax" and "low tax"

for the results shown in Table 4. The numbers in the table are "effective"

tax rates, as described above, calculated as the tax rate on economic income

that would leave firms with the same expected present value of taxes from the

investment.

        The table offers a number of familiar results. For each type of

investor and asset, the tax changes from 1972 to 1982 led to lower tax

liabilities. For any given asset, investor and year, an increase in the

inflation rate led to higher tax payments because of the declining real value

of depreciati'i allowances. As depicted above, recent tax changes have

greatly increased the relative tax incentive to invest in equipment instead of

structures.

        The main new result in the table is that firms in the "high tax"

position were likely to pay less in taxes on their new investments than their

"low tax" counterparts, because of the greater likelihood of obtaining the

full value of the early years' egative tax liabilities. This has become

especially true for equipment since the most recent t* law changes. Hence,

the observation of a firm paying a larger fraction of its earnings in taxes

than another is certainly a poor guide to the relative incentives for these

firms to undertake new investment.

        An implication of these findings is that those firms with existing

profitable operations providing taxable income are better disposed to

undertake new investments, either directly or through the purchase of other

firms   making these investments. Once again, the tax system provides an extra
incentive for the acquisition of one firm by another.




                                        14
                                     Table 4

Effective Tax   Rates:   The Iportance of Deferred Payaent, by Taxable Status

                                    (percent)



                          General industrial                Industrial
                               equipment                    structures
Tax law and              ____________________       ____________________
 inflation   rate        Lowtax      Righ tax       Low tax     Righ tax
 1965 tax law
No inflation                17           12            37             37
4 percent                   33           30            48             48
 8 percent                 47            43            53

 1972 tax law
No inflation                12               7         40                38
4 percent                   28           23            52             52
8 percent                  40            35            57             57

1982 tax law
No inflation                —3          —15            27                25
4 percent                   10           —3            37                35
 8 percent                  20               5         42             42




                                        15
V.    DeterinantS of Corporate Leverage

      An element of corporate policy that adds to each of the preceding ones

and helps tie them together is the debt—equity decision.    While the advantages

of retaining earnings instead of issuing new shares are fairly clear, the

decision of how much growth to finance internally and how much through the

floatation of debt has many interesting and complex aspects. How ich

corporations borrow, when they borrow, and the maturity structure of their

borrowing all have theories to explain them, but these theories are often

incomplete predictors of actual behavior.

      The tax law plays a central role in most models of corporate leverage,

and its recent changes motivate soie of the current interest in the question

of what determines corporate borrowing. As shown above in Sections III and

IV, estimates suggest that the effective ta rates on structures lie

substantially above those on equipment. !urther, nondepreciable assets, such

as land and inventories, do not qualify for any investment incentives

comparable to those available for plant and equipment.     This suggests that

there exists a potentially serious distortion in the choice of corporate

investments, but such a conclusion is necessarily valid only if a separation

prevails between real and financial corporate decisions. If, in contrast,

there are tax advantages to borrowing, and leverage is more acceptable to

corporations when investing in structures or land than equipment, this might

 act as an offset to the tax disadvantage of the former assets to which we have

 already alluded.

       In Auerbach (1985), I estimated models of the determinants of corporate

 borrowing. Before discussing the actual results, it will be useful to review

 briefly some of the theories that lie behind the model.

       Most theories of corporate leverage begin with the twin observations



                                       16
that corporate taxation appears to bias the choice of financial policy

completely toward debt, and that corporations typically finance perhaps only

one quarter of their accumulations of capital by issuing debt, The challenge

is to explain why this is so.

     The most basic explanation for observed debt—equity ratios is costly

bankruptcy. However, empirical evidence tends to refute the notion that

potential bankruptcy costs alone are of the same magnitude as the corporate

tax advantage to debt. In addition, though, additional borrowing may lead to

other costs, referred to in the finance literature as "agency" costs,

associated with the idea that it is difficult for holders of long—term bonds

in a firm to protect themselves from the firm taking subsequent action that is

detrimental to their interests, such as the commencement of an extremely risky

new investment program. With limited corporate liability, this act imparts

some of the program's risk to debt—holders. In anticipation of such behavior,

lenders might demand a high risk premium from firms with a high probability of

engaging in such activity, such as firms with high debt—equity ratios.

      One would expect a firm's potential agency costs to differ according to

a number of characteristics in addition to its debt—equity ratio. Myers

(1977) suggests that the problem is more acute for "growth" firms whose value

derives largely from anticipated future decisions, since they possess more

flexibility as to their actions. Presumably, the same argument holds for

firms whose capital stock has a short maturity, for these firms' future

replacement investment decisions loom much larger. This could be a reason for

firms that use structures relatively more than equipment in their production

processes to borrow more, or at least borrow more long term.

      Additional explanations for the limitation on corporate borrowing come

from suggestions that other tax factors act, cumulatively, to offset the tax



                                      17
advantage to borrowing, so that at a certain point, the net tax advantage to

borrowing disappears. At the corporate level, the tax advantage to debt i8

lost if firms do not have sufficient taxable income to deduct their interest

payments. As firms borrow more and attempt to deduct more interest, this

eventuality becomes ever more likely. This is the essence of the argument

offered by DeArigelo and Masulis (1980). The hypothesis has a number of

testable implications. First, firms with substantial loss carryforwards

should choose to issue less debt. (Here, care must be taken since such firms

may also be in greater need of funds.) Second, firms investing in assets with

a greater fraction of their total after—tax returns generated by tax credit8

and deductions should also use less debt finance1 for they will typically have

less taxable income for any given level of borrowing. Again, this is a reason

why firms might borrow less to finance purchases of equipment. Finally, one

would expect that firms with riskier earnings streams would be less likely to

borrow, for these firms would face a more likely prospect of having

insufficient taxable income, in any given year, to deduct all interest

payments.

      As with the pure bankruptcy explanation, this "limited tax shield"

argument, by itself, is unlikely to be important enough to explain the typical

firm's observed borrowing behavior. As part of the study of tax losses in

Auerbach (1983), I estimated the present value of tax deductions from an

additional dollar of debt for a typical firm, and found that such a firm could

expect to get about 92 percent of the value of these deductions.

Equivalently, this would be as if firms could deduct interest payments

regardless of their own tax status, but at a 42 percent rather than 46 percent

tax rate. This is still a substantial tax benefit.

      However, this differential is diminished by the consideration of



                                       18
personal taxes. Miller (1977) argued that the individual tax advantages to

equity may offset those to debt at the firm level. The basic argument is that

since, at the individual level, interest payments are taxable, while only

dividends and not capital gains are taxed fully, the individual tax burden on

the return to equity is lower than that on debt. In its simplest form, this

explanation i8 implausible, since the corporate tax on all equity earnings

plus the additional dividend taxation of that part of the individual return to

equity that is distributed to shareholders is substantially higher than the

IndIvIdual tax on interest income, regardless of the individual's tax

bracket. However, this effect may lessen the initial tax advantage to

leverage and, in conjunction with other reasons for limits on leverage given

above, may help explain observed behavior.

      Moreover, as argued above in Section II, though individual stockholders

pay taxes on dividends, these taxes do not necessarily constitute a burden on

the current return to equity. Because the value of the firm may be discounted

to account for the presence of the dividend tax, the tax itself does not lower

the return on investment for an equity holder. This point makes Miller's

original argument more realistic, for it means that the only additional

taxation of equity earnings besides the corporate tax itself is the individual

capital gains tax.

      In summary, explanations for borrowing limitations range over tax and

nontax factors. Among the latter include the potential bankruptcy and agency

costs that are thought to derive from additional leverage. Among the former

are the limited deductibility of additional interest payments by the corporate

borrower and the offsetting tax advantages to equity at the individual level.

      To test these different theories, I gathered balance sheet and income

statement data for the period 1958 to 1977 on 143 firms for which sufficient



                                       19
information was available about capital stock composition. All of the firms

chosen listed annual investment and capital 8toCkS separately for three

categories: structures, land the equipment.

        As in the calculations described in Section II, the first step was to

correct several book measures, such as earnings and debt. The former had to

be corrected for inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments, and

the latter for deviations from market value associated with interest rate

changes.

        Once this was done, I used the data from all of the firms to estimate

models of short—term and long—term borrowing. The models specify that there

is, for each firm,    a   desired ratio of short—term debt to total value and long—

term debt to total value. The annual borrowing decision is modeled as being

one of partial adjustment, with the change in each ratio of debt to value

depending on three factors: the gap between desired long—term debt and its

current level, the gap between desired short—term debt and its current level,

and the "cash flow" gap between current investment funds needed and the amount

of funds available through retentions after a normal dividend distribution.

Hence, the amount of long—term (or short—term) borrowing is hypothesized to be

influenced by how much long—term debt the firm would like to add, how much

short—term debt it would like to add, and how much debt overall that it must

add if it is not to reduce its dividend growth or issue new equity shares.

        The estimated equations indicate that firms    close   about 44 percent of

the   gap between desired and actual long—term debt to value ratios within one
year, but that short—term borrowing responds more rapidly, closing over 79

percent of its gap between desired and actual levels within one year. Both

forms   of   borrowing respond positively to the size of the cash flow deficit,

and short—term debt appears to increase also when there is a desire for more



                                           20
long—term debt, indicating a degree of substitutability between the two forms

of borrowing.

      We turn next to the determinants of desired debt—value ratios. For both

long—term and short—term debt, we estimated the impact of a number of firm

characteristics. Included in this group are the tax loss carryforward (if

present) the earnings growth rate, the variance of earnings (adjusted for

borrowing) around trend, and the fraction of the firm's value accounted for by

land, structures, equipment, net current assets (including inventories), and

ii                       —
                             'rho              •;                    .-; ac I. cc s ¼L ¼1 a S.
                                                                  a ._

difference between the aggregate replacement value of the firm's assets in the

other four categories and the market value of the firm itself. This is

intended to measure future earnings prospects, among other things.

      There are many factors estimated to affect significantly the desired

debt—value ratios, but only some are consonant with the theories laid out

above. As expected, land appears to be the most heavily leveraged of all

assets, and goodwill is less associated with borrowing than land, equipment or

current assets. However, for both long—ternL and short—term debt, the assets

that are estimated to have the lowest associated debt—equity ratios are

structures. This is a puzzle for which I have no ready explanation. Also

puzzling is the              impact on leverage of a firm's growth rate, although

here it mist be recalled that all of these firms studied are large "blue chip"

corporations. Hence, 1growth company" in this context does not have the usual

connotation of being a speculative enterprise. Finally, the effects of

earnings variance and tax 1088 carryforwards on leverage are not especially

perceptible.

      Thus,    the results offer no support for the proposition   that companies

investing   primarily in structures borrow more than companies investing in


                                          21
equipment, though land does seem to have greater associated borrowing. The

separation between real and financial decisions does not appear to hold, but

neither does any combination of the theories reviewed above suffice to explain

                                               it is difficult to know how to
completely this borrowing pattern. Hence,

bring the tax advantage to debt into calculations of overall tax incentives

facing investments of different types, though there appears to remain a

substantial tax advantage to investing in equipment rather than structures.



V L•   f.
       '.#1I.1 ..L'
       We   have discussed in each of the sections above how the impact of the

corporate tax is difficult to measure from observed revenue figures alone. It

will be useful to summarize them here.

       First, the "double taxation" of dividends is of highly questionable

existence. The payment of dividend taxes does not mean that these taxes

affect the returns to current investors, because the taxes will already be

reflected in the firm's market value via a discount relative to the intrinsic

value of the firm's assets. Second, investment incentives defer tax payments

by corporations so that income from newer assets is taxed less heavily than

 that from older assets. This makes aggregate corporate tax payments

 meaningless as economic indicators. Because of the relatively bigger tax

 shield offered by new investments, older assets will carry a discount in the

 determination of a corporation's market value, leading to a second tax—

 associated cause for the presence of a discount in the value of corporate

 equity.
        The riskiness of corporate investments combined with the asymmetry of

 the corporate tax in its treatment of gains and losses means that the

 corporation's incentive to invest depends on its tax status.      Given the



                                          22
negative accrued tax liabilities in the early years after an investment is

made, associated with investment tax credits and accelerated depreciation, the

incentive to invest is greater for a firm that is currently taxable than for a

firm that is not.

      Finally, the financial decision, if not made separately from the real

investment decision, may influence the investment choice among various

assets. Observed behavior indicates that financial and real decisions are

related, but not strictly according to any pattern predicted by prevailing

theories.




                                       23
                                  Footnotes



1. Economic Report of the President, 1984, Tables Bi and B76.

2. Economic Report of the President, 1984, Table B72.

3. As in Harberger (1962).
                                   References



 Auerbach, Alan J., (1983) "Corporate Taxation in the U.S.," Brookings Papers

    on Economic Activity 14, February, PP. 451—505.



_________________   (1984) "Taxes, Firm   Financial   Policy, and the Cost of

   Capital: An Empirical Analysis," Journal of Public Economics 23,

   February/March, pp. 27—57.



_________________   (1985) "Real Determinants of Corporate Leverage," in B.

   Friedman, ed., Corporate Capital Structures in the     U.S.,   forthcoming.




Dekngelo, Harry and Ronald Masulls, (1980) "Optimal Capital Structure Under

   Corporate and Personal Taxation," Journal of Financial Economics 8, March,

   pp. 3—81.




Harberger, Arnold C., (1962) "The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax,"

   Journal of Political Economy 70, May, pp. 261—75.



Miller, Merton H., (1977) "Debt and Taxes," Journal of Finance 32, May,      pp.
   261—75.




Myers, Stewart, (1977) "Determinants of Corporate Borrowing," Journal of

   Financial Economics 5, November, pp. 147—175.
