                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   WHY DID COUNTRIES ADOPT THE GOLD STANDARD? LESSONS FROM JAPAN

                                        Kris James Mitchener
                                          Masato Shizume
                                        Marc D. Weidenmier

                                        Working Paper 15195
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15195


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2009




We thank Simon Bytheway, Steve Quinn, Hisahiko Saito, and Michael Schlitz as well as seminar participants
at Rutgers University, Kobe University, IFN, Warwick University, the Solvay Business School at Universite
Libre de Bruxelles, and the Bank of Japan for comments and suggestions. We also thank Genna Tan,
Ronald Choi, and Lydia Fung for excellent research assistance. The National Science Foundation (NSF
Grant 0518661) provided financial support for this project. Mitchener also thanks the International
Institute, UCLA, for financial support while working on this project as a Global Fellow in 2008-9.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Kris James Mitchener, Masato Shizume, and Marc D. Weidenmier. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why did Countries Adopt the Gold Standard? Lessons from Japan
Kris James Mitchener, Masato Shizume, and Marc D. Weidenmier
NBER Working Paper No. 15195
July 2009
JEL No. E58,F33,N15,N25,N75

                                             ABSTRACT

Why did policymakers adopt the gold standard? Although previous research has identified ex post
effects of gold standard adoption on trade and bond yields, few studies have sought to understand whether
these were the actual outcomes of interest to policymakers at the time of adoption. We examine the
political economy of Japan’s adoption of the gold standard in 1897 by exploring the ex ante motives
of policymakers as well as how the legislative decision to adopt gold won approval. We then link the
beliefs of contemporaneous policymakers to data so that we can test the economic effects of adoption.
In contrast to previous studies examining bond yields, we find little evidence that joining the gold
standard reduced Japan’s country risk or investors anticipated a dramatic decline in borrowing rates
for the government. Moreover, we find no evidence of a domestic investment boom or that investors
anticipated one and bid it into stock prices. However, as some policymakers suggested, we find that
membership in the gold standard increased Japan’s exports by lowering transactions costs and because
the price of gold fell relative to silver, making exports to silver standard countries more competitive.
While Japan also received a boost in exports to its regional trading partners when it switched from
paper to silver, going onto gold allowed Japan to tap into the growing share of global trade that was
centered on the gold standard: by the late 1890s nearly 60 percent of Japanese exports and total trade
were with members of the gold club.


Kris James Mitchener                                Marc D. Weidenmier
Department of Economics                             Robert Day School of Economics and Finance
Leavey School of Business                           Claremont McKenna College
Santa Clara University                              500 East Ninth Street
Santa Clara, CA 95053                               Claremont, CA 91711
and NBER                                            and NBER
kmitchener@scu.edu                                  marc_weidenmier@claremontmckenna.edu

Masato Shizume
Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies
Bank of Japan
Nihonbashi-Hongokucho, 2-1-1, Chuo-ku
Tokyo, Japan
PXS00714@nifty.ne.jp
                            Why did Countries Adopt the Gold Standard?
                                       Lessons from Japan


        Why did countries join the gold standard? Recent research in economic history has generally

focused on two explanations. Bordo and Rockoff (1996) argue that adherence to the monetary rule was “a

good housekeeping seal of approval,” which signaled to international capital markets that countries were

committed to pursuing prudent monetary and fiscal policies.1 Investors rewarded countries that joined the

gold standard by lowering their cost of capital in financial markets by approximately 30 basis points

(Obstfeld and Taylor, 2003). Another explanation for joining the gold standard focuses on the importance

of fixed exchange rates in facilitating international trade. Flandreau and Maurel (2005) and Lopez-

Cordova and Meissner (2003) provide evidence that the gold standard increased bilateral trade flows

between 50 and 100 percent during the period 1870-1913. These studies argue that the hard peg promoted

international trade perhaps by reducing transaction costs or exchange-rate volatility.2

        Although these studies correlate economic outcomes with the adoption of a hard peg, they

provide little insight into the choice decision itself and whether contemporaries believed gold standard

adoption would affect trade and borrowing costs.3 To understand why countries would willingly choose to

tie the hands of their monetary authorities and join the gold standard, it is necessary to examine the policy

debates at the time of adoption and the factors that led to adoption. Then, one can test whether adoption

had intended effect or unintended consequences.

        While such an analysis might be theoretically possible at a cross-country level, it is likely to be

more feasible to collect detailed information on the policy process and multiple outcome variables for a

single country. In this paper, we suggest that Japan’s adoption of the gold standard in 1897 provides a

1
  Flandreau and Zumer (2005) and Ferguson and Schularick (2006a, 2006b) provide evidence that the gold standard
did not reduce the cost of capital during the gold standard period using a large sample of countries along with
additional control variables in their regressions.
2
  The precise mechanism is not specified.
3
  An exception is Meissner (2005), which considers multiple factors that affected a country’s decision about when to
adopt the gold standard. However, the analysis is primarily concerned with the process of gold standard diffusion
rather than the political economy of adoption, and does not explicitly consider why countries adopted and how the
decision to adopt then impacted economic outcomes such as borrowing cost, investment, and trade flows.


                                                         1
well-suited laboratory for understanding why countries adopted hard pegs and how such a decision

affected their economies. Japan’s experience is particularly interesting for three reasons. First, late

nineteenth-century Japan has many of the characteristics of today’s emerging market economies: it was a

small open economy with an expanding trade sector and a desire to borrow in international capital

markets. Examining Japan’s experience may help us better understand the decision making of countries

that adopt hard pegs today. Second, Japan’s historical archives provide detailed information on the

political economy of gold standard adoption and the role of special interest groups in the decision making

process. Furthermore, primary source materials from the nineteenth century also permit us to collect high

frequency price and yield data on domestic stocks and bonds as well as annual data on bilateral trade

flows that can be used to test ex ante and ex post economic effects of gold standard adoption. Third,

previous researchers have argued that Japan represents the canonical case of an emerging market

borrower benefiting from lower borrowing costs after adoption of a hard peg (Sussman and Yafeh 2000,

2006). We examine whether policymakers viewed this as a central objective of gold standard adoption,

and using a more complete database of Japanese sovereign debt and domestic debt issues, we re-assess

whether borrowing rates actually fell after adoption.

           Evidence from the legislative debates of the 1890s suggests that policymakers believed gold

standard adoption could impact borrowing costs, debt issuance, domestic investment and trade.4 We show

that, despite staunch opposition from the business community, the ruling party government was able to

engineer passage of the gold standard act of 1897 by gaining the legislative support of a key opposition

party during committee deliberations. Without the support of the Progressives, Prime Minister Masayoshi

Matsukata would not have been able to carry the vote.

           Using newly-assembled data on trade flows and asset prices, we explicitly link the legislative

debates to the beliefs of contemporaneous investors and to realized economic outcomes. Although some

participants in the parliamentary debates suggested that Japan would benefit from lower rates of

borrowing, we find no discernable trend in bond prices that would indicate that investors anticipated

4
    Contemporary economists also noted there was debate over gold standard adoption. See Laughlin (1897).


                                                         2
lower rates of borrowing. Furthermore, after it adopted the gold standard, Japan’s realized rates of

borrowing in both international and domestic capital markets did not fall. Likewise, we find no evidence

of domestic investors’ bidding up stock prices in anticipation of an investment boom, nor do we observe a

boom in domestic investment in the wake of adopting the gold standard.

        Japanese policymakers of the nineteenth century also suggested that going onto gold would affect

trade, but they were decidedly mixed as to whether it would increase it or reduce it. In examining the ex

post effects of adoption, we find that both the opponents of adopting the gold standard (like the business

community which had argued that Japan was receiving large benefits from being on silver) as well as

proponents (like the ruling party, which had argued Japan would benefit from lower transactions costs and

exchange rate volatility) turned out to be correct. Estimates from a gravity model of Japanese exports

suggest that Japan received a large boost in trade when Japan and its partners were on the silver standard.

However, gold standard adoption also significantly boosted exports and trade. It did so in two ways. First,

Japan adopted the currency system through which most of the world’s trade was being conducted by the

end of the nineteenth century. By joining the gold standard, it lowered transactions costs and exchange

rate volatility vis-à-vis other gold standard countries. The fact that it abandoned its regional and

historically relevant, silver-standard trading partners for the gold standard conducted, enabled it to plug

into the monetary system through which most of the world’s trade was being conducted by the end of the

nineteenth century. By 1897, approximately 60 percent of Japanese exports and total trade were with

countries that were on the gold standard (or countries taking measures to join the gold club within a

couple of years). Second, Japan’s fortuitous timing of gold standard adoption proved beneficial for some

of its exports. In particular, Japanese exports to silver standard countries received an additional boost in

competitiveness because Japan adopted the gold standard right as silver began to appreciate against gold.

        The next section of the paper discusses the events leading up to Japan’s decision to go on the gold

standard, the debates among Japanese policymakers over the adoption of the gold standard, and the

factors which led to legislative passage of the gold standard act in 1897. Section III examines evidence

from bond markets in both London and Tokyo to analyze the impact of gold-standard adoption on


                                                     3
sovereign yield spreads. Section IV employs a gravity model to assess the impact of adopting the gold

standard on bilateral trade flows. Section V assesses whether investors bid up bond prices in anticipation

of a domestic investment boom in Japan and whether Japan then subsequently realized a boom after gold

standard adoption. Section VI discusses the implications of our results for hard pegs and for the financial

history of the Meiji period.



II. The Decision to Adopt Gold

        During the Meiji period, Japan parted ways with its feudal past and began to forge a new national

identity for its economy. It turned outward in its orientation (initially induced by the “gunboat diplomacy”

of Western powers), developing industries and trading companies that sold products such as silk in

overseas markets and borrowing internationally to fund internal improvements that would facilitate the

movement of goods and people.5

        At the same time Japan was forging a national economy, it was experimenting with institutions

that would foster economic growth and stability. It introduced a national currency, the yen, in 1871. It

imported the U.S. model of a national banking system in 1872, and in 1876, allowed these national banks

to issue paper notes backed by government bonds. These early monetary institutions resulted in

unsustainably high inflation rates in the late 1870s and early 1880s, and paved the way for the Japanese

government to centralize control over the money supply. The Bank of Japan was founded in 1882, and

thereafter, it began issuing convertible notes that hastened the demise of commercial bank note issuance.

Japan adopted the silver standard in May 1885 and had made all yen-denominated paper money issued by

the government convertible to silver by January 1886. It stayed on the silver standard for eleven years.

        Beginning in 1893, the government made preparations to join the gold standard. The veteran

finance minister, Count Masayoshi Matsukata, initiated the program 6 . The government formed the


5
 Its first national debt, issued in London in 1870 financed railway construction.
6
 Matsukata played a central role in implementing the monetary and financial reforms of the Meiji era. As an official
of Ministry of Finance, he helped to engineer the fiscal stabilization program of the 1870s. As Finance Minister, he
also initiated the movement to establish the central bank, the Bank of Japan.


                                                         4
Committee on the Monetary System to explore what monetary system would be best for Japan’s economy

in the long run. The committee was charged with determining the global causes of gold-silver price

fluctuations and their consequences on the Japanese economy, and with recommending the monetary

standard that would be best suited for Japan. As finance minister, Kunitake Watanabe, stated in setting up

the committee, “Fluctuations in the price of gold and silver are having significant effects on the Japanese

economy and fiscal conditions. I propose to set the committee on the monetary system…and the

government will refer to it for building its strategy on monetary matters.”

        After seven general meetings and 41 task force meetings, the committee submitted its final report

to the returning and reappointed finance minister Matsukata, on July 3, 1895. Only one of the seven task

force members, a protégé of Matsukata, insisted on an immediate move to the gold standard. Of the 15

members on the main committee (composed of government officials, business leaders, and academics),

seven wanted to retain silver, six suggested moving to gold at some point in the future, and two desired a

bimetallic standard. Most of the supporters of gold standard adoption were bureaucrats and politicians

with close relationships to Matsukata whereas opponents were largely business leaders and academics.

Despite the tepid response of the committee, Matsukata continued to press for monetary reform, and was

emboldened to do so once China was forced to pay a large indemnity to Japan at the conclusion of the

Sino-Japanese War in 1895. Matsukata’s strategy was to request that China pay the indemnity in pound-

sterling in London even though the original treaty stated it would be paid in silver taels. The pound

sterling would then enable Japan to acquire gold reserves so that it could move onto the gold standard.

        After two years’ preparation for introducing the gold standard, including acquisition of gold

reserves in overseas markets, in March of 1897, the ruling government (led by Matsukata, who had been

both Prime Minister and Finance Minister since September 1896) officially submitted legislation to the

Imperial Diet authorizing a gold standard.

        Once the bill was introduced, fierce debate erupted in the legislative branch of the Japanese

government. Although a relatively new political institution, the Japanese Imperial Diet of the 1890s

served as a counterweight to the Prime Minister-led positions of the Emperor’s ruling government


                                                     5
(Muramatsu, Ito, and Tsujinaka, 2001, p.82).7 During the 1890s, the Diet routinely rejected and cut the

budget prepared by the ruling government, including military projects, hence exercising its right to

provide a check on the national budget.8 In contrast, the military was not a major political player until at

least the end of the Russo-Japanese War (1904-5).9

         Without the support of at least some factions of the two major opposition parties (the

Progressives and the Liberals), the ruling government stood little chance of passing any legislation,

including authorization to establish the gold standard in the 1890s. For example, in September 1896,

when Matsukata formed the Cabinet, with which he eventually introduced the gold standard, there were

111 Liberals, 99 Progressives, and at most 89 out of the 300 seats (one vacant) of the House of

Representatives (lower house of the Diet) who could be counted as supporting the ruling government

(Table 1).

         National legislators such as Atsushi Kawashima, a member of Giin Kurabu [Assembly Members’

Club], a political faction that supported the ruling government backed Matsukata’s position, and made

spirited arguments in favor of adoption.10 For example, Kawashima argued that “financial credibility


7
  Right after the Meiji Restration (1868), Japanese government was led by ex-samurai from Kagoshima (called ex-
Satsuma) and Yamaguchi (called ex-Choshu). The move to establish representation and form a Diet (the liberal
democratic rights movement) surged in the 1870s and 1880s against the dominance of ex-Satsuma and ex-Choshu
in political scene. Prior to the establishment of the first national Diet in 1890, an electoral system was introduced at
the prefectural level in 1879. A myriad of political parties was formed during the 1880s, including the powerful
Liberal (Jiyu-to) and Progressive (Kaishin-to) parties. (Kaishin-to was sometimes also referred to by English
contemporaries as the “Progressists” or “Progressionists” party. In 1896, Kaishin-to merged with other four smaller
parties and renamed Shinpo-to.) The first session of the Diet occurred in November 1890. Prime Ministers were
appointed by the Emperor with the consultation from Senators (Genro), or veterans of Meiji Restoration of 1868,
most of whom were ex-Satsuma or ex-Choshu. Higher-ranking government bureaucrats were also dominated by ex-
Satsuma and ex-Choshu.
8
  The independent actions of the Diet in the 1890s represented a major change from the doctrine of responsibility to
the emperor alone. Regarding the challenge to the government that came from the Diet, the press reported that
“political parties stoutly asserted the principle of administrative responsibility to the Diet, and employed, with
wholesale zeal, the only available means of enforcing their views – namely, destructive opposition in the
Legislature…the public did not fail to interpret the change correctly.” (“Japanese Politics, ”The Times (London),
December 4, 1896, p.8.)
9
  Harada (2007), pp.34-42.
10
   Atsushi Kawashima (1847-1911) was a member of House of Representatives. His career demonstrates close ties
with Matsukata. He was born in Kagoshima, the same prefecture as Matsukata. He had served in the Ministry of
Finance before being elected from his home region in the first national election in 1890. He was a member of the
previous Committee on the Monetary System, and he supported the gold standard upon the voting on the
committee’s final report. During the debate in the Diet in 1897, he belonged to a political fraction named Assembly
Members’ Club (Giin Kurabu), which supported the ruling government. In June 1897, two months after the passage


                                                           6
would be improved.” He opined that it would not only enhance Japan’s military power and domestic

economy, but it would also stabilize Japanese finances. Japan’s yen-based payments would not be subject

to exchange-rate risk. Kawashima suggested that adopting gold would enhance foreign investors’ credit

on Japanese government debts and help Japan attract foreign capital at reduced rates. He argued cheap

and affluent foreign capital could be used to build up a stronger military and promote domestic business

activities.11

         Legislative proponents also argued that going on gold would enhance trade. For example,

Kawashima commented that “to compete with other countries in the trade sphere, we must have the

common world currency as others do…The gold standard is beneficial for the development of commerce

and industries. Japan’s main trading partners are the gold-standard countries.” 12 Ministry of Finance

officials had drawn similar conclusions in the 1895 report, arguing that “many of the once-famous silver

standard countries such as Mexico…have already moved to the gold standard. These trends indicate the

natural course for Japan in financial and economic spheres” (Sakatani, Appendix to Final Report of the

Committee).13

         In addition to the benefits arising from what are now referred to as network externalities,

Kawashima suggested that gold standard adoption would reduce exchange-rate volatility and currency

risk. “Japan has suffered from fluctuations in domestic prices induced by exchange rate fluctuations. The

price fluctuations induced by exchange rate fluctuations will disappear under the gold standard. Foreign

banks have gotten a substantial premium on foreign exchange transactions of Japanese companies. The

Japanese companies do not have to pay such premium once we introduce the gold standard. Foreign

buyers of Japanese products will request the products more if the prices of the products are stable under




of the bills introducing the gold standard, he resigned to become the first Governor of Japan Hypothec Bank (Nippon
Kangyo Ginko), which was also established under Matsukata’s leadership.
11
   Imperial Diet (1897), reprinted in Bank of Japan (1960, pp.133-134). Other policymakers, however, suggested this
was unnecessary as Japan could simply issue debt denominated in gold.
12
   Imperial Diet (1897} reprinted in Bank of Japan (1960, p.135).
13
   Committee on the Monetary System (1895) reprinted in Bank of Japan (1957, p.901).


                                                        7
the gold standard.”14 Similarly, Juichi Soeda, Counselor of the Ministry of Finance, concluded: “Unless

we could remove the exchange rate risk, we could not expect proper development of Japanese foreign

trade.”15

        Proponents of the gold standard suggested that adoption might also lead to an investment boom:

“If we introduce the gold standard, foreign capital will invest in the Japanese markets and buy Japanese

government bonds and private securities, and the Japanese commerce and industries will be booming.”16

        In introducing the authorizing legislation, Matsukata summed up the Cabinet’s position: “First,

fluctuations of prices will be smaller under the gold standard than under the silver standard. Second, the

introduction of the gold standard will promote trade, especially with other gold standard countries. Third,

the introduction of the gold standard will reduce exchange rate risk with gold standard currencies. Fourth,

the gold standard will connect the Japanese financial market to overseas markets. As our country has been

developing, we need more communication with overseas financial markets. Fifth, the introduction of the

gold standard will benefit public finance.”17

        Before becoming law, the legislation would have to first clear a vote at the committee level and

then before the entire Diet. While the proponents of going onto the gold standard had the powerful

backing of Matsukata and the Ministry of Finance, many other legislators believed that adopting the gold

standard would hurt the Japanese economy and that the timing was not propitious. They noted that the

majority opinion of the 1895 report had concluded that recent fluctuations in the gold-silver price (while

Japan was on the silver standard) had increased the volume of exports, reduced the burdens of debtors and

fixed taxpayers, created a boom in agriculture, and led to prosperity in commerce and industry. As Eiichi

Shibusawa, one member of the 1895 committee and a prominent business leader wrote: “The exports to


14
   Imperial Diet (1897) reprinted in Bank of Japan (1960, p.135).
15
   Imperial Diet (1897) reprinted in Bank of Japan (1960, p.158).
16
   Comments of Atsushi Kawashima. Imperial Diet (1897), reprinted in Bank of Japan (1960, p.136).
17
   Speech of Finance Minister Court Masayoshi Matsukata. Ministry of Finance (1905, pp.182-183). Matsukata
suggested that the way the gold standard would increase exports was by reducing price fluctuations and making
commercial transactions more convenient (Matsukata’s speech cited in “The Gold Standard,” The Oregonian,
August 7, 1897). Matsukata may have also believed that adopting gold would increase the prestige and standing of
Japan internationally, and that it was broadly consistent with the national goals of modernizing Japan’s economy and
military.


                                                         8
gold standard countries increased by more than 260 percent from 1878 to 1893 while the imports from

these countries only increased by 70 percent over the same period. This is because the price of exports has

fallen while the price of imports has risen. This has promoted the development of industries, technical

progress, and growth in the demand for labor. These benefits exceed the costs of being a silver standard

country.” (Shibusawa, Appendix to Final Report of 1985). 18

         In the late 19th century, Emperor Meiji set national goals of “bringing more wealth to the nation,

and building a stronger military (fukoku kyouhei).” Business leaders such as Eiichi Shibusawa argued that

staying on silver would be consistent with those goals. Shibusawa wrote, “The effects of the recent

fluctuation in parity of gold and silver are quite beneficial to our economy in general under the current

monetary system. Japanese exports to gold standard countries have increased more than imports from

them. This is because the price of exported goods falls, while the price of imported goods increases. This

has promoted development of industries, import substitution of many products, technical progress, growth

in the demand for labor, and expanded national wealth. These benefits exceed the costs of being a silver

standard country. If Japan introduces the gold standard, prices would fall, and business conditions would

deteriorate, affecting the economy and society badly.” (Shibusawa, Appendix to Final Report).

         The business community was also largely in favor of remaining on the silver standard as export-

producing sectors of the economy had benefited from the depreciation of silver.19 In 1898, economist

Garrett Droppers wrote in the Quarterly Journal of Economics the following about the business

community’s view on Japan’s monetary standard: “From 1886 to 1897, a period of over a decade, it is

doubtful whether there was the slightest demand for return to the gold standard. On the contrary, every

18
   Eiichi Shibusawa (1840-1931) was born into a family that was involved in sericulture located near Tokyo. After
the Meiji Restoration, he joined Ministry of Finance and drafted the legislation to introduce a single unit of currency,
the yen, and to establish the National Banking system. When he left the government in 1873 he established and/or
run a number of Japan’s leading companies, including First National Bank, Oji Paper, Osaka Spinning, Kanegafuchi
Spinning, Tokio Marine Insurance, Nippon Yusen (NYK Line), Japan Railway, and the Tokyo Stock Exchange. He
chaired Tokyo Chamber of Commerce from 1878 to 1905 and often represented the viewpoints of the business
community in national political debates. In Japan, he has been referred to as “Father of Japanese Capitalism.”
19
   Contemporaries from other countries also expressed doubt about the beneficial effects of the gold standard that the
Japanese government was touting: “Foreigners, and even foreign political economists, in this country are nearly all
trying to dissuade Japan from making the change, clearly pointing out the disadvantages to trade and industries that
would accrue from the adoption of the gold standard.” (“The Gold Standard in Japan,” The Economist, April 24,
1897, p.603.)


                                                          9
so-called decline of silver was hailed with general satisfaction by those engaged in industrial and

commercial pursuits.”20

         Opposition from the business community to the gold standard was, in part, a function of the more

unified voice of exporters. Based on data from the 1890s, Japan’s exports were concentrated in a few key

commodities and industries. Forty-one percent of Japanese exports were silk products, and 27 percent

were tea, rice, and matches.21 The value added of these commodities was almost entirely domestic, and

Japanese producers of these goods had gained the most from the depreciation of the silver yen against

gold-standard currencies. In contrast to exports, there was no single import that accounted for a large

portion of total imports. Raw cotton accounted for 19 percent, sugar for 10 percent, machinery for 9

percent, and petroleum for 4 percent. Given that imports were used as inputs into a variety of products or

were final goods sold to consumers, it proved more difficult for policymakers to drum up support from

the business community to jettison the silver standard, since no one industry was experiencing a

disproportionate rise in input prices (due to the depreciation of silver).

         Politicians opposing the gold standard sided with the business community and many members of

the Committee on the Monetary System in arguing against adoption. Kungoro Shigeoka of the opposition

Liberal Party argued that Japan’s export industries would be hurt since the price of silver had been

declining relative to gold while Japan was on the silver standard. He reasoned that the increase in exports

outweighed the costs of exchange-rate volatility: “Although fluctuations in gold-silver exchange rates

might induce some inconvenience for foreign trade, the advantages in competitiveness for the silver

standard surpass the inconvenience effect.” 22 Shigeoka also maintained that adoption of gold would

commit Japan to persistent trade deficits driven by cheap imports and expensive exports (due to gold’s

appreciation relative to silver). Ironically, it was the export boom during the silver standard that may have


20
   Droppers (1898, p.164)
21
   Figures are average shares of exports based on data from 1893-1897.
22
   The great Meiji era entrepreneur Shibusawa Eiichi also argued that Japanese businesses had benefited immensely
from cheaper exports during the silver standard; he became the flag bearer of the business community’s opposition
to gold standard adoption (Metzler, 2006, p.30). In contrast, the Ministry of Finance argued that the benefits to trade
and industry were only temporary.


                                                          10
enabled Japan to go onto the gold standard. According to Miller (2007), export revenues during the period

of silver deflation enabled the Imperial Navy of Japan to purchase British cruisers, defeat China in the

Sino-Japanese War of 1894-5, and acquire the indemnity payable in gold, which enabled Japan to go onto

the gold standard.

         In addition, Shigeoka argued the time was not right because Japan had no tariff autonomy. The

so-called “unequal treaties” it was forced to sign with European powers and the U.S. in the 1860s limited

its ability to set tariff rates on imports. He also argued that, even if going on gold would allow Japan to

borrow at lower rates, these rates would only be temporary: the fall in exports to gold countries (due to

leaving silver) would cause foreign investors to lower their assessment of Japan’s growth rate and, in the

end, result in Japan having to borrow at higher rates.23

         Despite this opposition, Matsukata and his allies prevailed by forging a strategic alliance with a

key opposition party, the Progressive Party (Shinpo-to). In particular, when Matsukata formed the cabinet

in September 1896, and as a condition of his acceptance of the post of Prime Minister, he offered the post

of Foreign Minister to Shigenobu Okuma, the leader of the Progressive Party (another large political party

in Japan).24 Indeed, the ruling government found itself in a crisis of leadership after the resignation of

Prime Minister Ito in 1896, and commentators believed that the “Matsukata-Okuma coalition seems the

only appropriate outcome of the crisis.” 25 The press quipped that the Progressive party (which had

previously spearheaded opposition to the government) now signaled their alliance with the Matsukata

cabinet by “issuing a singularly tactless manifesto, in which they arranged for themselves the position of

austere mentors.”26 As Table 1 shows, the Progressive Party was a key player in the Diet and one of two

parties that, along with the Liberals, often voted to block the legislation of the ruling party. 27 More

importantly, the Progressive Party was well represented on the House of Representatives Special

23
   Imperial Diet (1897) reprinted in Bank of Japan (1960, pp.129).
24
   “Japanese Politics,” London Times, December 4, 1896, p.8.
25
   “Japanese Politics,” London Times, December 4, 1896, p.8.
26
   “Ministerial Changes in Japan,” London Times, November 22, 1897, p.6.
27
   During his first term as Prime Minister (1891-92), Matsukata failed to get the support of Progressives and Liberals
for the budget, which included finances for the building of warships. The failure of the budget resulted in his
resignation (Masumi, 1966, pp.202-9 and 233-9).


                                                         11
Committee on Monetary System to which the legislation was referred. Matsukata also bought off some

Liberal party members, a subset of which established the New Liberal Party (Table 2).28

        When the voting record and composition of the committee is examined more carefully, it is

apparent that without the support of Progressives (who held the committee chair and made up 8 of the 26

voting members), the legislation would have stalled at the committee level. To verify the importance of

Matsukata’s alliance, we used a probit regression model of voting behavior. We regressed each committee

member’s vote on individual characteristics, including party affiliation (whether the member was part of

the progressive-ruling party coalition), occupation (whether the member had served as a public servant),

and district of representation (whether the member was from a silk growing region, the key export at this

time). The coefficient on party (positive and statistically significant) suggests that committee members

voted according to party affiliation (Table 3). With the support of the Progressives and some of the

Liberals, the legislation narrowly passed 14 to 12.

        This coalition again proved sustainable when the debate moved out of committee and to the full

Diet. Count Mutsu, Secretary for the Japanese legation in Washington, commented in American

newspapers that the debate seemed to have already been won by the coalition in support of adoption: “In

many instances the discussion [in the Diet] proceeded upon lines as far removed as well could be from the

real point at issue.”29 The bill cleared the House of Representatives and the House of Lords and was

proclaimed law on March 29th. 30 The new currency act took effect on October 1, 1897.



Section III. Did Gold Standard Adoption affect Interest Rates?


28
   A contemporary reported that some 40 members from the Liberal Party were bought off by Matsukata’s allies
(Masumi, 1966, p.281).
29
   “Japan’s Gold Standard Law,” Salt Lake Tribune, September 14, 1897.
30
   Not all the Progressives agreed with the government’s position For example, Ukichi Taguchi, a famous free
market economist and a member of Progressive Party had insisted that Japan should move toward the bimetallic
standard. He made speeches opposing to the gold standard and voted against it. However, political commentators did
not dispute the importance of the strategic alliance. When Count Okuma retired from the cabinet in November 1897,
“the support of the political party led by him – namely, the Progressists – leaves the Government virtually without
any adherents in the House of Representatives.” (“Ministerial Changes in Japan,” The (London) Times, December
29, 1897.) We were unable to locate the records of how individual Diet members voted, perhaps because the
legislation was authorized with a simple voice vote or other majority consent procedure.


                                                        12
           The legislative and committee debates provide an understanding of why some policymakers

looked favorably upon gold standard adoption for Japan. Many of the arguments made by policymakers in

the 1890s are quite similar to those who advocate fixed exchange rates today: the ability to tap

international capital markets at lower rates of borrowing, reduced exchange-rate instability, and greater

trade. We now turn to assessing the consequences of gold standard adoption in order to examine whether

policymakers’ ex ante beliefs about the effects of the gold standard were anticipated by market

participants and whether they are consistent with realized outcomes. We begin with an assessment of the

effects of gold standard adoption on sovereign bond yields.



A. Evidence on Japanese Sovereign Debt from International Capital Markets

           One testable implication of committing to a policy rule such as the gold standard is that it should

lower the cost of borrowing in international capital markets (Bordo and Kydland (1995) Indeed, Japan’s

adoption of the gold standard has been frequently cited as a canonical case of the potential beneficial

effects of joining the gold standard, and contemporary media reports noted that this was the principal

purpose of joining gold.31 Sussman and Yafeh (2000), for example, find that country risk of Japanese debt

on the London market, defined as the current yield on a long-term Japanese bond minus the yield on the

risk-free British consol declined more than fifty percent (or approximately 200 basis points) when the

country joined the monetary rule in September 1897. They conclude that “the gold standard did

significantly reduce the perceived risk associated with Japanese bonds (Sussman and Yafeh, 2000, p.

442).”32

           To carry out the empirical analysis of sovereign yield spreads, Sussman and Yafeh (2000) spliced

the seven percent Japanese sterling bond issued in 1873 and paid off in 1897 with an unspecified long-

31
   “It is supposed that the principal object the government has in bringing about the change is to enable it, should
such a measure become necessary or expedient, to negotiate a loan in Europe on better terms than would be possible,
as they believe, if Japan remained on a silver basis.” (“Japan’s Gold Standard,” The Sentinel, March 30, 1897.)
32
   Using the data set from Sussman and Yafeh, Tomita (2006, p.263) reaches similar conclusions. Related to our
discussion, Tomita does note that it is difficult to draw inferences about risk spreads since the seven percent bond is
maturing in 1897; however, he does not provide alternative series for analyzing the behavior of the Japanese risk
premium.


                                                         13
term bond issued in 1897 or thereafter. They argue that this is the best approach for testing the effect of

adopting the gold standard on Japanese yield spreads since “data on domestic bond yields do not exist for

Japan until the beginning of the twentieth century” (Sussman and Yafeh, 2000, fn 9, p. 446). Their

unspecified debt series that begins in 1897 is most likely the War Loan Bond (fully redeemed by 1950),

which had been underwritten by the Deposit Money Bureau (the Treasury Fund) in 1895-96 and resold in

London in 1897 as the Imperial Japanese five percent bond of 1897. We infer that this is the bond they

used since it was the only debt issue actively traded on the London market that fits the time series plot

shown in their paper. Figure 1 graphs these two bond series, where we have spliced them together as in

their article. Using the current yield on the seven percent sterling loan and the five percent bond issue that

appeared on the London market in October 1897, there appears to have been a dramatic fall in interest

rates.

         There are some problems with splicing the two different bond series, some of which were noted

by Sussman and Yafeh (2002), but which we explore in greater detail in order to illuminate the discussion

of how bond yields reacted to gold standard adoption. 33 The Japanese government retired the seven

percent sterling issue in the first half of 1897 and then sold new long-term five percent bonds that would

be completely redeemed by 1950 in the second half of the year.34 Japan had long planned to retire the

bond issue in 1897, which means that the drawing had no connection with the country’s decision to join

the gold standard except for the fact that the two events coincidentally took place in the same year

(Ministry of Finance, 1904). Importantly, the redemption provisions of the seven percent debt issue

placed a floor on interest rates of seven percent because investors knew that the bonds would be redeemed

at par (where par=100) by April 1897. This means that the current yield provides little evidence about the

Japanese cost of capital since bond market investors would necessarily take a capital loss if they

purchased the seven percent bond at a price above par and paid the necessary transactions costs.

33
   See footnote 24 in Sussman and Yafeh (2000), p. 457.
34
   Bond markets investors were clearly aware ahead of time that the Japanese government intended to redeem the
bond issue by April 1897. In the original contract at the primary issue in 1873, the Japanese government announced
it would redeem the bond issue at par by 1897 (Ministry of Finance 1904, p.621). This information was reported in
the Official Stock Exchange Intelligence (see Official Stock Market Intelligence, 1896, p. 215).


                                                        14
           An alternative test for measuring the effects of joining the gold club on Japanese country risk is to

use a single bond issue that traded both before and after gold standard adoption. If one examines the

Investors’ Monthly Manual, the five percent Consolidated Loan bond was traded on the London Stock

Exchange around the time of adoption.35 Not only is this bond quoted in London, this bond was originally

issued in Tokyo and actively traded on the Japanese market. (Table 4 lists the bonds issued and/or listed

in London during the sample period and discussed in this article.) It began trading in London July 1896

and had terms similar to the other bonds sold by the Japanese government on the British market in 1897.

The Consolidated Loan bonds had a maturity length of 50 years and were callable after five years. The

only significant difference between the Consolidated Loan and the War Loan Bond sold by the Japanese

government immediately after gold standard adoption was that the War Loan Bond was endorsed to be

paid in sterling. 36 Matsukata’s (1899) book on gold standard adoption confirms the existence of this

domestic Consolidated Loan bond (Table L, p.378).

           Figure 2 shows that, in the months prior to adoption, investors did not anticipate that the gold

standard would lower future borrowing costs. Figure 2 also shows that country risk increased after

adoption. In March 1897, the Consolidated Loan Bond traded at the average price of 105.5 pound with

par value of 100 pounds. After the proclamation of the gold standard, the price dropped month by month

to 95.875 pounds in August. In October, the price rebounded a little to 99.25 pound, but then continued its

decline. It traded at 97 pound in December 1897.



B. Evidence on Japanese Sovereign Debt from the Domestic Bond Market

           Contrary to what has been asserted in some previous studies of Meiji-era Japan (Sussman and

Yafeh, 2000), an active and liquid market for domestic government bonds existed within Japan. From

their inception in 1878, the Osaka and Tokyo stock exchanges listed both government bonds and




35
     This bond listed in the IMM as the “92-3-5 red” bond.
36
     Financial History of Meiji-Era, vol.8, National Debts (1904, p.837).


                                                           15
company stocks. Prices and yields of bonds trading domestically can be used to clarify further whether

Japan’s adoption the gold standard had any effects on its borrowing costs.

         From 1870-1896, the Japanese government issued seventeen bonds in the domestic market and

two in the London Market. It also resold previously-issued domestic bonds twice in the London Market in

1896-97. In the late 1880s and early 1890s, the Japanese securities markets grew in volume and trading

activity. Non-financial private investors more than doubled their securities holdings from 1886 to 1896.

Japanese non-financial private sector ownership of financial assets increased from 265 million yen to 536

million yen between 1886 and 1896.37 The holdings of Japanese securities were widespread during our

sample period.38

         The Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE) served as the central market in Japan. This market appears to

have been well integrated with the rest of the world. Comparing the quotations for the Consolidated Loan

bond in the London and Tokyo markets in Figure 2, we observe that the movements between the debt

series are nearly identical. The minor differences between the interest rates probably reflect the fact that

yields from the domestic Japanese market are computed from the average monthly bond price, while the

yields for the London series are calculated from end-of-month prices reported in the IMM. Nevertheless,

the Johansen Maximum Likelihood Procedure indicates that the null hypothesis of no cointegration can be

rejected at the five-percent level of significance for the two interest rate series.39 The two Japanese bond

price series share a common stochastic trend, suggesting that the London and Tokyo markets were

integrated.




37
   In this section, figures of financial assets are from Fujino and Teranishi (2000).
38
   Private investors, including merchants and landowners, actively invested in domestic securities, and held large
portions of government bonds and company stocks. As of the end of 1896, non-financial private investors owned
160-million-yen of government bonds (44 percent of the total outstanding) and 354-million-yen of company stocks
(93 percent of total outstanding), while financial institutions owned 84-million-yen of government bonds and 27-
million-yen in equities (Fujino and Teranishi, 2000). Anecdotal evidence also suggests that merchants and
landowners in the countryside as well as in the cities traded securities on an over the counter basis. For example, see
Nakamura (2007).
39
   The estimated values for the λMAX and λTRACE test statistics were 15.20 and 17.12, respectively. Both the lambda
max and lambda statistics indicate that the null hypothesis of no cointegration for yields of the Consolidated loan on
the London and Tokyo markets can be rejected at the five percent level of significance.


                                                          16
         As of December 1896, TSE listed six government bonds, one municipal bond and 80 company

stocks. Included in these domestically listed issues were two long-term bonds that traded actively on the

Tokyo exchange before and after the country adopted the gold standard: (1) the previously mentioned five

percent Consolidated Loan of 175 million yen that was sold at various dates between 1887 and 1895 and

(2) the five percent War Loan of 125 million yen that was issued to help pay for the Japanese War with

China in 1894-95. The two debt issues were to be redeemed in 1951 and 1910, respectively. Both issues

paid interest in silver yen before the country adopted the gold standard in September 1897. After joining

the monetary rule, the Japanese government began making interest payments on its domestic debt

obligations in gold yen. This means that joining the gold standard could have also reduced exchange-rate

risk, the risk associated with changes in the value of the currency, in addition to country or political risk.

         Figure 3 shows the current yield for the two Japanese bond series from 1887-1910. The two series

are highly correlated and do not seem to significantly decline with the introduction of the gold standard.

Figure 3 suggests that domestic interest rates in Japan may have actually increased after the adoption of

the gold standard. Nor do they seem to have fallen prior to formal adoption, which might suggest that

investors were anticipating lower future borrowing costs. Simple summary statistics show that Japanese

interest rates were more or less flat prior to adoption and increased by approximately 30 basis points in

the six months after the country adopted the gold standard.40 We can gain some additional insight into

whether investors were anticipating lower borrowing costs by examining reports from the investment

community at that time. The Economist (p.879) wrote on June 19, 1897 that “the Japanese imagine that

because they are adopting a gold standard currency their 5 per cent loans should command a higher price,

but that they are trading below par (at 98 per cent) and “if any large amount were placed on the market

there would soon be a considerable decline in the price.” As a robustness check, Figure 4 shows the

interest-rate differential between Japanese bonds and the “risk-free” British consol. The interest-rate




40
   Japanese interest rates increased by about 15 basis points in the six months prior to Japan joining the gold
standard.


                                                          17
differential should help control for the effect of gold inflation that began in 1897-98. Again, the Japanese

yield spread does not appear to decline with the adoption of the gold standard.41

         Finally, if adopting the gold standard was meant to improve Japan’s reputation in capital markets

and allow it to issue more debt, the period directly after adopting gold is very revealing. Confident with

the victory of the Sino-Japanese war and the introduction of the gold standard, in 1899 the government

floated a new ¥100 million bond issue in London. It sold at 90 percent of par with a current yield of 4.45

percent – a much higher interest rate than predicted by Matsukata and the Japanese authorities. The

Japanese government then purchased much of the outstanding issue at 86 percent of par, an even deeper

discount with a yield of 4.65% (Suzuki, 1994). If we also account for the fact that the bonds were

denominated in sterling, which reduced exchange rate risk, then the new debt issue offered about the same

yield (4.8%) as the yen-denominated consolidated bonds that traded in London. Moreover, this debt issue

met with tepid response from foreign investors. Less than 10 percent of the primary issue was purchased

in the London market. The Japanese government (with assistance from the Bank of Japan) responded by

purchasing nearly 45 percent of the issue, with the underwriters having to absorb the remainder. Japan

had believed its credit rating, after adopting gold was “between Germany and Italy,” but according to

Suzuki (1994) and Metzler (2006), it had overestimated its creditworthiness in foreign markets and later

additional attempts to engage foreigners in purchasing these bonds (including attempts by J.P. Morgan

and Co., Baring Brothers, and the Rothschilds) were rebuffed by investors.

         Furthermore, archival evidence suggests that if, anything, the reason why Japan issued little debt

in the 1880s and early 1890s had more to do with fear of being colonized by foreign creditor governments

than it did with not being on gold. For example in July 1880, Former Finance Minister Shigenobu Okuma

and former Internal Minister Hirobumi Ito jointly proposed the establishment of “the specie bank,” which


41
  We formally tested this hypothesis using structural break analysis and following the procedure developed by Zivot
and Andrews (1992).The structural break tests for yield spreads and interest rates over the sample period 1892-1902
are not statistically significant at the five- or ten-percent level of significance. We also tested for a structural break
over the entire sample period 1887-1910 and found no evidence that the gold standard significantly reduced interest
rates. We also are not able to reject the null hypothesis of a unit root in favor of a structural break model. Results are
available from the authors upon request.


                                                           18
would be the Japanese equivalent of the Bank of England or the Bank of France. To this end, they

proposed to issue a government bond which would be salable to foreign investors. 42 Fearing foreign

control in Japanese affairs, Internal Minister Matsukata strongly opposed this idea, writing in September,

“We are now in a vulnerable position without having the independence of tariff and justice. If we

depended on capital of foreigners, who are superior in knowledge and financial power, we should be in a

big trouble even though we might see a temporary inflow of specie. We would have nothing to do when

Japan should be a country like Egypt, Turkey or India.”43 Matsukata turned down the proposal, and two

years later, as finance minister, he established the Bank of Japan, which was purely domestic.



Section IV. How did Gold Standard Adoption affect Trade?

           As identified by the parliamentary debates and the Committee on the Monetary System,

policymakers also believed that trade would be impacted by the adoption of the gold standard, but there

was considerable disagreement as to how it would affect trade. Some believed that maintaining the silver

standard was beneficial to trade as it enabled Japan to sell its exports more cheaply to gold standard

countries. Others argued that adopting gold would be beneficial for trade as it would lower exchange-rate

volatility and transaction costs. Other policymakers noted that the gains from being on silver were

transitory, based on a favorable silver-gold price that would not persist, and that going on gold would at

least permit Japan to trade among a global trade network that was organized around gold and not silver.

           To test these three hypotheses, we estimate a gravity model of Japan’s bilateral export flows

during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. We collected data on bilateral trade flows

between Japan and other countries from the Principal Trade of Foreign Countries of the British Board of

Trade Statistics and from Japan’s Ministry of Finance, Annual Return of the Foreign Trade of the Empire

of Japan. These two primary sources contain more than 800 observations on Japanese bilateral trade

flows with twenty-six of its main trading partners for the years 1877-1912. The sample contains data on


42
     Okuma (1880).
43
     Matsukata (1880).


                                                    19
bilateral flows between Japan and countries from Asia, Europe, North and South America including:

Australia, Canada, China, England, French Indochina, Hawaii, Hong Kong, India, Korea, New Zealand,

Philippines, Siam, Straits Settlement, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands,

Peru, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland, Russia, Turkey, and the United States.

        A gravity model is a very simple empirical relationship meant to capture the main effects of trade:

mass and distance. As in a standard gravity equation, mass (measured here by the size of countries) is

proportional to trade whereas distance should vary inversely. Given that we do not have GDP estimates

for many of the dyadic trade pairs in our sample, we use population as a proxy for mass which has been

shown to have a correlation of nearly ninety percent with output estimates for the classical gold standard

period (Mitchener and Weidenmier, 2007).

        We augment the gravity equation with additional covariates which are meant to capture other

influences on bilateral trade. We include railroad track miles to proxy for the importance of transportation

infrastructure in promoting bilateral trade flows. We include a dummy variable to indicate whether

Japan’s trading partner is landlocked. Since some studies have indicated that war negatively impacts trade

flows (Glick and Taylor, 2006), a war indicator variable is included to take into account the fact that

Japan fought two wars during our sample period. The indicator variable takes on a value of 1 when Japan

was at war with China (1894-95) or Russia (1904-05) for those respective dyads. We also code a Most

Favored Nation (MFN) dummy variable as unity in cases where Japan has a reciprocal MFN arrangement

(or in Korea and China where it imposed unilateral agreements during our sample period).

        The basic estimation equation is:

(1) ln(EXPORTSit) = β0 + β1PaperBimetit + β2PaperPaperit + β3PaperGoldit + β4SilverSilverit +

β5GoldGoldit + β6SilverGoldit + β7SilverPaperit + β8GoldPaperit + β9GoldSilverit + β10MFNit + β11ln(Dist)i

+ β12Lndlcki + β13ln(RRi)t + β14ln(PopiPopj)t + β15Wari,t-k + εit


where i denotes a trade partner of Japan, j denotes Japan, t denotes time, k denotes lags, and other
variables are defined as:




                                                      20
    •   EXPORTSit denotes Japanese exports to country i at time t;
    •   PaperBimet is a binary variable which is unity if Japan is on the paper standard and country i is
        on the bimetallic standard.
    •   PaperPaper is a binary variable which is unity if country i and Japan are both on a fiat money
        standard.
    •   PaperGold is a binary variable which is unity if Japan is on a fiat money standard and country i is
        on the gold standard.
    •   SilverSilver is a binary variable which is unity if country i and Japan both are on the silver
        standard;
    •   GoldGold is a binary variable which is unity if country i and Japan are both on the gold standard;
    •   SilverGold is a binary variable which is unity if Japan is on the silver standard and country i is on
        the gold standard.
    •   SilverPaper is a binary variable which is unity if Japan is on the silver standard and country i is
        on a fiat money standard.
    •   GoldPaper is a binary variable which is unity if Japan is on the gold standard and country i is on a
        fiat money standard.
    •   GoldSilver is a binary variable which is unity if Japan is on the gold standard and country i is on
        the silver standard.
    •   MFN is a binary variable that takes a value of 1 if Japan has negotiated a reciprocal most favored
        nation treaty with a trade partner or if it has imposed a unilateral MFN on a trade partner that is in
        effect at time t.
    •   Dist is distance between Japan and country i;
    •   Lndlck is a binary variable which is unity if Japan’s trade partner is landlocked;
    •   RR is railroad track miles;
    •   Pop is population;
    •   War is a binary variable which is unity for Japanese exports to China during the Sino-Japanese
        War (1894-95) and unity for Japanese exports to Russia during the Russo-Japanese War (1904-
        05);
    •   and ε is a well-behaved error term capturing other influences on bilateral trade.


    The coefficients β1-β9 measure the effects of Japan’s various monetary standards on bilateral trade

flows. The gold and silver dummy variables, SilverSilver and GoldGold, capture the network externalities

associated with Japan first adopting silver and being on the same currency regime as other silver standard

countries, and then later adopting gold and sharing that currency regime with other countries. If

membership in the same monetary standard reduces transactions costs or exchange rate volatility, then the

coefficients on the SilverSilver and GoldGold dummy variables should be positive and statistically

significant. By coding additional dummy variables reflecting the currency arrangements of all its trading

partners, not just those with which it shared the standard, we can simultaneously test for the other

hypotheses that follow from the historical debates of gold standard adoption. In particular, the pairs



                                                     21
SilverGold and GoldSilver enable us to determine whether Japan’s exports benefitted from movements in

the price of silver relative to gold. While Japan was on the silver standard, this metal was depreciating

relative to gold, so as argued by some legislators and exporters, Japan may have received a boost in its

trade to gold standard countries as a result of this price movement. (This would be reflected in a

positively signed and statistically significant coefficient on SilverGold.) Then, about the time when Japan

joined the gold standard, gold began to depreciate against silver; so once Japan was on gold its exports to

silver countries may have been more competitive, and hence higher.

    We estimate equation (1) with importer-country fixed effects as well as year dummies to control for

annual shocks such as global financial crises and recessions. The fixed-effects or within estimator is

equivalent to adding a complete set of country-pair intercepts to the estimating equation. Our first

regression specification, shown in column 1 of Table 5, uses the paper standard as a basis of comparison;

hence, the omitted dummy variable is when Japan was on the paper standard and other countries were on

the silver standard (in our nomenclature, PaperSilver). Using this specification, we can directly assess the

impact of switching from a fiat standard to a commodity exchange-rate regime. Since many of Japan’s

most important trading partners historically were on silver, this specification allows us to examine

whether there were gains to adopting the same standard as its neighbors on silver, such as China and

Korea. Conditioning on other variables, when Japan switched from paper to silver and its trade partner

was also on silver (SilverSilver), exports received a boost of over 1,094 percent ((e2.48-1)*100). This

positively signed and statistically significant (at the one-percent level) network externality effect suggests

that there were initially large gains to moving to the same monetary standard as its regional trade partners;

it reduced exchange rate volatility and lowered transactions costs.

    When Japan then switched to gold and traded with other gold standard countries, bilateral trade flows

increased by approximately 953 percent (relative to the baseline of PaperSilver). (The effect is

statistically significant at the five-percent level.) The switch to the silver standard also appears to have

raised Japan’s exports to gold standard countries (SilverGold), and its subsequent adoption of gold

appears to have then raised exports to silver standard countries. When Japan was on the silver standard


                                                     22
and its trade partner was on gold, exports increased by 860 percent.44 Hence, advocates of the silver

standard were correct in emphasizing that Japan had received an enormous boost in its trade due to the

depreciation of silver when it was on the silver standard. This statistically significant effect is consistent

with policymakers’ beliefs of what had occurred prior to 1897: Japan’s manufacturing exports benefitted

from the decline in the relative price of silver. However, when Japan was on the gold standard and its

trade partner was on silver, exports increased by 1525 percent. Hence, proponents of going to gold were

also correct in that Japan’s exports did not lose out on their competitive advantage with the switch from

silver to gold, although perhaps more out of luck than out of perfect foresight. That is, gold began to

depreciate against silver at about the same time that Japan joined the gold standard. If Japan had remained

on silver until 1913, it would not only have seen its competitiveness deteriorate, but it would also have

lost out on the gain in competitiveness form gold’s depreciation relative to silver. Overall, these

statistically significant coefficients suggest that relative to initially being on a fiat standard, a substantial

part of the gains from trade from going onto either gold or silver had to do with the movement in the

silver-gold price ratio and the competitiveness effects associated with this movement.

     Our other policy and institutional variables, trade agreements (MFN) and war dummies, are not

statistically significant at conventional levels. In terms of our other covariates, distance from Japan has a

strong negative impact and strong transportation networks in importing countries (proxied by railways)

increased Japanese exports. Although population has a negative and statistically significant effect on

exports, the unconditional correlation between (log) exports and population is positive, but not

statistically significantly different from zero.45

         The second column of Table 5 uses a slightly different baseline for comparison so that we can

more carefully consider the network externality effects of moving from the silver standard to the gold




44
   Metzler (2006) also suggests Japan saw an increase in trade when it was on the silver standard, although he does
not provide a formal test as we do here.
45
   When use a median regression model for exports, we find that population has a positive sign, but is insignificant
at conventional levels of statistical significance.


                                                         23
standard. In this regression, the omitted category is SilverSilver.46 The sign on GoldGold is positive, but

statistically insignificant, suggesting that the gains from being part of the gold club were not substantially

larger than those when Japan was on silver.47 This coefficient suggests that there was no differential

impact in terms of a network effect relative to the silver standard’s network effect. 48 So if adopting gold

did not raise Japanese exports (relative to the network externality effects of the silver standard), then did

Japanese trade receive any benefits from gold standard adoption?

         The answer may lie in Japan’s growing share of global trade coming from gold standard

countries. By the late 1890s, most of the world’s largest economies were on gold (U.S., UK, and

Germany) and much of the rest of the world was abandoning bimetallic, silver, and paper standards for

gold (Meissner, 2005). For example, Austria pegged its currency to gold in the mid-to-late 1890s, Russia

joined gold in 1897, India joined gold in 1898, and Argentina adopted in 1900. The benefits to remaining

on silver, even in Asia, were declining as the world moved to gold (Mitchener and Voth, 2009). Hence, as

the 19th century drew to a close, the longer Japan remained on silver, the smaller the benefit it would

receive by being linked to the same monetary regime of its historical and regional trading partners (silver

countries such as China and Korea).The network effect of silver was strong for Japan (as demonstrated by

the statistically insignificant coefficient on GoldGold in column 2), but as emphasized by contemporary

policymakers like Sakatani, Japan’s trade was turning outward, beyond Asia, to a world that was

increasingly dominated by the gold standard. By 1897, nearly 60 percent of all Japanese exports and trade

were conducted with gold standard countries in 1897. In comparison, silver accounted for approximately

30 percent of exports and 35 percent of total trade flows.


V. Did the Gold Standard Create an Investment Boom?




46
   The change in the omitted category means that we now include SilverPaper in the regression.
47
   The constant term in the regression is large, positive and statistically significant at the 1 percent level, suggesting
that network externality of effect of silver was large.
48
   Consistent with the regression results in column 1, Japan’s trade was lower when it was on paper and traded with
silver countries, suggesting the strong network externality effect of being on the silver standard.


                                                            24
         Some Japanese policymakers also believed that joining the gold standard could initiate a domestic

investment boom. Adherence to the monetary rule would lower domestic interest rates, leading firms to

invest in new plant and equipment (due to lower overall borrowing costs in the economy). Declining

interest rates may also precipitate a run up in stock prices as stocks become relatively more attractive in

comparison to bonds.

         To examine the investment-boom hypothesis, we first gathered new monthly data on Japanese

stock prices around the time of gold standard adoption from the archives of the Tokyo Stock Exchange.

Based on data for stocks listed and actively traded on the Tokyo exchange, we calculated a monthly

capitalized market index of 13 companies for the period 1895-1899. The index represents approximately

70 percent of the capitalized market value of the Japanese stock exchange.49 If expected profitability of

Japanese companies improved in anticipation of gold standard adoption or after gold standard adoption,

then this should have been capitalized into stock prices, and our composite index should show an increase

after the time of adoption.

         However, as Figure 5 shows, the data do not support the idea that the gold standard created an

investment boom that led to higher profitability of Japanese firms. The Japanese stock market index

increased in the beginning of the sample period before declining by more than 35 percent in the one-year

period before Japan joined the gold standard. This suggests that investors did not anticipate higher

expected future profitability as a result of adoption. The stock market index then fell by an additional ten

percent in the year after Japan joined the gold standard, suggesting that, after adoption, investors

perceived that firms were not large beneficiaries of a dramatically lower of interest rates. As a robustness

check, we also calculated an unweighted stock market index for the period. As shown in Figure 6, the

unweighted stock market index declined more than 30 percent after gold standard adoption. Bank of

Japan reported that the stock market remained dull throughout 1897, including the period prior to and

after the adoption of the gold standard. It said, “The stock market in 1897 was dull in general. While the

49
  Although it is possible that the increase in bilateral trade flows might have led to a surge in domestic investment,
most of the firms included in our stock sample were involved in domestic finance and transport – railway companies
building passenger railways.


                                                         25
adoption of the gold standard brought a temporary boom to the stock market, investors held still after all

because they had a feeling of anxiety for the future. In March, stock prices surged because the passage of

the New Currency Act brought a speculation of capital inflow in the future. But, it did not last for a

month, and the market turned dull in early April.” Commentators noted that the decline in security prices

reflected a general feeling of uncertainty in the business community following gold standard adoption.50

        Contemporaries reported that the adoption of the gold standard did not expand the borrowing

capacity of Japan nor did it bring about a domestic investment boom. Japanese newspaper accounts

written at the end of 1897 generally condemned the gold standard. The Jiji Shinpo called adoption of gold,

“the worst mistake ever committed by the government in the long history of the 30 years that have passed

since the Meiji era began. The Matsukata ministry, however, must bear the full responsibility for it.”51

Newspapers generally acknowledged that “the financial situation in Japan is worse than it was in 1896.

Public securities have fallen; railway and industrial shares are very low, and many new undertakings have

stopped for lack of funds…Foreign capital has not come in, neither have the public securities

appreciated.”52 On December 14, 1897, the nationwide newspaper, Yomiuri Shinbun, quoted prominent

economist, Tameyuki Amano, as describing the current economic condition as a combination of

insufficient capital and falling prices of stock and goods in general. He attributed the stagnating economy

to lack of credibility of the Japanese economy among the international investors and the absence of

capital inflow in spite of the adoption of the gold standard. The Yomiuri Shinbun also reported in

December 1897 that adoption of gold may have led to a financial panic in Osaka – news that was also

reported by the American press.53 On August 5, 1898, the Yomiuri Shinbun reported that even though a

number of railway companies had tried to attract foreign investment, none had succeeded. On October 19,

1898, the newspaper further commented that investment in Japan was not attractive for international



50
   Droppers (1898, p.177).
51
   The views of Japanese newspapers were summarized in the following article: “Japan and her Gold Standard,”
Denver Evening Post, March 2, 1898.
52
   “Japan and her Gold Standard,” Denver Evening Post, March 2, 1898.
53
   See, for example, “Gold Standard Panic in Japan,” Daily News, Denver, December 17, 1897, p.5.


                                                      26
investors mainly because of lack of credibility despite the fact that Japan had been on gold for more than

a year.

          Policymakers also saw no boom in the Japanese economy. The annual report of Bank of Japan in

1897 said, “in light of larger expectation of capital inflow to Japanese markets, prominent investors from

the United States and France came to Japan to explore the feasibility of investments. But, they returned

home with no achievement for their goal.” The report in 1898 continued, “some (international) investors

tried to launch new projects for foreign capital introduction into Japan, but all attempts failed… The

government explored the feasibility of issuing bond in the foreign markets as well as in the domestic

markets, but they were not able to do so. They were forced to finance the deficit by the remaining balance

of Chinese indemnity.” Clearly, Japan was failing to attract foreign capital or create an investment boom

by adopting the gold standard.54

          In order to assess further whether an investment boom occurred after gold standard adoption, we

collected data on the investment-GNP ratio. We compared the average investment-GNP ratio for the five-

year period before Japan (1893-1897) joined the gold standard with the five-year period after Japan joined

gold (1898-1902). We chose to end the “gold standard effect” in 1902 since some scholars have noted that

the Russo-Japanese War (1904-05) enhanced the country’s international standing and credibility (Metzler,

2006; Sussman and Yafeh, 2000). The average investment-GNP ratio was actually higher in the five-year

period before Japan joined the gold standard than afterwards (17.1 versus 16 percent). As a robustness

check, we dropped the value of the ratio for 1897 from the pre-gold period (since Japan voted to join gold

in March but did not formally adopt the monetary rule until September) and recomputed the investment-

GNP ratio in the five-year period before and after 1897. The investment-GNP ratio is slightly higher

when Japan was on the silver standard than after it went on gold: 16.3 versus 16 percent. 55 Overall, the




54
  Bank of Japan (1898, 1899).
55
  As a robustness check, we also compared the silver period 1888-1897 with the gold period 1898-1902 as well as
the silver period 1896-97 with the gold period 1898-1899. In all cases, we could not statistically reject the null
hypothesis that joining the gold standard had no effect on the investment-GDP ratio.


                                                        27
empirical evidence suggests that joining the gold standard did not stimulate a boom in the Japanese equity

market or in investment spending.

VI. Conclusion


        This paper argues that in order to understand the reasons why countries adopted monetary

standards and the consequences this choice had on their economies, it is helpful to begin the analysis by

considering the political economy of the adoption decision. Interest groups may not be aligned (as their

objective functions may differ) and outcomes may be uncertain. Examining countries adoption decisions

on a case-by-case basis, as we do in this paper, enables the researcher to design empirical tests that are

based on the ex ante beliefs of policymakers and to measure investor perceptions of adoption as well as

the effects of adoption on multiple economic outcomes.

        Our examination of the historical record suggests that a priori policymakers were split over of

Japan’s decision to join the gold standard in 1897. Many influential business leaders, academics, and

government officials emphasized that adopting gold as the monetary standard would significantly impact

trade, but they disagreed over whether it would be beneficial or detrimental. Some, like Matsukata,

argued that it would increase exports because other countries were moving to gold and that Japan would

have less exchange-rate volatility and lower transaction costs if it too were on gold. Others argued that it

would prematurely terminate the benefits of being on silver: the declining price of silver since 1870 had

been lowering the relative price of Japanese exports and many of Japan’s most important trading partners

were on the silver standard. Other policymakers encouraged Japan to adopt the gold standard for different

reasons – that it would be perceived by markets as a move towards better institutions and would hence

lower Japan’s borrowing costs. Prime Minister Matsukata, however, forged a successful coalition with a

rival party to overcome opposition to the legislation.

        Investors, however, did not seem to be swayed that gold standard adoption would have lasting

effects on either borrowing costs or domestic investment. Using newly assembled data on asset prices, we

show that stock prices and government bonds did not move in anticipation of gold standard adoption. We



                                                     28
further show that Japan’s adoption of the gold standard did not lower Japan’s borrowing costs nor lead to

a surge in domestic investment. Based on evidence from both international and domestic capital markets,

if anything, there was a slight increase in the rates of borrowing after adoption. These findings suggest a

reinterpretation of Meiji financial history since previous studies had associated a reduction in borrowing

costs with gold standard adoption. While it is theoretically possible that a hard peg can serve as a

mechanism for solving the time inconsistency problem, the case of Japan does not appear to be the

canonical case study of such a mechanism.

        Instead, Japan’s experience suggests that metallic standards had a much more significant effect on

exports. Estimates from gravity models show that exports increased when Japan went onto both the silver

and gold standards. Our results suggest that Japan received a large boost to its bilateral trade when it was

on the silver standard both through network externalities and via competitiveness effects: the declining of

silver relative to gold boosted exports to gold standard countries. Nevertheless, Japan’s adoption of the

gold standard proved to be fortuitously timed as the decline in silver prices reversed course at around the

same time Japan made the switch to gold and when the rest of the world was moving to the gold standard.

We find evidence that when Japan was on the gold standard its exports to other gold countries were

higher, relative to the reference period of paper, and that its trade with silver countries benefitted due to

the decline in the price of gold. If Japan had remained on the silver standard it would have necessarily

foregone a large gain in the competitiveness of its exports (something that was not known to

policymakers ex ante) and faced a declining benefit via network externalities as more and more countries

adopted gold. The political economy approach that we have used to study Japan’s adoption decision has

shed new light on the reasons for and consequences of adoption, and suggests a robust alternative to the

cross-country approach that could be employed to examine the adoption of gold for other countries during

the classical gold standard era.




                                                     29
References

Bank of Japan. (1898). “Meiji 30 Nen Nippon Ginko Tokei Nenpo” [Statistical Abstract of Bank of
       Japan, 1897], reprinted in Bank of Japan (1957), Nihon Kin’yu Shi Shiryo: Meiji/Taisho Hen,
       vol.19 [Materials of Japan’s Financial History: Meiji/Taisho Edition], vol.19, pp. 279-326.
Bank of Japan. (1899). “Meiji 31 Nen Nippon Ginko Tokei Nenpo” [Statistical Abstract of Bank of
       Japan, 1898] reprinted in Bank of Japan (1957), Nihon Kin’yu Shi Shiryo: Meiji/Taisho Hen
       [Materials of Japan’s Financial History: Meiji/Taisho Edition], vol.19, pp. 327-366.
Bordo, Michael and Finn Kydland. (1995). “The Gold Standard as a Rule: An Essay in Explorations.”
       Explorations in Economic History vol. 32(4) pp. 423-64.

Bordo, Michael and Hugh Rockoff. (1996). “The Gold Standard as a Good Housekeeping Seal of
       Approval” Journal of Economic History vol. 56 pp. 389-428.

Bytheway, Simon. (2001). “Japan’s adoption of the Gold Standard: Financial and Monetary Reform in the
      Meiji Period.” In John McGuire, Patrick Bertola, and Peter Reeves (eds.) Evolution of the World
      Economy, Precious Metals and India. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.79-95.
Christiano, Lawrence (1992). “Searching for a Break in GNP.” Journal of Business and Economic
        Statistics vol. 10 pp. 237-50.
Committee on the Monetary System. (1895). “Final Report,”reprinted in Bank of Japan (1957), Nihon
      Kin’yu Shi Shiryo: Meiji/Taisho Hen, [Materials of Japan’s Financial History: Meiji/Taisho
      Edition], 17.
Droppers, Garrett. (1898). “Monetary Changes in Japan.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 12(2): 153-185.
Ferguson, Niall and M. Schularick. (2006a). “The Empire Effect: The Determinants of Country Risk in
       the First Era of Globalization.” Journal of Economic History vol. 66(2) pp. 283-312.
Ferguson, Niall and M. Schularick. (2006b). “The Thin Film of Gold: The Limits of Monetary
       Commitments.” Harvard Business School Working Paper.
Flandreau, Marc and Mathilde Maurel. (2005). “Monetary Union, Trade Integration, and Business Cycles
       in the 19th Century.” Open Economies Review vol. 16(2) pp. 135-52.
Flandreau, Marc and Frederic Zúmer. (2004). The Making of Global Finance. Paris: OECD.
Fujino, Shozaburo, and Juro Teranishi. (2000). Nihon Kin’yu no Suryo Bunseki [A Quantitative Analysis
        of Finance in Japan], Toyo Keizai Shinpo Sha.
Glick, Reuven and Alan M. Taylor (2006). Collateral Damage: Trade Disruption and the Economic
        Impact of War,” NBER Working Paper 11565.
Harada, Keiichi. (2007). Nisshin-Nichiro Senso: Nihon Kin-Gendai Shi, [Sino/Russo-Japanese War:
       Modern and Contemporary Japanese History], 3, Iwanami Shoten.
Imperial Diet. (1897). “Teikoku Gikai Sokkiroku: Dai-Jukkai Teikoku Gikai” [Minutes of General
        Assembly and Committees of the 10th Session], reprinted in Bank of Japan (1960), Nihon Kin’yu
        Shi Shiryo: Meiji/Taisho Hen, 14 [Materials of Japan’s Financial History: Meiji/Taisho Edition],
        14.
Kydland, Finn and Edward Prescott. (1985). “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal
       Plans.” Journal of Political Economy vol. 85(3) pp. 473-91.


                                                  30
Laughlin, J. Laurence. (1897). “The Gold Standard in Japan.” Journal of Political Economy 5(3): 378-83.

Lopez-Cordova, J. Ernesto and Christopher Meissner. (2003). “Exchange-Rate Regimes
       and International Trade: Evidence from the Classical Gold Standard Era.” American Economic
       Review vol. 93(1) pp. 344-53.

Masumi, Jun’nosuke. (1965). Nihon Seito-Shi Ron [A Thesis on the History of Japanese Political Party
      System] vol. I, University of Tokyo Press.
Masumi, Jun’nosuke. (1966). Nihon Seito-Shi Ron [A Thesis on the History of Japanese Political Party
      System] vol. II, University of Tokyo Press.
Matsukata, Masayoshi. (1880). “Zaisei-Gi” [On Financial Policy], reprinted in Bank of Japan (1958),
       Nihon Kin’yu Shi Shiryo: Meiji/Taisho Hen, 4 [Materials of Japan’s Financial History:
       Meiji/Taisho Edition], 4, pp. 983-988.
Matsukata, Masayoshi. (1899). Report on the Adoption of the Gold Standard in Japan, Tokyo, the
       Government Press.
Mauro, Paolo, Nathan Sussman and Yishay Yafeh. (2006). Emerging Markets and Financial
      Globalization. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Metzler, Mark. (2006). Lever of Empire: The International Gold Standard and the Crisis of Liberalism in
        Prewar Japan. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Meissner, Chris. (2005). “A New World Order: Explaining the International Diffusion of the Gold
       Standard, 1870-1913.” Journal of International Economics. 66: 385-406.
Miller, Edward S. (2007). Bankrupting the Enemy: The U.S. Financial Siege of Japan Before Pearl
        Harbor. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press.
Ministry of Finance. (1904). Meiji Zaisei Shi, 8: Kokusai [Financial History of the Meiji-Era, 8: National
        Debts].
Ministry of Finance. (1905). Meiji Zaisei Shi, 11: Tuka [Financial History of the Meiji Era, 11: Money].
Ministry of Finance; Financial Bureau. (1898). “Kahei-Hou Seitei oyobi Jisshi Houkoku” [The Report on
        the Legislation of the Currency Act and its Implementation], reprinted in Bank of Japan (1958),
        Nihon Kin’yu Shi Shiryo: Meiji/Taisho Hen, 17 [Materials of Japan’s Financial History:
        Meiji/Taisho Edition], 17, pp. 1-289.
Ministry of Finance. (1898). “Meiji 30 Nen Heisei Kaikaku Shimatsu Gaiyou” [The Overview of the
        Reform of the Monetary System in 1899], reprinted in Bank of Japan (1958), Nihon Kin’yu Shi
        Shiryo: Meiji/Taisho Hen, 17 [Materials of Japan’s Financial History: Meiji/Taisho Edition], 17,
        pp. 291-558.
Mitchener, Kris James and Hans Joachim Voth. (2009). “Trading Silver for Gold: Asian Exports and the
       Political Economy of Currency Unions.” Unpublished Working Paper prepared for the Asian
       Development Bank.
Mitchener, Kris James and Marc D. Weidenmier. (2007). “Trade and Empire,” Santa Clara University
       Working Paper.
Muramatsu, Michio, Mitsutoshi Ito, and Yutaka Tsujinaka. (2001). Nihon no Seiji [Japanese Politics], 2nd
      edition, Toyo Keizai Shinpo Sha.
Murase, Shinya (1976). “The Most-Favored Nation Treatment in Japan’s Treaty Practice during the
       Period, 1854-1905.” American Journal of International Law vol. 70(2) pp.273-297.


                                                   31
Nakamura, Naofumi. (2007). “Meijiki no Yuka Shoken Toshi (Securities Investments in Meiji Era),” Ishii,
      Kanji and Satoru Nakanishi eds., Sangyoka to Shoka Keiei [Industrialization and the Family
      Merchant Business], Nagoya University Press.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan M. Taylor. (2003). “Sovereign Risk ,Credibility and the Gold Standard,
        1870-1913 versus 1925-1931.” Economic Journal vol. 113 (487) pp. 1-35.
Official Stock Market Intelligence. Various years. London.
Okuma, Shigenobu. (1880). “Kousai Shinbo oyobi Ginkou no Setsuritu ni Kansuru Seigi” [An Proposal
      for A New Government Bond Issue and the Establishment of A Bank], reprinted in Bank of Japan
      (1958), Nihon Kin’yu Shi Shiryo: Meiji/Taisho Hen, 4 [Materials of Japan’s Financial History:
      Meiji/Taisho Edition], 4, pp. 754-756.
Shimura, Kaichi. (1980). Nihon Koushasai Shijou Shi [A History of Bond Markets in Japan], Tokyo,
       University of Tokyo Press.

Sussman, Nathan and Yishay Yafeh. (2000). “Institutions, Reforms and Country Risk: Lessons from
      Japanese Government Debt in the Meiji Period,” Journal of Economic History vol. 60 pp. 442-67.

Suzuki, Toshio. (1994). Japanese Government Loan Issues on the London Capital Market, 1870-1913,
        London, The Athlone Press.

Tokyo Stock Exchange. (1928). Tokyo Kabushiki Torihikijo 50 Nenshi [50 years History of Tokyo Stock
       Exchange], Tokyo, Tokyo Stock Exchange.

Tomita, Toshiki. (2006). Kokusai no Rekishi [A History of National Debts], Tokyo, Toyo Keizai Shinpo
       Sha.

Zivot, Eric and Donald Andrews. (1992). “Further Evidence on the Great Crash, Oil Price Shock, and the
        Unit Root Hypothesis.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics vol. 10 pp.251-70.




                                                  32
Table 1. Composition of the House of Representatives, September 1896
(Lower House of Diet)
                         Party Affiliation     Strategic Voting        Name of Bloc
People's Association             32
                                                                  Government-oriented
others/independent               57                    89
                                                                  parties
Progressive Party                99                    99         Strategic alliance
Liberal Party                   111                    111        Opposition party
Total                           299


Source: House of Representatives and House of Peers,
Gikai Seido Nanaju Nen Shi [Seventy Years History of Parliamentary System], 1961.




                                                33
Table 2. Members of the Special Committee on Monetary System, House of Representatives (1897)
                                      Vote on Gold                      Ruling=1,
Last Name          First Name                          Party                         Electral District Previous Profession
                                      Standard                          Opposition=0


Taketomi           Tokitoshi          neutral(chair)   Progressive                    1 Saga             politician
Ito                Tokutaro           against          Liberal                        0 Chiba            business (landlord)
Kurihara           Ryoichi            against          Liberal                        0 Mie              journalist (political)
Shigeoka           Kungoro            against          Liberal                        0 Ehime            politician (lawer)
Horiuchi           Kashikuro          against          Liberal                        0 Nagano           business (landlord)
Takahashi          Anji               against          Liberal                        0 Saitama          lawyer
Tanaka             Ichibeye           against          Business                       0 Osaka            business (merchant)
Matsuo             Kanzo              against          Business                       0 Saga             business (entrepreneur)
Kosaka             Zennnosuke         against          Business                       0 Nagano           business (landlord)
Amano              Izaemon            against          Progressive                    1 Aichi            business (merchant)
Taguchi            Ukichi             against          Progressive                    1 Tokyo            journalist (economist)
Wada               Hikojiro           against          People                         0 Hiroshima        business (landlord)
Motoda             Hajime             against          People                         0 Oita             politician (lawer)
Takada             Sanae              for              Progressive                    1 Saitama          education
Abe                Okindo             for              Progressive                    1 Tokushima        business (entrepreneur)
Hamaguchi          Kichiemon          for              Progressive                    1 Wakayama         business (merchant)
Shimada            Takayuki           for              Progressive                    1 Toyama           politician
Nakano             Buei               for              Progressive                    1 Tokyo            business (Stock Exch.)
Fujita             Tatsuyoshi         for              Progressive                    1 Ehime            business (merchant)
Higashio           Heitaro            for              Progressive                    1 Osaka            business (landlord)
Nakamura           Kokusho            for              New-Liberal                    1 Kanagawa         business (merchant)
Kawarabayashi      Yoshio             for              Liberal                        0 Kyoto            business (rice trader)
Komatsu            Sansei             for              Liberal                        0 Kochi            journalist
Tsutsumi           Michihisa          for              National                       1 Fukuoka          bureaucrat (police officer)
Kashiwada          Morifumi           for              Assembly                       1 Kagoshima        politician
Kawashima          Jun                for              Assembly                       1 Kagoshima        bureaucrat (MOFA, MOF)
Inoue              Kakugoro           for              independent                    1 hiroshima        business (entrepreneur)


           Sources: House of Representatives and House of Peers, Gikai Seido Nanaju Nen Shi
                   [Seventy Years History of Parliamentary System], 1961. House of Representatives, "Minutes of Committes,"
                   Official Gazette . Nihon Jinmei Daijiten [Japan Who's Who], Kodansha, 2001. Concise Biographic
                   Encyclopedia: Japanese Issue , Sanseido, 1976. Ooue, Shiro ed., Meiji Obituary , 1935, reprited by
                   Tokyo Bijutsu, 1971.


            Notes: Private-sector-oriented parties are the Liberal Party, Businessmen's Club, People's Association, Progressive party,
                   and New Liberal Party (which was separated from Liberal Party). Government oriented parties are
                   Assembly Members Club and Nationalist Club. Progressive Party and New Liberal Party were private-sector
                   oriented, but joined a strategic alliance with the ruling government in 1897.




                                                                        34
Table 3 Predicting Voting Behavior in the House Special Committee (1897)



 Public-sector Profession               0.00
                                        0.74


 Political Party                        1.93 ***
                                        0.61


 Silk District                         -0.19
                                       -0.24


 Constant                              -0.92 *
                                        0.48




 Pseudo R-squared                       0.35
 Prob > Chi-squared                     0.01

Notes: Probit regression where unity equals a vote by a committee member in favor of referring the gold standard
legislation the full Diet. *** indicates significant at the 1-percent level. * indicates significant at the 10-percent level.




                                                       35
Table 4. Selective Japanese Governmnet Bonds traded in the London Market

                                 Date of
                                 Issuance or Coupon          Issue price Date of
Name of bond issue               Listing     rate            (par=100) maturity      Total amount (yen)      Means of issuing/listing


9% Foreign Bond (sterling)              1870             9            98      1882                4,880,000 indirect subscription
7% Foreign Bond (sterling)              1873             7           92.5     1897              11,712,000 indirect subscription
                                                                                                           quotation of domestic bond on
Consolidated Public Loan Bond           1896             5       -            1950              -          London Stock Exchange
War Loan Bond                           1897             5           99.9     1950              43,000,000 resale of domestic bond
First 4% Sterling Bond                  1899             4            90      1953              97,630,000 indirect subscription


Sources: O uchi, Hyoue, Nihon Zaisei Ron: Kousai Hen (Japanese Public Finance: Public Debts), Kaizo-sha, 1932; Ministry of Finance ed.,
Meiji Taisho Zaisei Shi,vol.11: Kokusai (Financial History of Meiji-Taisho Era, vol.11: Public Debts), 1936. Suzuki (1994).
Table 5: The Effects of Monetary Standards on Japanese Exports, 1877-1912
                                           Fixed Effects       Fixed Effects
Independent Variables                     PaperSilver Base   SilverSilver Base
SilverSilver                                  2.482***
                                                (0.93)
GoldGold                                       2.335**             0.242
                                                (1.15)             (1.08)
PaperPaper                                    2.267***             -1.388
                                                (0.84)             (1.07)
SilverGold                                    2.262***              -0.17
                                                (0.79)             (0.49)
SilverPaper                                      0.583           -1.793***
                                                (0.93)             (0.67)
GoldPaper                                      2.424**             0.298
                                                (1.24)             (1.18)
GoldSilver                                     2.788**             0.587
                                                (1.23)             (1.12)
PaperBimetallic                                1.737*              -1.899
                                                (1.05)             (1.25)
PaperGold                                     2.641***              -0.88
                                                (0.68)             (0.92)
PaperSilver                                                      -4.807***
                                                                   (1.07)
MFN                                              0.85              0.791
                                                (0.55)             (0.53)
Railroad                                         0.093             0.0515
                                                (0.08)             (0.08)
Population                                    -0.489**             -0.306
                                                (0.22)             (0.22)
War                                             -2.345             -2.337
                                                (1.65)             (1.63)
War(-1)                                          0.983             0.982
                                                (2.07)             (2.05)
War(-2)                                         -1.429             -1.424
                                                (2.36)             (2.34)
War(-3)                                          0.318             0.982
                                                (2.39)             (2.05)
War(-4)                                         -1.253             -1.231
                                                 2.34              (2.32)
War(-5)                                          0.047             0.063
                                                (2.07)             (2.05)
War(-6)                                         -2.001             -1.409
                                                (0.86)             (1.61)
Year Dummies                                     YES                YES
Observations                                      801                801
*significant at 10%;**significant at 5%;***significant at 1%
                                                                                              Figure 1
                                                                Japanese Interest Rates on the London Market, May 1873-July 1910
                                                                                           (Basis Points)

900


800
                                                                                                                                                                    Japan joins gold standard
700
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Russo-Japanese War

600


500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (1873) 7%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           War Loan 5%
400


300


200


100


  0
      3-May-73

                 3-May-75

                               3-May-77

                                          3-May-79

                                                     3-May-81

                                                                 3-May-83

                                                                            3-May-85

                                                                                       3-May-87

                                                                                                  3-May-89

                                                                                                             3-May-91

                                                                                                                        3-May-93

                                                                                                                                   3-May-95

                                                                                                                                              3-May-97

                                                                                                                                                         3-May-99

                                                                                                                                                                    3-May-01

                                                                                                                                                                               3-May-03

                                                                                                                                                                                          3-May-05

                                                                                                                                                                                                     3-May-07

                                                                                                                                                                                                                3-May-09
                            Source: Economist                                                         Weekly Intervals
                                  300
                                        350
                                              400
                                                                                          450
                                                                                                 500
                                                                                                       550
                                                                                                             600
                         1896/1

                         1896/4

                         1896/7

                        1896/10

                         1897/1

                         1897/4

                         1897/7

                        1897/10

                         1898/1

                         1898/4

                         1898/7

                        1898/10

                         1899/1

                         1899/4

                         1899/7
                                                    Japan joins gold standard




                        1899/10




1
    Monthly Intervals
                                                                                                                                         Figure 2




                         1900/1
                                                                                                                                      (Basis Points)




                         1900/4

                         1900/7

                        1900/10

                         1901/1

                         1901/4
                                                                                                                   5% Consolidated Loan in London and Tokyo, 1896-1902




                         1901/7

                        1901/10

                         1902/1

                         1902/4

                         1902/7

                        1902/10
                                                                                         Tokyo
                                                                                London
                                                                                                                Figure 3
                                                                                         Domestic Japanese Interest Rates, March 1887- June 1910
                                                                                                              (Basis Points)

700



600



500



400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Consolidated Loan 5%
                                                                                                                                                     Japan joins gold standard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       War Loan 5%
300



200



100



  0
                        1888/11




                                                                               1893/11




                                                                                                                                      1898/11




                                                                                                                                                                                             1903/11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1908/11
      1887/3
               1888/1


                                  1889/9
                                           1890/7
                                                    1891/5
                                                             1892/3
                                                                      1893/1


                                                                                         1894/9
                                                                                                  1895/7
                                                                                                           1896/5
                                                                                                                    1897/3
                                                                                                                             1898/1


                                                                                                                                                1899/9
                                                                                                                                                         1900/7
                                                                                                                                                                  1901/5
                                                                                                                                                                           1902/3
                                                                                                                                                                                    1903/1


                                                                                                                                                                                                       1904/9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1905/7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1906/5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1907/3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1908/1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1909/9
                                                                                                                     Monthly Intervals




                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                  0
                                      50
                                           100
                                                 150
                                                                                           200
                                                                                                                        250
                                                                                                                              300
                                                                                                                                    350
                                                                                                                                          400
                         1887/3
                         1888/1
                        1888/11
                         1889/9
                         1890/7
                         1891/5
                         1892/3
                         1893/1
                        1893/11
                         1894/9
                         1895/7
                         1896/5
                         1897/3
                         1898/1
                        1898/11
                         1899/9




    Monthly Intervals
                         1900/7
                         1901/5




3
                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 4




                         1902/3
                                                                                                                                                                    (Basis Points)




                         1903/1
                        1903/11
                         1904/9
                                                       Japan joins gold standard




                         1905/7
                         1906/5
                         1907/3
                                                                                                                                                Domestic Japanese Yield Spreads March 1887-June 1910




                         1908/1
                        1908/11
                         1909/9
                                                                                   War Loan 5%
                                                                                                 Consolidated Loan 5%
                                  0
                                      20
                                           40
                                                60
                                                                                 80
                                                                                      100
                                                                                            120
                                                                                                  140
                                                                                                        160
                         1895/1

                         1895/3

                         1895/5

                         1895/7

                         1895/9

                        1895/11

                         1896/1

                         1896/3

                         1896/5

                         1896/7

                         1896/9

                        1896/11

                         1897/1

                         1897/3

                         1897/5




4
                                                                                                                             Figure 5




                         1897/7

                         1897/9




    Monthly Intervals
                                                                                                                        (January 1895=100)




                        1897/11

                         1898/1
                                                                                                              Japanese Stock Market Index, 1895-1899




                         1898/3

                         1898/5

                         1898/7

                         1898/9
                                                     Japan joins gold standard




                        1898/11

                         1899/1

                         1899/3

                         1899/5

                         1899/7

                         1899/9

                        1899/11
                                                Index Value (Jan. 1895=100)




                                  0
                                      20
                                           40
                                                60
                                                                                 80
                                                                                      100
                                                                                            120
                                                                                                  140
                                                                                                        160
                                                                                                              180
                         1895/1

                         1895/3

                         1895/5

                         1895/7

                         1895/9

                        1895/11

                         1896/1

                         1896/3

                         1896/5

                         1896/7

                         1896/9

                        1896/11

                         1897/1

                         1897/3

                         1897/5




5
                                                                                                                                   Figure 6




                         1897/7

                         1897/9




    Monthly Intervals
                        1897/11

                         1898/1
                                                                                                                    Japanese Stock Market Index, 1895-1899




                         1898/3

                         1898/5

                         1898/7

                         1898/9
                                                     Japan joins gold standard




                        1898/11

                         1899/1

                         1899/3

                         1899/5

                         1899/7

                         1899/9

                        1899/11
                                Statistical Appendix: Zivot-Andrews Structural Break Tests, 1887-1910
Panel A: Interest Rates
                                   Consolidated Loan                               War Loan
Break Test                          Minimum T-test                  Break Date   Minimum T-test   Break Date
Intercept                               -2.665                        1897/6         -2.511          1897/6
Trend                                   -2.933                        1907/1         -3.356          1908/3
Intercept and Trend                     -3.346                       1906/12         -3.884          1907/12
Observations                              275                          275            175              175
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%



Panel A: Yield Spreads
                                   Consolidated Loan                               War Loan
Break Test                          Minimum T-test                  Break Date   Minimum T-test   Break Date
Intercept                               -3.024                        1894/6         -2.574          1895/12
Trend                                   -3.074                        1907/1         -3.685           1908/3
Intercept and Trend                     -3.199                        1907/1         -4.741          1907/12
Observations                              275                          275            175              175
