NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MARKUPS AND FIRM-LEVEL EXPORT STATUS
Jan De Loecker
Frederic Warzynski
Working Paper 15198
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15198

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2009

This paper was previously circulated under the name "A control function approach to estimate markups"
and has benefitted from seminar and conference participants at K.U. Leuven, NYU, Aarhus University,
IIOC 2008, Minneapolis Applied Micro Conference, EIFI 2009,CEPR ERWIT 2009, Wharton, NBER
PR, Chicago, Vanderbilt, SED 2010. In particular we thank Dan Ackerberg, Andrew Bernard, Allan
Collard-Wexler, Jeremy Fox, Penny Goldberg, Tim Kehoe, Joep Konings, Sam Kortum, Marc Melitz,
Amil Petrin, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Jim Tybout, Patrick Van Cayseele, Hylke Vandenbussche and
Frank Verboven for discussions on an earlier draft. We also thank three anonymous referees and the
editor for comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Jan De Loecker and Frederic Warzynski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Markups and firm-level export status
Jan De Loecker and Frederic Warzynski
NBER Working Paper No. 15198
July 2009, Revised October 2010
JEL No. F10,L10
ABSTRACT
Estimating markups has a long tradition in industrial organization and international trade. Economists
and policy makers are interested in measuring the effect of various competition and trade policies on
market power, typically measured by markups. The empirical methods that were developed in empirical
industrial organization often rely on the availability of very detailed market-level data with information
on prices, quantities sold, characteristics of products and more recently supplemented with consumer-level
attributes. Often, both researchers and government agencies cannot rely on such detailed data, but
still need an assessment of whether changes in the operating environment of firms had an impact on
markups and therefore on consumer surplus. In this paper, we derive an estimating equation to estimate
markups using standard production plant-level data based on the insight of Hall (1986) and the control
function approach of Olley and Pakes (1996). Our methodology allows for various underlying price
setting models, dynamic inputs, and does not require measuring the user cost of capital or assuming
constant returns to scale. We rely on our method to explore the relationship between markups and
export behavior using plant-level data. We find that i) markups are estimated significantly higher when
controlling for unobserved productivity, ii) exporters charge on average higher markups and iii) firms’
markups increase (decrease) upon export entry (exit).We see these findings as a first step in opening
up the productivity-export black box, and provide a potential explanation for the big measured productivity
premia for firms entering export markets.
Jan De Loecker
Department of Economics
307 Fisher Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
jdeloeck@princeton.edu
Frederic Warzynski
Aarhus School of Business
Aarhus University
fwa@asb.dk

1

Introduction

Estimating markups has a long tradition in industrial organization and international trade.
Economists and policy makers are interested in measuring the eﬀect of various competition
and trade policies on market power, typically measured by markups. The empirical methods
that were developed in empirical industrial organization often rely on the availability of
very detailed market-level data with information on prices, quantities sold, characteristics
of products and more recently supplemented with consumer-level attributes.1 Often, both
researchers and government agencies cannot rely on such detailed data, but still need an
assessment of whether changes in the operating environment of firms had an impact on
markups and therefore on consumer surplus. In this paper, we provide a simple empirical
framework in the spirit of Hall (1986) to estimate markups. Our approach nests various price
setting models used in applied industrial organization and international trade and relies on
optimal input demand conditions obtained from standard cost minimization and the ability
to identify the output elasticity of a variable input free of adjustment costs. The methodology
crucially relies on the insight that the cost share of factors of production, in our case labor
and intermediate inputs, are only equal to their revenue share if output markets are perfectly
competitive. However, under (any form of) imperfect competition the relevant markup drives
a wedge between revenue and cost shares.
Markup estimates are obtained using standard production data where we observe total
expenditures on variable inputs and revenue at the plant level, a condition which is satisfied
in almost all plant-level datasets. By modelling the firm specific (unobserved) productivity
process we can relax a few important assumptions maintained in previous empirical work.
First of all, we do not need to impose constant returns to scale, and secondly, our method
does not require observing or measuring the user cost of capital. We show that this approach
leads to a flexible methodology and reliable estimates, and use our empirical model to verify
whether exporters, on average, charge higher markups than their counterparts in the same
industry, and how markups change upon export entry. However, our framework is well suited
to relate markups to any observed firm-level activity, such as R&D, FDI, import status, etc.,
which is potentially correlated with firm-level productivity.

1.1

Recovering markups from production data

Robert Hall published a series of papers suggesting a simple way to estimate (industry)
markups based on an underlying model of firm behavior (Hall, 1986, 1988, 1990). These
papers generated an entire literature that was essentially built upon the key insight that
industry specific markups can be uncovered from production data with information on firm
or industry level usage of inputs and total value of shipments (e.g. Domowitz et al., 1988;
Waldmann, 1991; Morrison, 1992; Norrbin, 1993; Roeger, 1995; Basu and Fernald, 1997 or
1

See Goldberg (1995) and Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (2004) for example.

2

Klette, 1999)2 . This approach is based on a production function framework and delivers an
average markup using the notion that under imperfect competition input growth is associated
with disproportional output growth, as measured by the relevant markup. An estimated
markup higher than one would therefore immediately reject the perfect competitive model.3
However, some important econometric issues are still unaddressed in the series of modified
approaches. The main concern is that unobserved factors can impact output growth as well
and an obvious candidate in the framework of a production function is productivity (growth).4
Not controlling for unobserved productivity shocks biases the estimate of the markup as
productivity is potentially correlated with the input choice. This problem relates to another
strand of the literature that stepped away from looking for the right set of instruments to
control for unobserved productivity. Olley and Pakes (1996), and Levinsohn and Petrin
(2003) introduced a full behavioral model to solve for unobserved productivity as a function
of observed firm-level decisions (investment and input demand) to deal with the endogeneity
of inputs when estimating a production function.5 We refer to this approach as the proxy
approach.
The increased availability of firm or plant-level datasets further boosted empirical studies
using some version of the Hall approach on micro data. Dealing with unobserved productivity
shocks becomes an ever bigger concern when applying the Hall method to plant-level data
given the strong degree of heterogeneity, as the set of instruments suggested in the literature
were mostly aggregate demand factors such as military spending, and oil prices. Moreover,
the Hall methodology and further refinements have become a popular tool to analyze how
changes in the operating environment - such as privatization, trade liberalization, labor market reforms - have impacted market power, measured by the change in markups. Here again,
the correlation between the change in competition and productivity potentially biases the
estimates of the change in the markup. Let us take the case of trade liberalization. If opening up to trade impacts firm-level productivity, as has been documented extensively in the
literature, it is clear that the change in the markup due to a change in a trade policy is not
identified without controlling for the productivity shock.6
2
The literature also spread to international trade. See Levinsohn (1993), Harrison (1994) and Konings and
Vandebussche (2005).
3
In the original model, Hall actually tests a joint hypothesis of perfect competition and constant returns
to scale. However, in an extended version a returns to scale parameter is separately identified (Hall, 1990).
Importantly, our approach does not require any assumptions on the returns to scale in production as opposed
to the Roeger (1995) approach.
4
In addition, there has been quite a long debate in the literature on what the estimated markup exactly
captures and how the model can be extended to allow for intermediate inputs and economies of scale among
others (see Domowitz et. al 1988 and Morrison 1992).
5
Various refinements have since been proposed in the literature. However, Ackerberg, Benkard, Berry and
Pakes (2007) show that the basic framework remains valid. The methodology is now widespread in industrial
organization, international trade, development economics (see e.g. Van Biesebroeck, 2005 and De Loecker,
2007 who apply modified versions in the context of sorting out the productivity gains upon export entry).
6
The same is true in the case where we want to estimate the productivity response to a change in the
operating environment such as a trade liberalization. See De Loecker (2010a) for more on this.

3

We introduce the notion of a control function to control for unobserved productivity in
the estimation of the output elasticity of a variable input, which combined with standard
first order conditions on cost minimization generate estimates of firm-level markups. Our
approach provides estimates of markups while controlling for unobserved productivity and
relying on clearly spelled out behavioral assumptions. In addition, we identify markups while
allowing for flexible production technologies and can accommodate dynamic and/or fixed
inputs of production such as capital.
We show that our approach and the Hall (1986) approach are linked in a straight forward
way by considering a special case of our model where the markup is constant across producers.
We also compare our estimates to those obtained using an alternative suggested by Klette
(1999) who relies on a dynamic panel estimation techniques. We discuss in details how our
methodology diﬀers and show that Klette’s approach can be considered as a special case
of our estimation strategy while relaxing a few important assumptions on how productivity
shocks impact choice variables. In particular, we relax the assumptions on the productivity
dynamics and allow for markups to vary across producers and time, and in this way we
can correlate markups with economic variables such as productivity and export status. In
addition, both the sample size and the eﬃciency of the estimates increase considerably since
we do not rely on first diﬀerencing.

1.2

Markups and export status

In addition to providing a simple empirical framework to estimate markups using standard
production data, we provide new results on the relationship between firms’ export status and
markups using a rich micro data set where we observe substantial entry into export markets
over our sample period. The latest generation of models of international trade with heterogeneous producers (e.g. Melitz, 2003) were developed to explain the strong correlations
between export status and various firm-level characteristics, such as productivity and size.
In particular, the correlation between productivity and export status has been proven to be
robust over numerous datasets. The theoretical models such as Bernard, Eaton, Jensen and
Kortum (2003) and Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) emphasize the self-selection of firms into
export markets based on an underlying productivity distribution, creating a strong correlation between productivity and export status.7 However, these models also have predictions
regarding markups and firm-level export status and our empirical framework can be used to
test these.
Furthermore, we explore the dynamics of export entry and exit to analyze how it impacts markups. The latter will also allow us to shed more light on the often mentioned
"learning by exporting" hypothesis, which refers to significant productivity improvements for
exporters upon export entry. This has recently been confirmed for mostly developing coun7

A few recent papers have provided similar evidence on importers (Halpern, Koren and Szeidl, 2006).

4

tries.8 However, almost all empirical studies that relate firm-level export status to (estimated)
productivity rely on revenue to proxy for physical output and therefore do not rule out that
part of the export premium captures product quality improvements and market power eﬀects.
Related to this, recent studies by Kugler and Verhoogen (2008) and Hallak and Sivadasan
(2009) report higher product quality for exporters, whereas Manova and Zhang (2009) report
higher export prices for richer and more distant markets using Chinese transaction level data.
They suggest that their results are consistent with a model where firms adjust quality and
markups across destinations in response to market toughness Therefore, diﬀerences in pricing behavior between exporters and non exporters could, at least partially, be responsible for
the measured productivity trajectories upon export entry. Our framework is especially well
suited to address this question since our method generates firm-level estimates of markups
and productivity, while controlling for potentially endogenous productivity improvements as
a result of past export participation.
We study the relationship between markups and export status for a rich panel of Slovenian
firms over the period 1994-2000. Slovenia is a particularly useful setting for this. First,
the economy was a centrally planned region of former Yugoslavia until the country became
independent in 1991. A dramatic wave of reforms followed that reshaped market structure
in most industries. This implied a significant reorientation of trade flows towards relatively
higher income regions like the EU and led to a quadrupling of the number of exporters over
a 7 year period (1994-2000). Second, it has become a small open economy that joined the
European Union in 2004, and its GDP per capita is rapidly converging towards the EU
average. This opening to trade has triggered a process of exit of the less productive firms,
while deregulation and new opportunities facilitated the entry of new firms as well as entry
into export markets which contributed substantially to aggregate productivity growth.9
We find that markups diﬀer dramatically between exporters and non exporters and are
both statistically and economically significantly higher for exporting firms. The latter is
consistent with the findings of productivity premia for exporters, but at the same time requires a better understanding of what these (revenue based) productivity diﬀerences exactly
measure. We provide one important reason for finding higher measured revenue productivity:
higher markups. Finally, we find that markups significantly increase for firms entering export
markets.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces our empirical
framework and introduces our estimation routine and how we compute markups using our
estimates and the data. Section 3 provides a short discussion on the relationship between
markups and firm-level export status, and how our empirical model can be used to test some
recent models of international trade. In section 4 we turn to the data and in section 5 we
8
See e.g.. Van Biesebroeck (2005) and De Loecker (2007). The literature also emphasizes the importance
of self selection into export markets (e.g. Clerides, Lach and Tybout, 1998).
9
See De Loecker and Konings (2006) for more on the importance of entry in aggregate productivity growth
in Slovenian manufacturing.

5

discuss our main results . Section 6 provides a few robustness checks and we discuss remaining
caveats. The final section concludes.

2

A Framework to estimate markups

We introduce an empirical model to obtain firm-level markups relying on standard cost minimization conditions for variable inputs free of adjustment costs. These conditions relate the
output elasticity of an input to the share of that input’s expenditure in total sales and the
firm’s markup.10 After we derive this relationship for a general production function, we discuss the estimation of the output elasticities, which together with data on input expenditures
and total sales generate estimated markups.
To obtain output elasticities, we need estimates of the production function, for which we
rely on proxy methods developed by Olley and Pakes (1996), Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) and
Ackerberg, Caves and Frazier (2006). We present our empirical framework in this particular
order to highlight the flexibility of our approach with respect to the underlying production
technology, consumer demand and market structure. We view the restrictions we do impose,
and which we discuss in detail in below, to be mild especially given the state of the literature.

2.1

Deriving an expression for markups

A firm  at time  produces output using the following production technology,  =  (   ),
where it relies on a set of variable inputs  and capital  . The only restriction we impose
on  () to derive an expression of the markup is that  () is continuous and twice diﬀerentiable with respect to its arguments. Note that this expression encompasses a value added
production function when  is simply labor; and a gross output production function when
 contains labor and intermediate inputs such as materials.
We now assume that producers active in the market are cost minimizing and we can
therefore consider the associated Lagrangian function
L(     ) =   +   +  ( −  (   ))

(1)

where  and  denote a firm’s input price for variable inputs and capital, respectively.
Taking the first order conditions with respect to the variable inputs without adjustment costs,
we get that
L
 (   )
=  − 
=0
(2)


L
=  . Rearranging terms and
and  measures the marginal cost of production as 


multiplying both sides by  , generates the following expression.

 (   ) 
1  
=


 
10

Our approach is similar to Basu and Fernald (2002) and Petrin and Sivadasan (2010).

6

(3)

Cost minimization implies that optimal input demand is satisfied when a firm equalizes

the output elasticity of input  to its cost share 1   . Note that this expression holds
under any form of competition and underlying consumer demand. A final step to obtain
an expression for the markup  is to simply define it as  ≡  . This expression is
robust to various (static) price setting models, and does not depend on any particular form
of price competition among firms. The markup will, however, depend on the specific nature of
competition among firms. One restriction we do impose on price setting is that prices are set
period by period and hereby rule out dynamics in pricing such as menu pricing or simply costly
adjustment of changing prices.11 It is important to realize that we identify the markup from
the diﬀerence in price and marginal cost. However, markups are determined in equilibrium
depending on the specific model of competition and strategic interaction between firms. We
briefly discuss some leading cases of price competition (Cournot, Bertrand and monopolistic
competition) in applied industrial organization and international trade in Appendix B and
cast them in our empirical framework.
For our purpose, it is suﬃcient to define the markup  as the price-marginal cost fraction.
Using this definition, we obtain an expression of the markup
 =






(4)


where we use  
 to denote the output elasticity of input  and  is the share of expenditures on input  in total sales (  ). In order to obtain a measure of firm-level markups
using production data, we only require estimates of the output elasticities of one (or more)
variable input of production and data on the expenditure share. The latter is directly observed in most micro data. A diﬀerent way to interpret the last expression is to note that the
markup is identified of the diﬀerence between a firm’s variable input cost share and revenue
share, where the cost share is not observed but by optimality conditions has to equal the
output elasticity of the relevant input.
Although this derivation is standard and has been used throughout the literature, our
contribution is to provide consistent estimates of the output elasticities while allowing some
inputs to face adjustment costs and recover firm specific estimates of the markup which we
can relate to various economic variables. We also show how our approach relaxes the current
literature, which relies on a single equation approach to estimate industry level markups, in
a few important ways.
11

Our data is at the annual level and at this level of frequency prices are adjusted frequently, and we therefore
abstract away from this issue. We refer to Bils and Klenow (2004) who find that half of goods’ prices last 5.5
months or less, which implies that prices are adjusted much more at the annual level and reducing the price
stickiness at the annual frequency. Although we do not want to stress this too much in our paper, since it is
not the focus of the paper, our methodology can in principal deliver an estimate of the markup consistent with
dynamic pricing (under adjustment costs due to say menu costs for instance). A diﬀerent FOC on pricing will
be obtained which will imply that the wedge between an input’s marginal product and the real input price
will not measure the markup as the relevant markup is no longer simply price over marginal cost. Under a
specific structure, we can back out both parameters of the model. This lies beyond the scope of this paper.

7

It is important to stress that our approach can accommodate inputs with adjustment
costs. The most obvious candidate is the firm’s capital stock. The wedge between the firm’s
cost share of capital and its revenue share contains the expected stream of costs and revenues
and adjustment costs, in addition to the current markup.12

2.2

Estimating output elasticities and markups

In order to obtain estimates of the output elasticities 
 , we restrict our attention to production functions with a scalar Hicks-neutral productivity term and with common technology
parameters across the set of producers. The latter does not imply that output elasticities
of inputs across firms are constant, except for the special case of Cobb-Douglas. The two
restrictions imply the following expression for the production function
 =  (   ; ) exp(  )

(5)

where we highlight that a set of common technology parameters  govern the transformation
of inputs to units of output, combined with the firm’s productivity   .
We view this restriction to be very mild and the expression above contains most - if not all specifications used in empirical work such as the Cobb-Douglas and the Translog production
function.13 The main advantage of restricting our attention to production technologies of
this form is that we can rely on proxy methods suggested by OP, LP and ACF to produce
consistent estimates of the technology parameters .
From now on we consider the log version of (5) given that the output elasticity 
 is
 ln  (  ;)
and is by definition independent of a firm’s productivity level. We
given by
 ln 
discuss the details of how we estimate the production function parameters , which we need to
compute 
 , for the translog production function which nests the Cobb-Douglas production
14
function.
2.2.1

Estimation procedure

Moving towards the empirical specification of our model, we implicitly allow for measurement
error in output observed in the data and for unanticipated shocks to production, which we
combine into  . More precisely, we observe logged output  and assume that it is given by
 = ln  +  , where  are  shocks. Importantly firms do not observe  when making
optimal input decisions. We come back to this distinction when computing markups using
our estimates.
12
We will revisit this implication by comparing markups obtained from both variable inputs and the capital
stock.
13
We can relax the technology parameters to be time variant. In our empirical work we check the importance
of this assumption for our results.
14
We like to note that the identification of the translog production function using proxy estimators has not
been discussed as far as we know. In Appendix C we discuss the case of the CES production function as well.

8

The production function we take to the data, and estimate for each industry separately,
is therefore given by
2
2
 =    +    +   
+   
+     +   + 

(6)

where we subsume the constant term in productivity and lower cases denote the log of a
variable, e.g.  = ln  . We recover the Cobb Douglas (CD) production function when
2    2 ) and the interaction term (   ). The departure
omitting higher order terms (  
 
  
from the standard CD production function is important for our purpose. We identify firmlevel markups from the wedge between revenue and cost shares of inputs, and analyze how
markups diﬀer across firms and more specifically whether markups are diﬀerent for exporters
and whether a firm’s markup changes with export entry. If we were to restrict the output
elasticities to be independent of input use intensity, we would be attributing variation in
technology to variation in markups, and potentially bias the exporter eﬀect.
We discuss our estimation procedure for a value added production function. In Appendix
C, we discuss the gross output production function case, which is very similar and requires
additional moments to identify the coeﬃcients related to material inputs. We will revisit this
distinction below when discussing adjustment costs in labor demand.
In order to obtain consistent estimates of the production function, we need to control
for unobserved productivity shocks which are potentially correlated with labor and capital
choices. We deal with this standard simultaneity problem by relying on the insight of OP/LP
and use the ACF approach while relying on materials to proxy for productivity. The latter
has the advantage of not having to revisit the underlying dynamic model when considering
modifications to the original OP setup when dealing with additional state variables15 . We do,
however, describe our estimation routine when relying on a dynamic control, investment, and
discuss the additional assumptions we require. In our empirical work we run both procedures
on the data.
We follow Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) and rely on material demand,  =  (    ), to
proxy for productivity by inverting  (). We therefore rely on   =  (   ) to proxy for
productivity in the production function estimation. The use of a material demand equation
to proxy for productivity is important for us. The monotonicity of intermediate inputs in
productivity holds under a large class of models of imperfect competition. As long as 
  0
conditional on the firm’s capital use (the fixed input in production), we can use  (   )
to proxy for   and rely on the latter to index a firm’s productivity. This monotonicity is
preserved for a wide range of models of imperfect competition. In this setting, we also find it
useful to refer to Melitz (2000) and Melitz and Levinsohn (2006) who also rely on intermediate
15
As discussed by Ackerberg et al (2006), any additional (serially correlated) state variables which are not
modelled and hence unobservable will actually help identification when relying on a static input to control for
productivity. In contrast, when relying on investment as a proxy, all relevant state variables, both observed
and unobserved, have to be incorporated into the control function. We discuss this approach in Appendix C.
See De Loecker (2010a) for a more detailed discussion on this.

9

inputs to proxy for unobserved productivity while allowing for imperfect competition. Melitz
(2000) shows that this monotonicity condition holds as long as more productive firms do not
set inordinately higher markups than less productive. Melitz and Levinsohn (2006) further
state that “In this situation, an inordinate markup diﬀerence would imply that a productivity
increase would lead a firm to increase its markup by such an amount that it would lead to
a decrease in the firm’s input usage.”. Just like in their setting, we therefore rule out these
cases and impose this restrictions in our empirical application.16
We do depart from Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) and give up on identifying any parameter
in the first stage since conditional on a non parametric function in capital and materials,
identification of the labor coeﬃcient is not plausible.17 Note that the latter observation
is true even for a Cobb-Douglas production function. Given that we are concerned with
more flexible production functions and allow for interaction terms between labor and capital,
identification of the labor coeﬃcients in the first stage would rely heavily on functional form
assumptions.
Our procedure consists of two steps and follows Ackerberg, Caves and Frazier (2006)
closely. In a first stage, we run
 =  (     ) + 

(7)

b ) and an estimate for  . Expected output
where we obtain estimates of expected output (
is given by
2
2
 =    +    +   
+   
+     +  (   )
(8)
The second stage provides estimates for all production function coeﬃcients by relying on
the law of motion for productivity. We follow the standard assumption that productivity
follows a first order Markov process and is given by
  =  ( −1 ) +  

(9)

De Loecker (2010b) discusses the importance of restricting this productivity process to
be completely exogenous, or in other words no firm-level action such as investment, R&D
or exporting can aﬀect a firm’s future productivity level in expected terms. We can easily
accommodate this by allowing additional variables  , such as a firm’s export status, to be
included in  (). As we will show below, this will not impact our ability to identify the
coeﬃcients of the production function.18
16

For instance De Loecker (2010a) and Aw, Roberts and Xu (forthcoming) show that under a CES monopolistic competition setup, materials is increasing in productivity. Under models of strategic interaction
we require firms with higher productivity not to have disproportionally higher markups, putting restrictions
on the markup-productivity elasticity. For the case of Cournot for example lower marginal cost (higher productivity) implies a higher use of intermediate inputs, and hence output produced, at any level of residual
demand.
17
See Ackerberg, Caves and Frazier (2006) and Wooldrigde (2009) for a discussion.
18
In a similar way we can control for the non random exit of firms by including the propensity to exit 
as in Olley and Pakes (1996), i.e.  (−1   ).

10

After the first stage we can compute productivity for any value of β, where β = (              ),
b −   −   −  2 −  2 −    . By non parametrically regressing
using   (β) = 



 
 

  (β) on its lag, −1 (β), we recover the innovation to productivity given β,   (β).19 We
can now form moments to obtain our estimates of the production function, where we rely on
⎛

⎛

⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
 ⎜  (β) ⎜
⎜
⎝
⎝

−1

2
−1
2

−1 

⎞⎞

⎟⎟
⎟⎟
⎟⎟ = 0
⎟⎟
⎠⎠

(10)

to estimate the production function parameters and we use standard   techniques to
obtain the estimates of the production function and rely on block bootstrapping for the
standard errors.20
The moments above are similar to the ones suggested by Ackerberg, Caves and Frazier
(2006) and exploit the fact that capital is assumed to be decided a period ahead and therefore
should not be correlated with the innovation in productivity. We rely on lagged labor to identify the coeﬃcients on labor since current labor is expected to react to shocks to productivity,
and hence (   ) is expected to be non zero. However, in order for lagged labor to be a
valid instrument for current labor, we require input prices to be correlated over time. We
found very strong evidence in favor of this by running various specifications that essentially
relate current wages to past wages.21
The estimated output elasticity of an input  under the translog production function is
given by

b
b + 2
b  + 
b 
 = 
(11)



b . We now turn to how we
and under a Cobb-Douglas production it is simply given by 

compute markups using our estimates and data on firm-level input expenditures and revenues.
2.2.2

Obtaining markups from estimates and data

We now have everything in hand to compute markups. Using expression (4) and our estimate
for the output elasticity, we can directly compute markups. However, as mentioned above,
we do not directly observe the correct expenditure share for input  since we only observe
e , which is given by  exp( ). The first stage of our procedure does provide us with an

19

If we want to allow the export status to impact expected future productivity, we simply regress it on
( () z ), and obtain   () appropriately.
20
Wooldrigde (2009) provides a similar procedure where all coeﬃcients are estimated in a one step system
GMM approach which delivers standard GMM standard errors and higher eﬃciency by relying on cross
equation restrictions. However, we follow the two step procedure since we only have to search over five
parameters in the second stage, after recovering estimates for  and  in the first stage. The Wooldridge
(2009) approach is computationally much more demanding since it requires to search jointly over all five
parameters and all coeﬃcients of the polynomial functions we use to approximate  () and  ().
21
We come back to this point in Appendix C when we discuss the approach using investment, which requires
including wages in the investment policy function since they are serially correlated.

11

estimate for  and we use it to compute the expenditure share as follows,

 =

 



 exp(
 )

(12)

This correction is important as it will eliminate any variation in expenditure shares that
comes from variation in output not correlated with  (     ), or put diﬀerently from
output variation not related to variables impacting input demand including input prices,
productivity, technology parameters and output prices.
We obtain an estimate for the markup by simply applying the FOC on input demand for
a variable input in production in the following way:


−1

b = b
 (
 )

(13)

Markups for each firm  at each point in time  are obtained while allowing for considerable
flexibility in the production function, consumer demand and competition.
2.2.3

Some remarks

Before we turn to our application we want to make four remarks. First of all, we briefly discuss
the extension towards a gross output production function and the trade-oﬀ between using a
potentially more variable input to compute markups and the ability to identify the output
elasticity of that input. Secondly, we summarize how our procedure changes when we were to
rely on investment to proxy for productivity. Thirdly, we show how the standard and mostly
used specification, the Cobb-Douglas production function, is a special case of our estimation
routine. Finally, we briefly discuss a special case of our empirical model where markups are
constant across producers in an industry, and recover the specifications suggested by Hall
(1986) and subsequent work of Klette (1999).
Gross output and adjustment costs We presented our estimation routine under the
assumption that labor is a static input into production, which is consistent with the notion
that we can learn about markups from the optimal labor demand decisions. However, if labor
is a dynamic input, due to say adjustment costs such as hiring and firing costs, our procedure
can still produce consistent estimates of the production function. In that case we can rely
on current labor to identify the coeﬃcients on labor, just like with capital. It does have
implications for computing markups. In fact, if firms face adjustment costs the wedge between
a firm’s cost and revenue share contains more than just the markup. It is easy to show that
the FOC on labor demand will introduce an additional component which contains adjustment
costs.22 In this case, we can rely on a gross output production function and compute the
markups using the output elasticity of materials and its expenditure share. Material inputs
22

See Petrin and Sivadasan (2010) for such an application.

12

are potentially much less prone to adjustment costs, up to inventory management, and in our
empirical work we will check the robustness of our results to this. We refer the reader to the
Appendix C for a detailed discussion of the estimation of the production function parameters
under a gross output production function.
Using investment to proxy for productivity In order to rely on the Olley and Pakes
(1996) version of the ACF estimator and use investment to proxy for productivity, we need to
incorporate any additional state variable in the investment policy function and check invertibility. Obvious candidates for additional state variables are serially correlated input prices
and a firm’s export status. Adding the extra state variables, up to showing monotonicity,
has no implications on our ability to identify the coeﬃcients of interests.23
Cobb-Douglas production function The Cobb-Douglas production function is obtained
by simply shutting the parameters   ,   and   to zero in equation (6). The rest of the
procedure is unchanged. The output elasticity of labor for instance simply reduces to  
and implies a constant elasticity across producers and time. Therefore all variation in the
expenditure share will carry over to the variation in markups across firms. The latter implies
that under this restrictive model choice, we can immediately rank firms’ markups by ranking
their expenditure shares. In our empirical work we compare markups under both production
technologies.
Special case: constant markup We can use our framework to recover the original Hall
approach, as well as Klette (1999), by assuming that markups are constant across firms and
time,  = , and that productivity is simply a fixed eﬀect,   =   +   , which can be
eliminated by taking first diﬀerences. When considering a Cobb-Douglas production function
for simplicity, we obtain the following expression

∆ =   ∆ +   ∆ + ∆e

(14)

where ∆ is a first diﬀerence operator such that ∆ =  − −1 and the error term ∆e
 =
∆ +   . A final step in recovering the Hall framework is to directly impose the first order
conditions from cost minimization on all inputs of the production function. The estimating
equation then reduces to

(15)
∆ = ∆ + ∆e
where ∆ = ( ∆ +  ∆ ).24 It is worth emphasizing that the constant markup
condition can either be imposed through economic theory, such as considering a constant
23

Appendix C provides the details of the estimation routine. We refer to Van Biesebroeck (2005) and De
Loecker (2007) for a detailed discussion, and we rely on their results to use investment when considering export
as a state variable.
24
In general, the revenue shares are firm and time specific. However, in the case of Cobb Douglas with a
constant markup, they need to be constant across firms since   =  .

13

elasticity of demand model, or by restricting the goal of the estimation routine to estimate
the average markup. Both constraints lead to the same estimating equation but identification
of the parameter  is quite diﬀerent. Equation (15) further highlights that capital is assumed
to be a variable input since the static first order condition is used to substitute the capital
coeﬃcient. In addition, we require a measure of the user cost of capital ( ) which, as
discussed before, is hard to come by. Variants of this equation have been used extensively
in the literature and this paper brings forward the strong assumptions required to obtain
markup estimates. In our empirical work we will compare our estimates to those obtained
with the Hall approach.
Finally, we can directly verify the importance of relaxing the assumptions on the productivity shock by relying on our control function in the first diﬀerence setting. The proxy for
productivity has the advantage of not having to treat capital as a static input since we collect
all terms on capital and materials in e
 (). More precisely we have that ∆  =   −  −1
and   =  (   ). This approach generates the following estimating equation.
∆ = ∆e
 + e
 (   ) + ∆

(16)

 (   ) =   ∆ +  (   ) − −1 (−1  −1 ). We can
where ∆e
 = ( ∆ ), and e
turn to similar moment conditions as discussed extensively under section 2.2 to identify ,
although eﬃciency is further sacrificed by requiring instruments at least twice lagged (−2 ).

3

Exporters, productivity and markups

We can now rely on our empirical framework to analyze markup diﬀerences between exporters
and non exporters. In addition, we are interested in how new exporters’ markups change as
they enter foreign markets. To answer this, we correlate markups with a firm’s export status
and check whether markups change with export entry, while controlling for input usage.
We further explain our empirical model in detail once we have introduced the data and
discuss the information we can rely on. We stress that we want to verify whether exporters
charge diﬀerent markups without taking a stand on any specific model of international trade.
However, when interpreting the estimated markup parameters, we can turn to various models
to interpret and explain our findings.
A number of models of international trade with heterogeneous producers and firm specific
markups have predictions on the relationship between a firm’s export status and its productivity level. Most of the empirical work in this literature has focussed on the latter, while not
much attention has been devoted on the relationship between a firm’s export status and its
markup. These models generate the result that more productive firms set higher markups,
and given that those firms can aﬀord to pay an export entry cost therefore predict that
exporters will have higher markups. Bernard et al (2003) rely on a Bertrand pricing game
while allowing for firm-level productivity diﬀerences and show that on average exporters have
14

higher markups. Recently, Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) model firms, in an international trade
setting, that compete in prices where products are horizontally diﬀerentiated. This model
generates a firm specific markup which is a function of the diﬀerence between the firm’s
marginal cost and the cut-oﬀ marginal cost where the firm is indiﬀerent between staying in
the industry or exiting. Therefore, when a firm is relatively more productive, it can charge
a higher markup and enjoy higher profits. Markups therefore drive a wedge between actual
and measured productivity, and disproportionately so for exporting firms.
A wide range of models will predict the aforementioned relationship which essentially
comes from a single source of heterogeneity on the supply side (productivity). Another
strand of the trade literature explores the role of quality diﬀerences between exporters and
non exporters. If exporters produce higher quality goods, while relying on higher quality
inputs, all things equal they can charge higher markups. For an empirical analysis see Kugler
and Verhoogen (2008) and Hallak and Sivadasan (2009).
Both mechanisms are thus expected to generate higher markups for exporters in the
cross section. In the time series dimension, however, it is not clear how markups change as
firms enter export markets compared to already exporting firms and domestic producers. We
therefore see this paper as providing both a check of current models of international trade
generating a relationship between export status and markups, as well as new evidence on
markup dynamics and export status. Since most theories are static in nature, they cannot
speak to this time dimension. More recently, Cosar, Guner and Tybout (2009) develop a
dynamic general equilibrium trade model to explain certain features of the labor market, and
their model implies that exporters charge higher markups because factor market frictions
prevent them from freely adjusting their capacity as exporting opportunities come and go
over time.
Taking stock of the above, we therefore expect higher markups for exporters. However,
it is clear that markup diﬀerences are related to both supply and demand factors impacting both costs and prices. Our procedure delivers both markup and productivity estimates
and allows us to further decompose the markup diﬀerence between domestic producers and
exporters. In this way we can verify whether after controlling for diﬀerences in marginal
costs (i.e. productivity) exporters still have higher markups. In this way we can, once we
have established our main results, eliminate the productivity component from the markup
diﬀerence and provide some suggestive evidence on the role of other factors impacting price.
We therefore relate our results to a recent literature that has put forward the importance of
these factors, such as diﬀerences in elasticities of demand across markets and product quality
for instance.

15

4

Background and data

We rely on a unique dataset covering all firms active in Slovenian manufacturing during the
period 1994-2000. The data are provided by the Slovenian Central Statistical Oﬃce and
contains the full company accounts for an unbalanced panel of 7,915 firms.25 We also observe
market entry and exit, as well as detailed information on firm level export status and export
sales. At every point in time, we know whether the firm is a domestic producer, an export
entrant, an export quitter or a continuing exporter.
Table 1 provides some summary statistics about the industrial dynamics in our sample.
While the annual average exit rate is around 3 percent, entry rates are very high, especially
at the beginning of the period. This reflects new opportunities that were exploited after
transition started.

Year
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000

Table 1: Firm Turnover and Exporting in Slovenian Manufacturing
Nr of firms Exit rate Entry rate #Exporters Labor Productivity
3820
3.32
13.14
1738
14.71
4152
2.60
5.44
1901
16.45
4339
3.43
4.47
1906
18.22
4447
3.94
4.14
2003
18.81
4695
3.26
3.30
2192
21.02
4906
2.69
3.38
2335
21.26
Labor Productivity is expressed in thousands of Tolars.

Our summary statistics show how labor productivity increased dramatically, consistent
with the image of a Slovenian economy undergoing successful restructuring. At the same time,
the number of exporters grew by 35 percent, taking up a larger share of total manufacturing
both in total number of firms, as in total sales and total employment.
We study the relationship between exports and markups since exports have gained dramatic importance in Slovenian manufacturing. We observe a 42 percent increase in total
exports of manufacturing products over the sample period 1994-2000. Furthermore, entry
and exit has reshaped market structure in most industries. Both the entry of more productive firms and the increased export participation was responsible for significant productivity
improvements in aggregate (measured) productivity (De Loecker and Konings, 2006 and De
Loecker, 2007). Therefore, we want to analyze the impact of the increased participation in
international markets on the firms’ ability to charge prices above marginal cost using our
proposed empirical framework.
25
We refer to Appendix A for more details on the Slovenian data, and to De Loecker (2007). In the Appendix
we also list the variables we use in our empirical work and how they are measured. The unit of observation is
an establishment (plant) level, but we refer to it as a firm.

16

5

Results

In this section we use our empirical model to estimate markups for Slovenian manufacturing
firms, and test whether exporters have, on average, diﬀerent markups. In addition, we rely
on substantial entry into foreign markets in our data to analyze how markups change with
export entry and exit, and as such we are the first, to our knowledge, to provide robust
econometric evidence of this relationship.
After estimating the output elasticity of labor and materials, we can compute the implied
markups from the FOCs as described above. We use our markup estimates to discuss several
major findings. First, we compare our markup estimates to the literature (Hall and Klette)
and we consider a restricted version of our approach which revisits the Hall/Klette framework
but relies on our proxy for productivity. Secondly, we look at the relationship between
markups and firm-level export status in both the cross section and the time series. Thirdly,
we briefly discuss the relationship between markups and other economic variables. This
analysis cannot be done using previous methods where a common markup across a set of
producers is estimated.26 Finally, we discuss an important aggregate implication given our
results.

5.1

Firm-level markups

We obtain an estimate of each firm’s markup and can compare the average or median with
the Hall/Klette approach. Although that our focus is not so much on the exact level of the
markup, we do want to highlight that the markup estimates are comparable to those obtained
with diﬀerent methodologies, but are diﬀerent in an important way.
Our procedure generates industry specific production function coeﬃcients which in turn
deliver firm specific output elasticity of variable inputs. The latter are plugged in FOC of
input demand together with data on input expenditure to compute markups. We list the
median markup using a wide set of specifications to highlight our results. We first present
results using the standard methods in the literature, using Hall and Klette. We present our
results using both value added or gross output production functions, allowing for endogenous
productivity processes, under a translog and Cobb-Douglas technology. We also consider
a specification where we include the export dummy as an input.27 Finally, we estimate a
few restricted versions of our model where we impose a common markup by industry, and
take first diﬀerences while controlling for productivity using our proxy method. For value
added production functions we rely on the output elasticity of labor to compute markups and
compare them with markups obtained from the output elasticity of materials under a gross
26

An exception is Klette (1999) who estimates the covariance of time averaged markups and productivity, (    ), while relying on additional assumptions. We discuss those in detail and compare it to our
framework.
27
Some literature has followed this approach to generate the result that exporters produce under diﬀerent
technologies. However, this specification does not sit well with the Cobb-Douglas framework which implies
that a firm can substitute any other input for exporting.

17

output production function.28 More specifically we run the following specifications: I: Value
Added under Cobb-Douglas, II: I + endogenous productivity process, where past exporting
can impact current productivity as given by   = ( −1  −1 ) +   , III: I + impose both
moments on capital, (  ()− ) = 0 for  = {0 1}, and rely on a weighing matrix in the
  procedure, IV: Value Added under Translog, V: II and include an export dummy as
an additional input, VI: Gross output production function under Cobb-Douglas, VII : I with
a common markup, VIII: VII estimated in first diﬀerences as describe in equation (16).
The table below presents the median markup for the various specifications. The standard
deviation across the various specifications (I-VI) results are similar and around 05, and
indicate a substantial variation in markups across all firms of the manufacturing sector, as
expected.

Table 2: Estimated Markups
Methodology Markup (St.error)
Hall*
1.03 (0.004)
Klette*
1.12 (0.020)
Specification
I
1.17
II
1.10
III
1.23
IV
1.28
V
1.23
VI
1.26
VII*
1.16 (0.006)
VIII*
1.11 (0.007)
*: Markups are estimated and we report the standard errors in parentheses. The standard deviation
around the markup in specifications I-VI is about 05.

The table above clearly highlights that our estimates of the markup are consistently higher
compared to the Hall and Klette approach. The markup estimate under Hall is obtained by
regressing output growth on an index of input growth where each input is weighted by their
expenditure share as given by equation (15), and we find a markup of 103. In the second
row, we estimated a higher markup of 112 using Klette’s algorithm 29 . Both these models
28

We report both and want to note the trade-oﬀ facing both. Material inputs are potentially less costly
to adjust and satisfy the conditions we rely on more. However, as shown by Bond and Soderbom (2002),
identification of a variable and freely chose input can be challenging in a Cobb-Douglas framework. We choose
to simply run all our regressions using both estimates to check for robustness of our results.
29
Instead of using Arellano and Bond (1991), we use the more eﬃcient method of Arellano and Bover (1995)
and Blundell and Bond (1998). Also see Blundell and Bond (2000) for an application to production functions.
We only use employment and capital (as in Klette), lagged from −2 onwards as instruments (this corresponds
to model  in Klette), following the discussion in section 2.2.

18

are estimated in first diﬀerences, and it is well known to lead to a downward bias of the
estimates, here the markup, by exacerbating measurement error.30
We obtain markups in the range of 117 − 128 and our various specifications give very
similar results. Note that the markups obtained using specifications I - VI are simply medians
over the underlying distribution, and in all cases the standard deviations are substantial as
expected. We explore the variation across firms in the next section when we relate markups
to various economic variables, with a focus on export status.
As mentioned before our methodology requires the availability of a variable input of
production without adjustment costs, in order to rely on the FOC. We compare our markups
obtained using cost minimization conditions on the labor input (I-V), with markups obtained
using materials, VI, by running a gross output production function and our results are very
similar.31
It is worth noting that the markups obtained imposing a static FOC on capital, which
clearly goes against the evidence of important adjustment costs in capital, are considerably
higher. The latter is as expected since the wedge between the output elasticity of capital and
the revenue share contains current markups as well as capital adjustment costs, and should
therefore be higher. We find a median markup of 15 using this approach.
It is interesting to note that when relying on our methodology while imposing a common
markup, VII, we obtain an estimate of 116, which is below our other estimates but still
much higher than the standard Hall estimate.32 This estimate of the markup is obtained
directly within our estimation routine by imposing the FOCs on the variable inputs in the
production function. This approach is similar to the original Hall approach, except that
the regression is estimated in levels and productivity shocks are explicitly controlled for
using economic theory. To further demonstrate the importance of controlling for unobserved
productivity shocks, we consider a first diﬀerence version of our approach, VIII, while keeping
the markup constant and we obtain an estimate of 111, which is higher than the standard
Hall approach and closer to our preferred estimates.33 More specifically, comparing the first
and the last row shows the importance of controlling for unobserved productivity shocks
30
In the traditional Hall model, a Taylor expansion of the production function gives rise to estimating the
model in first diﬀerences. However, this implicitly restricts the underlying demand system whereby markups
do not change between two time period. We refer to De Loecker and Warzynski (2009) for more. Klette (1999)
first considers deviations from the median output/input firm before taking first diﬀerences.
31
We obtain two separate measures for the markup using the gross output production function. It is feasible
to use both estimates to learn about potential frictions in labor demand. This lies beyond the scope of this
paper.
32
∗
We consider a value added production function and obtain the following estimating equation  = 
+
∗
=  
.
Note
that
we
do
not
impose
the
FOC
on
the
capital
coeﬃcient.
Relying
   +   +   where 

on our empirical framework and using  (   ) to control for productivity we directly obtain an estimate
for the markup. The steps are as before and we obtain an estimate of the markup by relying on the same
moments as discussed in section 2.2.1.
33
We estimate equation (16) and use materials to proxy for productivity and identify the markup in a second
stage. Alternatively when we rely on investment to proxy for productivity, we can estimate the markup in a
first stage when relying on additional assumptions as discussed in ACF.

19

when estimating markups. These restricted versions, VII-VIII, of our model highlight the
additional assumptions and restrictions of previous approaches in the literature. We run
these specifications to highlight the set of assumptions we relax in our approach, and how it
impacts the results. In particular relaxing the constant markup assumption across firms and
allowing for time varying productivity shocks leads to substantially higher markups, ranging
up to twelve percent higher.

5.2

Markups and Exporting

We can now turn to main focus of our application, whether exporters on average have higher
markups and whether markups change when firms enter export markets. We first discuss
the cross sectional results, before turning to the time series dimension of our data and verify
whether markups change when firms enter export markets. Finally, we also show how our
method allows to shed light on the correlation of markups and other economic variables such
as productivity.
5.2.1

Do exporters have diﬀerent markups?

Given that we have firm specific markups, we can simply relate a firm’s markup to its export
status in a regression framework. As noted before, we are not per se interested in the level
of the markup, and we therefore estimate the percentage diﬀerence in markups between
exporters and domestic producers. We do convert these percentages into absolute markup
diﬀerences in order to compare our results to those obtained using the Hall approach. The
specification we take to the data is given by
ln  = 0 + 1  +   +  

(17)

where  is an export dummy and 1 measures the percentage markup premium for exporters.34 We control for labor and capital use in order to capture diﬀerences in size and
factor intensity, as well as year ( )-industry () dummies to take out aggregate trends in
markups, and collect them all in  with  the corresponding vector of coeﬃcients. We stress
that we are not interpreting 1 as a causal parameter. We rely on our approach to test
whether on average exporters have diﬀerent markups. The latter, to our knowledge, has not
been documented and we see this as a first important set of results. We are not interested
in , but later on we will revisit the separate correlations of markups and other economic
variables. We estimate this regression at the manufacturing level and include a full interaction of year and industry dummies.35 Once we have estimated 1 , we can compute the level
markup diﬀerence by applying the percentage diﬀerence to the constant term which captures
34

We consider logged markups since the variation in firm-level markups is quite substantial and therefore
rely on OLS to minimize proportional deviations, rather than absolute deviations. We discuss an additional
advantage of estimating this relationship in logs in section 6.
35
We have also run this by industry and the magnitude varies across the diﬀerent industries as expected.

20

the domestic markup average. We denote this markup diﬀerence by  and we compute it
by applying  = 1 exp(0 ) after estimating the relevant parameters. Table 3 presents our
results.
Table 3: Markups and Export Status I: Cross Section
Methodology Export Premium (St. error)
Hall
0.0155 (0.010)
Klette
0.0500 (0.090)
Specification
I
0.1633 (0.017)
II
0.1608 (0.017)
IV
0.1304 (0.014)
V
0.1829 (0.017)
VIII
0.1263 (0.013)
The standard errors under specifications I-V are obtained from a non linear combination of the
relevant parameter estimates.  indicates not significant at 10 percent level. All regressions include
labor, capital and full year and industry dummies.

We run the regression for the various estimates of the markups as described above. The
parameter 1 is estimated very precisely in all specifications (I-V) and is around 0078. We
rely on these estimates to compute the level markup diﬀerences reported in the table above.
As expected, the results relying on a Cobb-Douglas technology are very similar because the
variation in markups is identical across the various specifications. Only the level of the
markup diﬀers due to diﬀerent   estimates, which is captured by the constant term 0 . The
results using a translog production function, IV, rely on firm specific output elasticities and
we get a somewhat lower estimated  of 01304. One important message that comes from
this table is that no significant markup diﬀerences are detected when relying on the Hall or the
Klette approach. In order to check whether restricting the markup to be constant across firms
is important for this diﬀerence, we consider a restricted version of our approach (VIII). The
markup premium is estimated to be 01263 which is similar to the results under the more
general framework. These results highlight the importance of controlling for unobserved
productivity shocks when estimating markups directly.
An important advantage of considering log markups is that our results are unchanged even
if all variable inputs we considered to compute markups are subject to adjustment costs. As
long as exporting firms are not more or less subject to these adjustment costs, our results are
not aﬀected.36
 −1
We can write the first order condition with adjustment costs in general as follows, 
(1+ 
 =  ( )
 ),

where the term (1 +   ) contains the additional wedge between the input’s marginal product and the input
price coming from the adjustment cost. We thus require (ln(1 +  
 ) ) = 0 in order to obtain consistent
estimates of the percentage diﬀerence in markups, while controlling for  and  which further control for
potential diﬀerences in adjustment costs related to the size of the firm.
36

21

These results are consistent with recent models of international trade such as the model of
Bernard et al (2003) where exporters charge on average higher markups, simply because they
are more productive and can therefore undercut their rivals. This prediction is supported by
comparing the average markup of exporters to non exporters in the cross section. However, in
their model firms of the same productivity will charge the same markup, making productivity
diﬀerences the only source for markup diﬀerences. Our procedure generates estimates for
both markups and productivity and we can shed light on this by including both. When
including both a firm’s export status and productivity, the coeﬃcient on export 1 , expressed
in percentages, goes down from 0076 to 0021, as expected. Once we control for productivity,
we control for diﬀerences in marginal cost and the coeﬃcient on export status picks up the
variation in average prices between exporters and domestic firms. To see this note that we
are actually running
(ln  − ln  ) = 0 + 1  + 2   +   +  

(18)

which shows clearly that 1 will measure the average price diﬀerence (in percentages) if  
picks up ln  fully. As discussed in Katayama, Lu and Tybout (2009) and De Loecker
(2010a), we know that  potentially picks up price diﬀerences and therefore we expect
2 to pick up additional variation across producers related to market power, and demand
conditions. An important point to take away from this is that the export eﬀect is still present
even after controlling for productivity diﬀerences. In fact, the export dummy still explains
around thirty percent of the markup diﬀerence, while controlling for productivity. The latter
implies that other factors, which are reflected in price diﬀerences, play an important role in
explaining markup diﬀerences between exporters and domestic producers. Our results are
therefore consistent with a recent literature emphasizing diﬀerences in product and input
quality between exporters and domestic producers. However, simple diﬀerences in demand
elasticities and income across markets can equally explain price diﬀerences. Given our data
constraints, we cannot further discriminate between those various mechanisms.
Taking stock of the results described above has potential important policy implications.
The well documented productivity premium of exporters could, at least partly, be reflecting
markup diﬀerences. Recent models of international trade with heterogeneous firms emphasize
the reallocation of market share from less eﬃcient producers to more eﬃcient exporters. This
mechanism relies on exporters being more productive, because they can cover the fixed cost
of entering foreign markets. A growing list of empirical studies has documented (measured)
productivity premia for exporters, and furthermore recent work has found evidence on further
improvements in (measured) productivity post export entry (learning by exporting). Our
results, however, require a more cautious interpretation of the exporter productivity premium
and how exporting contributes to aggregate productivity growth. More specifically, given that
measured productivity is a simple residual of a sales generating production function, it is well
known that it contains unobserved quality diﬀerences in both inputs and output, as well as
22

market power eﬀects broadly defined.37 Our results therefore provide additional information
in explaining the measured productivity premium, and emphasize the importance of studying
the export-productivity relationship jointly with market power in an integrated framework.
We further investigate the markup trajectory as a function of export status in the next
section. The latter will allow us to dig deeper in the (measured) productivity trajectories
after export entry.
5.2.2

Export entry and markup dynamics

So far, we have just estimated diﬀerences in average markups for exporters and domestic
producers. Our dataset also allows us to test whether markups diﬀer significantly within the
group of exporters. It is especially of interest to see whether there is a specific pattern of
markups for firms that enter export markets, i.e. before and after they become an exporter.
This will help us to better interpret the results from a large body of empirical work documenting productivity gains for new exporters. These results are used to confirm theories of
self-selection of more productive firms into export markets as in Melitz (2003) or learning
by exporting. We now turn our attention to the various categories of exporters that we are
able to identify in our sample: starters, quitters and firms that export throughout the sample
period.
We run the following regressions on the data where we simply compare markups before
and after export entry (and exit), while also estimating the markup diﬀerential for firms who
continuously export in our sample.38
ln  =  0 +  1  ∗  +  2  ∗  +  3  +   +  

(19)

The constant term captures the average log markup for domestic producers and pre export
entrants/exiters. The interest lies in the coeﬃcient  1 which measures the markup percentage
diﬀerence, for starters, between the post and pre export entry periods. The other coeﬃcient
 2 measures a similar eﬀect but for export exit. Finally,  3 measures the markup diﬀerence
for firms exporting throughout, and we expect this coeﬃcient to be positive. There is little
guidance from theory on the coeﬃcient  1 , given that almost all models are static in nature
as discussed before. We therefore see our results as as providing new evidence on markup
dynamics and export status.
We compute the implied markup level eﬀects from export entry as before,  =  1 exp( 0 ),
and report them for our various specifications in Table 4 below.

37
In fact the markup diﬀerences between exporters and domestic producers only fully reflect cost (productivity) diﬀerences if both domestic producers and exporters set the same output prices.
38
We eliminate the very small fraction of firms that enters or exits export markets more than once in our
sample.

23

Table 4: Markups and Export Status II: Export Entry Eﬀect
Methodology
Export Entry Eﬀect
Percentage ( 1 ) Level ( )
I
0.0467
0.0939
(0.0127)
(0.0260)
II
0.0467
0.0925
(0.0127)
(0.0250)
IV
0.0481
0.0797
(0.0128)
(0.021)
V
0.0497
0.0994
(0.0127)
(0.0260)
VIII
n.a.
0.0700
(0.022)
The standard errors under DLW1-5 are obtained from a non linear combination of the relevant
parameter estimates. All regressions include labor, capital and full year and industry FE.

The table in Appendix D lists the detailed results and we find that export entry is associated with substantially higher markups, ranging around four percent while controlling
for aggregate markup changes. The other coeﬃcients are also as expected. Interestingly,
we can include productivity (as before) and still find a significant positive eﬀect for export
entry. The latter suggest again that price changes are associated with export entry, which
can come from: diﬀerences in demand conditions (elasticities, etc.) and quality diﬀerences, as
discussed before. Table 4 lists both the percentage and the level estimates and our estimates
suggest that export entry is associated with a significant increase in markups of around four
to five percent, or between 0079 and 0099 in levels. We compare our results to the restricted
common markup model in a first diﬀerence setting and we obtain a similar export entry eﬀect
of 007 in the level of the markup. The estimates across the various rows demonstrate that
our results are robust with respect to various production technologies and assumptions on
the underlying productivity process.
When relying on the same regression framework and allow the markup eﬀect to depend
on export intensity, by replacing the export dummy  by the share of export sales in total
. The coeﬃcient on the export entry eﬀect is larger, 0097, and allows us to plot
sales, 

over time. Figure D.1
the post export entry markup trajectory as obtained by tracing 

in Appendix D illustrates this graphically.
It is important to note that the finding and patterns discussed above are not found when
we rely on standard methods, and when not controlling for unobserved productivity shocks.
In fact markups are not significant and much lower in magnitude.
5.2.3

Interpreting our results

In sum, we report two major findings: 1) in the cross section we find that exporters have
higher markups than their domestic counterparts in the same industry, and 2) in the time
24

series we find that markups increase when firms enter export markets, while controlling for
aggregate demand and supply eﬀects through year dummies. How can we explain our results?
A few recent models (Bernard et al., 2003; Melitz and Ottaviano, 2008) provide a theoretical analysis of the relationship between firm export status and (market specific) markups.
Under various hypotheses regarding the nature of competition, more eﬃcient producers are
more likely to have more eﬃcient rivals, more likely to charge lower prices, to sell more on
the domestic market and also to beat rivals on export markets. They benefit from a cost
advantage over their competitors, set higher mark-ups (under certain conditions regarding
the relative eﬃciency between firms on the domestic and the export market in the case of
the Melitz and Ottaviano model) and have higher levels of measured productivity. An alternative explanation could be that the elasticity of demand is diﬀerent on the export market,
or that consumers have diﬀerent valuation for the good. The exact mechanism underlying
these results is not testable given the data at hand. For instance we do not have firm specific
information on prices which could allow us to separate out the markup diﬀerence into a cost
and price eﬀect. We did show that controlling for cost diﬀerences, exporters on average still
have higher markups which suggests additional factors impacting prices are important, and is
consistent with recent work by Manova and Zhang (2009) and Hallak and Sivadasan (2009).
Finally, at a broader level our evidence suggests that the gap between the notion of (physical) productivity in theoretical models of international trade with heterogeneous producers
and the empirical measurement of productivity is an important one given that markups are
diﬀerent for exporters and that they change significantly, both economically and statistically,
when firms enter export markets.

5.3

Markups and other economic variables.

We can rely on our estimates of firm-level markups and relate them to other economic variables of interest, such as productivity. Note that our procedure generates both estimates for
markups and productivity. A large class of models in industrial organization predict that
firms with lower marginal cost (higher productivity) will be able to charge higher markups,
all things the same. In Cournot, higher productivity firms will have a higher market share
and have a higher markup. Recent models of international trade with heterogeneous firms
also predict that more productive firms will have higher markups. We run the same regression as in (17) and replace the export status by productivity. We obtain a highly positive
estimate of 03 for the coeﬃcient on productivity, and it does not change when adding a firm’s
export status. Our results are therefore consistent with a wide range of theory models, and
confirms that more productive firms have higher markups. We briefly mention this result
and do not pursue any further analysis given that productivity measures potentially contain
price/demand variation as well, and might be poor measures of marginal cost as discussed
by Katayama, Lu and Tybout (2009) and De Loecker (2010a).

25

5.4

Aggregate implications

The Hall framework was initially set out to obtain estimates for productivity growth while
appropriately controlling for imperfect competition. We briefly revisit this by considering the
Hall version of our framework and use it to back out estimates for productivity growth after
estimating markups. Note that our methodology generates estimates for productivity and
markups, for each firm. We could compute productivity growth directly after estimating the
production function. However, here we revisit the literature using a restricted version of our
model to highlight the importance of correctly estimating markups. We rely on our estimates
of the markup 
b and compute productivity growth as follows
b ∆ = ∆ 
∆ − 
b∆e
 − 


(20)

We rely on our estimates of the markup 
b and the capital coeﬃcient   . In addition to a
diﬀerent estimate for the markup, as presented in Table 2, our approach does not impose any
restrictions on returns to scale. It is clear that using standard techniques will lead to biased
estimates for productivity growth since they are based on downward biased markup estimates. Within the context of sorting out markup diﬀerences between exporters and domestic
producers, the uncorrected approach would actually predict no diﬀerences in productivity
growth, conditional on input use, between the two, which is clearly in contradiction with
empirical evidence.
It is clear that productivity growth is overestimated without controlling for the endogeneity of inputs and markup diﬀerences. This bias is further increased when we allow for
markups to change when firms switch export status. Although our method is not intended to
directly provide estimates for productivity growth, we see this as an important cross validation of the estimated markup parameters. Our estimates suggest average annual productivity
growth rates for Slovenian manufacturing between 3 and 1.5 percent.
Our results have some important implications for aggregate productivity. It is immediately clear that when relying on the standard framework, markups are underestimated
for domestic producers and even more so for exporters. It first of all implies that we will
overestimate aggregate manufacturing productivity growth, which is obtained by a weighted
average of firm-level productivity growth, even when ignoring diﬀerences in markups between
exporters and domestic producers. However, when analyzing productivity growth of sectors
or countries during a period where export participation increased substantially, an additional
bias kicks in. Based on our estimates it is straightforward to show how aggregate productivity growth is overestimated when not controlling for diﬀerent markups across domestic
producers and exporters. In the case of Slovenia, the bias in aggregate productivity growth
becomes larger as resources were reallocated towards exporters and therefore accounting for
a growing share in aggregate output as the number of exporters quadrupled and export sales
grew substantially. These results therefore suggest that the estimated aggregate productivity
gains from increased export participation are biased upward when ignoring that exporters
26

charge, on average, higher markups. The wedge between measured and actual aggregate productivity growth increases as a larger share of manufacturing firms are becoming exporters
and are accounting for a larger share of total output. This distinction between measured
productivity growth and actual productivity due to market power eﬀects is consistent with
recent models of international trade with heterogeneous producers.

6

Robustness and final remarks

We discuss two robustness checks below. In turn we discuss the use of deflated sales to
proxy for output and we allow for diﬀerent markups for exporters in foreign markets and the
domestic market.

6.1

Unobserved prices and revenue data

Implicitly we have treated deflated sales as a measure of physical quantity when estimating
output elasticities, and therefore our approach is potentially subject to the omitted price
variable bias discussed in Klette and Griliches (1996). However, in our context we are not
concerned with obtaining correct productivity estimates. As discussed by De Loecker (2010a)
not controlling for unobserved prices is particularly problematic for obtaining reliable estimates for productivity. In our setting unobserved prices are expected, if anything, to bias
the output elasticities downward. The correlation between inputs and prices is expected to
be negative as mentioned in the original work by Klette and Griliches (1996) under quite
general demand and cost specifications, i.e. all things equal more inputs will lead to higher
output and push prices down. This implies that if anything we are underestimating markups.
However, unobserved prices will only aﬀect our estimates of the level of the markup, and will
not impact our results on the relationship of markups and export status.
The use of the proxy for productivity does help against not observing prices as well.
Price variation that is correlated with variation in productivity will be controlled for and will
therefore not bias the estimates of the production function. However, price variation due to
demand shocks not correlated with  () can still bias the estimates of the input coeﬃcients.
The latter will potentially bias the output elasticity estimates but will not impact our main
results because in all of our empirical work we correlate log markups to export status. Given
our framework this implies that we ran

(ln 
 − ln  ) =  0 +  1  +  

(21)

on the data. Under a Cobb-Douglas technology the output elasticity 
 reduces to a constant,   in the case of using labor, and therefore the bias induced by unobserved prices
only impacts the estimate of the constant term 0 . In other words, we obtain the correct
percentage diﬀerence in markups between exporters and domestic producers, and if anything

27

underestimate the diﬀerence in levels. When considering a more flexible production technology, like the translog, we face a trade-oﬀ between allowing for variation in output elasticities
and potentially introducing a bias through unobserved prices. Our estimates of the average

percentage diﬀerence in markups are consistent as long as the diﬀerence (ln b
 − ln 
 ) is not
correlated with the firm’s export status  . The estimated percentage diﬀerences presented
in Appendix D show that the results using Cobb-Douglas (I,II,V) and Translog (IV) are
very similar, and we see those in support of the fact that unobserved prices are not impacting our main estimates. The estimated markup level diﬀerences are somewhat lower under
the translog production function. This is consistent with a potential downward bias in the
production function coeﬃcients, which leads to a lower average output elasticity and hence
a lower 0 used to compute markup levels.39 However, variation in output elasticities also
impacts the point estimate of the constant term.

6.2

Exporting and markups: digging deeper

We documented that exporters have on average higher markups, and that markups increase
after export entry. However, exporters sell products on diﬀerent markets and our estimate of
the markup contains potentially diﬀerent market specific markups. We rely on firm specific
export destination information and check whether we can detect diﬀerences in markups across
destination markets. Secondly, we revisit the eﬀect of export entry on markups and include
the intensity of exporting to shed light on the separate eﬀect of export entry on domestic and
foreign markups.
6.2.1

Export destinations and markups

We rely on firm-level export destination information to check whether markups are diﬀerent
across various export destination markets.40 For the case of Slovenia exporting includes
shipping products to regions formerly part of the Yugoslavian Republic prior to Slovenia’s
independence in 1991, as well as high income regions such as the US and Western Europe.
As mentioned above, recent work has documented that exporters produce and ship higher
quality products while controlling for a host of firm-level characteristics including size, where
quality is measured indirectly by either unit prices or whether a firm has an ISO 9000 certification.41 In order to see whether markups are higher for exporters sending their products
to high income regions such as Western Europe, we simply include interaction terms with

If unobserved prices are negatively correlated with inputs, all production function coeﬃcients estimates 

are biased downward. This in turn implies that the estimated output elasticities 
 and hence the markups

 are downward biased as well. Consequently the (log) average of the markups are estimated lower, and
result in lower estimates of the constant term. The table in Appendix D demonstrates this potential eﬀect.
40
As mentioned in De Loecker (2007), the destination information is not available at each point in time in
our sample. We therefore return to our cross sectional comparison of exporters and domestic producers.
41
For instance, Kugler and Verhoogen (2008) document this for Colombia, and Hallak and Sivadasan (2009)
provide evidence for manufacturing establishments in India, the U.S, Chile and Colombia.
39

28

the various export destination regions to the estimating equation (17). We obtain a 0045
higher markup (in levels) for firms exporting to Western Europe, but estimated less precise
as expected given the remaining degree of heterogeneity within the region of Western Europe. This implies that exporters shipping to this region, on average, charge a higher markup
compared to the average exporter shipping to other regions. Our results are consistent with
the quality hypothesis, given that it is expected that quality standards are higher in Western
European markets than in the Slovenian domestic market. Given the data constraints we
cannot measure quality at the firm level and therefore leave this for future research.
6.2.2

Decomposing export entry markup eﬀect

So far we have shown that markups increase when firms enter export markets. However,
for exporting firms we rely on an average markup across the domestic and foreign market.
In principal our methodology can generate markup estimates by market. Applying the first
order condition of labor by market , where  = {() ()}, we can compute
the markup as before. However, in our data we do not observe hours worked or number
of employees used in production by destination market. We only observe total number of
workers in production and this is a standard restriction in plant-level data. Using equation
(4) and explicitly relying on the assumption that an exporting plant produces with a given
technology in a given location where it faces a given wage rate, implies that we can write


=




µ

 [  ]
[  ]

¶−1

(22)

where  measures the share of the wage bill used in exported production. Total export
sales, [  ] , and the total wage bill are directly observed in our data. Therefore, in
order to compute the domestic markup for an exporter and compare it with the average
markup across all destination markets, we can compare  to  by plant. We adopt the
following strategy to verify whether the domestic markup of export entrants changes with
export entry. We run the same procedure as in (19), but we rely on the share of export
sales in total sales, and interact this with the  dummy. This specification allows us
to inspect whether the increase in the firm’s average markup (across domestic and foreign
markets) due to export entry, depends on the intensity of exporting. We can look at firms
with a very small fraction of sales coming from exporting, say less than one percent, when
they enter the export market which can be informative about what happens to their domestic
markup. We obtain a significant coeﬃcient of 0097 for  1 and this implies a level estimate
of 016, which is substantially higher than the estimates reported before. However, to get
the total eﬀect of export entry we need to multiply this estimate with the relevant export
share  , and this implies that the markup entry eﬀect is very small for firms selling a small
share of their production abroad. For exporters selling less than one percent on foreign
markets, markups only increase with 000097 percent, suggesting that domestic markups do
29

not change. This approach is clearly not without problems as the export share increases over
time and the separation between domestic and export markups becomes harder to make.
In addition, this approach does not necessarily use the optimal weight which will depend
on how we aggregate inputs across production by destination within a firm. The export
sales weight implicitly assumes that inputs are used in proportion to final sales. The latter
is an assumption maintained throughout most empirical work, see Foster, Haltiwanger and
Syverson (2008) for example. Given the data constraints, we leave the discussion of the
optimal weight for future research.

7

Conclusion

This paper investigates the link between markups and exporting behavior. In order to analyze
this relationship we propose a simple and flexible methodology to estimate markups building
on the seminal paper by Hall (1986) and the work by Olley and Pakes (1996). The advantages
of our method are that we can accommodate a large class of price setting models while
recovering firm specific markups and do not need to rely on the assumption of constant
returns to scale and measuring the user cost of capital.
We use data on Slovenia to test whether i) exporters, on average, charge higher markups
and ii) whether markups change for firms entering and exiting export markets. Slovenia is a
particularly interesting emerging economy to study as it has been successfully transformed
from a socially planned economy to a market economy in less than a decade, reaching a level
of GDP per capita over 65 percent of the EU average by the year 2000. More specifically,
the sample period that we consider is characterized by considerably productivity growth and
relative high turnover. Our methodology is therefore expected to find significantly diﬀerent
markups as we explicitly control for unobserved productivity shocks. Our results confirm the
importance of these controls.
Our method delivers higher estimates of firm-level markups compared to standard techniques that cannot directly control for unobserved productivity shocks. Our estimates are
robust to various price setting models and specifications of the production function. We find
that markups diﬀer dramatically between exporters and non exporters, and find significant
and robust higher markups for exporting firms. The latter is consistent with the findings of
productivity premium for exporters, but at the same time requires a better understanding of
what these (revenue based) productivity diﬀerences exactly measure. We provide one important reason for finding higher measured revenue productivity: higher markups. Furthermore,
we provide new econometric evidence that markups increase when firms enter export markets.
Our evidence suggests that the gap between the notion of (physical) productivity in
theoretical models of international trade with heterogeneous producers and the empirical
measurement of productivity is an important one, i.e. markups are diﬀerent for exporters
and they change significantly, both economically and statistically, when firms enter export

30

markets. We see these results as a first step in opening up the productivity-export black
box, and provide a potential explanation for the big measured productivity gains that go
in hand with becoming an exporter. In this way our paper is related to the recent work
of Costantini and Melitz (2008) who provide an analytic framework that generates export
entry productivity eﬀects due to firms making joint export entry-innovation choice, where
innovation leads to higher productivity.

31

References
[1] Ackerberg, D., Benkard, L., Berry, S. and Pakes, A., 2007. "Econometric Tools for
Analyzing Market Outcomes". in Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 6, 4173-4276.
[2] Ackerberg, D., Caves, K., and Frazer, G., 2006. Structural Identification of Production
Functions, mimeo, UCLA.
[3] Arellano, M., and Bond, S., 1991. Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo
evidence and an application to employment equations, Review of Economic Studies, 58,
277-297.
[4] Arellano, M., and Bover, O., 1995. Another look at the instrumental variable estimation
of error-components models, Journal of Econometrics, 68: 29-51.
[5] Aw, B.Y., Roberts, M. and Xu, Y., R&D Investment, Exporting, and Productivity
Dynamics, American Economic Review, forthcoming.
[6] Basu, S. and Fernald, J.G., 1997. Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates and
Implications, Journal of Political Economy, 105, 249-83.
[7] Basu, S. and Fernald, J.G., 2002. Aggregate productivity and aggregate technology,
European Economic Review, 46, 963-991.
[8] Bellone, F., Musso, P., Nesta, L. and Warzynski, F., 2008. Endogenous Markups, Firm
Productivity and International Trade, mimeo, OFCE.
[9] Bernard, A.B., Eaton, J., Jensen, J.B. and Kortum, S., 2003. Plants and Productivity
in International Trade. American Economic Review, 93, 1268-1290.
[10] Berry, S., Levinsohn, L. and Pakes, A. 1995. Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,
Econometrica, 63, 841-890.
[11] Berry, S., Levinsohn, L. and Pakes, A. 2004. Diﬀerentiated Products Demand Systems
from a Combination of Micro and Macro Data: The New Car Market, Journal of Political
Economy, 112, 68-105.
[12] Bils, M. and Klenow, P. J., 2004. Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,
Journal of Political Economy, 112, 947—985.
[13] Blundell, R., and S. Bond. 1998. Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic
panel-data models, Journal of Econometrics, 87, 115-143.
[14] Blundell, R. and Bond, S., 2000. GMM Estimation with persistent panel data: an application to production functions, Econometric Reviews, 19, 321-340.

32

[15] Bond, S. and Söderbom, M., 2002. Adjustment Costs and the Identification of Cobb
Douglas Production Functions. Mimeo, Oxford University.
[16] Clerides, S., Lach, S. and Tybout, J. 1998. Is ’Learning-by-Exporting’ Important? MicroDynamic Evidence from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 113, pp. 903-47.
[17] Costantini, J. and Melitz, M., 2008. The Dynamics of Firm-Level Adjustment to Trade
Liberalization, in Helpman, E., D. Marin, and T. Verdier, The Organization of Firms in
a Global Economy, Harvard University Press.
[18] Cosar, A.K, Guner, N. and Tybout, J. 2009. Firm Dynamics, Job Turnover, and Wage
Distributions in an Open Economy, Penn State mimeo.
[19] De Loecker, J. and Konings, J. 2006, Job Reallocation and Productivity Growth in an
Emerging Economy, European Journal of Political Economy, vol 22, pp. 388-408.
[20] De Loecker, J. 2007. Do Export Generate Higher Productivity? Evidence from Slovenia.
Journal of International Economics, 73, 69—98.
[21] De Loecker, J. 2010a. Product Diﬀerentiation, Multi-Product Firms and Estimating the
Impact of Trade Liberalization on Productivity, Princeton mimeo.
[22] De Loecker, J. 2010b. A Note on Detecting Learning by Exporting, Princeton mimeo.
[23] Domowitz, I. Hubbard, R.G. and Petersen, B.C. 1988. Market Structure and Cyclical
Fluctuations in U.S. Manufacturing, The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 70,
No. 1., pp. 55-66.
[24] Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J. and Syverson, C., 2008. Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and
Eﬃciency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability? American Economic Review, 98
(1), 394-425.
[25] Goldberg, P. 1995. Product Diﬀerentiation and Oligopoly in International Markets: The
Case of the U.S. Automobile Industry, Econometrica, Vol. 63, No. 4, pp. 891-951.
[26] Görg, H. and Warzynski, F., 2003. The Dynamics of Price Cost Margins and Exporting
Behaviour: Evidence from the UK. LICOS Discussion Paper # 133.
[27] Hall, R.E., 1986. Market Structure and Macroeconomic Fluctuations. Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity 2, 285-322.
[28] Hall, R. E., 1988. The Relation between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry.
Journal of Political Economy 96 (5), 921-947.

33

[29] Hall, R. E., 1990. Invariance Properties of Solow’s Productivity Residual, in Diamond, P.
(ed.), Growth, productivity, Unemployment: Essays to celebrate Bob Solow’s Birthday,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 71-112.
[30] Hallak, J.C. and Sivadasan, J. 2009. Exporting Behavior under Quality Constraints,
NBER WP #14928.
[31] Halpern, L., Koren, M. and Szeidl, A. 2006. Imports and Productivity, mimeo CEU,
Budapest.
[32] Harrison, A., 1994. Productivity, Imperfect Competition, and Trade Reform: Theory
and Evidence, Journal of International Economics 36, 53-73.
[33] Katayama, H., Lu, S. and Tybout, J. 2009. Why Plant-Level Productivity Studies are
Often Misleading, and an Alternative Approach to Inference, International Journal of
Industrial Organization, 27, 403-413.
[34] Klette, T. J. , 1999. Market Power, Scale Economies and Productivity: Estimates from
a Panel of Establishment Data. Journal of Industrial Economics 47 (4), 451-476.
[35] Klette, T. J. and Griliches, Z., 1996. The Inconsistency of Common Scale Estimators
When Output prices Are Unobserved and Endogenous, Journal of Applied Econometrics
11 (4), 343-361.
[36] Konings, J., Van Cayseele, P. and Warzynski, F. 2005. The Eﬀect of Privatization and
Competitive Pressure on Firms’ Price-Cost Margins: Micro Evidence from Emerging
Economies, Review of Economics and Statistics 87 (1), 124-134.
[37] Konings, J. and Vandenbussche, H., 2005. Antidumping protection and markups of domestic firms, Journal of International Economics, 65 (1), 151-165.
[38] Kugler, M. and Verhoogen, E. 2008. The Quality-Complementarity Hypothesis: Theory
and Evidence from Colombia, NBER working paper #14418.
[39] Levinsohn, J., 1993. Testing the imports-as-market-discipline hypothesis, Journal of International Economics, 35, 1-21.
[40] Levinsohn, J. and Petrin, A., 2003. Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to
Control for Unobservables. Review of Economics Studies 70, 317-340.
[41] Manova, K. and Zhang, Z., 2009. Export Prices and Heterogeneous Firm Models. Working paper, Stanford University.
[42] Melitz, M. 2000. Estimating Firm-Level Productivity in Diﬀerentiated Product Industries. Mimeo, Harvard University.
34

[43] Melitz, M. 2003. The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity, Econometrica, Vol. 71, November 2003, pp. 1695-1725.
[44] Melitz, M. and Levinsohn, J., 2006. Productivity in a Diﬀerentiated Products Market
Equilibrium. Mimeo, Princeton University.
[45] Melitz, M. and Ottaviano, G. 2008. Market Size, Trade, and Productivity, Review of
Economic Studies, Vol. 75, January 2008, pp.295-316.
[46] Morrison, C.J. 1992. Unraveling the Productivity Growth Slowdown in the United States,
Canada and Japan: The Eﬀects of Subequilibrium, Scale Economies and Markups, Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 74, No. 3. (Aug., 1992), pp. 381-393.
[47] Norrbin, S. C., 1993. The Relation between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry:
A Contradiction, Journal of Political Economy 101, 1149-1164.
[48] Olley, S. G. and Pakes, A, 1996. The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment Industry, Econometrica 64 (6), 1263-1297.
[49] Petrin, A. and Sivadasan, J., 2010. Estimating Lost Output from Allocative Ineﬃciency,
with Application to Chile and Firing Costs. Mimeo, University of Minnesota.
[50] Roeger, W., 1995. Can Imperfect Competition Explain the Diﬀerence between Primal
and Dual Productivity Measures? Estimates for U.S. Manufacturing, Journal of Political
Economy, 103, 316-330.
[51] Shapiro, M., 1987. Measuring Market Power in US Industry. NBER WP # 2212.
[52] Van Biesebroeck, J., 2005. Exporting Raises Productivity in sub-Saharan African Manufacturing Firms, Journal of International Economics, 67 (2), 373-391
[53] Waldmann, R. J., 1991. Implausible Results or Implausible Data? Anomalies in the Construction of Value-Added Data and Implications for Estimates of Price-Cost Markups,
Journal of Political Economy 99, 1315-1328
[54] Wooldridge, J. M., 2009. On estimating firm-level production functions using proxy
variables to control for unobservables, Economics Letters, 104, 112-114.

35

Appendix A: Data Description
In this appendix we describe the firm-level data used more in detail. The data are taken
from the Slovenian Central Statistical Oﬃce and are the full annual company accounts of firms
operating in the manufacturing sector between 1994-2000. The unit of observation is that of
an establishment (plant). In the text we refer to this unit of observation as a firm. Related
work using the same data source includes De Loecker (2007) and references herein. We have
information on 7,915 firms and it is an unbalanced panel with information on market entry
and exit and export status. The export status - at every point in time - provides information
whether a firm is a domestic producer, an export entrant or a continuing exporter. If we only
take into account those (active) firms that report employment, we end up with a sample of
6,391 firms or 29,804 total observations over the sample period. The industry classification
NACE rev. 1 is similar to the ISIC industry classification in the U.S.A. and the level of
aggregation is presented in Table A.1 below.
Table A.1.: Industry Classification

Nace 2-Digit
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37

Description
Food Products
Tobacco Products
Textiles
Wearing Apparel
Leather and Leather Products
Wood and Wood Products
Pulp, Paper and Paper Products
Publishing and Printing
Coke and Petroleum Products
Chemicals
Rubber and Plastic Products
Other Non-Metallic Mineral Products
Basic Metals
Fabricated Metal Products
Machinery and Equipment n.e.c.
Oﬃce Machinery and Computers
Electrical Machinery
RTv and Communication
Medical, Precision and Optical Instr.
Motor Vehicles
Other Transport Equipment
Furniture/ Manufacturing n.e.c.
Recycling

36

All monetary variables are deflated by the appropriate two digit NACE industry deflators (for output and materials). Investment is deflated using a one digit NACE investment
deflator. The variables used in the analysis are: Sales ( ): Total operating revenue in thousands of Tolars, total operating revenue from exporting in thousands of Tolars, Value added
in thousands of Tolars ( ), Employment (): Number of full-time equivalent employees in
a given year, Capital (): Total fixed assets in book value in thousands of Tolars, Material
consumption in thousands of Tolars ( ), Total cost of employees (wage bill) in thousands
of Tolars (), and export status () at each point in time. We experimented with both
reported investment and computed investment from the annual reported capital stock and
depreciation. Investment is calculated from the yearly observed capital stock in the following
way  = +1 − (1 −   ) where   is the appropriate depreciation rate (5%-20%)
varying across industries .
Finally, the firm-level dataset has information on the ownership of a firm, whether it is
private or state owned. The latter is very important in the context of a transition country
such as Slovenia. In our sample around 85 (5,333 in 2000) percent of firms are privately
owned and a third of them are exporters (1,769 in 2000).
Year 2000

Private Owned

0
1
Total

Export Status
0
1
Total
227
690
917
3,564 1,769 5,333
3,791 2,459 6,250

The ownership status of a firm serves as an important control by comparing productivity
trajectories of exporting and non exporting firms with the same ownership status (private or
state). All our results are robust to controlling for ownership diﬀerences and by comparing
exporters to privately owned domestic firms.

37

Appendix B Price Setting
In the main text we show that we simply require the FOCs from cost minimization. In
this appendix we want to show how a few leading cases of price setting fit in our framework
and show how they relate to our procedure. The various expressions can be used to further
test implications of those price setting theories using our estimates.
As such we can interpret the markup under various assumptions regarding the nature of
competition in the industry, as suggested by Levinsohn (1993). We consider this flexibility
an important strength of the model which can be important if we want to relate a specific
theoretical model to the empirical methodology. We now turn to some specific price setting
models to show how we derive our main estimating equation.
Consider firms that produce a homogeneous product and compete in quantities (play
Cournot) while operating in an oligopolistic market where profits   are given by
  =   −   − 
  −  

(B.1)

where all firms take input prices ( , 
 and  ) as given. The optimal choice of labor is
simply given by setting the marginal revenue product equal to the wage,
µ
¶


 −1
=
(B.2)
1+



where  =  is the market share of firm ,   is the market elasticity of demand. The
optimal output choice  will satisfy the following F.O.C.
¶
µ

 −1
= 1+
≡ 
(B.3)


where  is the marginal cost of production and we define  as the relevant firm specific
markup.42 Under Cournot diﬀerences in markups across firms are generated by diﬀerences in
productivity and market structure (    ). Intuitively, if firms set prices equal to marginal
costs ( = 1), the share of each input in output growth is simply given by the relevant share
in total revenue, whereas under imperfect competition it is the cost share (  =  ).43
We stress that the input shares for variable inputs (such as labor and intermediates) are
directly observed in the data. We can then rewrite (2) and obtain the same expression as
in the main text.
A similar expression can be obtained with a more general model of Bertrand competition
(Nash in price) with diﬀerentiated products.44 The markup over marginal cost,   , in
42

See Shapiro (1987) for a discussion of what the markup measures.
Hall (1986) obtains this estimating equation starting from the observation that the conventional measure
of total factor productivity (TFP) growth is biased by a factor proportional to the markup under the presence
of imperfect competition.
44
Also see Röller and Sickles (2000) for an explicit treatment of markups in a product diﬀerentiated equilibrium.
43

38

³
´−1
a Nash equilibrium among firms is in fact given by 1 + 1
, which is our measure of

³
´−1
the markup, and  ≡ 1 + 1
. A firm’s individual residual demand elasticity  will

in general depend on the degree of product diﬀerentiation, the number of firms and the
elasticities of demand, both own and cross price elasticities.
The same notion applies when considering multiproduct firms such as in Berry, Levinsohn
and Pakes (1995) and Goldberg (1995) where the markup is a function of the sensitivity
of market share to price, given the set of prices set by competitors, the characteristics of
all products on the markets and the characteristics of the consumers on the market. As
mentioned in section 6.2 a FOC will apply for each product which will allow to recover each
product’s relevant markup up to observing product specific input expenditures and the ability
to estimate product specific output elasticities. The latter is clearly a challenge given current
data where input usage is not recorded by product across a wide range of industries (or by
destination of the product produced as mentioned before). Our methodology can therefore
be thought of providing a firm specific markup, potentially averaged across various products.
But we would like to emphasize that our methodology is readily applicable whenever we see
input expenditure by product, coupled with estimates on technology.
In this way our empirical model can take into account pricing heterogeneity between firms,
and is flexible enough to consider various assumptions regarding the nature of competition and
accommodates the most common static model of competition used in industrial organization
and international trade. It is important to stress that regardless of the exact model of
competition we always estimate the correct markup. What is important to note though, is
that the estimates  will depend on diﬀerent economic variables depending on the underlying
economic model. Our framework can further shed light on the relationship between markups
and such economic variables.

39

Appendix C Estimating Output Elasticities: Alternative Approaches
In this Appendix we briefly discuss our estimation routine under a gross output production
function which will generate estimates of both the output elasticity of labor and materials, and
allows us to rely on materials to compute markups. Furthermore, we describe our estimation
routine when relying on investment to proxy for productivity (as suggested by Olley and
Pakes, 1996). Finally, we briefly discuss the case of a CES production function to highlight
the flexibility of our approach regarding technology.
1. Gross output production function.
Moving to a gross output production function allows us to recover the markup from a
potentially more variable input, i.e. materials. However, under this setting we face a tradeoﬀ between the ability to identify the coeﬃcient on materials, and being able to recover the
markup from a potentially more variable input than labor, and hence eliminating potential
frictions that can generate a wedge between the marginal product and the input price, other
than the markup, for instance hiring or firing costs. Furthermore, we can allow labor to a
dynamic input and explicitly allow this in our estimation routine. The ability to identify
the coeﬃcient on the material input - in the context of the ACF approach - relies on the
assumptions one makes on timing and whether input prices are serially correlated (see Bond
and Soderbom, 2001). The second part on computing markups is as before, except that we
can calculate them using either the coeﬃcient on materials only, or use both the labor and
the materials coeﬃcient.45
We briefly discuss the estimation of those coeﬃcients. The first stage is now given by


=  (     ) + 

(C.1)


is gross output and  () =    +    +    +  (   ).46 The second stage
where 
is similar to the one described before. We rely on the following moments, where  +1 () is
again obtained after non parametrically regressing +1 () on   (),
⎛
⎞⎞
⎛

(C.2)
 ⎝ +1 (        ) ⎝  ⎠⎠ = 0
+1

Note that the instrument on labor depends on whether we assume labor to be a variable input
or a dynamic one. If labor is decided a period ahead (just like capital), we have potentially
two instruments (+1 and  ) to identify the coeﬃcient   .
45

Note that the coeﬃcient on capital is not informative for recovering a measure of the markup, since the
static first order condition does not hold given capital’s fixed nature. In fact, the wedge between the marginal
product of capital and the user cost of capital will in general capture capital adjustment costs in addition to
markups. Our approach can potentially be informative about the extent of those adjustment cost if we are
willing to specify a particular form.
46
If labor is a dynamic input we have that  (     ).

40

Markups can now be computed using
b



µ

 
 

¶−1

and we can directly compare them using
b



µ

 
 

¶−1

=
b

=
b

(C.3)

(C.4)

depending on whether we want to assume that a firm’s labor choice is not restricted due
to any frictions. Strictly speaking, if the implied markups diﬀer (significantly) using both
equations, it would suggest that additional important frictions or adjustment costs in labor
demand are present. We ran all the regression reported in the results section using the FOC
on materials and are results are very similar.47
2. Using Investment as a Proxy.
In order to rely on the Olley and Pakes version of the ACF estimator we need to incorporate input prices that are serially correlated. Furthermore, given our focus on markup
diﬀerences between domestic producers and exporters, we need to incorporate the export
status of a firm into the investment policy function. This has no implications on our ability
to identify the coeﬃcients of interests. The only extra requirement is that the investment
function is still invertible when including the export status. We refer to Van Biesebroeck
(2005) and De Loecker (2007) for a detailed discussion, and given that we do not rely on this
approach, we simply assume we can follow the OP approach.
We show the OP version under a value added production functions setting. The investment policy function is given by
 =  (        )

(C.5)

Note that the firm’s export status is either at time  or lagged depending on whether we
assume a firm’s export entry decision is taken one period ahead. For our purposes the
diﬀerence is not important. We can write a firm’s productivity as a function of its capital
stock, investment, wage and export status,
 =  (       )

(C.6)

The first stage of the ACF procedure therefore consists of running
 =  (         ) + 
47

(C.7)

For presentation purposes we choose to not compare the small diﬀerences in point estimates across both,
and draw conclusions from them.

41

where we are explicit about the wage rate being serially correlated over time. The latter is
important for the identification of the labor coeﬃcient. The second stage of the modified
OP/ACF approach is as before, except for the fact that  +1 is now calculated using a
diﬀerent estimate for  . Note that we can easily allow the export status of a firm to impact
its future productivity shock by considering  +1 =  (    ) +  +1 . The moments we take
to the data are identical to the one in our main approach.
µ
µ
¶¶
−1
   (     )
=0
(C.8)

We can now rely on −1 as an instrument for  given we allowed for serial correlated wages,
which create a correlation between labor choices over time, but the productivity shock at 
should not be correlated with the labor choice at time  − 1.
Our approach shows that we can easily accommodate various proxy estimator approaches,
and also makes it clear that - for the Cobb-Douglas case - diﬀerences in parameter estimates
for   will not aﬀect the variation in markups across firms, since this comes entirely from the
variation in the share of the wage bill in total sales.48 The level of the markup is aﬀected,
however, by diﬀerences in estimates for the labor coeﬃcient.
3. CES Production Function
The CES production function relaxes the substitution elasticity among inputs and nests
the fixed proportion (Leontief) and Cobb-Douglas production function. For our purpose
it is important to note that this production function will, as in the translog case, deliver
firm specific output elasticities and impact the estimate for the markups. We consider the
following CES production function49
¤1
£
1−  

 = 1−

+


exp(  )
(C.9)





1
. The marginal product of labor is
and where the elasticity of substitution, , is given by 1−
then given by
£ 1− 
¤−1

=  1− −1
 +  
(C.10)
  


and the output elasticity of labor, 
 , is given by
£
¤
 −1
1− 
  1−  + 1−

 = 
 

(C.11)

In order to compute the output elasticity of a firm  at time  we need estimates for   
and . We obtain estimates by running the following regression,
 =
48

¤
1 £ 1− 
 +   + 
ln   + 1−



(C.12)

Note that the diﬀerent procedures do produce diﬀerent estimates for  and therefore potentially also
change the variation in the labor share as well.
49
Note that for a value added production function, we already assumed that intermediates are used in a
fixed proportion to output.

42

We rely on the same proxy method as before, and replace unobserved productivity by a
function in capital and intermediate inputs. The functional form of the CES production
function in principal allows identification of all parameters using a   estimation procedure. From this routine we obtain estimates for the CES parameters and using the FOC on


labor, 
 =   , we recover estimates for the markups

b =

Ã

 

 exp(
 )

!−1

h
i−1
 


b
 1− 
+ 1−

b
 1− 



(C.13)

We recover the same expression as in the main text under a Cobb-Douglas production technology when  = 0, or equivalently when the elasticity of substitution is equal to one, where

 + is then the output elasticity of labor (  under Cobb-Douglas).
This appendix illustrates how our methodology can accommodate any production function, as long as the coeﬃcients are common across a set of producers. However, we do not
have to restrict the output elasticity of labor (or any other input) to be the same across
all firms, as is the case with Cobb-Douglas. The only condition we require is that we can

write the FOC of labor as 
 =   , where we drop subscripts. Note that this the case as
long as the production function can be written as  =  (   ; ) exp(  ), where  () is
described by a set of technology parameters  constant across firms, as discussed in detail in
the main text.

43

Appendix D Extra Results

Table D.1. Estimates of regression (19)
Parameters
0

Markup Estimates obtained using
DLW1 DLW2 DLW5 DLW4
0.6980
0.6824
0.6936 0.5042
0.0174

0.0174

0.0174

0.0174

0.0467

0.0467

0.0497

0.0481

0.0127

0.0127

0.0127

0.0128

2

-0.0166

-0.0166

-0.0246

-0.0138

0.0138

0.0138

0.0138

0.0139

3

0.0160

0.01604

0.0218

0.0151

0.0094

0.0094

0.0094

0.0094

1

Regressions are ln  =  0 + 1  ∗  + 2  ∗ + 3  +   +   ,
All regressions include labor, capital and year/industry dummies as controls,
and standard errors are reported below the coeﬃcients.

Figure 1: Markup Trajectory Upon Export Entry
0.04

0.035

0.03

0.025

0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

0
‐1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Scale (years exported)

Estimated markup increase in level compared to pre-export entry, based on estimate of  2 using

. Average over all entrants in the sample.


44

