NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEASURING ECONOMIC GROWTH FROM OUTER SPACE
J. Vernon Henderson
Adam Storeygard
David N. Weil
Working Paper 15199
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15199

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2009

We thank Chris Elvidge for advice and auxiliary data; Andrew Foster, Stefan Hoderlein, Blaise Melly,
Daniel Orenstein, Matt Turner, and seminar participants at Brown University, Princeton University,
the XXVI International Population Conference of the IUSSP, the 2008 BREAD/CEPR/Verona Summer
School on Development Economics, the Urban Economics Association, the Conference on Urban
and Regional Economics (Milan, 2009), the Northeast Universities Development Consortium Conference,
and the 2009 Annual Meeting of the Population Association of America for comments; and Joshua
Wilde and Isabel Tecu for research assistance. We thank the editor and anonymous referees for comments
that were instrumental in improving the paper. Storeygard acknowledges support from Award Number
T32HD007338 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by J. Vernon Henderson, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring Economic Growth from Outer Space
J. Vernon Henderson, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil
NBER Working Paper No. 15199
July 2009, Revised December 2010
JEL No. E01,O47,Q1,R11
ABSTRACT
GDP growth is often measured poorly for countries and rarely measured at all for cities or subnational
regions. We propose a readily available proxy: satellite data on lights at night. We develop a statistical
framework that uses lights growth to augment existing income growth measures, under the assumption
that measurement error in using observed light as an indicator of income is uncorrelated with measurement
error in national income accounts. For countries with good national income accounts data, information
on growth of lights is of marginal value in estimating the true growth rate of income, while for countries
with the worst national income accounts, the optimal estimate of true income growth is a composite
with roughly equal weights. Among poor-data countries, our new estimate of average annual growth
differs by as much as 3 percentage points from official data. Lights data also allow for measurement
of income growth in sub- and supranational regions. As an application, we examine growth in Sub
Saharan African regions over the last 17 years. We find that real incomes in non-coastal areas have
grown faster by 1/3 of an annual percentage point than coastal areas; non-malarial areas have grown
faster than malarial ones by 1/3 to 2/3 annual percent points; and primate city regions have grown
no faster than hinterland areas. Such applications point toward a research program in which “empirical
growth” need no longer be synonymous with “national income accounts.”
J. Vernon Henderson
Department of Economics
Box B
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
j_henderson@brown.edu
Adam Storeygard
Department of Economics
Box B
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
adam_storeygard@brown.edu

David N. Weil
Department of Economics
Box B
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
david_weil@brown.edu

Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is the most important variable in analyses of economic growth.
The conceptual problems in defining GDP, let alone using it as a measure of welfare, are the
stuff of introductory economics courses. Just as serious, however, is the problem that GDP itself
is often badly measured, especially in developing countries. Relative to developed countries, in
many developing countries a much smaller fraction of economic activity is conducted within the
formal sector, the degree of economic integration and price equalization across regions is lower,
and, most significantly, the government statistical infrastructure is weaker. These factors make
the calculation of nominal GDP (total value added, in domestic prices) difficult.
This paper focuses on measurement of real GDP growth over time within a country,
which besides measuring nominal GDP requires the construction of reliable domestic price
indices, again a problem for many developing countries. We focus exclusively on real GDP
growth within countries. If, in addition, we wanted to compare real GDP levels across countries,
that would require purchasing power parity exchange (PPP) rates based on prices for a
comparable set of goods across countries.
In the Penn World Tables (PWT), one of the standard compilations of cross-country data
on income, countries are given grades corresponding to subjective data quality, with a grade of A
indicating a margin of error of 10%, B indicating 20%, C indicating 30%, and D indicating 40%.
The grading is based in part on the ability to construct good PPP measures, but also reflects a
country’s capacity to produce reliable national income accounts and domestic price indices.
Almost all industrialized countries receive a grade of A. By contrast, for the 43 countries of subSaharan Africa, 17 get a D and 26 get a C. (Deaton and Heston 2008). In the worst case, some
countries simply have no national accounts data available. For example, Iraq, Myanmar, Somalia,
and Liberia are among the countries not included in the most recent (6.2) version of PWT.
An illustration of the degree of measurement error in the PWT comes from Johnson et
al.’s (2009) study of revisions to the PWT data. Specifically, the authors compared version 6.1
of the PWT, released in 2002, with version 6.2, released in 2006. The standard deviation of the
change in countries’ average growth over the period 1970-1999 was 1.1% per year – an
enormous change in comparison to the average growth rate over this period of 1.56% per year.
To give a striking example, the authors calculated the ten worst growth performers in Africa

1

based on the 6.1 data and similarly based on the 6.2 data. Only five countries were on both lists.1
As another example of how poorly measured GDP data creates problems for research and policy
making, Dawson et al. (2001) claim that the asserted empirical link between output volatility and
income growth in the PWT data is purely a product of measurement error in annual income
Besides the PWT, as detailed later the IMF and World Bank both rank sets of countries as
to the reliability of their national income accounts. In applications later in the paper we use this
ranking rather than the PWT. In the PWT we couldn’t fully disentangle whether poorly rated
countries had low quality national accounts data or just poor baseline information for PPP
comparisons. The World Bank and IMF ratings concern just the quality of a country’s national
accounts data, which is our concern.
In addition to all the problems of measurement error in GDP, a second issue is that in
most countries GDP numbers are not available on any consistent basis at the sub-national level.
Much of the interesting variation in economic growth takes place within rather than between
countries. Similarly, many of the theories about factors that affect growth, for example those that
look at the importance of geography, pertain to regions made up of parts of one or more
countries. However, for the vast majority of economics research, “empirical analysis of growth”
has become synonymous with use of national accounts data. We think the tools are available to
set aside this limitation.
In response to the problems of measuring GDP, there is a long tradition in economics of
considering various proxies that cover periods or regions for which GDP data are not available at
all or not available in a timely fashion. For example, until the year 2005, the Federal Reserve
Board based its monthly index of industrial production in part on a survey of utilities that
measured electricity delivered to different classes of industrial customers. Similarly, an IMF
study examining electricity consumption in Jamaica over the decade of the 1990s concluded that
officially measured GDP growth, which averaged 0.3% per year, understated true output growth
1

Changes in data between different versions of the PWT can result from changes in the pricing survey used to
establish purchasing power parities (known as the International Comparisons Project or ICP) as well as revisions in
underlying national income accounts data and changes in methodology. Versions of the PWT within the same
“generation,” for examples versions 6.1 and 6.2, use the same ICP data. Johnson et al. report that changes in
national income accounts data are the dominant source of differences between the two versions. In our paper,
because we are not making comparisons between countries, we have no need for PPP measures. Thus in all of our
analysis, when we look at national income account data we use growth in constant local currency units, as suggested
by Nuxoll (1994).

2

by 2.7% per year, the gap being explained by growth of the informal sector (IMF, 2006). Young
(2009) constructs proxies for the level and growth rate of consumption in 56 developing
countries by using microeconomic data in the Demographic and Health Surveys. Economic
historians have also employed a variety of proxies for studying economic outcomes in the period
before the creation of national income accounts and in order to examine growth in sub-national
units. For example, Good (1994) estimates output in 22 sub-regions of the Habsburg Empire in
the period 1870-1910 using proxies such as the number of letters mailed per capita. The essays in
Steckel and Rose (2002) use skeletal remains to measure both the average standard of living and
the degree of inequality in the Americas over the last two millennia.
In this paper we explore the usefulness of a different proxy for economic activity: the
amount of light that can be observed from outer space. More particularly, our focus will be on
using changes in “night lights” as a measure of economic growth. We will show that lights
growth gives a very useful proxy for GDP growth over the long term and also tracks short term
fluctuations in growth.
How might we use this new proxy? First we can use the change in night light intensity as
an additional measure of income growth at the national level. Even if changes in light observable
from space are subject to measurement error, it is well known that several error-prone measures
are better than one, especially if there is no reason to think that the measurement errors are
correlated. In the paper, we develop a simple framework showing how to combine our lights
measure, which is in a different metric than income, with income measures to improve estimates
of true economic growth (c.f., Browning and Crosley, 2009 or Krueger and Lindahl, 2001). We
illustrate the methodology with an application to a set of countries that are rated by the World
Bank as having very low capacity in generating reliable national income accounts and price
indices. For these countries we provide new estimates of their economic growth over the period
1992/3 to 2005/6.
Second, we can use night lights data to tell us about economic growth in circumstances
where we have no measures of income growth. Most compelling is that night lights data are
available at a far greater degree of geographic fineness than is attainable in any standard income
and product accounts. As discussed later, we can map data on light observed from space on
approximately one-kilometer squares and aggregate them to the city or regional level. This
makes the data uniquely suited to spatial analyses of economic activity. Economic analysis of

3

growth and of the impacts of policies and events on cities and regions of many countries is
hindered by a complete absence of any regular measure of local economic activity. While
population data are sometimes regularly available for cities above a certain size, almost no
countries have city level GDP data.2 Night lights data give us such a measure. Note also that data
from satellites are available at a much higher time frequency than standard output measures.
They are also available well in advance of income measures from national accounts and provide
an early signal of country growth changes. Further, as will be illustrated below, they allow us to
assess the time patterns on regional income growth of events such as discovery of minerals, civil
strife, and the like.
This is the first paper we are aware of that uses night lights data to measure real income
growth. A number of researchers have shown that night lights reflect human economic activity
(e.g., Croft (1978), Elvidge et al. (1997b), Sutton and Costanza (2002), Ebener et al (2005), Doll
et al. (2006) and Sutton et al (2007))3, but have not used lights in a statistical framework to
measure real economic growth. Satellite data on land cover has been used to examine the spatial
expansion of settlements in the USA (e.g., Burchfield et al., 2006). Chen and Nordhaus (2010)
adapt the statistical methodology of the first version of our paper and apply lights data to a
somewhat different context than the ones here.4
Finally we note that lights data has an advantage over other proxies which could serve a
similar purpose, such as electricity consumption. Night lights data are available over time and all
space. Data on electricity consumption is unavailable for many lower income countries and is
generally unavailable for most countries at sub-national levels.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 1 gives a brief introduction to the
night lights data and discusses more obvious examples of how they represent differences in
income levels or growth across countries and the effects of political-economic shocks on growth
or income levels. In Section 2 we develop the statistical framework to show how information on
2

For an exception, see Au and Henderson (2006) on China.
Several of these authors estimated the cross-sectional lights-GDP relationship for countries and subnational units
of some countries (e.g., Ghosh et al, 2009) . However, to our knowledge, Sutton et al (2007) is the only paper with
quantitative analysis of data for multiple (two) years, but they do not produce panel estimates.
4
We became aware of their project after the first draft of our paper was completed and only saw a draft of Chen and
Nordhaus (2010) after this revision was essentially completed. Their paper criticizes applications we did in our first
draft, but in the revised version we have done rather different applications. At this point both papers seem to agree
that night lights data are useful in evaluating growth in contexts where national accounts data are poor and, of course,
where they are non-existent.
3

4

changes in lights is related to changes in measured income, as well as developing the framework
for combining measures of lights growth with existing measures of GDP growth to get improved
estimates of true income growth. In Section 3 we estimate the relationship between GDP and
lights growth, examining annual and long difference changes, functional specification, use of
electricity data and other issues. In Section 4 we turn to the application where we use lights
growth measures to improve estimates of true income growth for countries with poor data quality.
In Section 5, we present some further applications in which night lights data can be used to
assess growth in regions defined by geography, economic, or health metrics, rather than by
political borders. Section 6 concludes.

1. Night lights data

Several US Air Force weather satellites circle the earth 14 times per day, recording the intensity
of Earth-based lights. Each satellite observes every location on the planet every night at some
instant between 8:30 and 10:00 pm local time. Scientists at the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) National Geophysical Data Center (NGDC) process
these raw data and distribute the final data to the public. In processing, they remove
observations for places experiencing the bright half of the lunar cycle, the summer months when
the sun sets late, auroral activity (the northern and southern lights) and forest fires. These
restrictions remove intense sources of natural light, leaving mostly man-made light. Observations
where cloud cover obscures the Earth’s surface are also excluded. Finally, data from all orbits of
a given satellite in a given year are averaged over all valid nights to produce a satellite-year
dataset.5 It is these datasets that are distributed to the public.
Each satellite-year dataset is a grid reporting the intensity of lights as a six-bit digital
number, for every 30 arc-second output pixel (approximately 0.86 square kilometers at the
equator) between 65 degrees south and 75 degrees north latitude.6 The exclusion of high latitude
5

An auxiliary dataset reports the number of valid nights used in this averaging for each satellite-year-pixel. An
average of 39.2 (s. d. 22.2) nights are used.
6
Data for lights are reported on a latitude-longitude grid. An arc-second is one 60th of an arc-minute, which is one
60th of a degree of latitude or longitude. Because of the curvature of the Earth, grid cell size varies in proportion to
the cosine of latitude. Thus all grid cell sizes are reported at the equator; sizes at other latitudes can be calculated
accordingly. For example a grid cell in London, at 51.5 degrees north latitude, is 0.53 square kilometers. Because
pixel size varies by latitude, below in statistical analysis we calculate a weighted average of lights across pixels
within a country. Each pixel’s weight is its share of its country’s land area.

5

zones affects approximately ten thousand people, or 0.0002% of the global total, in four
countries or country-equivalents, two of which (Canada and Russia) have GDP data. In our
analysis below, we exclude areas north of the Arctic Circle (66 degrees, 32 arc-minutes North),
because a disproportionate percentages of pixels there have missing data for entire satellite-years,
most likely because of auroral activity. Only 0.036% of global population, in 7 countries, lives
there.7 Datasets currently exist for 30 satellite-years covering the years 1992 to 2008, for a total
of about 22 billion satellite-year-pixels, 6.4 billion of which fall on land. We calculate simple
averages across satellites within pixel-years for all analysis below.
The digital number is an integer between 0 (no light) and 63. A small fraction of pixels
(less than 0.1%), generally in rich and dense areas, are censored at 63. De facto sensor settings
vary over time across satellites and with the age of a satellite, so that comparisons of raw digital
numbers over years can be problematic. In statistical work we will control for such issues with
year fixed effects. The digital number is not exactly proportional to the physical amount of light
received (called true radiance) for several reasons. The first is sensor saturation, which is
analogous to top coding. Further, the scaling factor (“gain”) applied to the sensor in converting
it into a digital number varies for reasons that are not explained, possibly to allow Air Force
analysts to get clearer information on cloud cover. Unfortunately, the level of gain applied to the
sensor is not recorded in the data. In an experiment carried out for 18 days during the winters of
1996 and 1997, the settings of one of the satellites were altered so that a true radiance measure
could be calculated.8 The resulting experimental radiance-calibrated dataset, averaged across all
18 days, is also distributed by NOAA. We find close to unit elasticity in comparing lit pixels
from this experiment to lit pixels from the standard data from 1997 (the year of the majority of
the 18 days). Details of this exercise and more information about the lights are in the Appendix.
Intensity of night lights reflects outdoor and some indoor use of lights. However, more
generally, consumption of nearly all goods in the evening requires lights. As income rises, so
does light usage per person, in both consumption activities and many investment activities.
Obviously this a complex relationship, and we abstract from such issues as public versus private
lighting, relative contributions of consumption versus investment, and the relationship between
7

In no country does the arctic population comprise more than 10% of the total, and in only one does it comprise
more than 2%.
8
Unfortunately, these altered settings can’t be used at all times because they conflict with the Air Force’s primary
use of the satellite for weather observation.

6

daytime and nighttime consumption and investment. This paper is concerned with poor or nonexistent data on national and local income. For the other aspects of economic activity just listed
there are no consistent measures over time and countries, so we can’t directly incorporate these
aspects into our analysis, although we will illustrate a variety of considerations in the course of
the paper. However, because we will look at growth in lights in the statistical work, crosscountry level differences in these other variables will be accounted for in the statistical
formulation.
Table 1 gives some sense of the data, describing the distribution of digital numbers across
pixels for ten countries covering a broad range of incomes and population densities. For
reference, we also include data on GDP per capita at PPP, population density, and the fraction of
the population living in urban areas. Our economic and population measures are taken from the
World Development Indicators (WDI).
Table 1 shows the fraction of pixels assigned to different reading intervals on the 0-63
scale for different countries. In many countries a high fraction of pixels are unlit. In the United
States and Canada respectively 69.3% and 93.9% of pixels are unlit, while in a high density
country like the Netherlands only 1% are unlit. The percentage of unlit pixels falls with income
holding density constant; Bangladesh, with higher population density than the Netherlands, has
66.7% of pixels unlit. Among poor, sparsely populated countries like Mozambique and
Madagascar, over 99% of pixels are unlit. Note the small difference in fraction of pixels that are
unlit (first row of the table) versus the area of a country that is unlit (later row) occurs because of
variation in area per pixel within a country as one moves north and south.
Among the countries in Table 1 (and more generally in the sample) there are remarkably
few pixels with digital numbers of 1 or 2. Among middle and lower income countries, the most
commonly observed range for the digital number is from 3-5; for Canada, it is 6-10; and for the
Netherlands, it is 21-62. The minimal fraction of pixels with digital numbers of 1 or 2 reflects,
we believe, algorithms used to filter out noise in the raw data. More generally the censoring of
data at the low end means some low density-low income pixels do not get counted, so to some
extent we will undercount lights nationally. Pixels with a value of 63 are top-coded. The fraction
of top coded pixels in low and middle income countries is zero or almost so, while in a denselypopulated rich country like the Netherlands 1.58% of pixels are top-coded.
Table 1 also shows the mean digital number and the within-country Gini for the digital

7

number. The mean ranges from 23.5 in the Netherlands to 0.023 in Madagascar. While richer
countries tend to have higher average digital numbers, geography and population density also
play a strong role, so Bangladesh has a higher average digital number than Canada. For that
reason night lights data are best for measuring differences in economic growth across countries
because geographic variation across counties is differenced out over time, rather than measuring
differences in income levels across countries. Below in the empirical work we will explore
whether dispersion measures like the Gini, as well as fraction unlit and fraction top-coded,
additionally contribute to our ability to predict income growth.

1.1 Simple examples of what night lights data reflect

A global view
A quick look at the world in Figure 1 suggests that lights do indeed reflect human economic
activity, as pointed out as early as Croft (1978). In the figure unlit areas are black, and lights
appear with intensity increasing from gray to white. Lights in an area reflect total intensity of
income, which is increasing in both income per person and number of people. In the United
States, where living standards are fairly uniform nationally, the higher concentration of lights in
coastal areas and around the Great Lakes reflects the higher population densities there. The
comparison of lights in Western Europe and India reflects huge differences in per capita income,
as does the comparison between Brazil and the Democratic Republic of Congo. Again, given
cultural differences in use of lights and geographic differences in unlit and top-coded areas, our
focus in this paper is on using lights to measure income growth and fluctuations.
We now illustrate the relationship between income changes and night lights with several
examples that highlight what night lights record and issues in their application.

Korean peninsula
Figure 2 shows lights for North and South Korea at two different points in time, 1992 and 2008,
indicating scales of luminance. The lights for South Korea illustrate how lights reflect long term
growth. In this time period South Korea’s real GDP (in constant local currency units) increased
by 119%. This overall growth in GDP for South Korea is matched in the figure by increasing
light intensity, with expanding areas of high and medium coding, in red and yellow shades

8

respectively. The average digital number for South Korea increases by 72% in the same time
period. Even if the elasticity of lights growth with respect to income growth is close to one, we
don’t expect the percentage growth in income and lights to be the same because the lights
measures were done by different satellites in 1992 and 2008, the sensor settings of which will not
exactly match. Off-shore lights near South Korea in 1992 are from fishing boats shining bright
lights to attract photophilic creatures like squid. Figure 2 also shows the dismal comparative
situation in North Korea, with little or no growth in the same time period. The average digital
number fell by 7.4%.

Indonesia
To illustrate the high frequency response of lights to an economic downturn, we use data from
Indonesia in 1997, before the Asian fiscal crisis, and in 1998, when Indonesia was at a GDP low.
Overall for Indonesia the digital number declined by 6% from 1997 to 1998 and real GDP
declined by 13%. To improve visualization we focus just on the main island of Java, pictured in
Figure 3. In Figure 3, lights in 1997 are in the top panel; lights in 1998 are in the second; and
large positive and negative changes for 1997-1998 are in the third panel. In Figure 3, while one
can stare at the first and second panels and see light decreases between 1997 and 1998 especially
around the fringe of large urban areas, the third panel shows large light declines in red, where
digital numbers change by more than 3. There are large patches of light declines in west Java
around Jakarta and its suburban areas and in east Java around the growth pole of Surabaya and
its hinterlands, going south-west from Surabaya. In some rural areas there is an increase in lights,
depicted in blue. We know that there was some return to rural areas by urban migrants in the
crisis and that there is also drilling and refining of petroleum in some of these areas. In the
bottom panel, we show the plot of real GDP in local currency units around the time period. In
this box we also show predicted incomes from the statistical model presented later in the paper,
where lights data are used to predict incomes in a panel framework.

Rwandan genocide
To illustrate how a traumatic crisis event is reflected in lights, the box in Figure 4 shows the
huge decline in income during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, with the partial recovery by 1996,
along with income predictions from the panel analysis in Section 3. Here the overall raw lights

9

data clearly mark the sharp temporary economic decline as lights dim from 1993 to 1994 and
then mostly relight by 1996. The capital Kigali in particular dims in 1994 and then relights by
1996, as well as more minor urban centers.
We note that, in Figures 3 and 4 in comparing measured income versus our predictions
from lights data, in both cases, lights under-predict the extent of measured income declines. For
Indonesia where national income data are relatively good, this could be under-prediction of the
true income decline. For Rwanda, national income data are less reliable and economic activity
may have been poorly recorded in the period of genocide. Still there is the issue of how well
lights predict real income fluctuations, especially the extent to which lights actually dim with
economic downturns. Later we look explicitly at a form of generalized ratchet effects and reject
them, but still there may be some smoothing in the lights data of short term fluctuations. We
believe lights data are best suited to predicting long term growth and that is the focus of
applications later in the paper.

Gemstones in Madagascar
As mentioned above, a major advantage of night light data is that they can be used to examine
changes in economic activity at a very local scale. In late 1998, large deposits of rubies and
sapphires were accidentally discovered in southern Madagascar, near the town of Ilakaka. The
region is now thought to contain the world’s largest sapphire deposit, accounting for around 50%
of world supply, and Ilakaka has become a major trading center for sapphires. Previously little
more than a truck stop, Ilakaka’s population is now estimated at roughly 20,000.9 The story of
these developments can clearly be seen in the night lights data in Figure 5. In 1998 (and all of the
previous six years for which we have data) there were no lights visible in Ilakaka. Over the next
five years there was a sharp growth in the number of pixels for which light is visible at all, and in
the intensity of light per pixel. The other town visible in the figure, Ihosy, shows no such growth.
If anything, Ihosy’s light gets smaller and weaker, as it suffers in the competition across local
towns for population.

9

Hamilton, Richard BBC News Online, “Madagascar's Scramble for Sapphires,” 1 August 2003,
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/3114213.stm Accessed 18 January 2008
Hogg, Jonny. BBC News Online, “Madagascar's Sapphire Rush,” 17 November 2007,
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/programmes/from_our_own_correspondent/7098213.stm Accessed 18 January 2008

10

2. Lights as a measure of economic activity

In this section we specify the estimating equation to relate lights to GDP growth, specify our
assumptions concerning error structure, and develop a statistical framework to show how
measures of lights growth can be combined with measures of GDP growth to arrive at an
improved estimate of true income growth.
Let y be the growth (or log difference) in true real GDP, z the growth of real GDP as
measured in national income accounts, and x the growth of observed light. The variance of true
income growth is  . For country j (with year subscripts suppressed for now), we assume that
there is classical measurement error in GDP growth as recorded in national income accounts:
z j = y j + ε z, j ,

(1)

where the variance of ε z is denoted  . Later we allow for the variance of the measurement error
in national income data,  , to vary among country groups.
The relationship between growth of lights and growth of true income is given by
x j = β y j + ε x, j ,

(2)

where the variance of ε x is denoted  . The assumption underlying this specification is that
there is a simple constant elasticity relationship between total observable light in a region (X) and
total income (Y): 



, where β is the elasticity of lights with respect to income. As reported

later we consider different functional forms and controls for changes in light dispersion. Those
experiments suggest (2) is appropriate. Since y is the growth rate of total income, we are
assuming that observable light is increasing at the same rate in the number of people and per
capita income.
The error term in equation (2) we think of as noise in the way measured lights growth
reflects GDP growth. This noise includes measurement error in lights, that is, a difference
between true light emanating into space and what the satellite records. But the measurement
error also includes variation among countries in the relationship between GDP growth and
growth of light emanation, due to variation in the mix of products consumed and produced. For
example, the increased consumption of automobile services and educational services both
represent additions to GDP, but the former results in a larger increase in visible light than the
latter. In estimation of the relationship between output and light fluctuations, we will allow for

11

country specific factors in the error specification. Because we don’t think measurement error in
GDP is related in any consistent fashion to the error in the equation determining observable light,
we assume that Cov(ε x , ε z ) = 0.
While equation (2) specifies a production relationship between income and lights, in most
applications we are concerned with using lights growth to predict income growth. As such, for
predictive purposes, we want a regression of growth of income on growth of lights, or
z j = ψˆ x j + e j ,

(3)

We present estimates of this equation in the next section, to look at how well lights reflect
fluctuations in income growth and long differences. The OLS parameter ψˆ is cov( x, z ) / var( x ) .
Using the moments in (9b) and (9c) below, the relationship between ψˆ and the structural
parameter β is
plim(ψˆ ) =

2 2
1  β σy
 2 2
β  β σ y + σ x2


 .


(4)

While the parameter ψˆ is an estimate of the inverse of the elasticity of lights with respect to
income, by construction (inversion of the production relationship and measurement error in x), as
equation (4) indicates it is a biased estimate. However, equation (3) using ψˆ is a best fit
relationship to be used in producing proxies for income growth. Call these proxies zˆ j = ψˆ x j .
Fitted values of income growth based on lights growth, that is ẑ , can be created for subnational units such as cities as well as for countries in which there are no available income data.
Further, however, even where there are available income data, fitted values from lights can be
used to improve the precision of estimated income growth. Specifically, ẑ is a separate estimate
of income growth which can be combined with a national account measure to arrive at a
composite estimate of income growth which will have lower error than either one separately.
Specifically, consider a composite estimate of income growth, ŷ :
yˆ j = λ z j + (1 − λ ) zˆ j ,

(5)

What are the optimal weights on z j and zˆ j to use in calculating an estimate of true income
growth? We specify weights that minimize the variance of measurement error in this estimate
relative to the true value of income growth. Based on our assumptions about error structure, the
variance of this composite estimate is

12

Var ( yˆ − y ) = Var (λ ( z − y ) + (1 − λ )( zˆ − y )) = λ 2σ z2 + (1 − λ ) 2 Var ( zˆ − y )

(6)

The last term in this equation can in turn be expanded as follows:
ˆ y + ψε
ˆ x − y ) = (ψβ
ˆ − 1) 2 σ y2 + ψˆ 2σ x2
Var ( zˆ − y ) = Var (ψˆ x − y ) = Var (ψβ

Using the value of ψˆ from equation (4), this can be rewritten as

σ y2σ x2
Var ( zˆ − y ) = 2 2
β σ y + σ x2
Substituting this into the equation for variance:
Var ( yˆ − y ) = λ σ + (1 − λ )
2

2
z

2

σ y2σ x2
.
β 2σ y2 + σ x2

(7)

From (7), we solve for the weight λ which minimizes this variance, where

σ x2σ y2

*

λ =

σ z2 ( β 2σ y2 + σ x2 ) + σ x2σ y2

.

(8)

λ * is a function of four unknown parameters ( σ y2 , σ12 , σ 22 , and β ), but the observed data provide
only three sample moments:
var( z ) = σ y2 + σ z2

(a)

var( x ) = β 2σ y2 + σ x2

(b)

cov( x , z ) = βσ y2

(c)

(9)
.

Note for the last moment, cov( y , x ) = cov( z , x ). To solve the system and to solve for λ * , we need
one more equation. Our approach to that equation is as follows.10
In general one needs to make an assumption about the ratio of signal to total variance in
measured GDP growth, z for a set of countries. Define this ratio as

σ y2
φ= 2
σ y + σ z2

(10)

10

An alternative to the approaches discussed here would be to get an unbiased measure of ψˆ by regressing growth
in lights on growth in measured income, using instrumental variables to correct for measurement error in income.
Eligible instruments in this case would any variables that drive income growth and which have measurement error
which is uncorrelated with the measurement error in income. Investment in physical or human capital, changes in
institutions, and similar variables would be potential candidates. In general, we were concerned about the validity
and power of any instrument for z . For countries with poor quality national income data in particular, we could not
find variables that were sufficiently good predictors of income growth and were available for a large enough number
of countries.

13

If we assume a specific value for φ then the optimal λ is given by

φ var( z ) var( x) − cov( z, x) 2

φ − ρ2
=
λ* =
,
var( z ) var( x) − cov( z, x)2
1− ρ 2

(11)

where ρ is the correlation between z and x .
We use a variant of this approach which uses information on the relative quality ratings
of national income data provided by the IMF and World Bank. Suppose we impose the same
lights-economic structure on a set of countries—that is assume the last two moments (and the
estimate of ψ ) apply to all countries in the set. But then we allow the income noise term, σ z2 , to
vary by country group within the set, using information on the quality of GDP measurement in
different countries. Consider a simple case where the set of countries is divided into two groups
with different levels of measurement error in GDP. Let g denote countries with good GDP
measurement and b denote countries with bad measurement. Now the first moment in (9)
becomes two equations:
var( z g ) = σ y2 + σ z2, g

(a)

var( z b ) = σ y2 + σ z2,b

(b)

(12)

Along with the equations for var( x ) and cov( z , x ) , we now have four equations with five
unknowns ( β , σ y2 , σ x2 , σ z2, g , σ z2,b ) . For the fifth, we only need to specify the value of signal to total
variance, φ g for, say, the good data countries which, with (12a), then solves σ y2 and σ z2, g . Those
parameters imply φb and σ z2,b for bad data countries, given (8) and (12b). Given the value of σ y2 ,
the equation for cov( z , x ) defines β and then the equation for var( x ) tells us σ x2 . With all
parameters solved, we can then calculate λg and λb for good and bad data countries respectively
in equation (8).
At an extreme for good data countries, if φ g =1 and thus σ z2, g = 0 and λ g = 1 , then (12)
(where now var( z g ) = σ y2 ) plus the equations for var( x ) and cov( z , x ) give the complete
solution for parameters. If we have more than two data quality groups, we can proceed in a
similar fashion, where the φ for the best data countries implies σ y2 , and in turn the σ z2 ’s and φ ’s
for other groups. In Section 4 below we present an application of this process.

14

2.1 Data quality rankings

The procedure described above requires a measure of data quality or a classification of countries
into different data quality groups. The grade rankings in the Penn World Table are an example
of such a classification, but as noted earlier much of the concern in the PWT grading is with
whether baseline surveys were conducted for PPP comparisons which is not relevant here.
Fortunately there are other rating schemes.
The IMF grades countries’ statistical bureaus as high versus lower capability. High
capability means countries are subscribers to the IMF's Special Data Dissemination Standard
(SDDS) and meet a set of specifications for data provided to the IMF (with a view to data quality
requirements desired in international capital markets). The SDDS grade defines a set of countries
with reliable domestic income and price data. Most high income countries meet that standard, but
many low and middle income ones do not. Unfortunately the set of non-SDDS countries is large
and heterogeneous, and the IMF provides little guidance on varying capabilities within the group.
Moreover some countries do not subscribe to the IMF dissemination system and are not graded.
The World Bank (2002) reports an indicator of statistical capacity based on the
availability, timeliness, and standard of several kinds of national accounts data for 122 low- and
middle-income countries with populations of more than one million.11 The measure runs from 0
to 10. Within the group, ratings are positively correlated with income, although some low
income countries such as India get good scores. IMF SDDS countries that appear in the World
Bank report all have scores of 5 or above, and most have scores of 7 or more. We will use this
World Bank grading scheme to define countries that have better or worse data. In particular we
will isolate a group of very low quality data countries which have scores of 3 or less. These
include Liberia and the Central African Republic which have essentially no capability to produce
reliable data and countries like Burundi, Congo, Iraq, and Angola which have extremely weak
capabilities.

3. Predicting GDP with lights
11

World Bank (2002) includes two tables with slightly different country lists. We use the 122 countries appearing
in both lists. Also, we recalculate their data quality measure based on the underlying data provided in the second
table, because the categorization provided in the first table does not exactly match the underlying data, due to what
appears to be a minor coding error on their part.

15

Our data’s capacity to measure true luminance varies across countries by climate and auroral
activity. Further, measured luminance for the same GDP may vary with variation in the
composition of income between consumption and investment, the division of economic activity
between night and day, population density, and land area across counties. Finally, worldwide
lighting technology may vary over time, which will affect the relationship between luminance
and GDP. To mitigate these problems, we restrict attention to growth formulations and we
estimate (3) in several ways. These ways emphasize different cuts on prediction—predicting
annual growth and fluctuations, focusing more on predicting annual fluctuations, and predicting
long term growth.
First, in a panel context for 1992-2008, we generalize the error structure in (3) to be
e jt = c j + d t + e jt ,

(13)

for country j in year t. In (13), year fixed effects ( d t ) control for any differences in light
sensitivity across satellites, as well as sweeping out effects of changes in worldwide economic
conditions, technological advance, and energy costs. Country fixed effects control for crosscountry cultural differences in the use of night lights versus day time activities as well as
economic factors such as differences in investment and consumption, public versus private
lighting, national conditions for generating electricity, and the like. Identification is from withincountry relative variation in lights and income over time, relating growth and fluctuations in
lights within countries to annual growth and fluctuations in measured income.
If we want to focus more on annual income fluctuations in equation (3) and less on
growth, in addition to the error structure in (13), we add a country specific time trend, κ j t . This
formulation asks, for a country on a particular growth path, how well do lights predict
fluctuations about that growth path? A country specific time trend also allows for country
specific trends in activities generating light and in socio-economic uses of lights. In addition we
look at the possibility of “ratchet effects”: whether relative (to the country mean over time)
increases and decreases in lights are symmetrically related to increases and decreases in income.
Finally we estimate (3) directly to focus on long run growth, with a long differenced
relationship. We examine the period 1992/93 to 2005/06, because 2007 and 2008 are missing
data for more countries than any other years in the sample. In our application in section 4 of the

16

statistical model developed in Section 2, we rely on the long differenced model.

3.1 Baseline results

3.1.1 Annual growth and fluctuations
Table 2 presents some basic results for a slightly unbalanced panel of 188 countries over 17
years. Lack of balance arises primarily because some countries lack GDP data in certain years,
particularly the most recent. There are also 23 country-years excluded because at least 5% of
their land area south of the Arctic Circle is missing data, because of summer lights, auroral
activity and/or cloud cover. On average, 177 countries appear in each year. The smallest number
in any year is 163 in 2008 (the second smallest is 172). Column 1 shows the fixed effect results,
with an estimate of ψ of 0.275. The coefficient is highly significant. Note the R2 of 0.77 is a
within- R2 , but accounts for the role of year dummies. Later we report the R2 (about 0.21) for
data demeaned over countries and years.
Column 2 of Table 2 suggests a quadratic specification does not fit the data. Figures 6a
and 6b show this non-parametrically for the data overall and then over a restricted domain. The
figure graphs the z jt , x jt relationship net of year and country effects. The pictured relationship
indicates a linear specification in the growth rates is appropriate. We also conducted a RESET
(Ramsey 1969) test of this specification (net of year and country fixed effects). Linearity for the
overall sample is rejected (p-value of 0.008), but there is no compelling higher order
specification. In quadratic through a fifth order polynomials expansions, the higher order terms
are always insignificant. Below we will show that a long difference specification is distinctly
linear, meeting the RESET standard.
Column 3 controls for the number of pixels which are top-coded and the number which
are unlit. The former is significant but the estimate of ψ is virtually unchanged as is the R2 . In
column 4, we control for dispersion of lights within a country by using the Gini coefficient for
lights among pixels within a country. Given the panel formulation, the coefficient on lights is the
same as in column 1 and the Gini has a zero coefficient. These experiments suggest country

17

fixed effects deal with issues of varying light dispersion and unlit areas across countries.12
In columns (5) - (7) of Table 2 we explore the relationship between GDP, lights, and
electricity consumption. We use electric power consumption in total kilowatt hours (KWH) from
the World Development Indicators database. The measure encompasses output from power
plants, but excludes small generators unconnected to the power grid. Much light observable
from space is from electric illumination. For example if we estimate a panel regression of log
lights on the log of KWH, we get a highly significant elasticity of 0.49, and a within R2 of 0.54,
including the effect of year dummy variables.
Could we substitute electricity consumption for lights data and could we gain by using
both, ignoring the issue that electricity consumption data are only available for 60% of our
observations? To start, column (5) repeats the specification of column (1) for the sample of
country-years for which electricity consumption data are available, showing results are little
changed by the reduction in sample. In columns (6) and (7) we look at the predictive power of
electricity. Column (6) shows a regression corresponding to columns (1) and (5), except the log
of total electricity consumption replaces lights, while column (7) includes both measures. In
column (6), electricity consumption has essentially the same predictive power for GDP and the
same elasticity as does lights. When the two measures are included together in column (7) both
remain significant, indicating they may not capture exactly the same aspects of economic activity,
but explanatory power is only modestly improved by inclusion of both. We might also worry that
lights are produced on an intensive margin (more usage by those connected to an existing grid)
versus an extensive margin (extensions of the grid and more connections to an existing grid).
Does knowing about the extensive margin help predictive power? For a very small sample of
country-years, the nationally representative Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS)13 contains
information on the household connections, with which we can try to explore whether adding
information on the extensive margin improves our ability to predict measured GDP growth. In

12

In early work, we also tried interactions of the Gini with lights and a translog formulation of the two, but the
results suggest the simple log-linear model fits the data better. To measure dispersion one could also use the
standard deviation of lights within a country. However, even after factoring out country and year fixed effects the
simple correlation between the standard deviation and mean of lights is 0.88. Note the Hirschman-Herfindahl index
can be decomposed into a part related to the standard deviation and a part to do with number of pixels per country;
the latter is already controlled for by country fixed effects.
13
http://www.measuredhs.com. For the 23 surveys conducted over the course of two different calendar years, we
match to our annual data using the year of the median survey month.

18

the sample, growth in connections yields insignificant effects and no increased explanatory
power relative to either just controlling for lights or controlling for both electricity consumption
and lights.14
In sum, while electricity consumption could be used to predict GDP growth, the key issue
is that electricity data are available for far fewer countries than are lights. Only 16 of the 30
countries we will later define as bad GDP data countries have electricity data, and many of the
countries with no GDP data (such as Afghanistan and Somalia) also do not have electricity data.
Second and very critically, electricity usage is generally unavailable for sub-national areas,
whereas lights are available for pixels of size less than a square kilometer across the globe.
As discussed above, our data are filtered to remove natural sources of night light, such as
auroral activity. Of the remaining man-made light, the majority is artificial light generated so
that people can see things at night. The largest exception is light generated by the flaring of
natural gas, as a byproduct of oil production. Elvidge et al. (2009) delineate polygons in which
observed light in 1992, 2000, or 2007 is primarily from gas flares. 1.0% of the world’s land area,
with 0.34% of world population in 2000, fell into these polygons. 3.6% of land-based light
emanated from them. In column (8) we report results from a regression corresponding to column
(1) in which we exclude all pixels that fell within the gas flare polygons. The results change
very little.

3.1.2 Annual fluctuations
Table 3 explores the two other types of income change in which we are interested: annual
fluctuations in income and long term growth. Column 1 shows the baseline fixed effects result
from Table 2. Column 2 in Table 3 adds country time trends, so lights now just explain
deviations of GDP about a country’s growth path. While the value of ψ falls to 0.18 from 0.275,
it is still highly significant, suggesting the data do a reasonable job of just predicting annual
fluctuations, consistent with the examples we looked at in Section 2. Later when we turn to our
sample of low and middle income countries where we apply the lights data, the value of ψ
remains around 0.3 with or without country specific time trends.
To explore fluctuations further, in column 3, we examine the ratchet issue: the possibility
that because some light growth reflects the installation of new capacity, lights are non-decreasing,
14

Results available upon request.

19

so that economic downturns will not be reflected in lights. For column 3, we completely demean
the data by regressing GDP and lights on year and country fixed effects and then regressing the
GDP residuals on two variables: absolute value positive and negative lights residuals. Positive
residuals indicate deviations of lights above average for the time interval for that country and
negative residuals are deviations below. They have virtually identical coefficients (of opposite
sign given absolute values), consistent with an absence of ratchet effects. Further, the coefficient
estimates are almost identical to that in column 1. The R2 of 0.21 now reflects the contribution of
lights to explaining within-country and within-year variation in income.

3.1.3 Long term growth
The last two columns of Table 3 explore the original equation (3) formulation: how well long
term growth in lights predicts long-term measured GDP growth. For this we use long differences
between 1992/93 and 2005/06. The long difference estimate of ψ is 0.32, a little higher than the
fixed effect value of 0.27, but close and also highly significant. The R2 is 0.27. Column (5) adds
controls for top-coded and unlit pixels, which have little effect on the ψ and R2 . Figure 6c
shows the plot of the raw long differences in lights versus GDP for each country. As in Figures
6a and 6b, the non-parametric fit of raw numbers appears linear. And in this case, the Ramsey
RESET test distinctly cannot reject linearity, with a p-value of 0.73.

3.2 Sample of low and middle income countries

We now turn to a sub-sample of 118 low and middle income countries where we have ratings of
their statistical capacity by the World Bank. There are also 27 high income countries not rated by
the World Bank which we know from IMF ratings have high quality data. We omit these from
the sample we now analyze for several reasons. First has to do with light measurement. These
high income countries include a number of northern countries where in some years lights have
poor coverage because of aurora activity, lit summer nights, and cloud cover in the winter.
Second, we believe the economic structure for these countries as given in the last two moments
in (9) may differ from low-middle income countries. For example, in the long difference
specification we use in the next section, these countries’ ψ (and also β ) seems to differ from our

20

middle-low income countries. While the sample is too small to get strong results, for a pooled
sample of these high income countries with our low-middle income ones, the overall coefficient
(s.e.) for ψ is 0.322 (0.042), and the differential in coefficient for the high income countries is
-0.145 (0.144). This suggestion of a lower ψ for high income countries persists in all
formulations.
For the 118 (113 in long differences) low-middle income countries with a World Bank
rating, we repeat the estimates of the three cases – fixed effects, fixed effects with a country
specific time trend, and long differences. Results are in Table 4. They are similar to what we had
before, except that now ψ is about 0.3 in all formulations; in particular it doesn’t drop off once
country growth trends are added.
With this sample, we now explore the idea that countries with different statistical ratings
have different variances of measurement error in income ( σ z2 ), with variances declining as
ratings improve. In particular, the regression results can be used to directly calculate the variance
of z −ψˆ x . Under our assumptions this variance can be shown to equal [σ y2 − β 2σ y4 / var( x)] + σ z2 .
By imposing a common economic-lights structure across all low and middle income countries,
we are assuming only σ z2 varies across sets of countries, as in equation (12a) versus (12b). In this
context, we separate out from our sample of 113 countries, 30 low-middle income countries that
have very bad ratings: 0-3 out of 10, to compare with the remaining better data low-middle
income countries.
In the bottom part of Table 4, in the first row, we show the results from a regression
which allows the slope coefficient on lights to differ from the whole sample for bad data
countries. As the row reveals, the differential between good and bad data counties is generally
small for the different empirical formulations and in all cases is insignificant. This supports the
idea that good rated versus bad rated low and middle countries have similar ψ ’s and economiclights structure. However in the next line in the bottom part of the table, Bruesch-Pagan tests
indicate heteroskedasticity in the residuals between the two groups of countries. Given that, the
third line reports results of a simple regression of squared residuals ( ( z −ψˆ x) 2 ) for each column
for the model in the top part of the table on a constant term and a dummy variable for good data
countries. This asks whether the σ z2 in var( z −ψˆ x) = [σ y2 − β 2σ y4 / var( x)] + σ z2 differs for good

21

data countries; that is, whether σ z2,b > σ z2, g . In columns 1 and 2 the differential for good data
countries is negative and significant; in the third column the point estimate is also negative but
insignificant.
It is also interesting to do a finer cut on good data countries, to look at all the best data
low-middle income countries, those with a rating greater than 6 (as opposed to just greater than
3). Following the Table 4 column format, we regress the squared residuals on a constant and 2
dummy variables: 1) if a country has a rating of 4-6 and 2) if it has one 7 or more. The constant
term [s.e.] and coefficient [s.e.] on the dummy variable for 7 or more are respectively for the
fixed effect, trend and long difference cases: {0.016 (.0014); -0.0101 (0.0021)}; {0.0068
(0.0008); -0.0044 (0.0013)}; and {0.068 (.016); -0.041 (.023)}. 15 That is, relative to bad data
countries (the constant term), the best data countries on average have squared residuals that are
less than half those of bad data countries. The data fits the best data countries well, noting
however this is all applied to a limited number of countries. In sum, given the evidence, we
proceed under the assumption that bad data countries have a higher σ z2 in equation (12) and a
lower signal to total variance ratio, φ , in equation (10), (i.e. φb < φg ).

4. Improving estimates of true GDP growth

As an application of the model we turn to the issue of how to augment measured GDP growth
data with lights data to obtain an improved estimate of true income growth. The sample we use is
the 113 low-middle income countries whose statistical capacity is rated by the World Bank and
who have GDP data for 1992/93 and 2005/06. We focus on the set of 30 bad data countries
whose ratings are between 0 and 3 (out of 10), but also examine the rest of low-middle income
countries.
To solve the model, as presented in Section 2, we impose the same economic-lights
structure, or use the moments (9b) and (9c) for all 113 countries together. We also solved the
model treating bad countries as having a separate economic-lights structure. We comment on
these latter results, but they are very similar to what we present for the overall sample. We use
(12a) as applied to the 83 good data countries and (12b) as applied to the 30 bad data countries,
15

The coefficients on the dummy variable for countries with a rating of 4-6 are also negative, but they are somewhat
smaller than for the best data countries and at best weakly significant.

22

where σ z2,b > σ z2, g . To close the model we assume a specific φ g for good data countries in (10)
which together with (12a) gives us σ y2 and σ z2, g , which in turn defines σ z2,b in (12b) and φb in
(10). Given σ y2 , the moments (9a) and (9b) define the rest of the parameters of the model,
including β . Given all the parameters, we can then solve for the weights on measured GDP
growth and predicted GDP growth from lights for both good and bad data countries to use in
getting an improved estimate of true income growth, ŷ , in equation (5). In equation (5), for good
[bad] data countries λg [λb ] is the weight on measured GDP growth.
Table 5 presents some basic calculations. We do the calculations for different assumed
values of signal to total variance ratios for good data countries, φ g , looking at φ g = 1, 0.9, 0.8,0.7
and 0.6. For these values of φ g , the implied weights on measured income for good data
countries are respectively 1, 0.85, 0.71, 0.58, and 0.45, indicating that the measured income
weight drops off sharply as the signal to total variance ratio declines somewhat modestly. For the
same φ g ’s, the implied φb ’s are 0.66, 0.59, 0.53, 0.46 and 0.40 and implied λb ’s are 0.56, 0.48,
0.41, 0.33, and 0.26 respectively. By construction bad data countries have much lower signal to
total variance ratios and weights for measured income. The resulting β ’s vary from 1.03 to 1.72.
In the next section, we will present our estimates of true income growth for the bad data
countries for the case in row 2 of Table 5 where φ g =0.9 and hence φb =0.594. Since we focus on
this case, we note the full set of results for it. In particular, Table 5 tells us that for this case β =
1.15; and we note that σ y2 = 0.054 , σ z2, g = 0.006 , σ z2,b = 0.037 , σ x2 = 0.127.

β = 1.15 is the “structural” elasticity of lights growth with respect to income growth, an
elasticity that is close to one, so that the long term rate of lights growth approximately equals the
long term rate of true income growth. This estimate of β for this case is from a specification
where we assume a common economic-lights structure across all low-middle income countries,
so that we pool all low-middle income countries in using the moments (9a) and (9b). If we
assumed poor data countries have a different economic structure from good ones, solved the
model by using (9a)-(9c) applied just to those 31 countries, and specified φb =0.594 in (10), we
would calculate β = 1.50 and λb = 0.48. That β is higher than the estimate in Table 5 but
based on a very small sample. When we bootstrap its standard errors, the estimate in Table 5 is
23

well within its confidence interval.

4.1 Estimates of true income growth for bad data low-middle income countries

For our 30 bad data countries, following row 2 of Table 5, we apply the weight 0.48 to the
reported GDP growth rates in local currency units and a weight of 0.52 to our fitted values from
equation (3), to get an estimate of the average annual growth rate of true income, ŷ , for each of
the 30 countries. For good data countries, the corresponding weight on measured income is 0.85.
Under that measured income weight for good data countries, measured and true income growth
estimates are very close, so we don’t report on them.
For bad data countries, in Table 6, for comparison, we report measured income growth,
predicted income growth from lights and our estimate of true income growth. We also report the
difference between our estimate of the true growth rate and the official WDI growth rate. Figure
7 presents a graphical version of the comparison. The horizontal axis records the annualized
growth rate of GDP over the decade as measured in the WDI while the vertical axis shows the
same thing as measured by the lights data. Points near the 45 degree line in Figure 7 are
countries where the two measures give similar results. The further above (below) the 45 degree
line is a data point, the higher (lower) is growth in lights data in comparison to growth in the
WDI data. The figure also shows a set of iso-composite growth lines, where each iso-composite
growth line shows the combinations of lights and WDI based growth rates for which our
calculated true growth rate is the same. The slope of these iso-composite growth lines (but not
the position of the data points on the graph) will vary with the assumed value of λb ; as the
weights on lights based growth rates decline, lines become steeper but the points at which they
intersect the 45 degree line do not change.
The figure and table suggest that, as would be predicted by a standard analysis of
measurement error, growth is more likely to be underestimated in the WDI for countries with
low measured income growth rates, and overestimated in the WDI for some countries showing
very high growth rates. But there is a lot of variation across countries in the adjustment. By
reading the true growth rates versus WDI and lights based numbers in Table 6 or by viewing the
divergence between the WDI versus lights based numbers in Figure 7, one can see, that after
adjustment, countries like the Republic of Congo (COG), Cote d‘Ivoire (CIV), and Haiti (HTI)

24

have noticeably higher growth rates, while the number for The Gambia (GMB) is the same. We
somewhat downgrade certain higher growth rate countries like Angola (AGO) and Nigeria (NGA)
but not Liberia (LBR) or Mali (MLI).
For these bad data countries at the tails of high or low recorded growth such as Myanmar
(MMR) and Burundi (BDI), we strongly amend recorded growth rates. For example, in Burundi,
the WDI data imply an annual average growth of GDP of -0.71% per year while the satellite data
imply growth of 2.86% per year. The optimally weighted average is 1.12%. In Myanmar, the
WDI data say that GDP grew at an annual rate of 10.0% while the lights data imply an annual
growth rate of 3.2%. In both these cases, there is reason, beyond the night lights data, to suspect
that GDP is particularly poorly measured in the WDI. Burundi experienced civil war and
reconstruction for much of the period for which we have satellite data, while the economy in
Myanmar was largely autarkic and non-market, with a governing regime that would not be
averse to exaggerating GDP growth.

4.2

Elasticity of Light with Respect to Income

Our focus in this paper is on producing improved estimates of GDP growth in countries with bad
data and on producing estimates of GDP growth for subnational regions. However, a byproduct
of this procedure, interesting in its own right, is the estimate of the elasticity of light with respect
to income. As discussed above, the parameter ψˆ is a biased estimate of the inverse of this
elasticity. However, using the auxiliary assumptions about measurement error required to form
proxies for income growth, we also produce direct estimates of the elasticity, β . For a high
signal to total variance ratio which we expect in good data countries, the elasticities in column 3
of Table 5 are close to one. Recall also as reported earlier and in the Appendix, for a limited
sample, the estimated elasticity of true radiance with respect to night lights is close to one. This
implies that the elasticity of true radiance with respect to GDP is also close to one.
We can think of mechanisms that would tend to push the elasticity both higher and lower
than one. There are large fixed costs associated with electricity distribution, which could lead to
a convex relationship between income and light output around some income threshold, and thus
an elasticity greater than one. On the other hand, there could be diminution in the rate of
increase of light as income rises. For example, with more urbanization there is a greater

25

likelihood of people living above one another, so that some light is blocked from reaching space;
and there may be economies of scale in the use of lights, such as street lamps. These factors
would, a priori, produce an elasticity lower than one. Regardless, for low and middle income
countries, it appears that using an elasticity of one between true income and true light growth is
reasonable.

5. Additional Applications

As discussed above, one natural application of the night lights data is to improve estimates of
GDP growth at the national level. However, night lights data are also well suited to looking at
growth in both sub-national regions and in spatial groupings that cross national borders. In these
cases typically no reliable real income data are available on a consistent basis. Thus night lights
data allow us to broaden the set of questions researchers investigate. The recent rapid
development of spatially based analytical tools and datasets points to a number of research
directions in which empirical growth analysis need no longer be tied exclusively to availability
of national income data.
To illustrate this point, we apply the night lights data to growth issues that require
subnational data but go beyond national borders. The application is to sub-Saharan Africa, where
alternative sources of data are of lowest quality and where the issues we look at are compelling.16
The issues concern coastal versus non-coastal growth (Gallup, Sachs, and Mellinger, 1999),
primate city versus hinterland growth (Ades and Glaeser, 1995 and Davis and Henderson, 2004),
and growth in malarial versus non-malarial areas (Weil, 2010). In addressing these issues, we are
not trying to resolve particular debates, since that would require much more detailed analysis.
Instead we provide a few facts about where growth is occurring in sub-Saharan Africa overall,
from which further analyses could proceed.
For each of our three cases, we start by dividing up the continent into two or more zones
(e.g., coastal versus non-coastal) based on a particular criterion. We then sum the digital number
for all pixels in each zone and look at the log difference between the average for the first two
16

Specifically, we use data from the set of 41 countries defined as follows: all of mainland Africa plus Madagascar,
minus the 5 countries that border the Mediterranean Sea, South Africa, and Equatorial Guinea. We drop South
Africa as is standard in talking about sub-Saharan Africa since it is such an outlier in terms of level of development
and we drop Equatorial Guinea because over 90% of its recorded light is from gas flares in most years (see text
below).

26

years in our data (1992 and 1993) and the last two years (2007 and 2008). We then compare this
log change across zones. This procedure implicitly allows for both zone and time fixed effects.
Note that we are able to include an extra two years of data, in comparison to the analysis in
Section 4 of the paper, because we are not constrained to look at years in which GDP data are
available.
The issue of light from gas flares, mentioned above in the context of our global
regressions, is particularly acute in sub-Saharan Africa. Recall that for the world as a whole,
polygons containing gas flares represented 1.0% of land area, 0.34% of population, 3.6% of light
emanation. For sub-Saharan Africa as we have defined it, these figures (for the year 2000) are
0.22% of land area, 1.5% of population, and 30.2% of light emanation.17 For this reason, we
conduct our analysis in this section excluding areas with gas flaring.

5.1

Growth on the Coast vs. in the Interior

Mellinger, Sachs, and Gallup (2000) report that the 49.9% of the world’s population that lives
within 100 kilometers of the ocean or of an ocean-navigable waterway produces 67.6% of world
GDP – twice the level of GDP per capita of people who live away from the sea. Gallup, Sachs,
and Mellinger (1999) find that the fraction of a country’s population that lives within 100 km of
an ocean or ocean-navigable river has a significantly negative coefficient in a standard growth
regression. They follow Adam Smith in arguing that distance from the ocean means that some
regions are excluded from the opportunity to reap benefits from trade, and thus impeded in their
ability to develop economically. In their work, population data are widely available for subnational regions that can mapped into the geographic categories that they define. But subnational income data were available for only 19 of 152 countries in their sample, almost all of
them wealthy.
We revisit this issue for Sub-Saharan Africa with its 15 landlocked countries and poor
quality road system linking interior areas to the coast (Buys et al., 2010). During the period for
which we have lights data, world trade volume increased by a factor of 2.5, making the
examination particularly compelling. We are thus interested in the relative performance of
regions with and without access to the sea over this period.
17

88.2 % of the light from gas-associated polygons in sub-Saharan Africa comes from Nigeria.

27

To generate the coastal variable, we started with the 100-km buffer of coastlines and
navigable rivers from Mellinger, Sachs, and Gallup (2000). Because their coastlines didn't line
up exactly with ours, we added all areas that fell in the ocean in their classification to our coastal
zone. Our finding is that, in sub-Saharan Africa, inland lights grew 0.133 log points more than
coastal areas over the 15 year period 1992/93 to 2007/08. Using the ψˆ coefficient of 0.329 from
the long difference estimation in column 3 of Table 4, the lights data imply that the increase in
total GDP inland was 4.4% greater than on the coast – a difference of 1/3 of a percent per year.
While we cannot say anything about the long-run benefits over centuries of being on the coast,
during a period of rapidly growing trade, coastal areas in Africa grew more slowly than noncoastal areas. There may be a number of competing explanations for this, including the new
economic geography debate about whether increases in external trade benefit coastal versus
interior areas (Fujita et al., 1999). The supposedly inherent advantage of coastal location for
growth in this period in sub-Saharan Africa does not dominate other forces that may have been at
work.

5.2

Primate Cities vs. Hinterland

Increased urbanization is an integral part of economic growth. However, over the past several
decades, many observers have argued that in the context of developing world, there has been an
unhealthy focus of growth in very large, dominant cities, which are known as “primate cities.” In
particular it is noted that in many developing countries, the largest city is disproportionately
large in comparison to the rest of the distribution of city sizes. This size discrepancy is believed
to result from superior provision of public goods and opportunities for rent seeking (Ades and
Glaeser, 1995 and Davis and Henderson, 2004). Henderson (2003) provides empirical evidence
that economic growth in developing countries is slowed by over-concentration of cities, although,
because of data requirements there are almost no sub-Saharan African cities in his sample.
Duranton (2009), summarizing this literature, concludes that “The potentially large misallocation
of resources associated with primate cities suggests that policies to reduce urban primacy are
needed.”
We ask how the growth of primate cities has compared to growth in other places (either
non-primate cities or rural areas) for the period for which we have data. For our analysis, we

28

define primate cities as follows. First, lights are summed across all satellite-years. Contiguously
lit polygons are defined based on this set of summed lights. Then we use data from a gazetteer
of city populations in which cities are defined as points in longitude-latitude space. We add up
the populations of all city points that fall within three kilometers of the polygon border (this
buffer allows for measurement error in locations). The polygon with the highest population in
each country is designated as the primate city. The remainder of each country is designated as
hinterland. 18 Again we are doing an aggregate comparison across the nations of sub-Saharan
Africa to see what the overall differential growth pattern has been in this time period.
The change in log digital number was .029 larger in hinterland areas than primate cities.
Again using the ψˆ coefficient from Table 4, column 3, this differential translates into a tiny (1%
over 15 years) difference in GDP growth between the two types of areas. A detailed study would
be required to explain the result. It could be that primate cities have reached the point of strong
diminishing returns to scale. Perhaps less likely, it might be that sub-Saharan African countries
have increased their relative investment in hinterland areas compared to primate cities.
Regardless of whether sub-Saharan countries are continuing to favor primate cities in policy
making, hinterland areas are growing at least as fast as primate cities. Of course if primate cities
have continued to be heavily favored in this time period, this suggests that the money is being
wasted—it is not producing higher growth rates.

5.3

The Effect of Malaria on Growth

An extensive literature examines the effect of disease in general, and malaria in particular, on
economic growth in sub-Saharan Africa. Although the negative correlation between income
levels and malaria prevalence is striking, the existence of a causal link from malaria to
underdevelopment is a highly contentious issue (see Weil, 2010, for a discussion of the
literature). Because our methodology looks only at recent growth, we cannot address the
question of whether malaria has been a source of underdevelopment over the centuries.
However, the period for which we have satellite data, especially the second half of it,
corresponds to a renewed effort on the part of the international community and affected states to
18

In the analysis of primate cities we exclude Somalia and Swaziland, the former because much of the hinterland is
not functionally linked to the primate city, the latter because its visible light is dominated by the polygon
representing Johannesburg.

29

combat the disease. The Roll Back Malaria Partnership, bringing together key international
agencies, was launched in 1998. This was followed by a significant increase in resources devoted
to the disease. For example, international funding disbursements for malaria increased by a
factor of 2.8 from 2004 to 2007 (Roll Back Malaria, 2008). New technologies, such as longlasting insecticide treated bed nets and artemisinin-based combination therapy were introduced
over this period. Thus, one might like to know how growth has differed between regions with
high and low malaria prevalence over this time period. If growth were higher in areas with
historically high malaria prevalence, that might be taken as evidence that the anti-malaria
campaign has borne economic as well as humanitarian fruit.
As our measure of malaria prevalence, we use an index developed by Kiszewski et al
(2004). This measure assigns to each grid square (one half degree longitude by one half degree
latitude) a value corresponding to the stability of malaria transmission, which in turn is based on
data about climactic factors and the dominant vector species. For our analysis, we generated
quartiles from the original distribution for the sample region.19 We then compared growth rates
in each other quartile to the first (lowest index) quartile. Our findings are that the second quartile
grew 0.146 log points less; the third grew 0.324 points less; and the fourth 0.184 points less than
the first quartile. These relative gaps are experienced more in the 2000-2008 time period after the
start of the malarial initiatives than before 2000. These gaps translate to annual income growth
differences relative to the first quartile of between 1/3 and 2/3 percent per year. However might
one think of these gaps, apart from the notion that being non-malarial is still helpful despite antimalarial campaigns? Malarial quartiles may differ in other ways. For example the lowest
prevalence quartile includes many low density arid areas. The application of anti-malaria
programs may also have differed across quartiles. Nonetheless these facts are not encouraging.

6. Conclusion

Satellite night-lights data are a useful proxy for economic activity at temporal and geographic
scales for which traditional data are of poor quality or are unavailable. In this paper, we develop
a statistical model to combine data on changes in night lights with data on measured income
growth to improve estimates of true income growth. One assumption of the model is that
19

The cutoffs of the malaria index between the quartiles 6.90, 9.26 and 18.618.

30

measurement error in growth as depicted in the national income accounts is uncorrelated with the
measurement error that occurs when the change in light is used to measure growth. While there
are many potential sources of error in using lights growth to measure income growth, none of
them suggest this assumption is inappropriate. But if one wanted to, the framework could be
adjusted to allow for such correlation.
Our methodology involves estimating both a coefficient that maps light growth into a
proxy for GDP growth and also an optimal weight to be applied in combining this proxy with
national accounts data. For countries with high-quality national accounts data, the information
contained in lights growth is of little value in improving income growth measures. However, for
countries with low-quality national accounts data, the optimal composite estimate puts roughly
equal weight on lights growth and national accounts data. We apply the methodology to low and
middle income countries with very low quality national accounts data, as rated by the World
Bank. For these 30 countries, we get a new set of income growth numbers for the years 1992/3–
2005/6. These estimates differ from measured WDI real GDP growth numbers by up to 3.2% per
year. We also estimate that among low and middle income countries, the elasticity of growth of
light emanating into space with respect to income growth is close to one.
For all countries, lights data can play a key role in analyzing growth at sub- and
supranational levels, where income data at a detailed spatial level are unavailable. To illustrate
this and build on the theme that research directions in empirical growth need no longer be
synonymous with national income accounts data, we examine three issues in growth analysis
applied to sub-Saharan Africa. We look at whether over the last 17 years coastal areas have
grown faster than non-coastal areas; whether primate cities have grown faster than hinterlands;
and whether malarial areas have had a better growth experience compared to non-malarial areas.
The answer to all these questions is no, which leaves for future research the question of why.

31

Appendix: Data

Lights

The Version 4 Defense Meteorological Satellite Program Optical Linescan System
(DMSP-OLS) Nighttime Lights Time Series data used in this paper are available from the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) National Geophysical Data Center
(NGDC) .20 Key aspects of the data are discussed in the text. Here we give more details of a few
of these aspects. The first has to do with the light that is recorded. As noted in the text, the sensor
saturates at a level of light that is common in the cities of rich countries, resulting in top-coded
values. At high latitudes no summer data can be used because sunlight is still contaminating
images at local pass times of 8:30 to 10 pm. This effect is diminished closer to the equator. The
data are subject to overglow or blooming, which means that lights tend to appear larger than they
actually are, especially for bright lights and over water. Snow tends to magnify light values.
Humidity is known to affect the performance of other sensors but has never been studied in
relation to the DMSP-OLS. Many of these problems are not likely to be important in poorer
countries, as there are few instances of top-coding, and many are tropical countries with no long
summer nights, and virtually no snow in populated areas. In addition to spatial coverage and
resolution, sensors also have spectral range and resolution. The DMSP-OLS sensor covers the
visual-near infrared portion of the spectrum, from 500 to 900 nanometers. Different lighting
technologies have different emissions profiles, but they all have substantial emissions in this
range, because the human eye can only see radiation between approximately 380 and 750
nanometers. Further details about the lights data and processing can be found in Elvidge et al.
(1997a, 1999, 2003, 2005, 2010), Lieske (1981), and Small et al. (2005).
Across all 30 satellite years, an average of 2.7% of land-based pixels, representing 1.5%
of land area, are missing data for entire satellite-years. As noted in the text, they are
overwhelmingly at high latitudes, which is why we exclude areas above the Arctic Circle.
Below the Arctic Circle, this phenomenon affects pixels representing 0.45% percent of land area.
We exclude 23 country-years in which at least one constituent country-satellite year was missing
data for at least 5% of its land area.
Because de facto sensor setting may vary across satellites and as a satellite ages, Elvidge
20

Available at http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/dmsp/downloadV4composites.html

32

et al. (2009) perform an “intercalibration”, relating the different satellite years of data to each
other, without tying them directly to physical quantities, based on the identifying assumption that
lights in Sicily did not change between 1994 and 2008. Rather than use the formulas in Elvidge
et al. (2009) to do that specific intercalibration, in statistical work we control for these problems
with year fixed effects, which we find to be more readily interpretable.
As briefly reported in the text, in an experiment carried out for 18 days during the winters
of 1996 and 1997, the settings of one of the satellites were altered so that a true radiance measure
could be calculated with no top-coding (Elvidge et al. 1999). Settings alternated across these
nights between low and high magnification in order to capture both intense and weak lighting.
The resulting experimental radiance-calibrated dataset, averaged across all 18 days, is also
distributed by NGDC. After a scaling factor is applied, each 30 arc-second pixel reports the
radiance in Watts per cm2 per steradian.
Since the grid for the radiance calibrated data is in principle the same as that for the
annual composites, individual pixels can be compared across datasets. However, the real-world
location of each pixel is measured with an error of approximately 2 km (Elvidge et al. 2004), so
that the pixels in the two data sets don’t exactly overlap. In Table A1, column 1, we report the
results of a regression of the log of digital number from the most comparable of the 30
uncalibrated datasets (F-12, 1997) on the log of radiance, for the 8.6 million cells that are lit in
both datasets. The elasticity is 0.587. We expect the elasticity is biased downwards because of
measurement error from pixels not exactly overlapping. In the remaining columns, we run the
same regressions after aggregating all lit cells into larger square cells, with the linear scale factor
noted. So in column 2, 2-by-2 arrays of the original cells are merged to become cells with four
times the original cell area, and in column 3, 5-by-5 arrays are formed. By column 3, there are
still over six hundred thousand cells, but the elasticity now is close to one. Additional
aggregation doesn’t change the elasticity much.

33

Table A1: Radiance versus digital numbers
(1)
(2)
(3)
F-12 DN
F-12 DN
F-12 DN
Radiance
0.587*** 0.79876*** 0.94694***
[0.00020] [0.00039]
[0.00058]
Constant
0.674*** 0.05970*** 0.62278***
[0.00076] [0.00187]
[0.00333]
Observations
8657670
2590447
606988
R-squared
0.47
0.678
0.862
linear scale
factor
1
2
5

(4)
F-12 DN
0.97767***
[0.00072]
0.78730***
[0.00474]
229774
0.917

(5)
F-12 DN
0.98090***
[0.00092]
0.78213***
[0.00679]
93423
0.944

(6)
F-12 DN
0.97117***
[0.00125]
0.67790***
[0.01028]
38013
0.958

(7)
F-12 DN
0.95957***
[0.00174]
0.55325***
[0.01599]
14792
0.966

(8)
F-12 DN
0.95548***
[0.00198]
0.50717***
[0.01888]
10848
0.969

10

20

40

80

100

Table A2: Summary statistics
variable
ln(lights)
ln(GDP, LCU)
ln(electricity use)
fraction topcoded
fraction unlit
spatial gini
ln(lights)
ln(GDP, LCU)
ln(lights)
ln(GDP, LCU)
delta ln(lights)
delta ln(GDP, LCU)
delta ln(lights)
delta ln(GDP, LCU)
delta ln(lights)
delta ln(GDP, LCU)

mean
-0.0645
25.2829
23.5009
0.0030
0.7123
0.8255
-0.6927
25.9829
-1.8696
24.8654
0.3385
0.4600
0.3823
0.4904
0.4106
0.4689

sd
2.0364
4.0326
1.9024
0.0126
0.3246
0.2020
1.8768
4.0438
1.9654
5.9608
0.4017
0.2441
0.4348
0.2605
0.5447
0.3021

min
-5.9498
0.3811
18.5946
0.0000
0.0000
0.1662
-5.9498
0.3811
-5.4424
0.3811
-1.0390
-0.1624
-1.0390
-0.1624
-0.6379
-0.0928

Max
3.8753
35.2722
29.0303
0.2204
0.9998
0.9999
3.0628
35.2722
3.0628
33.8656
1.9036
1.2415
1.9036
1.2415
1.9036
1.2415

count
3014
3014
1853
3014
3014
3014
1953
1953
541
541
170
170
113
113
30
30

sample
full
full
full
full
full
full
low-middle income
low-middle income
low-middle income, DQ score 0-3
low-middle income, DQ score 0-3
full
full
low-middle income
low-middle income
low-middle income, DQ score 0-3
low-middle income, DQ score 0-3

34

References

Ades, Alberto F., and Edward L. Glaeser. 1995. “Trade and Circuses: Explaining Urban Giants.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(1): 195-227.
Au, Chun-Chung, and J. Vernon Henderson. 2006. “Are Chinese Cities Too Small?” Review of
Economic Studies, 73(3): 549-76.
Browning, Martin, and Thomas Crossley. 2009. “Are Two Cheap, Noisy Measures Better Than
One Expensive, Accurate One?” American Economic Review, 99(2): 99-103.
Burchfield, Marcy, Henry G. Overman, Diego Puga, and Matthew A. Turner. 2006. Causes of
sprawl: A portrait from space. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2): 587-633.
Buys, Piet, Uwe Deichmann, and David Wheeler. 2010. "Road Network Upgrading and
Overland Trade Expansion in Sub-Saharan Africa" Journal of African Economies 19(3):
399-432
Chen, Xi, and William D. Nordhaus. 2010. “The Value of Luminosity Data as a Proxy for
Economic Statistics.” NBER Working Paper 16317.
Croft, T. A. 1978. “Night-time Images of the Earth from Space.” Scientific American, 239: 68-79.
Dawson, John W., Joseph P. DeJuan, John J. Seater, and E. Frank Stephenson. 2001. “Economic
Information versus Quality Variation in Cross-Country Data.” Canadian Journal of
Economics, 34(3): 988-1009.
Davis, James and J.Vernon Henderson (2003), “Evidence on the Political Economy of the
Urbanization Process.” Journal of Urban Economics, 53: 98-125.
Deaton, Angus, and Alan Heston. Forthcoming. “Understanding PPPs and PPP-based National
Accounts.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.
Doll, Christopher N.H., Jan-Peter Muller, and Jeremy G. Morley. 2006. “Mapping Regional
Economic Activity from Night-time Light Satellite Imagery.” Ecological Economics
57(1): 75-92.
Duranton, Gilles. 2009. “Are Cities Engines of Growth and Prosperity for Developing
Countries?” In Urbanization and Growth, ed. Michael Spence, Patricia Clarke Annez,
and Robert M. Buckley, 67-113. Washington DC: World Bank on behalf of the
Commission on Growth and Development.
Ebener, Steeve, Christopher Murray, Ajay Tandon, and Christopher D. Elvidge. 2005. “From
wealth to health: modelling the distribution of income per capita at the sub-national level

35

using night-time light imagery.” International Journal of Health Geographics, 4(5): 1-17.
Elvidge, Christopher D., Kimberley E. Baugh, Eric A. Kihn, Herbert W Kroehl, and Ethan R.
Davis. 1997a. “Mapping of City Lights Using DMSP Operational Linescan System Data.”
Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 63: 727-34.
Elvidge, Christopher D., Kimberley E. Baugh, Eric A. Kihn, Herbert W Kroehl, Ethan R. Davis,
and C. W. Davis. 1997b. “Relation between satellite observed visible-near infrared
emissions, population, and energy consumption.” International Journal of Remote
Sensing, 18: 1373-1379.
Elvidge, Christopher D., Kimberley E. Baugh, John B. Dietz, Theodore Bland, Paul C. Sutton,
and Herbert W. Kroehl. 1999. “Radiance Calibration of DMSP-OLS Low-light Imaging
Data of Human Settlements.” Remote Sensing of Environment, 68(1): 77-88.
Elvidge, Christopher D., Ruth Hobson, Ingrid L. Nelson, Jeffrey M. Safran, Benjamin T. Tuttle,
John B. Dietz, and Kimberley E. Baugh. 2003. “Overview of DMSP-OLS and Scope of
Applications.” In Remotely Sensed Cities, ed. Victor Mesev, 281-99. London: Taylor &
Francis.
Elvidge, Christopher D., Jeffrey M. Safran, Ingrid L. Nelson, Benjamin T. Tuttle, Ruth Hobson,
Kimberley E. Baugh, John B. Dietz, and Edward H. Erwin. 2004. “Area and position
accuracy of DMSP nighttime lights data”, In Remote Sensing and GIS Accuracy
Assessment, ed. Lunetta R. S. and Lyon, J.G., 281-292. London: CRC Press.
Elvidge, Christopher D., Kimberley E. Baugh, Jeffrey M. Safran, Benjamin T. Tuttle, Ara T.
Howard, Patrick J. Hayes, and Edward H. Erwin. 2005. “Preliminary Results From
Nighttime Lights Change Detection.” International Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote
Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, 36(8).
Elvidge, Christopher D., Daniel Ziskin, Kimberly E. Baugh, Benjamin T. Tuttle, Tilottama
Ghosh, Dee W. Pack, Edward H. Erwin, and Mikhail Zhizhin 2009. “A Fifteen Year
Record of Global Natural Gas Flaring Derived from Satellite Data.” Energies 2: 595-622.
Elvidge Christopher D., D. M. Keith, Benjamin T. Tuttle, and Kimberley E. Baugh. 2010.
“Spectral Identification of Lighting Type and Character.” Sensors, 10(4): 3961-3988.
Fujita, Masahisa, Paul Krugman, and Anthony J. Venables. 1999. The Spatial Economy.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gallup, John Luke, Jeffrey Sachs, and Andrew Mellinger. 1999. “Geography and Economic

36

Development.” International Regional Science Review, 22(2):179-232.
Ghosh, Tilottama, S. Anderson, R. L. Powell, Paul C. Sutton, and Christopher D. Elvidge. 2009.
"Estimation of Mexico's Informal Economy and Remittances Using Nighttime Imagery.”
Remote Sensing, 1(3): 418-444.
Good, David F. 1994. “The Economic Lag of Central and Eastern Europe: Income Estimates for
the Habsburg Successor States, 1870-1910.” The Journal of Economic History, 54(4):
869-91.
Henderson, Vernon. 2003. “The Urbanization Process and Economic Growth: The So-What
Question.” Journal of Economic Growth, 8:47-71.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2006. “Jamaica: Selected Issues.” IMF Country Report No.
06/157.
Johnson, Simon, William Larson, Chris Papageorgiou, and Arvind Subramanian. 2009. “Is
Newer Better? Penn World Table Revisions and Their Impact on Growth Estimates.”
NBER Working Paper 15455.
Kiran Chand, T. R., K. V. S. Badarinath, C. D. Elvidge, C. D., B. T. Tuttle. 2009. “Spatial
characterization of electrical power consumption patterns over India using temporal
DMSP-OLS night-time satellite data.” International Journal of Remote Sensing, 30(3):
647-661.
Kiszewski Anthony, Andrew Mellinger, Andrew Spielman, Pia Malaney, Sonia E. Sachs, and
Jeffrey A Sachs. 2004. “A global index representing the stability of malaria transmission.”
American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 70(5): 486-98.
Krueger, Alan B. and Mikael Lindahl. 2001. “Education for Growth: Why and for Whom?”
Journal of Economic Literature, 39(4): 1101-36.
Lieske, R.W. 1981. “DMSP primary sensor data acquisition.” Proceedings of the International
Telemetering Conference, 17:1013-20.
Mellinger, Andrew, Jeffrey Sachs, and John Gallup. 2000. “Climate, Coastal Proximity, and
Development. In Oxford Handbook of Economic Geography, ed. Gordon L. Clark,
Maryann P. Feldman, and Meric S. Gertler, 169-194. London: Oxford University Press.
Nuxoll, Daniel A. 1994. “Differences in Relative Prices and International Differences in Growth
Rates.” American Economic Review, 84(5): 1423-36.
Ramsey, J. B. 1969. "Tests for Specification Errors in Classical Linear Least Squares Regression

37

Analysis." J. Roy. Statist. Soc. B., 31(2): 350–371.
Roll Back Malaria, The Global Malaria Action Plan for a Malaria-Free World, 2008
http://www.rollbackmalaria.org/gmap/gmap.pdf
Small, Christopher, Francesca Pozzi and Christopher D. Elvidge. 2005. “Spatial Analysis of
Global Urban Extent from DMSP-OLS Nighttime Lights.” Remote Sensing of
Environment, 96: 277-91.
Steckel, Richard H., and Jerome C. Rose. 2002. The Backbone of History: Health and Nutrition
in the Western Hemisphere. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Sutton, Paul C., and Robert Costanza. 2002. “Global estimates of market and non-market values
derived from nighttime satellite imagery, land cover, and ecosystem service valuation.”
Ecological Economics, 41(3): 509-27.
Sutton, Paul C., Christopher D. Elvidge, and Tilottama Ghosh. 2007. “Estimation of Gross
Domestic Product at Sub-National Scales Using Nighttime Satellite Imagery.”
International Journal of Ecological Economics & Statistics, 8(S07): 5-21.
World Bank. 2002. Building Statistical Capacity to Monitor Development Progress. Washington.
Young, Alwyn. 2009. “The African Growth Miracle.” LSE processed.

38

Table 1: Night Lights Data for Selected Countries, 1992-2008 average
DN
Bangladesh USA
Canada Netherlands Brazil
Costa Rica Guatemala Madagascar
0
66.72% 69.32% 93.89%
1.00%
94.02%
59.26%
79.23%
99.73%
1-2
0.637% 0.110% 0.001%
0.000%
0.001%
1.060%
0.244%
0.005%
3-5
24.48% 10.85%
1.65%
3.45%
2.60%
24.79%
13.84%
0.15%
6-10
5.27%
9.60%
2.48%
24.04%
1.83%
9.26%
4.17%
0.06%
11-20
1.69%
4.53%
1.09%
28.83%
0.77%
3.00%
1.46%
0.03%
21-62
1.13%
5.02%
0.83%
41.10%
0.73%
2.33%
0.95%
0.03%
63-66
0.06%
0.58%
0.05%
1.58%
0.06%
0.31%
0.10%
0.0001%
% unlit
66.94% 66.20% 92.54%
1.05%
94.31%
60.70%
80.42%
99.74%
avg. DN
2.0108 4.6648
0.9381
23.5244
0.6342
3.1401
1.4059
0.0233
gini(DN)
0.7879 0.8471
0.9643
0.3925
0.9689
0.7734
0.8822
0.9985
pop. density (per sq. km)
1,080
31
3
469
21
76
105
26
percent urban
24%
79%
79%
76%
81%
59%
45%
27%
GDP per capita, PPP (2005 $)
917 37,953
31,058
32,226
8,046
8,167
3,905
892
GDP per capita (2000 $)
344 33,582
22,531
23,208
3,760
4,084
1,693
249
annual %∆GDP, 1992-2008
5.38%
3.04%
3.18%
2.70%
3.21%
5.02%
3.96%
3.18%
annual %∆ lights, 1992-2008
0.57%
0.38% -0.42%
0.36%
2.92%
4.10%
6.35%
2.41%
Notes:
1) % area unlit accounts for differences in cell area, whereas the percentage of cells having digital number 0, 1-2, etc. does not.
2) Each figure is calculated within satellite-years, averaged across satellites within a year, and then across years.

Mozambique
99.47%
0.031%
0.28%
0.11%
0.05%
0.05%
0.0003%
99.51%
0.0435
0.9974
23
30%
546
252
7.52%
6.71%

Malawi
97.67%
0.000%
0.93%
0.85%
0.27%
0.27%
0.0012%
97.15%
0.3010
0.9865
125
15%
672
143
3.65%
2.06%

39

Table 2. Baseline results for the world: 1992-2008; growth in real GDP (constant LCU)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

ln(lights/area)

ln(GDP)

ln(GDP)

ln(GDP)

ln(GDP)

ln(GDP)

0.275***
[0.031]

0.260***
[0.034]

0.265***
[0.031]

0.286***
[0.034]

0.282***
[0.046]

ln(lights/area) sq.

ln(GDP)

ln(GDP)

0.167***
[0.051]

0.283***
[0.030]

-0.0060
[0.0060]

ln(count top-coded + 1)

0.0116*
[0.0059]

ln(unlit)

-0.012
[0.011]

Spatial Gini

ln(GDP)

(8)

0.179
[0.193]

ln(KWH)
Observations
3014
3014
3014
3014
Countries
188
188
188
188
(within) R-sq
0.768
0.769
0.770
0.769
All specifications include country and year fixed effects
Column (8) excludes regions identified with gas flares.
Robust standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

1853
128
0.757

0.283***
[0.047]

0.201***
[0.041]

1853
128
0.767

1853
128
0.782

3014
188
0.769

40

Table 3. Lights up/down, time trend, long difference
(1)
(2)
(3)
Fixed
Country
Demeaned
Effects
time trend
Plus/Minus
lndn

0.275***
[0.031]

0.180***
[0.035]

│+∆ ln lights│

0.271***
[0.038]

│- ∆ln lights│

-0.280***
[0.055]

(4)
Long
difference

(5)
Long
difference

0.317***
[0.037]

0.299***
[0.037]

Ln (top-coded + 1)

0.021
[0.015]

Ln (unlit)

-0.0075
[0.023]

Time effects
Yes
Yes
In demean
No
No
Country effects
Yes
Yes
In demean
No
No
Observations
3014
3014
3014
170
170
Countries
188
188
188
170
170
(within) R-sq
0.768
0.905
0.207
0.273
0.282
Robust standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
In columns 4 and 5, long differences are formed by averaging the first and last two years of levels
data

41

Table 4. Results for rated low-middle income countries; growth in real GDP (local
currency units)
Fixed
Country
Long
effects
time trend
difference
(1)
(2)
(3)

ln(lights/area)

0.308***
[0.037]

0.270***
[0.043]

0.329***
[0.046]

n/a

n/a

0.365***
[0.028]

1953
118
0.780
Yes
Yes
No

1953
118
0.903
Yes
Yes
Yes

113
113
0.301
No
No
No

0.041
[0.063]

-0.013
[0.063]

0.095
[0.092]

<0.00005

<0.00005

0.0396

-0.0055***
[0.0017]

-0.0017*
[0.0010]

-0.029
[0.018]

Constant
Observations
Number of isonv10
(Within-country) R-sq
Country fixed effects
Year fixed effects
Country time trend
_________________________________
Difference in ψ for good data countries
(reestimated base ψ not shown)
Heteroskedasticity:
Breusch-Pagan p-value
Regression of squared residuals:
Good data dummy

Robust standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
In column 3, long differences are formed by averaging the first and last two years of levels
data

Table 5. Solving the statistical model
30 bad data countries, 83 good data countries
Signal to total variance of
Structural effect of
measured income
true income growth
on lights growth
Good data
countries: ψ g

Bad data
countries: ψ b

β

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

0.660
0.594
0.528
0.462
0.396

1.032
1.147
1.290
1.474
1.720

Weight for measured income
growth in calculation of true
growth
Good data
countries: λ g

Bad data
countries:

1.0
0.852
0.710
0.575
0.449

0.563
0.484
0.407
0.333
0.262

λb

42

Table 6. Average annual growth rates in true income, for bad data countries
(1992/93-2005/06)
optimal
combination of
ISO
WDI
fitted
WDI and fitted
Country
code
(LCU)
lights
lights
difference

Myanmar
Angola
Nigeria
Sudan
Vietnam
Burkina Faso
Benin
Ghana
Rwanda
Algeria
Oman
Mali
Sierra Leone
Cameroon
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Niger
Gambia, The
Liberia
Central African
Republic
Mauritania
Swaziland
Lebanon
Madagascar
Eritrea
Guinea-Bissau
Congo, Rep.
Haiti
Côte d'Ivoire
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Burundi

MMR
AGO
NGA
SDN
VNM
BFA
BEN
GHA
RWA
DZA
OMN
MLI
SLE
CMR
IRN
NER
GMB
LBR

10.02%
6.99%
4.04%
5.92%
7.60%
5.80%
4.52%
4.60%
3.06%
3.29%
4.28%
5.08%
3.04%
3.29%
4.03%
3.48%
3.80%
6.75%

3.25%
3.88%
1.90%
4.01%
5.82%
4.46%
3.50%
3.71%
2.24%
2.84%
3.84%
4.77%
2.75%
2.99%
3.74%
3.20%
3.80%
6.99%

6.47%
5.37%
2.93%
4.93%
6.67%
5.10%
3.99%
4.14%
2.63%
3.06%
4.05%
4.92%
2.89%
3.14%
3.88%
3.34%
3.80%
6.87%

-3.22%
-1.51%
-1.07%
-0.94%
-0.86%
-0.66%
-0.50%
-0.44%
-0.41%
-0.22%
-0.22%
-0.15%
-0.15%
-0.15%
-0.15%
-0.14%
0.00%
0.12%

CAF
MRT
SWZ
LBN
MDG
ERI
GNB
COG
HTI
CIV
COD
BDI

1.59%
3.68%
3.42%
3.85%
2.74%
3.51%
-0.29%
2.63%
-0.28%
1.82%
-0.52%
-0.71%

1.92%
4.04%
3.94%
4.45%
3.38%
4.99%
1.41%
5.02%
2.74%
4.91%
3.04%
2.86%

1.76%
3.86%
3.69%
4.16%
3.07%
4.27%
0.58%
3.86%
1.27%
3.40%
1.30%
1.12%

0.17%
0.18%
0.26%
0.30%
0.32%
0.74%
0.88%
1.20%
1.55%
1.56%
1.83%
1.84%

43

Figure 1: Lights at night, 2008

Robinson projection

1992

2008

Digital Number
High : 63
Low : 0
0 25 50

100 km

Figure 2: Long term growth: Korean peninsula

Universal Transverse Mercator projection

1997

Digital Number
High : 63
Low : 0

Universal Transverse Mercator projection

1998

0

50

100

200 km

Changes

< -4

-3 - 3

>4

Figure 3: Asian financial crisis: Java, Indonesia

1993

1994

Digital Number

High : 63
0 5 10 20 km

Low : 0

Universal Transverse Mercator projection

1996

Figure 4: Genocide event: Rwanda

Figure 5: Discovery of sapphire and ruby deposits in Madagascar

1998

Ihosy

Ilakaka

1999

Universal Tranverse Mercator projection

Digital number
0

3

2

more than 4

1

2003

0

5

10

20 km

4

Firaisana boundaries

ln(GDP) net of country and year fixed effects
−1
−.5
0
.5

Figure 6a. GDP versus lights: overall panel

−1
bandwidth = .8

−.5
0
.5
ln(lights/area) net of country and year fixed effects

1

ln(GDP) net of country and year fixed effects
−.4
0
.4

Figure 6b. GDP versus lights: restricted interval panel

−.4

−.2
0
.2
ln(lights/area) net of country and year fixed effects

notes: 1. bandwidth = .8; 2. excludes 5% of country−years to the left and right

.4

ln(GDP 05−06) − ln(GDP 92−93)
0
.4
.8
1.2

Figure 6c. GDP versus lights: long differences
MMR

CHN

KHM
ARM
IRL
UGA

IMN

VNM

MOZ

AGO
TCD
LAO

IND

LBR
BTN

ARE
EST

BWA
SDN
BFA MYSETH CPV
TKM
KOR DOM
AZEBGD
MLI
YEM
JOR
CHL
LKA
TZA MUS
BLZ
CRI
PER
GHA
POL
TUN
LUX
BEN
KIR
SVK
EGY
MNG
PAN NPL
NAM
OMN
PHL
ATG
KNA
ISR
PAK
TUR
NGA
IRN SVN SEN
ISL WSM
THA
NIC
BOL
SYR
CYP GIN
GMB
HRV
AUS
IDN MRT MAR LBN
GTMHND
TGO
HUN
LTU
FIN
NZL VCT
ERI
BMU
NER
BLR
SLV
SWZ
GRC
CAN
LSO
ESP
GEO
ZAF
CMR
DZA
GRD
USA MLT
NOR
KAZ UZB
ECU
RWA
COL
KEN
BHS
SWE
GBR SLE
CZE
MWI
MEX BRA LCA
SUR
ROU
NLD
COG
SAUMDG GUY
FJI
SYC
ARG
DNK ZMB
PRT
VUT
BGR
AUT
PLW
BEL
FRA
BRN
TON
PRY
URY
CIV
VEN
COM
GAB
CAF
DMA
RUS
ITA CHE
PNG
DEU
JAM
MKD
SLBJPN
TTO
LVA

ALB

KGZ
DJI
TJK

MHL

HTI
FSM

GNB

BDI
MDA

ZWE

UKR

−.8
bandwidth = .8

COD

−.4

0
.4
.8
1.2
ln(lights05−06) − ln(lights92−93)

1.6

2

6%

LBR

VNM

CIV

COG

ERI
MLI

4%

LBN
MRT
SWZ
GMB
IRNOMN
GHA
BEN
MDG
NER
CMR
DZA
SLE

COD
BDI
HTI

BFA
SDN

AGO

2%

RWA
CAF

NGA

GNB

0%

predicted annualized % change in GDP from lights

8%

Figure 7: Growth in fitted lights vs. WDI for WBDQ<3.5 countries 1992−2006

lambda=.484, phi=.594

0%

identity
annualized iso−composite growth lines

2%
4%
6%
8%
annualized % change in GDP, WDI LCU

MMR

