NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF OEF/OIF DEPLOYMENT INTENSITY ON THE RATE OF POSTTRAUMATIC
STRESS DISORDER AMONG ACTIVE DUTY POPULATION
Yu-Chu Shen
Jeremy Arkes
Boon Wah Kwan
Lai Yee Tan
Thomas V. Williams
Working Paper 15203
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15203

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2009

Shen and Arkes thank GSBPP DFR program and N1 MPT&E for financial support. From the Center
for Healthcare Management Studies, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense, Health Affairs (OASD
(HA)), TRICARE Management Activity (TMA), Falls Church, VA. We thank Dennis Mar, Wendy
Funk and the staff at DMDC and TMA for assisting with data extraction. The opinions or assertions
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the view of the United States Department
of Defense and any of the affiliated institutions. This work received IRB approvals from NPS, DMDC,
TMA, and the Office of Navy Medicine. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Yu-Chu Shen, Jeremy Arkes, Boon Wah Kwan, Lai Yee Tan, and Thomas V. Williams.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of OEF/OIF Deployment Intensity on the Rate of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Among Active Duty Population
Yu-Chu Shen, Jeremy Arkes, Boon Wah Kwan, Lai Yee Tan, and Thomas V. Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 15203
July 2009
JEL No. I1
ABSTRACT
This study estimates the effect of deployment location and length on the risk of developing PTSD,
relative to what it would be from the normal military operations. We use a random sample of activity-duty
enlisted personnel serving between 2001 and 2006. We identify PTSD cases from TRICARE medical
records and link deployment information from Contingent Tracking System. Comparing to those in
other duties around the world, deployment to Iraq/Afghanistan increases the odds of developing PTSD
substantially, with the largest effect observed for the Navy (OR=9.06, p<0.01) and the smallest effect
for the Air Force (OR=1.25, p<0.01). A deployment longer than 180 days increases the odds of PTSD
by 1.11 times to 2.84 times, depending on the service, compared to a tour under 120 days. For Army
and Navy, a deployment to Iraq/Afghanistan further exacerbates the adverse effect of tour length. Our
research identifies the extent of PTSD across services and quantifies the risks associated with OEF/OIF
deployment intensity. Further research is needed for effective monitoring and preventive measures
of PTSD on the active duty population.

Yu-Chu Shen
Graduate School of Business and Public Policy
Naval Postgraduate School
555 Dyer Road
Monterey, CA 93943
and NBER
yshen@nps.edu
Jeremy Arkes
Graduate School of Business and Public Policy
Naval Postgraduate School
555 Dyer St
Monterey, CA 93943
jaarkes@nps.edu
Boon Wah Kwan
Naval Postgraduate School
555 Dyer Road, Monterey CA 93943
bw_kwan@yahoo.com

Lai Yee Tan
Naval Postgraduate School
555 Dyer Road, Monterey CA 93943
irenetanly@hotmail.com
Thomas V. Williams
TRICARE
5111 Leesburg Pike, Suite 810
Falls Church, VA 22041-3238
thomas.williams@tma.osd.mil

Introduction
Recent research suggests that the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, also known as Operation
Enduring Freedom (OEF) and Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF), pose substantial mental health
challenges to U.S. military service members and mental health systems (Hoge, Castro et al. 2004;
Hoge, Auchterlonie et al. 2006; Erbes, Westermeyer et al. 2007; Rosenheck and Fontana 2007; Seal,
Bertenthal et al. 2007; Tanielian and Jaycox 2008). Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), in
particular, has risen steadily, with heavy combat typically being cited as a leading cause of PTSD
(Helzer, Robins et al. 1987; CDC 1988; The Iowa Persian Gulf Study Group 1997; Prigerson,
Maciejewski et al. 2002; Kang, Natelson et al. 2003; Hoge, Castro et al. 2004). A recent
comprehensive review of the literature by Rand found a wide range of PTSD rates among those
serving in Iraq and Afghanistan, with estimates ranging from 4% to 45%, depending on the samples
and how PTSD was measured (Tanielian and Jaycox 2008). Many studies used anonymous survey
responses from convenience samples of Army soldiers who were deployed in either Iraq or
Afghanistan from 2003 to 2005 (Helzer, Robins et al. 1987; Hoge, Castro et al. 2004; Grieger, Cozza
et al. 2006; Vasterling, Proctor et al. 2006; Erbes, Westermeyer et al. 2007). Some analyzed the
mental health issues using post-deployment health assessment surveys collected by the Mental
Health Advisory Team (MHAT), which measured PTSD by primary-care PTSD screening questions
(U.S. Army 2003; U.S. Army 2005; Hoge, Auchterlonie et al. 2006; U.S. Army 2006; U.S. Army 2006;
Shen, Arkes et al. 2009), while a few used actual medical records from the VA health care system.
With the Global War on Terrorism (GWOT) going into its 8th year and with a planned surge
of forces in Afghanistan, it is critical to evaluate the prevalence of PTSD among the active duty
population and how the deployment intensity in OEF/OIF affect the mental health readiness of the
Armed Forces. While previous studies have provided important information on PTSD in the
current operations, they have several shortcomings. First, the previous studies have been descriptive

3

analyses except for a study analyzing UK solders and one focusing on the US Navy (Rona, Fear et al.
2007; Shen, Arkes et al. 2009). Second, most studies focus on just the Army and Marine Corps. Yet
the rates of PTSD among those deployed in Iraq and Afghanistan could be different across services
because of different types of assignments, and such differences are important to identify in
evaluating total force readiness. Third, most studies used convenience samples on those returning
from OEF/OIF, without a comparable control group of personnel who were not deployed under
OEF/OIF. Thus, while these studies indicate the frequency of PTSD for those deployed under
OEF/OIF, they cannot speak to the effect of being deployed under OEF/OIF relative to their risk
of PTSD under other military operations. Fourth, studies using surveys often had to rely on
screening questions (such as PCL-DSM IV), which are typically short and simple to administer but
likely miss some cases of PTSD and misdiagnose PTSD in other cases (Kimerling, Ouimette et al.
2006; Ramchand, Karney et al. 2008). Finally, previous studies focus on the effect of the
deployment location (i.e, Iraq or Afghanistan) with little attention paid to the duration of
deployment or the cumulative effect of multiple deployments on the PTSD occurrence. However,
deployment duration and frequency are equally important deployment dimensions to consider when
designing the optimal deployment strategy.
In this study, we address the shortcomings of the previous literature with a random sample
based on all active duty enlisted personnel serving between 2001 and 2006. We merge data on PTSD
diagnoses from the TRICARE medical records and deployment records from the Contingency
Tracking System. We then examine the effects of OEF/OIF deployment intensity for enlisted
personnel separately for the four services (Army, Marines, Navy, and Air Force). We analyze two
dimensions of deployment intensity: location and duration. Specifically, we address the following
research questions:
1. What are the rates of PTSD among all active duty enlisted personnel and how do the rates

4

differ by service and deployment location?
2. How do deployment location and length of deployment affect the probability of being
diagnosed with PTSD?
3. Is there an interactive effect between a deployment’s length and location? In particular, do
longer deployments to Iraq or Afghanistan exacerbate the risk of PTSD?

Data and Methods
Methods Overview. Our sample is based on all individuals who were active duty enlisted
service members of the US Armed Forces between 2001 and 2006. The outcome of interest is
whether the individual was diagnosed with PTSD within the TRICARE system. We first use a
descriptive analysis to compare the rate of PTSD among different branches of the Armed Services
by deployment location. We then estimate two multivariate models using logistic regressions to
assess the effect of deployment intensity (location, duration) under OEF/OIF on the rate of PTSD.
These regression models address the policy question of how much an Iraq/Afghanistan (or other
OEF/OIF) deployment increases the risk of developing PTSD relative to the risk military personnel
would have had if they had not been deployed to OEF/OIF missions. We estimate our models
separately for each service (Army, Air Force, Marines, and Navy). We provide more details on the
model specifications below.
Data and Sample. We use a random sample of activity-duty enlisted personnel serving
between 2001 and 2006 because the GWOT started in 2001 and 2006 is the year for which the latest
data are available. We combine several data sources from TRICARE and the Defense Manpower
Data Center (DMDC) to form the basis of our analysis. First, we identify the active duty personnel
population and obtain demographic and service information (such as age, gender, race, rank) from

5

the Defense Enrollment Eligibility Reporting System (DEERS). Second, depending on where
PTSD was diagnosed (military treatment facility or TRICARE civilian provider) and whether it was
identified from inpatient or outpatient claims, we identify the date that PTSD was first diagnosed
and related health information from the following sources: the Standard Inpatient Data Record, the
Standard Ambulatory Data Record, and the TRICARE Encounter Data. Third, we obtain
OEF/OIF deployment characteristics and military occupational specialty (MOS) codes between
2001 and 2006 from the Contingency Tracking System (CTS). The CTS Deployment Files were used
to track personnel involved in contingency operations and report all personnel who have been
deployed in support of the Global War on Terror (GWOT) since September 11, 2001. CTS data
contain information on deployment location, start and end dates of the deployment. A person
would have multiple sets of deployment records in CTS if he were deployed multiple times during
the study period. The study received expedited IRB approval.
Each observation in our data represents unique enlisted personnel. Based on the TRICARE
medical records and monthly DEERS records, we first identify all personnel who were diagnosed
with PTSD and take their demographic and rank information from DEERS the month they were
diagnosed. Next, for the remaining active duty population (those without PTSD), we randomly
select a month from each individual’s monthly DEERS records for their demographic and rank
information. We then draw a 25 percent random sample of this population from each service
(regardless of whether they used TRICARE services). At the end, our data consist of 678,227
unique enlisted personnel from all services. This represents a 25% random sample of the active
population without PTSD and 100% of the PTSD population. We weight all of our comparisons
and empirical models to reflect this sampling scheme so our estimated numbers are representative of
all personnel from each service. For all personnel in our sample, we extract complete deployment
information from CTS.

6

Outcome measures. The dependent variable in our analysis is whether an enlisted person
was diagnosed with PTSD anytime between 2001 and 2006 (i.e., if the ICD-9 code of the principal
diagnosis is 309.81)(American Psychiatric Association 2000).
Statistical Models. After an initial set of descriptive analyses for raw comparisons of PTSD
rates for different types of deployments across services, we conduct regression models in order to
control for relevant factors. Because our outcome is binary, we estimate logistic regression models.
In the primary models, we focus on deployment characteristics of the last deployment. For
example, if a person was included in the analytical sample on March 2004 and his/her most recent
deployment prior to this date was July 2003, we would use deployment information from the July
2003 deployment in this set of models. Our key variables of interest in Model 1 are the deployment
location and duration (details below). In Model 2, we estimate an interaction effect between
deployment duration and deployment location (in particular, Iraq and Afghanistan) to test whether
longer deployments as a result of OIF and OEF magnifies the effect of such a deployment on the
probability of being diagnosed with PTSD.
As a sensitivity analysis on the location effect, we also estimate a model based on all past
deployments’ locations, since PTSD is not necessarily triggered by the last deployment and often
emerges after a long delay. Specifically, if a person was included in the sample on March 2004, we
identify the locations for all deployments between 2001 and March 2004. The key variable of
interest in this sensitivity model is whether a person was ever deployed to a given location (details
below). In all models, we control for service and demographic characteristics as explained below.

7

Explanatory variables. There are three categories of variables that we include in the
models: deployment characteristics, service characteristics, and demographic information. Summary
statistics of these measures are presented in Table 1. We describe here the different types of
variables.
We classify three categories of deployment locations: not deployed under OEF or OIF (the
reference group), deployed to Iraq/Afghanistan, deployed on other OEF/OIF missions (such as
Kuwait, Quatar, Saudi Arabia, Turkey).1 For the duration of the last deployment, we classify the
deployment length into three categories: short if the length of the last deployment is less than 120
days (the reference group), medium if the length of last deployment is between 120 and 180 days,
and long if the duration is greater than 180 days. In the sensitivity analysis, we define four mutually
exclusive categories of all past deployment location indicators: ever deployed to Iraq or Afghanistan
(but not other locations), ever deployed on other OEF/OIF missions, ever deployed to
Iraq/Afghanistan as well as other OEF/OIF missions, and never deployed on any OEF/OIF
mission (the reference group).
For service characteristics, we include rank and military occupation specialty (MOS)
categories. Studies have shown that soldiers in combat divisions and those in medical service tend to
have different rates of PTSD than non-combat specialties (Martin 2007; Tanielian and Jaycox 2008).
We categorize military occupational specialty codes into the following categories: Combat arms
(reference group), combat support, combat service support, aviation, medical, and other MOS.2
To control for demographic characteristics, we include the following demographic
1 We do not define more detailed location categories because sample size would be too small for the finer
categorization.
2 The four service branches use different sets of military occupation codes. The Army and Marine Corps use a
Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) code, while a system of Air Force Specialty Codes (AFSC) is used in the Air
Force. The Navy uses a system of naval ratings and designators along with the Naval Enlisted Classification (NEC)
system. For some service branches, some of the categories are merged due to small numbers of observations in the
individual categories and some categories are missing (for example, Marines and Air Force do not have medical MOS)

8

information in the models: gender, race (with White as the reference group, African-American,
Hispanic, Asian, and other races), marital status (single or married), and age. Lastly, we include year
indicators to control for possible macro trends in PTSD rate in the general active duty population.

Results
Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics of the sample by service branches. We focus our
discussion on the deployment characteristics. The majority of the active duty personnel were not
deployed under OEF/OIF: the percentages range from 61.5% in Air Force to 78% in Army.
However, while not shown, this rate did vary by year as increasing numbers of Army and Marine
Corps personnel were deployed under OEF/OIF in later years. Not surprisingly, the service with
the highest share of its enlisted members sent to Iraq/Afghanistan is the Army (11.3%), follow by
the Marines (8.6%). The Navy and Air Force appear to serve a more supporting role, with 35% and
33%, respectively, of their enlisted population being sent on OEF/OIF missions other than
Iraq/Afghanistan. Among those deployed, large proportions of Army and Marine Corps personnel
had been deployed more than 180 days in their most recent deployment prior to being included in
the sample (58% and 48%, respectively), whereas 65% of deployed Air Force personnel had a tour
length under 120 days. The next set of summary statistics report the proportions of those ever
deployed under OEF/OIF who were ever deployed to a given location since September 11, 2001.
We categorize the past deployment location indicators into three mutually exclusive categories to
allow for easier comparison (i.e., the three rows add up to 100%). With the Army, for example, 31%
of solders ever deployed under OEF/OIF were sent to Iraq/Afghanistan (but not on other
OEF/OIF missions), 45% were sent on other OEF/OIF missions, and the remaining 24% have
been to Iraq/Afghanistan as well as other OEF/OIF missions. The rest of Table 1 provides
summary statistics of service and demographic characteristics, which are representative of the US

9

Armed Forces active duty population.
Table 2 reports the proportion of the active duty population who were diagnosed with
PTSD for each service. The first row presents the PTSD percentage for the entire active duty
population, regardless of their deployment status, and ranges from 0. 6% for Air Force to 1.4% for
Army. The next set reports the PTSD rate by the last deployment location. People deployed to
Iraq/Afghanistan had much higher rates of being diagnosed with PTSD compared to those not
deployed under OEF or OIF (4.4% vs. 0.6% for the Army, 3.5% vs. 0.5% for the Marines, 6.5% vs.
0.5% for the Navy, and 1.3% vs. 0.6% for the Air Force; p<0.01 for statistical tests of all of these
differences). Army and Marine Corps personnel deployed to other OEF/OIF missions also have
higher rates of PTSD compared to those not deployed under OEF/OIF (3.8% for Army, 2.3% for
Marines), but the opposite is the case for the Navy and Air Force. Among those deployed under
OEF/OIF, the PTSD rate increases as the tour length increases. With the Army, for example, the
proportion of enlisted personnel who were later diagnosed with PTSD is 2.9% among those with a
short tour length (1-120 days), and the rate increases to 3. 5% in the medium length category (120180 days) and to 4.8% for long tours (>180 days). We observe similar, but not as stark, patterns for
the other three services.
The last set of statistics in Table 2 reports the PTSD rate by whether a person was ever
deployed to a given location. With the Army, the proportion of people ever deployed to
Iraq/Afghanistan (but not other OEF/OIF missions) who were diagnosed with PTSD is 3.5%. The
number is slightly lower for those who were deployed elsewhere except for Iraq/Afghanistan
(3.4%). The rate of PTSD is even higher (6.2%) for those who have been to Iraq/Afghanistan, as
well as other OEF/OIF missions. We observe similar pattern for the other three branches.
The raw proportions of personnel being diagnosed with PTSD shown in Table 2 provide a
good comparison across services of the prevalence of PTSD based on types of deployments. We

10

next report, in Table 3, the logistic regression results that compare, across services, the effect of the
OEF/OIF deployment on the risk of developing PTSD relative to the risk enlisted personnel would
have had in the more typical military missions around the world. We present the results in terms of
odds ratios and focus only on the effect of deployment characteristics in Table 3 (the complete
regression results for Model 1 are included in the Appendix). The top panel of Table 3 reports the
main effect of the last deployment’s location and duration. With the Army, the first row indicates
that the odds of being diagnosed with PTSD is 3.96 times higher among those deployed to
Iraq/Afghanistan compared to those not deployed under OEF/OIF (p<0.01). Being deployed on
other OEF/OIF missions also increases the odds of PTSD by the same magnitude (OR=3.97,
p<0.01).
The effects of being deployed to Iraq/Afghanistan and on other OEF/OIF missions are
comparable for the Marines, as it increases the odds of developing PTSD by 4.57 and 3.51 times
(p<0.01 for both), respectively. For the Navy, being deployed to Iraq/Afghanistan also carries a
very high risk of developing PTSD (OR=9.06, p<0.01) compared to those not deployed under
OEF/OIF. Iraq/Afghanistan missions appear to have the smallest impact for Air Force, as the
odds of developing PTSD among those deployed to Iraq/Afghanistan is only 1.25 times higher than
those not deployed (p<0.05). For the Navy and Air Force, the risk of being deployed on other
OEF/OIF missions is actually lower than for those not deployed on an OEF/OIF mission
(OR=0.54 and 0.44, respectively, both p<0.01).
Model 1 also shows that the tour length matters. Compared to those who have a short tour
length (<120 days), Army soldiers whose last deployment was between 120-180 days are 1.18 times
more likely to get PTSD (p<0.01) and those whose last deployment was more than 180 days have an
odds ratio of 1.62 (p<0.01). Similar adverse effects of longer tours are observed for the Navy and
Air Force. For the Marine Corps, the duration effect only shows up if they have been deployed

11

more than 180 days (OR=1.11, p<0.10). It is worth noting that the adverse effects of deployment
location and length are present even after we control for MOS, and not surprisingly, those in
combat arms specialty (the reference group) have the highest odds of developing PTSD (Appendix).
For Model 2, presented in the lower panel of Table 3, we add an interaction effect between
the Iraq/Afghanistan location and the tour duration variables to test whether long tour exacerbate
the effects of deployments to these two countries. For the Army, the 1.53 odds ratio on the long
duration variable itself now indicates that those whose OEF/OIF deployment to locations other
than Iraq/Afghanistan lasted more than 180 days are 1.53 times more likely to be diagnosed with
PTSD than those whose last tour to those locations were under 120 days. The odds ratio on the
Iraq/Afghanistan indicator now essentially compares the rate of PTSD between those deployed to
Iraq/Afghanistan under 120 days and those not deployed to OEF/OIF missions. Even with a short
tour, deployment to Iraq still results in an odds ratio of 3.70 (p<0.01). The same applies to the
Marine Corps and Navy, but the Air Force still has a smaller effect of an Iraq/Afghanistan
deployment. The key variables are the last two rows. Among soldiers whose last deployment was to
Iraq/Afghanistan, those that lasted more than 180 days had a 1.15 times higher risk of developing
PTSD (p<0.10) compared to those with a short (less than 120-day) deployment, which is in addition
to the main Iraq/Afghanistan effect of 3.96). For the Army, a medium-length deployment had no
additional effect on the risk of developing PTSD. We observe additive effects for the Navy (OR
for the interactive terms on medium and long duration are 2.50 and 2.47, respectively, p<0.01), but
not for Marines or Air Force.
As a sensitivity analysis, we estimate Model 3, which captures whether the individual was
ever deployed to a given location. The results in Table 4 are similar to Model 1 (where we only
capture the location of last deployment). The odds ratio of developing PTSD for those deployed to
Iraq/Afghanistan (but not other OEF/OIF locations) compared to those never deployed under

12

OEF/OIF ranges from 1.85 times for the Air Force to 10.34 times for the Navy (p<0.01 for all
services). The highest odds belong to those who were deployed to Iraq/Afghanistan as well as other
OEF/OIF locations (essentially, deployed at least twice): the odds ratio of developing PTSD ranges
from 1.92 for the Air Force to 9.65 for the Navy (p<0.01 for all services) compared to those never
sent on an OEF/OIF missions.
In another sensitivity analysis, we address the empirical issue that the year variables could be
highly correlated with the -OEF/OIF missions, thus causing multicollinearity and perhaps leading to
an underestimation of the deployment effect on the risk of developing PTSD. Thus we estimated
models that excluded the year dummies, and the estimated effects of an Iraq/Afghanistan
deployment on the risk of developing PTSD were about 10-15 percent higher than our main
models.

Comments
In this study, we link deployment information and TRICARE health records to examine the
relationship between deployment intensity and PTSD. We find that the percentage of PTSD
diagnoses among the active duty population varies by service, but are all below one percent among
those not deployed on OEF/OIF missions. But, those deployed to Iraq/Afghanistan have a much
higher probability of developing PTSD, with the percentages ranging from 1.3% for the Air Force
to 6.5% for the Navy. Those deployed on other OEF/OIF missions, on the other hand, have
higher PTSD rates relative to those not deployed on such missions only for the Army and Marines.
While those comparisons describe the actual rates of PTSD across the services for different
types of deployments, our regression models further explore how the deployment location and
duration affect the risk of developing PTSD, relative to what it would have been in other typical
world-wide missions of the U.S. military. A deployment to Iraq/Afghanistan increases the odds of

13

developing PTSD substantially, with the largest effect observed for the Navy (OR=9.06) and the
smallest effect for the Air Force (OR=1.25). The tour length also matters, as a deployment lasting
longer than 180 days increases the odds of PTSD by 1.11 times to 2.84 times, depending on the
service, compared to a short tour. Furthermore, for the Army and Navy, a deployment to
Iraq/Afghanistan further exacerbates the adverse effect of tour length. The sizable adverse effect of
deployment location persists when we considered all past deployments, not just the previous
deployment.
Our overall rates of PTSD are much lower than previously reported based on surveys or on
VA data (Ramchand, Karney et al. 2008). There are several important factors that contribute to the
differences. First, our sample is active duty personnel who are still deemed fit to serve in the
military, whereas people who show up in the VA health care system are those who had left the
military because they have serious physical or mental health problems that prevent them from
continuing to serve. Second, compared to PTSD rates reported in anonymous surveys, which lack
clinical details in the screening questions, our PTSD rates are based on clinical diagnoses. The
enlisted person may be more willing to admit to PTSD symptoms, even if they were mild, on an
anonymous survey than they would to military health officials. Third, for people who have the
desire to continue serving (and thus stay within the TRICARE system), the stigma of PTSD often
prevents them from seeking care when needed since this information would then go on the service
person’s record.
It is also important to keep in mind the following limitations of this study. First, even
though we were able to include military occupational specialty categories, we do not have details on
the specific assignments. The lack of details on assignments might contribute to the lower odds
ratios we observe among Navy and Air Force personnel who were deployed to OEF/OIF locations

14

that are not in Iraq or Afghanistan.3 Second, since our intention is to look at the prevalence of
PTSD among the population of personnel who are still in service, we most likely miss severe cases
of PTSD since those would show up in the VA system unless they were first diagnosed inside the
TRICARE system.
With these caveats in mind, there are several important policy implications from our
findings. While the adverse effects of Iraq/Afghanistan deployments across all services is expected,
it might be surprising that such deployments cause the highest PTSD rates for the Navy. This might
be due to many sailors deployed to Iraq or Afghanistan being what the military calls Individual
Augmentees (IA), who are those deployed individually or in a small group to assist Army and
Marines. The IAs are subject to additional stress as they are thrust into an unfamiliar environment
away from their parent command. It may be important to train these personnel for not just the
additional physical skills but also mental health readiness for such assignments. In addition, the
adverse effect of tour length is observed across all services—and for the Air Force, longer durations
are more likely to lead to PTSD than being deployed in Afghanistan/Iraq. While a recommendation
of the optimal tour length for each branch is beyond the scope of this study, our findings do suggest
that efforts to keep OEF/OIF deployments to reasonable lengths could help reduce PTSD rates.
Given the continuing nature of the Global War on Terror, it is unavoidable that many
enlisted personnel will be subjected to multiple deployments to OEF/OIF locations. We can expect
thousands of new cases of PTSD, and it is imperative to monitor these soldiers’ mental health. The
DoD has begun to address this issue by introducing the Post-Deployment Health Reassessment
(PDHRA, DD2900) in March 2005, and mandates the completion of this re-assessment at 90-180
days after a deployment (US Department of Defense 2008). However, our data show that almost 75
3 For example, in the Navy the reference group is mostly people on routine shipboard operation (although they

might also be on their shore rotation). Personal communications with the sailors reveal that the living condition on ship
is usually horrendous, and a ground OIF assignment in places like Quatar or Kuwait might actually be better compared
to life on ship.

15

percent of the PTSD population in our sample did not get diagnosed with PTSD until 200 days after
their last deployment—the average lapse between the last deployment and the first diagnosis of
PTSD is 291 days. Further research effort should look into the extent of the effect due to repeated
deployments and explore how effective PDHRA is in identifying PTSD cases, as well as more
effective monitoring methods beyond the 180 day mandated surveys.
PTSD leads to a host of long-term family and workplace problems and is often comorbid
with other psychiatric and physical disorders. Our research identifies the extent of the PTSD
problem within the active duty population and highlights how certain enlisted personnel, based on
their deployment characteristics, are at higher risks of developing this disorder. Further research
into preventive measures and effective treatments of PTSD on the active duty population, especially
the higher risk groups, needs to remain a focus within the Department of Defense. In addition,
while PTSD remains the focus of media attention, other mental health illness such as depression and
substance abuse have higher prevalence in the active duty population, and are just as costly to the
individuals, military health system, and the society. A comprehensive analysis of other mental health
illness would help the evaluation of total force readiness.

16

Reference
American Psychiatric Association (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
DSM-IV-TR.
CDC (1988). "Health status of Vietnam veterans. I. Psychosocial characteristics. The Centers for
Disease Control Vietnam Experience Study." JAMA 259(18): 2701-7.
Erbes, C., J. Westermeyer, et al. (2007). "Post-traumatic stress disorder and service utilization in a
sample of service members from Iraq and Afghanistan." Military medicine 172(4): 359-63.
Grieger, T. A., S. J. Cozza, et al. (2006). "Posttraumatic stress disorder and depression in battleinjured soldiers." The American journal of psychiatry 163(10): 1777-83; quiz 1860.
Helzer, J. E., L. N. Robins, et al. (1987). "Post-traumatic stress disorder in the general population.
Findings of the epidemiologic catchment area survey." N Engl J Med 317(26): 1630-4.
Hoge, C. W., J. L. Auchterlonie, et al. (2006). "Mental health problems, use of mental health
services, and attrition from military service after returning from deployment to Iraq or Afghanistan."
JAMA 295(9): 1023-32.
Hoge, C. W., C. A. Castro, et al. (2004). "Combat duty in Iraq and Afghanistan, mental health
problems, and barriers to care." N Engl J Med 351(1): 13-22.
Kang, H. K., B. H. Natelson, et al. (2003). "Post-traumatic stress disorder and chronic fatigue
syndrome-like illness among Gulf War veterans: a population-based survey of 30,000 veterans." Am
J Epidemiol 157(2): 141-8.
Kimerling, R., P. Ouimette, et al. (2006). "Brief report: Utility of a short screening scale for DSM-IV
PTSD in primary care." Journal of general internal medicine 21(1): 65-7.
Martin, C. (2007). "Routine screening and referrals for PTSD after returning from Operation Iraqi
Freedom in 2005." U.S. Armed Forces Medical Surveillance Monthly Report 14(6): 2-7.
Prigerson, H. G., P. K. Maciejewski, et al. (2002). "Population attributable fractions of psychiatric
disorders and behavioral outcomes associated with combat exposure among US men." American
journal of public health 92(1): 59-63.
Ramchand, R., B. R. Karney, et al. (2008). Prevalence of PTSD, Depression, and TBI among
Returning Service members. Invisible Wounds of War: Psychological and Cognitive Injuries, Their
Consequences, and Services to Assist Recovery. T. Tanielian and L. H. Jaycox. Santa Monica, Rand
Corporation: 35-84.
Rona, R. J., N. T. Fear, et al. (2007). "Mental health consequences of overstretch in the UK armed
forces: first phase of a cohort study." BMJ 335(7620): 603.
Rosenheck, R. A. and A. F. Fontana (2007). "Recent trends In VA treatment of post-traumatic stress
disorder and other mental disorders." Health affairs (Project Hope) 26(6): 1720-7.
17

Seal, K. H., D. Bertenthal, et al. (2007). "Bringing the war back home: mental health disorders
among 103,788 US veterans returning from Iraq and Afghanistan seen at Department of Veterans
Affairs facilities." Arch Intern Med 167(5): 476-82.
Shen, Y. C., J. Arkes, et al. (2009). "The effects of deployment intensity on post-traumatic stress
disorder: 2002-2006." Military medicine 174(3): 217-23.
Tanielian, T. and L. H. Jaycox (2008). Invisible Wounds of War: Psychological and Cognitive
Injuries, Their Consequences, and Services to Assist Recovery, Rand Corporation.
The Iowa Persian Gulf Study Group (1997). "Self-reported illness and health status among Gulf War
veterans. A population-based study. The Iowa Persian Gulf Study Group." JAMA 277(3): 238-45.
U.S. Army (2003, Jan 1). "Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) Mental Health Advisory Team (MHAT)
Report." Retrieved May 11, 2009, from
http://www.armymedicine.army.mil/reports/mhat/mhat/mhat_report.pdf.
U.S. Army (2005, January 30, 2005). "Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) Mental Health Advisory Team
(MHAT-II) Report." Retrieved May 11, 2009, from
http://www.armymedicine.army.mil/reports/mhat/mhat_ii/OIF-II_REPORT.pdf.
U.S. Army (2006, May 29, 2006). "Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) Mental Health Advisory Team
(MHAT-III) Report." Retrieved May 11, 2009, from
http://www.armymedicine.army.mil/reports/mhat/mhat_iii/MHATIII_Report_29May2006Redacted.pdf.
U.S. Army (2006, November 17, 2006). "Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) Mental Health Advisory
Team (MHAT-IV) Report." Retrieved May 11, 2009, from
http://www.armymedicine.army.mil/reports/mhat/mhat_iv/MHAT_IV_Report_17NOV06.pdf.
US Department of Defense (2008, October 14, 2008). "Post-Deployment Health Reassessment
(PDHRA) Program (DD Form 2900)." Retrieved October 14, 2008, from
http://www.pdhealth.mil/dcs/pdhra.asp
Vasterling, J. J., S. P. Proctor, et al. (2006). "Neuropsychological outcomes of army personnel
following deployment to the Iraq war." JAMA 296(5): 519-29.

18

19

20

21

22

23

