                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE COMPOSITION MATTERS:
CAPITAL INFLOWS AND LIQUIDITY CRUNCH DURING A GLOBAL ECONOMIC CRISIS

                                              Hui Tong
                                            Shang-Jin Wei

                                        Working Paper 15207
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15207


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2009




We thank Anusha Chari, Stijn Claessens, Todd Gormley, David Romer, Heather Tookes and seminar
participants at the IMF, HKMA, University of Illinois at Chicago, the 16th Mitsui Finance Symposium
at University of Michigan, and the Yale/RFS Financial Crisis Conference for helpful comments, and
Elif Aksoy, John Klopfer, and Jane Yoo for excellent research assistance. The views in the paper are
those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect those of the IMF or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Hui Tong and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Composition Matters: Capital Inflows and Liquidity Crunch during a Global Economic
Crisis
Hui Tong and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 15207
July 2009
JEL No. F3,G3

                                             ABSTRACT

International capital flows, while potentially beneficial, are said to increase a country’s vulnerability
to crisis – especially if they are skewed to non-FDI types. This paper studies whether the volume and
composition of capital flows affect the degree of credit crunch faced by a country’s manufacturing
firms during the 2007-09 crisis. Using data on 3823 firms in 24 emerging countries, we find that, on
average, the decline in stock prices was more severe for firms that are intrinsically more dependent
on external finance for working capital. The volume of capital flows per se has no significant effect
on the severity of the credit crunch. However, the composition of capital flows matters a great deal:
pre-crisis exposure to non-FDI capital inflows worsens the credit crunch, while exposure to FDI alleviates
the liquidity constraint. Similar results also hold when we perform an event study surrounding the
Lehman Brothers bankruptcy.


Hui Tong
Research Department
IMF Washington DC
700 19th Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
htong@imf.org

Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu
                                              2


“The claim that disruptions to the banking system necessarily destroy the ability of non-
financial businesses to borrow from households is highly questionable.”

                                                            Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe (October 2008)

“There is no clear evidence to date that supply constraints have cut off access to credit.”
                                                  European Central Bank Monthly Bulletin (March 2009)



1. Introduction

       Financial globalization, in theory, can bring capital, knowledge, and discipline to a
country, and therefore improve efficiency and productivity. The empirical literature, however,
does not produce clear-cut results. This has generated a large body of work which has been
reviewed and summarized in several survey articles (see Stulz, 2005; Henry, 2007; Kose,
Prasad, Rogoff, and Wei, 2003 and 2009; and Rodrik and Subramanian, 2009). One channel
through which exposure to financial globalization may carry a downside is increased
vulnerability to a financial crisis. This is thought to be especially relevant if the composition
of capital inflows is skewed toward non-FDI types such as bank lending and portfolio flows
(Wei, 2001 and 2006; Levchenko and Mauro, 2007) since international bank lending, and to
some smaller extent portfolio flows, are more likely to be reversed than FDI.
       While the crises discussed in previous empirical literature tend to be those associated
with foreign currency debt or balance of payments problems, the global crisis of 2008-2009
offers a chance to check if the severity of an emerging market economy’s credit crunch is
systematically linked to the volume and the composition of its pre-crisis international capital
inflows, since the crisis may have triggered a reversal of global capital flows. Non-financial
firms may suffer from a liquidity crunch that is linked to a capital flow reversal even if they
do not borrow directly from foreign banks. The liquidity of a domestic banking sector is
partially supported by domestic banks’ borrowing from foreign banks. In principle, when
foreign lending retrenches, as it is prone to do in a global crisis, domestic banks may be
forced to cut down lending to domestic non-financial firms. This creates a channel for the
liquidity crunch experienced by non-financial firms in a country to be linked to the country’s
prior exposure to foreign lending. In comparison, if FDI flows are less cyclical, then a
liquidity crunch in a host country should be less linked to its FDI exposure. Foreign portfolio
flows are likely to be in between FDI and bank lending in terms of reversibility during a
                                                  3


crisis. These possibilities have important economic and policy implications, and should
therefore be subject to a thorough empirical testing. The 2007-2009 crisis started off in
August 2007 in the United States as a subprime mortgage crisis but quickly morphed into a
global financial crisis in which financial institutions teetered on the edge of bankruptcy in
many countries. A global economic crisis ensued in which non-financial firms around the
world appeared to spiral downward as well. Part of the reason is a contraction of demand for
the output of these firms. Another key potential contributor to the plight of the non-financial
firms was the financial crisis itself, in the form of a negative shock to the supply of external
finance available to non-financial firms. That is, non-financial firms did not do well, simply
because they found themselves being cut off from the supply of working capital, even if they
still had unfulfilled orders for their product.
        However, it is far from self-evident that non-financial firms suffered from a liquidity
crunch. As Bates, Kahle, and Stulz (2007) carefully document, non-financial firms held an
abundance of cash prior to the crisis. According to them, “the net debt ratio (debt minus cash,
divided by assets) exhibits a sharp secular decrease and most of this decrease in net debt is
explained by an increase in cash holdings. The fall in net debt is so dramatic that the average
net debt for US firms was negative in 2004. In other words, on average, firms could have
paid off their entire debt[s] with their cash holdings.” Given the apparent secular upward
trend in cash holdings, the net debt ratio was likely even further into negative territory by
mid-2007, right before the start of the full-blown economic crisis. This at least suggests the
possibility of no serious liquidity tightening outside the financial sector. Probably out of this
belief, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke called strong corporate balance sheets “a
bright spot in the darkening forecast” during his testimony to the U.S. Congress regarding
monetary policy on February 27, 2008. While there may have been increasing recognition
over time of a credit supply shock to non-financial firms, this is still by no means a consensus
view. For example, in a paper dated October 2008, Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe (2008)
rejected the idea of a sharp decline in either bank lending to non-financial firms or
commercial paper issuance by non-financial firms during the financial crisis.
        This paper has two objectives. First, we assess whether manufacturing firms in
emerging economies experienced a liquidity crunch (beyond falling demand). Second, we
examine if the pre-crisis volume and composition of capital inflows systematically affect the
severity of the credit crunch across countries. We use data on 3823 manufacturing firms in 24
                                             4


countries, and explore cross-firm as well as cross-country variations in stock price responses
to the crisis. The basic idea is this: changes in aggregate economic indicators and aggregate
stock prices potentially reflect a multitude of factors, making it difficult to identify the
severity of a credit crunch. However, if a credit crunch exists, it should be reflected in the
relative stock price movement of those manufacturing firms that rely disproportionately on
external finance for investment and working capital, versus those firms that don’t.
       We construct a measure of intrinsic dependency on external finance for long-term
investment (DEF_INV) and another measure of intrinsic dependency on external finance for
working capital (DEF_WK). The DEF_INV variable is based on Rajan and Zingales (1998)
except that we compute the measure using data for a more recent period during 1990-2006
and for each 3-digit SIC sector as opposed to their use of 2-digit sectors. Thus, we have 253
sectors as opposed to their 36 sectors. Our measure of DEF_WK is modified from Raddatz
(2006) by using data from the recent period of 1990 to 2006 as well. Our key regressors,
DEF_INV and DEF_WK, are statistically significant with a correct sign in most regressions.
       We base the choice of our control variables on the Fama-French (1992) three-factor
model, including beta, firm size, and book/market ratio, and, in some specifications, also
including a measure of momentum suggested by Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994).
These factors are often but not always statistically significant. These control variables reduce
the magnitude of DEF_INV but have little impact on DEF_WK. Our interpretation is that
during the financial crisis period, our two variables of external finance dependence
(particularly DEF_WK) may reflect aspects of firm risk that are not completely captured by
the three-factor or the four-factor model.
       We make sure that our key regressors are pre-determined with respect to the full-
fledged financial crisis. In other words, our thought experiment is this: if we classify
manufacturing firms into different baskets, based on their ex ante sensitivity to shocks to
external finance (in terms of investment and working capital needs), will this classification
help us to forecast the ex post stock price performance of these firms? If there is forecasting
ability associated with these classifiers, would it carry over beyond what can be explained by
the Fama-French three factors and the momentum factor? To preview the main results, we
find clear evidence of a worsening credit crunch in emerging market economies in 2008.
Relative to those firms whose intrinsic dependence on external finance for working capital
(DEF_WK) is at the bottom quartile, those firms whose DEF_WK is at the top quartile
                                               5


experienced a greater decline in their stock prices by at least nine percentage points during
the same period. While the average effects are statistically significant, they are not
quantitatively overwhelming when compared to the extent of the total fall in stock prices
(more than half).
       This paves the way for the central part of the paper: the role of country-level exposure
to financial globalization in the transmission of the supply-of-finance shock. We zoom in on
pre-crisis exposure to international capital flows in particular, and interact it with firms’
sensitivity to external finance. We find that the total volume of pre-crisis capital inflows is
not systematically related to the severity of credit crunch, but the composition of the capital
inflows matters in an important way. In particular, a large pre-crisis exposure to non-FDI
capital inflows tends to be associated with a more severe credit crunch during the crisis, but
pre-crisis exposure to FDI does not worsen a credit crunch. This provides fresh evidence for
the idea in the literature that different types of capital flows bring different benefits and costs
to recipient countries.
       This paper is linked to two sets of literature. The first is on credit crunches (for
example, Bernanke and Lown, 1991; Borensztein and Lee, 2002; Kroszner, Laeven, and
Klingebiel, 2007; Dell’Ariccia, Detragiache, and Rajan, 2008; Claessens, Kose, and Terrones,
2008). A small but growing literature has investigated the origin and consequences of the
current financial crisis, including work by Mian and Sufi, (2008), Reinhart and Rogoff,
(2008), Dell’Ariccia, Igan and Laeven, (2008), Greenlaw et al, (2008), Almeida et al (2009),
Ehrmann, Fratzscher and Mehl, (2009), and Eichengreen et al (2009). None of these papers
examines the role of the composition of capital flows in the transmission of a financial crisis
across countries.
       The second literature to which this paper is related studies the benefits and costs of
financial globalization. A subset of the literature investigates possibly different effects of the
composition of capital flows for economic growth or vulnerability to balance of payments
crises. The views diverge. On the one hand, some regard FDI as more stable and thus less
likely to trigger financial crisis than portfolio financial flows and bank loans (e.g. Berg,
Borenzstein, and Pattillo, 2004). On the other hand, others doubt the relative destabilizing
properties of bank lending and portfolio flows (e.g. Claessens, Dooley and Warner, 1995). In
a more recent paper, Levchenko and Mauro (2007) find mixed evidence: while FDI is less
volatile than other types of capital flows as measured by coefficient of variation, different
                                               6


types of capital flows do not seem to differ significantly in persistence, pro-cyclicality, and
responsiveness to U.S. interest rates. For emerging market economies, the current global
crisis is different from a usual balance-of-payments crisis or a home-grown financial crisis,
which were the subjects of virtually all previous papers on financial crisis. Thus, while none
of the previous papers studies if and how the extent of a liquidity crunch experienced by non-
financial firms across countries is linked to a country’s pattern of capital flows, the current
crisis provides an opportunity to do so.
       The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents our key specification, construction
of key variables, and sources of data. Section 3 discusses the main empirical results and a
slew of robustness checks and extensions. Section 4 offers concluding remarks.


2. Specification and Key Variables


2.1 Basic specification
       Our basic empirical strategy is to check whether an ex ante classification of firms by
their characteristics in terms of degree of liquidity constraint helps to predict the ex post
magnitude of their stock price changes from the start of the global crisis (taken as July 31,
2007) to Dec 31, 2008. To be precise, our specification is given by the following equation:


(1) StockReturn i,k,j = country fixed effects + β*FinancialDependence k + Controli,k,j + ε i,k,j


where i stands for company, k for sector, and j for country. Note that this is a purely cross-
sectional regression, and the key regressors are pre-determined (in 2006). We start by
assuming the same βj for all countries in order to estimate an average effect, but will allow
for variations across countries later.
       Asset pricing models provide guidance for control variables. We add the three factors
from Fama and French (1992): firm size (log assets), the ratio of the market value to book
value, and the beta (the correlation between the firm stock return and the market return). We
further control for sector-level intrinsic sensitivity to a demand contraction as in Tong and
Wei (2008). In some specifications, we also add a fourth control variable: a momentum
factor from Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishy (1994). We follow Whited and Wu (2006) and
incorporate the four factors by entering the relevant firm characteristics directly in our
                                               7


regressions rather than entering them indirectly by first going through a factor model. For
control variables, these two ways of incorporating the four factors should be equivalent.
Entering firm characteristics directly in our regressions is easier to implement, though the
interpretation of the coefficients on these factors is less straightforward.
       To see how a pattern of pre-crisis exposure to capital flows affects the extent of a
liquidity crunch, we now consider the interaction between a country’s pattern of financial
integration and its manufacturing firms’ dependence on external finance. In other words,


       (2) βj = β 1 + β 2 Pattern_of_Capital_Flow j


where the Pattern_of_Capital_Flow experienced in country j is measured by either the total
volume of pre-crisis capital inflows, or the composition of capital inflows (FDI v. non-FDI).
The slope coefficient, β2, then captures the degree to which the extent of a credit crunch
depends on patterns of capital inflows.


2.2 Key Data
Percentage change in stock price
       The stock price index is retrieved from Datastream, which adjusts for dividends and
capital actions such as stock splits and reverse splits. Table 1 presents the log difference of
stock price for manufacturing firms from the 24 emerging countries and 20 developed
economies over the period from the end of July 2007 to the end of December 2008.
(Manufacturing sectors are those with U.S. SIC 3-digit codes ranging between 200 and 399).
Among emerging economies (the focus of this paper), the log difference of stock price index
was 81.8% on average, with a standard deviation as large as 66.7%. It shows significant
variation both across sectors within a country and across countries, with Poland and Russia
experiencing the largest decline in stock prices and Mexico and Thailand the smallest.


Financial dependence indices
       We develop two measures of intrinsic dependence for external finance:
•      Intrinsic dependence on external finance for investment (DEF_INV)
                                              8


       We construct a sector-level approximation of a firm’s intrinsic demand on external
finance for capital investment following a methodology in Rajan and Zingales (1998):
                                                         capital expenditures - cash flow
(4) Dependence on external finance for investment =                                       ,
                                                               capital expenditures
where Cash flow = cash flow from operations + decreases in inventories + decreases in
receivables + increases in payables. All the numbers are based on U.S. firms, which are
judged to be least likely to suffer from financing constraints (during a normal time) relative
to firms in other countries. While the original Rajan and Zingales (1998) paper covers only
40 (mainly SIC 2-digit) sectors, we expand the coverage to around 250 SIC 3-digit sectors.
       To calculate the demand for external financing of US firms, we take the following
steps. First, every firm in the COMPUSTA USA is sorted into one of the SIC 3-digit sectors.
Second, we calculate the ratio of dependence on external finance for each firm from 1990-
2006. Third, we calculate the sector-level median from firm ratios for each SIC 3-digit sector
that contains at least 5 firms, and the median value is then chosen, to be the index of demand
for external financing in that sector. Conceptually, the Rajan-Zingales (RZ) index aims to
identify sector-level features, i.e. which sectors are naturally more dependent on external
financing for their business operation. It ignores the question of which firms within a sector
are more liquidity constrained. What the RZ index measures could be regarded as a
“technical feature” of a sector, almost like a part of the production function. To capture the
economic concept of the percentage of capital expenditure that has to be financed by external
funding, we winsorize the RZ index to range between 0 and 1.


•      Intrinsic dependence on external finance for working capital (DEF_WK)

       Besides capital need for investment, working capital is required for a firm to operate
and to satisfy both short-term debt payment and ongoing operational expenses. Firms may
use lines of credit, term loans or commercial paper to cover such needs. If a liquidity crunch
makes it difficult for a firm to raise funds for working capital distinct from external financing
for long-term investment, we would like to capture that. If there is an unexpected liquidity
crunch for working capital, those industries that depend intrinsically more on external
finance for working capital should experience a larger decline of stock prices.
                                                      9


         We construct a sector-level measure of intrinsic need for external finance for working
capital by the concept of a “cash conversion cycle”, which has also been adopted by Raddatz
(2006) and Kroszner, Laeven, Klingebiel, (2007). The cycle measures the time elapsed from
the moment a firm pays for its inputs to the moment it receives payment for the goods it sells.
We assume that dependence on external finance for working capital is due to pure
technological reasons, such as the length of time in the production process and the mode of
operation. For U.S. firms during a non-crisis period, when the supply of finance is as
abundant as in any country, the relative values of the cash conversion cycle across sectors
reflect relative true needs for external finance for working capital. Specifically,1
                                     ⎛ inventories - account payables account receivables ⎞
         Cash conversion cycle= 365* ⎜                               +                    ⎟
                                     ⎝       cost of goods sold           total sales     ⎠
         The sector-level proxy is constructed as follows: First, for each U.S. firm from 1990
to 2006, we calculate the cash conversion cycle based on annual data from Compustat USA
Industrial Annual. Then we calculate the median within each U.S. SIC 3-digit sector, and
apply it as the sector’s intrinsic dependence on external finance for working capital. The
index for the U.S. firms is then extrapolated to other countries. As in Raddatz (2006), we rely
on U.S. firm data in that the supply of liquid funds is much more elastic in the US, and hence
observed differences in relative working capital levels across industries are mainly demand
driven. The median and mean values of this index are both 71 days, and the standard
deviation is 41 days.


Control Variables and Summary Statistics
         In some subsequent analyses, we add other variables meant to control for risks, such
as the three factors from the Fama-French (1992) model, which are firm size (as measured by
the log of book assets), market asset to book asset ratio, and beta from the datasets of
Worldscope and Datastream. The firm-level market beta is based on the correlation between
monthly firm stock price and the country-level market index over the past five years. We also



1
 Inventories, accounts receivable, and accounts payable are year-end numbers, while costs of goods and sales
are aggregated over the year. Hence we follow the literature and multiply the ratio by 365, i.e., the number of
days in a year.
                                              10


include a measure of the momentum factor: that is, the stock return for the firm from January
31, 2007 to June 30, 2007.
       In our model, we use the domestic beta. Griffin (2002) finds that domestic factor
models explain much more time-series variation in returns and have lower pricing errors than
the world factor model. Moreover, the addition of foreign factors to domestic models leads to
less accurate in-sample and out-of-sample pricing. Hence, “practical applications of the
three-factor model… are best performed on a country-specific basis”.
       Another regressor is an index of a firm’s sensitivity to a contraction in consumer
demand. Tong and Wei (2008) propose such an index at the sector level based on the stock
price reactions of the firms in that sector to the September 11, 2001 terrorist attack. To
construct the index, we first compute the change in log stock price for each US firm from
September 10, 2001 to September 28, 2001. We then look at the mean of log stock price
change for each three-digit SIC sector, and use it as the sector-level demand sensitivity.
Excluding financial sector firms, we are left with 361 3-digit level sectors in total.
       This index reflects the sensitivity of a firm’s stock price to an unexpected shock in
consumer demand, and it is not contaminated by a firm’s sensitivity to liquidity shocks or
other factors. We verify that there was a big downward shift in expected aggregated demand,
as reflected by a downward adjustment in the consensus forecast of subsequent U.S. GDP
growth in the aftermath of the shock at the same time, because the Federal Reserve took
timely and decisive actions, it may be argued that the effect of the 9/11 shock on firms’
financial constraints was small or at most short lived. In the 2001 episode, both the level of
the real interest rate and the TED spread (risk premium), after initial spikes, quickly returned
to a level only moderately higher than the pre-9/11 level. This suggests that the market
regarded the Federal Reserve’s actions in the first few days following the terrorist attack as
sufficient to restore the market’s desired level of liquidity. We therefore conclude that the
cumulative stock price change from September 10 to 28, 2001, is unlikely to also reflect
firms’ reactions to a deterioration of credit availability. (In contrast, the subprime crisis news
is associated with a much greater increase in the TED spread.) Additional details can be
found in Tong and Wei (2008).
       Table 2a reports summary statistics of the key variables. Table 2b reports pair-wise
correlations among the variables.
                                              11


3. Empirical Analysis


3.1 The extent of financial constraint
       We examine percentage change in stock price (or more precisely, difference in the log
of stock price) from July 31, 2007 to December 31, 2008 for manufacturing firms in 24
emerging countries. In Column 1 of Table 3, we have the dependence on external finance for
investment (DEF_INV) as the only regressor. Here, it has a negative but statistically
insignificant coefficient. In Column 2, we use the dependence on external finance for
working capital (DEF_WK) as the only regressor. The coefficient is also negative, and
significant at the 5% level. In Columns 3, we put DEF_INV and DEF_WK together in the
regression, and find that DEF_WK maintains its earlier magnitude and sign. This is not
surprising, as the correlation between the two indexes is low (only 0.04). That is, they appear
to capture different needs for external finance.
       Columns 1 to 3 show that the fall in stock price is statistically larger for sectors with
higher dependence on external finance for working capital. What about the economic
significance?   An increase in the dependence for external finance for working capital
(DEF_WK) from the 25th to the 75th percentile (i.e., from 35 to 95 days) leads an extra
decline in the stock price to by 9.3 percentage points. This is economically important.
       The difference in the significance levels between DEF_WK and DEF_INV can be
interpreted in two ways. First, it is possible that DEF_WK is a better measure of a firm’s
intrinsic dependence on external finance than DEF_INV. Indeed, Fisman and Love (2007)
suggest that DEF_INV may capture sector-specific shocks, though it is less likely to be case
here since DEF_INV is pre-determined (measured with pre-crisis data and based on US
firms’ actual use of external finance). Second, to the extent that the two measures capture
different aspects of a firm’s dependence on external finance, the statistical results suggest
that the contraction of credit supply and widespread concern among financial institutions
about counterparty risk have inflicted disproportionate pain on those firms that are heavily
dependent on external finance for working capital.
       In Column 4, we add beta as a control variable. The coefficient on the “beta*market
return” variable is positive and significant. This is intuitive as it says that firms with a smaller
beta experience a smaller reduction in stock price during the market downturn, other things
being equal. We also add, as controls, firm size and market-to-book ratio from the Fama-
                                              12


French model, as well as the momentum factor (stock return from January 31 to June 30,
2007). The firm size variable is positive, as firms with large size may have better access to
credit in times of crisis. Firms with a high market-to-book ratio experience a greater decline
in price. Adding these factors slightly reduces the magnitude of DEF_WK, suggesting that
part of the financial constraint on DEF_WK is correlated with firm-level risk factors as
described by the Fama-French model.
       In Column 5, we control for a sector’s intrinsic sensitivity to aggregate demand. This
is significantly negative, verifying that a demand contraction is one reason for the
deteriorating performance of manufacturing firms. In Column 6, we further control for firms’
pre-crisis leverage. We find that leveraged firms suffered greater stock price declines during
this crisis, probably due to the difficulty of rolling over debt in an environment of tight
financial supply. In the last two columns, we continue to find a significant effect of
DEF_WK but not of DEF_INV.
       Since a global recession could affect a firm’s earnings direct through the international
channel, we further examine if the firm-level sensitivity to trade plays a significant role
during the current crisis.    We use a two-step procedure, to construct a measure of the
sensitivity to trade. First, a firm's annual stock return is regressed onto a constant and
the annual percentage change of its 3-digit SIC sector exports from its country over the
period from 1992 to 2006. Second, the coefficient on the exports is then used to proxy the
trade sensitivity of the firm. By adding this variable to the regressions in Table 3, the sample
size shrinks by around 4.5%. In any case, the trade-sensitivity index does not turn out to be
statistically significant (with a coefficient of 0.05 and a standard error of 1.76). When we
reclassify the negative values of the trade sensitivity as zeros to reduce potential noises in the
proxy, we obtain a negative but still insignificant coefficient (see the last column of Table
3). Importantly, adding trade sensitivity does not alter the earlier results for DEF_WK.


3.2 The role of pre-crisis exposure to international finance
       So far we have documented the existence of a worsening financial constraint, on
average, across countries. We now turn to the central part of the analysis by examining
whether the cross-country variation in the severity of a credit crunch is related to a country’s
pre-crisis exposure to international capital flows.
                                              13


       International capital flows increased rapidly from 2002, peaking in 2007. Since 2008,
however, world capital inflows have declined sharply, by 44% in absolute dollar amount
relative to the peak in 2007. As a result, emerging markets have experienced a “systemic
sudden stop”, a capital account reversal with a systemic and largely exogenous origin, as
defined by Calvo, Izquierdo, and Mejia (2008).
       Capital flow reversals could bring catastrophic economic results. For example, they
could disrupt liquidity supply available to firms and raise the foreign debt burden of firms
due to currency depreciation. In the previous literature, there was some weak evidence that
the output loss incurred by a capital flow reversal is more severe for emerging markets that
are more integrated with the global financial market (see Kose, Prasad, Rogoff and Wei,
2009). Most such evidence is based on country level data. In this paper, we combine firm-
level financial data with country-level capital flows to study whether and how a capital flow
reversal affects firms’ access to external finance.
       To measure a country’s pre-crisis exposure to foreign capital, we adopt a de facto
measure: the country’s annual inflow of capital over GDP averaged from 2002 to 2006. (We
will use an alternative measure based on actual policy restrictions in a robustness check).
Table 4 presents the pre-crisis exposure. We can see that emerging markets on average enjoy
a significant inflow of capital from 2002 to 2006, although this is still smaller than in a
typical developed country.
       We multiply the volume of capital inflow by the two indexes of financial constraints
(DEF_INV and DEF_WK), respectively, and add these interaction terms to the econometric
model. We separate emerging markets from developed countries, as the literature has
documented an asymmetric effect of financial integration on these two groups of countries
(Kose, Prasad, Rogoff, and Wei, 2009). We focus on emerging markets in our baseline case.
        Table 5 examines the volume effect of pre-crisis capital flows. The dependent
variable is stock returns from July 31, 2007 to December 31, 2008. The sample consists of
listed manufacturing companies in 24 emerging markets. In Column 1 of Table 5, we include
the interactions between the volume of capital inflows and the two measures of financial
dependence, respectively. Neither interaction term is significant. On average, the extent of
the liquidity crunch does not appear to be linked to a country’s pre-crisis volume of capital
inflows. In Column 2, we control for firm level factors; and in Column 3, we add sector fixed
effects. In these two specifications, the volume of capital flow multiplied by DEF_INV is not
                                              14


significant, while capital flow multiplied by DEF_WK is significant at the 10% level. Hence
there are some indications that the volume of pre-crisis capital flows may have affected the
degree of a liquidity crunch during the 2007-08 crisis, but the evidence is not overwhelming.
       However, it may be misleading to conclude that a country’s exposure to financial
globalization does not matter. The literature suggests that the composition of capital flows
matters in currency and balance of payments crises (Wei, 2001 and 2006, and Kim and Wei,
2002). For example, it has been pointed out that the volume of international bank lending
(scaled by a recipient country’s GDP) is generally more volatile than international direct
investment as measured either by standard deviation or coefficient of variation. The
theoretical model of Goldstein and Razin (2006) also predicts that projects financed by FDI
are less reversible because they are more difficult to be liquidated than projects financed by
other types of international capital. The 2007-2009 crisis provides a fresh opportunity to
examine the connection between a liquidity crunch and the composition capital flows. Hence
we separate capital inflows into three components: foreign direct investment (FDI), foreign
portfolio investment (FPI), and foreign loans (FL). This breakdown follows the definition in
the IMF’s International Financial Statistics dataset.
       Figure 1 traces the different components of international capital inflows from 1999 to
2009 for the 24 emerging economies in our sample, with the data collected from the IMF’s
World Economic Outlook database. While all three components rose in the years leading up
to the crisis and exhibited a reversal during the crisis, there are still visible differences among
them. In particular, both the rise and the fall are the sharpest for international bank loans. In
contrast, international direct investment (FDI) is comparatively stable. While the pre-crisis
rise of FDI was more gradual than international bank loans, the reversal by FDI started only
in 2008 and has been relatively mild. Does this translate into differential capital reversal at
the country level? Figure 2 plots the reversal of total capital inflows from 2007 to 2009 at the
country level against the initial share of FDI in total capital inflows (in 2007). Indeed, a
higher pre-crisis FDI share in capital inflow is associated with a smaller magnitude of capital
reversal during the crisis. Because the number of countries is small, the slope coefficient
(2.64) is statistically significant at the 15% level. Of course, this is only suggestive evidence
that the composition of capital inflows may matter for a country’s fortune during a crisis.
       We now examine formally whether the degree of financial constraint during the 2007-
09 crisis is related to the components of pre-crisis capital flows.          Each component is
                                             15


multiplied by our two financial dependence indicators for long-term investment (DEF_INV)
and short-term working capital (DEF_WK), respectively. The results are in Table 6. In
Column 1, the multiplication of DEF_INV with FPI is significantly negative. That is, firms
with needs for external finance for long-term investment suffer more from a liquidity crunch
in countries with a large exposure to FPI. Meanwhile, foreign loans generate a negative
coefficient and FDI generates a positive coefficient, although statistically insignificant in
both cases. In Column 2, we add DEF_WK and the interaction terms. We find similar sign
patterns. While FDI has a positive coefficient that is significant at the 5% level, both FPI and
foreign loans have negative coefficients. These are significant at the 1% level. Moreover, the
foreign loans variable generates a coefficient more than twice that on FPI, consistent with the
story that international loans are reversed (not renewed) more quickly in a crisis, which
triggers domestic banks to cut down their loans to firms even for working capital needs. In
addition, even though the interaction term between FDI and DEF_WK is significantly
positive, if we multiply each flow component by its coefficient in Column 2, and sum them
up together with the coefficient on DEF_WK itself (i.e., –0.153), we would still back out the
earlier results in Column 2 of Table 3 that a higher DEF_WK is on average associated a
greater decline in stock prices.
       In Column 3 of Table 6, we add sector fixed effects to control for potentially omitted
sector-level variables that are correlated with financial dependence indexes. This drops
financial dependence indices and the demand sensitivity index from the regression as they
are part of the sector specific fixed effects. But the interaction terms between financial
dependence and capital flow components are preserved. This addition generally shows a
sharpened asymmetric impact of different capital flow components on the severity of a
financial shock.
       In Column 4, we add firm-level controls and find similar results. Besides the three
Fama-French factors, other firm-level factors may affect the stock price movement. For
example, firms with a higher pre-crisis leverage ratio may have more difficulty in rolling
over their debt during a crisis. In addition, a higher leverage ratio may by itself trigger a
larger decline in stock price for a given demand shock. Hence we include the leverage ratio
as a control variable in Column 5. It turns out that the coefficient on the leverage ratio is
significantly negative, confirming that a higher leverage ratio by itself is associated with a
larger decline in stock prices. When we interact it with capital flow components in Column 6,
                                                  16


the interaction term with FDI has a positive coefficient, and those with foreign portfolio and
foreign bank loans are negative. Interestingly, it does not affect the results for our financial
constraint indicators (DEF_INV and DEF_WK).
          It is important to note that, for capital flows to affect a liquidity crunch, it is not
necessary for manufacturing firms to borrow directly from international banks or to raise
funds directly from the international capital market. In a study of the effect of capital controls
on liquidity constraints in Chile, Forbes (2007) notes that borrowing by domestic banks from
international banks and capital markets is enough to forge a connection between liquidity
constraints on domestic manufacturing firms and a country’s exposure to international capital
flows. In particular, firm-level financial constraints could be affected by the global financial
market, “whether the small firms received capital inflows directly, or whether they borrowed
from banks (which experienced a lengthening of their maturities and attempted to match the
maturities of their assets and liabilities).” In Figure 3, we plot the extent of the decline in
banking stock prices in a country during the crisis against the country’s pre-crisis volume of
borrowing from international banks. The two are clearly related. Banks fare less well during
the crisis in a country that relied relatively more on international bank loans before the crisis.
Korea also offers another demonstration of an indirect but significant linkage between
domestic firms and international financial markets. Before the crisis, Korean banks had
developed a reliance on wholesale financing from the international capital market. Once the
crisis hit, they suffered significantly when sources of foreign financing dried out. This
induced them to cut down loans to domestic firms. According to an HSBC report on Sep 09,
2008: “Korean banks' high reliance on wholesale funding is transmitting higher funding costs
from global credit markets into the leveraged Korean economy.”2
          The effect of pre-crisis exposure to FDI on the financial constraint is worth noting. In
normal times, having an internal capital market is considered a strength of multinational
firms. This is shown by Aguiar and Gopinath (2005) and Desai, Foley and Forbes (2008).
The relatively strong financial position by multinational firms can be used by these firms to
alleviate financial constraint in the foreign subsidiaries that they invest in. In a time of
financial crisis, this is more of an open question since multinational firms could be in
2
    Mahendran, Devendran, (2008), “Korean banks: Increasing costs to the economy”, HSBC Report (September
9, 2008). http://www.rgemonitor.com/457?cluster_id=2263
                                              17


financial difficulties themselves. Indeed, the news about the financial difficulties faced by the
GM and Chrysler points to this possibility. On the other hand, since many manufacturing
firms in the U.S. had a high level of cash reserves just before the crisis (according to Bates,
Kahle, and Stulz, 2007), those firms that engage in FDI, which tend to be larger than average,
may still be in a better position to weather a financial shock than other firms, especially than
firms in developing countries. The evidence in the current paper suggests that the internal
capital market of multinational firms may very well be tapped in places where foreign
subsidiaries experience financial difficulties and could not obtain financing from the host
country financial system.
       The estimated effect of pre-crisis exposure to foreign portfolio inflows on the
financial constraint is also sensible. The withdrawal of international portfolio capital makes it
more costly for firms to roll over their debt. For firms that wish to use seasonal stock
offerings to raise new capital, the cost of capital also increases when less international capital
is available to support the market. In either case, when international portfolio flows retreat,
the extent of financial constraint experienced by firms in the recipient countries tightens.


3.3 Robustness tests and extensions
       We have included country fixed effects to control for the impacts of country-level
variables on average stock prices. We now examine whether some other country level
variables, besides capital flows, may also affect stock prices through the channel of firm
financial dependence. One prominent suspect is the degree of domestic financial
development (see Prasad, Rajan, and Subramanian, 2007). As a robustness check, we interact
the country’s level of domestic financial development with the sector’s finance dependence.
We measure domestic financial development by the ratio of private credit over GDP at the
end of 2006. (The correlation between financial development and the average capital inflow
is 0.54 in our sample of emerging economies.) The interaction between a country’s domestic
financial development and sector-level financial dependence is not significant for either
DEF_INV or DEF_WK (see Column 1 of Table 7). Moreover, adding domestic financial
development does not alter the results for capital flows. In Column 2 of Table 7, we
experiment with a second proxy of domestic financial development: the sum of private credit
and stock market capitalization over DP at the end of 2006. Again, this does not change our
key results regarding the role of capital flows.
                                             18


       In all regressions, we measure pre-crisis capital inflows over the period 2002-2006.
As robustness checks, we test two variations of this measure. First, we extend the pre-crisis
window to include 2007. In this case, the results become stronger (Column 3 of Table 7). The
multiplication of DEF_INV with FDI is positive and significant at the 1%, with a larger
magnitude than the counterpart in Table 6. FPI is still significantly negative at the 1% level,
while foreign loan moves from insignificantly negative in Table 6 to significantly negative at
the 5% level. Hence, by using a slightly longer window, the contrast between FDI and non-
FDI flows on financial constraints becomes more pronounced.


3.4 A de jure measure of exposure to financial globalization
       So far, we measure exposure to financial globalization by a country’s de facto, or
realized, capital flows. The realized volume of capital flows may not reflect government
policies. As an extension, we use a de jure measure based on a country’s actual policies as
recorded in the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions
(AREAER). A country’s policies on cross-border capital flows are classified by the IMF into
about 100 categories, covering FDI, portfolio flows, bank lending, and others. We use the
policies in 2006 to construct three separate indicators of de jure openness for inward FDI,
inward FPI (purchase of local shares and bonds by nonresidents), and foreign loans
(commercial and financial credit from nonresidents to residents), respectively. The de jure
indicators are listed in Appendix Table 1. The de jure classification and the de facto
classification (based on realized inflows) are positively correlated but far from perfectly, with
correlation coefficients of 0.38, 0.25 and 0.37, respectively, for direct investment, portfolio
investment and foreign loans. This means that the de jure index can potentially provide an
informative and independent check on the connection between the composition of capital
flows and a liquidity crunch. The regression results are in the last column of Table 7. For
DEF_INV, we find that pre-crisis FDI openness significantly alleviates financial constraint
during this crisis; for DEF_WK, pre-crisis openness to FPI significantly worsens the
financial constraint during the crisis. Between the de facto and the de jure measures, we put
more weight on the de facto measure as different types of policy restrictions may not have
the same intensity but de facto measures automatically assign more weight to more important
policy restrictions (see Kose et al, 2003 for a discussion on de facto versus de jure measures).
                                              19


3.5 Contemporaneous betas and other robustness checks
       We have used pre-crisis beta based on monthly stock returns from 2002 to 2006. The
advantage of constructing the beta measure based on the recent past is that the regressor is
then pre-determined. A potential disadvantage is that it may miss some time-varying aspect
of the risk. As a robustness check, we construct a contemporaneous measure using a market
model and weekly stock return data during July 31, 2007-December 31, 2008. We then
multiply the contemporaneous beta by the local market return during this period as a control
variable in our model. We first check if it affects the average liquidity crunch across
countries (Column 1 of Table 8). The beta variable has a significant coefficient close to 0.93
with a t-stat of 11.42. This is not surprising given how the beta is calculated. It is important
to note that the new measure does not alter our earlier results. In particular, DEF_WK still
has a significant coefficient of -0.12. In Column 2 of Table 8, we find that the new measure
does not alter the results on the composition of capital flows, either. In particular, the
coefficients on the interaction terms between DEF_WK and pre-crisis portfolio inflows, and
between DEF_WK and pre-crisis foreign loan, are still negative and statistically significant.
       In Columns 3-4 of Table 8, we define the left-hand-side variable as
[logPk, dec08 – log Pk, july07] / (½)[logPk, dec08 + log Pk, july07]. This leads to no change in the
qualitative patterns reported earlier.
       The regressions so far assign equal weights to all firms, but different countries have a
different number of stocks. As a robustness check, we use a weighted least squares regression
specification, with the weights proportional to the inverse of the square root of the number of
manufacturing stocks in a country (Column 5 of Table 8). This does not change the pattern
that the coefficients on the interaction terms between DEF_WK and pre-crisis portfolio
inflows, and between DEF_WK and pre-crisis foreign loan, are negative and significant.
       As some countries in our sample have very few manufacturing stocks, e.g. 5 for
Czech Republic, and 8 for Colombia, it is difficult to generate enough variations in financial
dependence across firms for them. As another check, we limit the sample to countries with at
least 25 manufacturing stocks (resulting in 19 countries) and re-run the weighted least
squares estimation. The results are in Column 6 of Table 8. Again, all the interaction terms
involving FDI have positive coefficients while all those involving non-FDI components have
negative coefficients. Of those coefficients, the interaction between FDI and DEF_INV and
that between FPI (or foreign loans) and DEF_WK are statistically significant.
                                              20


       We have been focusing our sample on manufacturing firms thus far. We now expand
the sample to all non-financial firms as a robustness check. While this change results in a
50% expansion of the regression sample, the sign patterns of the coefficients are the same,
although the significance levels are generally weak. The weakening of the significance level
could indicate that intrinsic dependence on external finance for working capital (DEF_WK)
is more readily measured for manufacturing firms than for other non-financial firms.
       As another extension, we investigate the possibility that capital flows affect stock
prices through aggregate demand. Hence, we include an interaction of demand sensitivity
with capital flows. We use two proxies of demand sensitivity: i) a sector’s pro-cyclicality
from the FTSE/JSE Global Classification System; ii) a sector-level demand sensitivity index
from Tong and Wei (2008). The FTSE system classifies sectors into resources, basic
industries, general industrials, cyclical consumer goods, non-cyclical consumer goods,
cyclical services, non-cyclical services, utilities, financials, and information technology. We
construct a dummy which equals one if a manufacturing firm belongs to cyclical consumer
goods or services, and then interact the dummy with capital flows. In the specification with
sector and country fixed effects, the pro-cyclicality dummy interacted with FDI inflow
renders a significantly positive coefficient, while its interactions with FPI and loans render an
insignificantly negative coefficient. More importantly, the results on financial constraint
indicators (DEF_INV and DEF_WP) are not affected. Alternatively, when we apply the
demand sensitivity index from Tong and Wei (2008), its multiplications with capital flow
components do not turn out to be significant. Again, the results on financial constraint
indicators are not affected (results not reported to save space).
       Finally, as Fisman and Love (2007) suggest, the Rajan-Zingales index of external
financial dependence may partly reflect cross-sector differences in global growth
opportunities. To reduce potential measurement bias in DEF_INV, we control for shocks to
global opportunity directly over the period from 1990 to 2006, which is the sample period we
use to construct DEF_INV. Following Fisman and Love (2007), we first calculate the real
annual growth rate for each US firm in the COMPUSTA dataset, then take the US SIC 3-
digit-sector median of the firm-level growth rates as the USGrowth. The correlation between
USGrowth and the Rajan-Zingales index is around 0.30 for 120 manufacturing sectors. We
then Winsorize USGrowth at the 1% level and interact it with capital flow components (FDI,
FPI and foreign loans). It turns out the growth opportunity variable and its interactions with
                                              21


capital flow components are not significant (with p-values larger than 0.4). Most important,
they do not affect the earlier results on the interactions involving DEF_INV. That is, a
liquidity crunch experienced by firms is more serious for firms that depend on external
finance for capital investment, especially in countries with a high exposure to foreign loans
before the crisis (Results not reported to save space).


3.6 A placebo test
       All the robustness tests above are designed to see if key results survive if we add
variations to the basic specification or variable definitions. We now perform a placebo test by
looking at a non-crisis period. In particular, we examine whether capital flows from 2002 to
2005 affect stock prices from January 1st 2006 to June 30, 2007. If the composition of capital
flows generates vulnerability for the recipient country only in a time of crisis, then the
patterns reported earlier would not be repeated in the placebo test.
       In Column 1 of Table 10, we examine the average effect of financial constraints. We
do not find any significant effect for either DEF_INV or DEF_WK. (Similarly, we do not
find a significant effect for demand sensitivity). In Column 2, we check for the effect of
capital flow volume and do not find it to be significant. In Column 3, we examine the role of
capital flow components by interacting flow components with DEF_INV and DEF_WK. The
interaction of FDI and DEF_INV is significant at the 10% level, but none of the other five
interaction terms is significant. In Column 4, we include sector fixed effects, then
FDI*DEF_INV becomes insignificant. The placebo test hence suggests that the key pattern
in our baseline case is a feature of the crisis but not a general feature of the normal times.


3.7 The Lehman Brothers bankruptcy as an event study
       The collapse of Lehman Brothers with a government bailout on September 15, 2008,
came as a surprise to many, but has been regarded as a watershed event (as least ex post) that
may have aggravated the global financial panic and tightened global liquidity. This means
that the Lehman collapse could serve as an event study allowing us to investigate the
research questions of this paper from another angle.
       We check the relative movement in stock prices in the short period from the last
trading day before the Lehman bankruptcy filing (Friday, September 12) to the day after the
collapse (September 16) and pay special attention to any role played by the patterns in a
                                             22


country’s pre-crisis capital flows. We estimate the same model as before, except for the now
much narrower time window. The results are presented in Table 11. In the last column with
sector fixed effects and firm level controls, we find that the interaction of pre-crisis FDI with
DEF_INV is significantly positive at the 1% level, while the interactions of pre-crisis non-
FDI flows with DEF_INV are negative. Moreover, the interactions of FPI and foreign loans
with DEF_WK also generate significantly negative coefficients. These patterns confirm our
earlier findings that FDI may alleviate the financial constraints, while pre-crisis reliance on
non-FDI may tighten the constraints during a crisis.


4. Conclusion


       In this paper, we propose a methodological framework to study the effect of capital
flows on liquidity constraints in a recipient country and the role of the composition of pre-
crisis capital inflows in the liquidity crunch. To investigate the presence of liquidity
constraint, we ask the question: if we classify manufacturing firms into different baskets,
based on their ex ante sensitivity to shocks to external finance (in terms of investment and
working capital needs), would this classification help us to forecast the ex post stock price
performance of these firms? To investigate the role of capital inflows we embed both
country-level capital flows, and their interactions with sector level dependence on external
finance, into the regression framework.
       If we just include total volumes of capital inflows, we do not find a connection
between a country’s exposure to capital flows and the extent of the liquidity crunch
experienced by its manufacturing firms during 2007-09. However, this masks an important
compositional effect. FDI and non-FDI flows have very different effects that may offset each
other in the aggregate. When we disaggregate capital flows into three types (FDI, foreign
portfolio flows, and foreign loans), a different but consistent pattern emerges. Liquidity
shocks are more severe for emerging economies that have a higher pre-crisis exposure to
foreign portfolio investments and foreign loans, but less severe for countries that have a
higher pre-crisis exposure to foreign direct investments. This empirical pattern suggests that
one should not lump different capital flows together when one wishes to understand the
connection between capital flows and a liquidity crunch in a crisis.
                                            23


        It is important to point out that the current paper is not meant to be a comprehensive
assessment of the welfare effects of the composition of capital flows. To do that, one also
needs to examine several additional pieces of information, including how different forms of
capital flows affect liquidity constraints and growth rates during a tranquil time. This would
be a fruitful topic for future research.




References:
Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath, 2005, “Fire-Sale Foreign Direct Investment and Liquidity
Crises,” Review of Economics and Statistics 87(3), pp 439-452.

Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, Bruno Laranjeira and Scott Weisbenner, 2009,
“Corporate Debt Maturity and the Real Effects of the 2007 Credit Crisis”, NBER WP 14990.

Bates, Thomas W., Kathleen M. Kahle, and René M. Stulz, 2007, “Why do U.S. firms hold
so much more cash than they used to?” NBER Working Paper No. 12534

Berg, Andrew, Eduardo Borensztein, and Catherine Pattillo, 2004, “Assessing Early Warning
Systems: How Have They Worked in Practice?” IMF Working Paper 04/52 .

Bernanke, Ben S, 2008, Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress, February 27,
2008. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/bernanke20080227a.htm.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Cara S. Lown, 1991, “The Credit Crunch,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, No.2, pp. 205-247.

Borensztein, Eduardo, and Jong-Wha Lee, 2002, “Financial Crisis and Credit Crunch in
Korea: Evidence from Firm-level Data,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 49(4), pp.
853-875.

Calvo, Guillermo A., Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis-Fernando Mejia, 2008, “Systemic
Sudden Stops: The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects And Financial Integration,” NBER
Working Paper No. 14026.

Claessens, Stijn, Michael P. Dooley, and Andrew Warner, 1995, “Portfolio Capital Flows:
Hot or Cold?” The World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 9. No. 1, pp. 153–74.

Chari, V. V., Lawrence J. Christiano and Patrick J. Kehoe 2008, “Facts and Myths about the
Financial Crisis of 2008”, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Working Paper 666.

Claessens, Stijn, Michael P. Dooley, and Andrew Warner, 1995, “Portfolio Capital Flows:
Hot or Cold?” The World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 9. No. 1, pp. 153–74.
                                           24


Claessens, Stijn, Ayhan M. Kose, and Marco Terrones 2008, “What Happens During
Recessions, Crunches, and Busts?" IMF Working Paper 08/274.

Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, Enrica Detragiache, and Raghuram Rajan, 2008, “The Real Effect of
Banking Crises,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, vol. 17(1), pp. 89-112.

Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, Deniz Igan, and Luc Laeven, 2008, “Credit Booms and Lending
Standards: Evidence From the Subprime Mortgage Market,” CEPR Discussion Papers 6683.

Desai, Mihir, Fritz Foley and Kristin Forbes, 2008, “Financial Constraints and Growth:
Multinational and Local Firm Responses to Currency Depreciations.” Review of Financial
Studies 21, pp. 2857-2888.

Eichengreen, Barry, Ashoka Mody, Milan Nedeljkovic, and Lucio Sarno, 2009, “How the
Subprime Crisis Went Global: Evidence from Bank Credit Default Swap Spreads”, NBER
Working Paper No. 14904.

Mihir Desai, Fritz Foley and Kristin Forbes, 2008, “Financial Constraints and Growth:
Multinational and Local Firm Responses to Currency Depreciations.” Review of Financial
Studies 21, pp. 2857-2888.

Ehrmann, Michael, Marcel Fratzscher, and Arnaud Mehl, 2009, “What Has Made the Current
Financial Crisis Truly Global,” Unpublished ECB working paper, 20 May 2009.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992, “The Cross-Section of Expected Stock
Returns,” Journal of Finance, vol. 47(2), pp. 427-465.

Fisman, Raymond and Inessa Love, 2007, “Financial Dependence And Growth Revisited”,
Journal of the European Economic Association 5(2–3), pp. 470–479.

Forbes, Kristin J. 2007, “One cost of the Chilean capital controls: Increased financial
constraints for smaller traded firms”, Journal of International Economics 71, pp. 294–323.

Goldstein, Itay and Assaf Razin, 2006, “An information-Based Tradeoff between Foreign
Direct Investment and Foreign Portfolio investment”, Journal of International Economics 70,
271-295.

Greenlaw, David, Jan Hatzius, Anil K. Kashyap, Hyun Song Shin, 2008, “Leveraged Losses:
Lessons from the Mortgage Market Meltdown,” draft paper prepared for US Monetary Policy
Forum Conference Report No. 2.

Griffin, John, 2002, “Are the Fama and French Factors Global or Country-Specific?” Review
of Financial Studies 15, 783-803.

Henry, Peter, 2007, “Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, Evidence, and Speculation,”
Journal of Economic Literature vol. 45(4), pp. 887-935.
                                            25



Kim, Woochan, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2002, “Foreign Portfolio Investors Before and During a
Crisis,” Journal of International Economics. 56(1): 77-96.

Kose, Ayhan M., Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2003, “Effects of
Financial Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Evidence,” IMF Occasional Paper
220.

Kose, Ayhan M., Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2009, “Financial
Globalization: A Reappraisal,” IMF Staff Paper, vol. 56(1), pp. 8-62.

Kroszner, Randall, Luc Laeven, and Daniela Klingebiel (2007), “Banking crises, Financial
dependence, and Growth”, Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 84(1), pp. 187-228.

Lakonishok, Josef., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert.W. Vishny, 1994, “Contrarian Investment,
Extrapolation and Risk,” Journal of Finance, vol. 49(5), pp. 1541–78.

Levchenko, Andrei A., and Paolo Mauro, 2007, “Do Some Forms of Financial Flows Help
Protect Against "Sudden Stops"?, World Bank Economic Review 2007:389-411.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2008, “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion:
Evidence from the 2007 Mortgage Default Crisis,” NBER Working Paper No. 13936.

Prasad, Eswar S., Raqhuram G. Rajan, and Arvind Subramanian, 2007, “Foreign Capital and
Economic Growth,” NBER Working Paper No.13619.

Raddatz, Claudio, 2006, “Liquidity needs and vulnerability to financial underdevelopment,”
Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 80(3), pp. 677–722.

Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales, 1998, “Financial dependence and growth,” American
Economic Review, vol. 88(3), pp. 559-586.

Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2008, “Is the 2007 U.S. Sub-Prime Financial Crisis
So Different? An International Historical Comparison,” NBER Working Paper No. 13761.

Rodrik, Dani, and Arvind Subramanian, 2009, “Why did financial Globalizations
Dissappoint?,” IMF Staff Paper, vol. 56(1), pp. 112-138.

Stulz, René M., 2005, “The limits of financial globalization,” Journal of Finance, vol. 60(4),
pp. 1595-1638.

Tong, Hui and Shang-Jin Wei, 2008, “Real Effects of the Subprime Mortgage Crisis: Is it a
Demand or a Finance Shock?,” NBER Working Paper No.14205 and IMF Working Paper
08/186.

Wei, Shang-Jin, 2001, “Domestic Crony Capitalism and International Fickle Capital: Is There a
Connection?” International Finance, 4(1): 15-45.
                                            26



Wei, Shang-Jin, 2006, "Connecting two views on financial globalization: Can we make further
progress?," Journal of the Japanese International Economics,20(4): 459-481.

Wei, Shang-Jin, and Yi Wu, 2002, "Negative Alchemy? Corruption, Composition of Capital
Flows, and Currency Crises," in Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey Frankel, eds., Preventing
Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002, p461-501.

Whited, Toni, and Guojun Wu, 2006, "Financial Constraints Risk," Review of Financial
Studies, vol.19(2), pp. 531-559.
                                      27



                Table 1: Average Change of Stock Price(log)
             from 7/31/07 to 12/31/08 for Manufacturing Firms
COUNTRY                 Obs #   Median     Mean     Std Dev   Min       Max
ARGENTINA               28      -16.8      -31.6    56.0      -138.6    47.2
BRAZIL                  90      -51.9      -56.3    70.7      -307.6    80.2
CHILE                   47      -26.2      -28.2    49.0      -164.5    87.6
CHINA                   893     -89.2      -89.1    51.3      -361.5    209.5
COLOMBIA                8       -16.5      -43.0    102.3     -268.9    67.3
CZECH REPUBLIC          5       -9.5       -22.1    30.0      -66.9     2.6
EGYPT                   27      -36.4      -27.9    45.5      -99.9     107.3
HONG KONG               322     -112.2     -122.7   76.1      -454.7    119.3
HUNGARY                 12      -84.9      -72.8    41.2      -124.6    0.1
INDIA                   516     -71.6      -73.5    57.5      -244.0    221.9
INDONESIA               112     -39.9      -45.1    77.3      -321.6    225.8
ISRAEL                  61      -117.2     -120.6   100.8     -462.8    18.6
KOREA (SOUTH)           624     -79.3      -89.5    77.1      -709.5    120.2
MALAYSIA                418     -53.2      -64.0    64.3      -366.1    60.5
MEXICO                  38      -22.9      -34.4    62.9      -174.2    81.8
PAKISTAN                66      -57.0      -60.5    70.2      -209.4    144.1
PERU                    19      -39.5      -39.8    61.4      -141.9    89.6
PHILIPPINES             32      -61.4      -69.4    69.4      -213.9    31.2
POLAND                  84      -148.0     -147.2   77.8      -534.2    13.3
RUSSIAN FEDERATION      24      -143.7     -129.4   65.2      -216.5    18.8
SINGAPORE               242     -110.3     -111.3   75.1      -352.8    152.4
SOUTH AFRICA            57      -39.5      -47.6    62.1      -259.0    83.6
THAILAND                214     -34.7      -42.9    54.2      -214.7    71.8
TURKEY                  120     -87.0      -82.2    59.2      -243.5    174.2
AUSTRALIA               225     -93.1      -102.3   87.9      -448.2    135.8
AUSTRIA                 34      -105.7     -114.5   73.8      -384.5    0.8
BELGIUM                 50      -80.5      -87.7    57.5      -220.9    28.7
CANADA                  263     -104.4     -121.5   113.1     -642.9    264.4
DENMARK                 52      -94.5      -105.9   76.9      -317.2    36.4
FINLAND                 65      -84.9      -90.1    53.7      -266.5    19.8
FRANCE                  222     -74.8      -84.3    73.0      -506.7    134.3
GERMANY                 280     -63.2      -79.3    89.1      -521.3    89.7
GREECE                  100     -101.0     -104.7   57.0      -336.1    30.2
IRELAND                 17      -115.5     -118.1   84.9      -269.6    -7.0
ITALY                   103     -93.1      -96.0    55.1      -214.7    58.2
JAPAN                   1582    -69.0      -74.2    60.1      -764.0    151.4
NETHERLANDS             62      -76.9      -85.8    61.8      -265.2    39.3
NEW ZEALAND             30      -49.1      -54.5    73.9      -344.5    82.5
NORWAY                  51      -84.7      -106.2   97.7      -434.7    39.8
PORTUGAL                18      -68.5      -75.9    52.6      -184.4    1.0
SPAIN                   39      -83.2      -79.6    51.6      -198.1    12.9
SWEDEN                  130     -90.4      -97.7    61.2      -263.7    37.7
SWITZERLAND             107     -58.2      -68.9    56.6      -313.5    16.1
UNITED KINGDOM          421     -87.8      -108.8   106.0     -619.1    80.0
Total                   7911    -77.45     -84.95   73.98     -764.01   264.45
                                                               28




                                    Table 2a. Summary Statistics

                                        Obs#          Median      Mean      Std Dev      Min          max
Change in stock price (log)             3823          -77.8       -81.8     66.7         -347.2       55.4
DEF_INV                                 3796          0.2         0.2       0.3          0.0          1.0
DEF_WK                                  3823          86.8        88.5      28.5         22.3         169.2
Demand sensitivity                      3819          1.4         1.5       0.7          -1.1         4.3
Company size                            3823          14.5        15.0      2.7          9.0          25.1
Market/book                             3823          1.5         2.4       2.8          0.3          23.6
Beta                                    3778          0.64        0.71      0.65         -1.42        3.45
Momentum                                3823          20.77       26.45     37.54        -178.39      331.42

Note: DEF_INV is the external financial dependence for investment; and DEF_WK is the external financial dependence
for working capital. Summary stats are based on listed manufacturing firms in 24 emerging economies. Change in stock
price is from July 31, 07 to Dec 31, 08. All other variables are pre-crisis at year 2006.




                                               Table 2b. Correlation of Variables

                               Stock           DEF_INV        DEF_WK           Demand           Company        Market/book       Beta
                               return                                          sensitivity      size

DEF_INV                        -0.05
DEF_WK                         -0.11           0.09
Demand sensitivity             -0.15           0.05           0.10
Company size                   0.07            0.01           -0.08            -0.04
Market/book                    -0.06           0.05           0.03             -0.03            -0.04
Beta                           -0.16           0.02           0.03             0.08             0.01           0.02
Momentum                       -0.15           0.06           0.02             0.04             0.01           -0.05             -0.10

Note: DEF_INV is the external financial dependence for investment; and DEF_WK is the external financial dependence for working capital.
Correlations are based on listed manufacturing firms in 24 emerging economies. Change in stock price is from July 31, 07 to Dec 31, 08. All other
variables are pre-crisis at year 2006.
                                                               29




                      Table 3: The Average Effect of Liquidity Crunch Across Countries

                                        Case 1      Case 2          Case 3     Case 4         Case 5         Case 6          Case 7
DEF_INV                                 -2.893                      -1.832     0.374          0.973          -0.101         0.575
                                        [10.02]                     [8.276]    [8.014]        [7.164]        [6.809]        [7.152]
DEF_WK                                              -0.156**        -0.154**   -0.139**       -0.123**       -0.136***      -0.130**
                                                    [0.0627]        [0.0645]   [0.0618]       [0.0545]       [0.0510]       [0.0516]
Beta*Market Return                                                             0.326***       0.310***       0.303***       0.310***
                                                                               [0.0440]       [0.0440]       [0.0426]       [0.0439]
Firm size                                                                      1.622          1.295          2.643**        2.842**
                                                                               [1.078]        [1.078]        [1.093]        [1.090]
Market/Book                                                                    -1.166*        -1.250*        -0.973         -0.885
                                                                               [0.672]        [0.669]        [0.666]        [0.676]
Momentum                                                                       -0.145***      -0.144***      -0.132***      -0.128***
                                                                               [0.0399]       [0.0399]       [0.0397]       [0.0411]
Demand Sensitivity                                                                            -9.350***      -8.876***      -8.735***
                                                                                              [2.062]        [2.059]        [2.204]
Leverage                                                                                                     -35.44***      -36.89***
                                                                                                             [4.453]        [4.605]
Trade sensitivity                                                                                                           -3.052
                                                                                                                            [2.331]
Observations                            3796        3823            3796       3751           3747           3743           3576
R-squared                               0.14        0.144           0.145      0.175          0.184          0.198          0.191
Country fixed effects                   Yes         Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes

Note: Dependent variable is the change of stock price (log) from July 31, 07 to December 31, 08. DEF_INV is the external financial
dependence for investment; and DEF_WK is the external financial dependence for working capital. Number of emerging countries is 24
as listed in Table 2. Standard errors in brackets; ***, **, and * denote p-value less than 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. Standard errors
are clustered at the sector level.
                                           30




               Table 4. Pre-crisis Exposure to Capital Inflows
                 (% of GDP; Averaged from 2002 to 2006)

Country                 Total Inflow   FDI      FPI     Foreign Loans   developed
Argentina               1.00           2.29     -3.21   1.92            0
Brazil                  2.11           2.26     0.11    -0.26           0
Chile                   8.41           5.61     1.43    1.38            0
China                   5.13           3.11     0.78    1.24            0
Colombia                4.08           4.22     0.16    -0.31           0
Czech                   5.77           6.24     -2.76   2.30            0
Egypt                   4.17           3.95     0.57    -0.35           0
HK                      24.31          15.53    -6.42   15.20           0
Hungary                 11.31          5.02     2.05    4.24            0
India                   3.68           1.16     1.08    1.44            0
Indonesia               1.48           0.96     1.34    -0.82           0
Israel                  8.23           3.93     3.53    0.78            0
Korea                   4.19           0.72     1.56    1.91            0
Malaysia                20.07          3.05     22.73   -5.71           0
Mexico                  2.96           2.96     -0.13   0.13            0
Pakistan                0.53           1.36     0.13    -0.96           0
Peru                    3.62           3.06     1.92    -1.36           0
Philippines             -1.70          1.55     0.29    -3.54           0
Poland                  6.95           3.68     2.58    0.70            0
Russia                  6.22           2.03     0.79    3.41            0
Singapore               30.45          14.11    3.89    12.46           0
South Africa            5.48           0.95     3.02    1.51            0
Thailand                2.99           3.77     1.59    -2.37           0
Turkey                  6.55           1.52     1.90    3.13            0
Australia               12.99          2.25     9.12    1.62            1
Austria                 24.96          6.14     10.85   7.97            1
Belgium                 10.78          10.99            -0.21           1
Canada                  5.69           2.23     2.07    1.38            1
Denmark                 14.37          1.35     4.26    8.76            1
Finland                 11.37          2.91     6.61    1.85            1
France                  21.18          2.96     9.35    8.87            1
Germany                 9.53           1.41     6.09    2.03            1
Greece                  13.05          0.67     9.47    2.90            1
Ireland                 151.06         2.89     93.81   54.36           1
Italy                   9.39           1.30     5.13    2.95            1
Japan                   0.76           0.09     2.87    -2.20           1
Netherlands             8.21           3.84     14.81   -10.45          1
New Zealand             9.86           3.36     2.88    3.62            1
Norway                  20.53          1.33     6.88    12.32           1
Portugal                20.59          3.00     8.24    9.35            1
Spain                   19.95          3.09     11.76   5.10            1
Sweden                  3.61           3.94             -0.33           1
Switzerland             15.63          2.27     0.90    12.46           1
UK                      39.56          4.00     8.89    26.67           1
                                                    31



   Table 5. Role of Pre-Crisis Exposure to Capital Inflows in Emerging Economies
                                   (Volume Effect)

                                     Case 1                  Case 2                 Case 3

DEF_INV                              -4.414                  -2.488
                                     [10.21]                 [9.098]
DEF_INV*Inflow                       0.329                   0.442                  0.576
                                     [0.492]                 [0.455]                [0.424]
DEF_WK                               -0.108                  -0.0504
                                     [0.0772]                [0.0706]
DEF_WK*Inflow                        -0.00495                -0.00778*              -0.00846*
                                     [0.00524]               [0.00468]              [0.00479]
Beta*market Index                                            0.312***               0.285***
                                                             [0.0439]               [0.0432]
Firm size                                                    1.281                  1.317
                                                             [1.072]                [1.136]
Market/Book                                                  -1.285*                -1.404**
                                                             [0.669]                [0.680]
Momentum                                                     -0.145***              -0.144***
                                                             [0.0399]               [0.0422]
Demand Sensitivity                                           -9.425***
                                                             [2.068]
Observations                         3796                    3747                   3747
R-squared                            0.145                   0.185                  0.239
Industry fixed effects               No                      No                     Yes

Note: Dependent variable is the change of stock price (log) from July 31, 07 to December 31, 08.
DEF_INV is the external financial dependence for investment; and DEF_WK is the external financial
dependence for working capital. Standard errors in brackets; ***, **, and * denote p-value less than 1%,
5%, and 10%, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the sector level.
                                                         32



  Table 6. Role of Pre-crisis Exposure to Capital Inflows in Emerging Economies
                                (Composition Effect)

VARIABLES                     Case 1     Case 2          Case 3         Case 4         Case 5        Case 6

DEF_INV                       -4.585
                              [12.49]
DEF_INV*FDI                   2.859                      3.375**        3.240*         3.480**       3.610**
                              [1.870]                    [1.627]        [1.661]        [1.606]       [1.653]
DEF_INV*FPI                   -1.626*                    -1.503*        -1.387*        -1.499*       -1.582*
                              [0.909]                    [0.789]        [0.799]        [0.783]       [0.814]
DEF_INV* Foreign loan         -2.531                     -2.491         -2.076         -2.267        -2.38
                              [1.651]                    [1.670]        [1.798]        [1.768]       [1.839]
DEF_WK                                   -0.153*
                                         [0.0818]
DEF_WK*FDI                               0.0441**        0.0407*        0.0308         0.0268        0.0275
                                         [0.0216]        [0.0226]       [0.0218]       [0.0207]      [0.0211]
DEF_WK*FPI                               -0.0219***      -0.0218**      -0.0198**      -0.0176**     -0.0185**
                                         [0.00817]       [0.00862]      [0.00816]      [0.00770]     [0.00801]
DEF_WK* Foreign loan                     -0.0555***      -0.0585***     -0.0508***     -0.0466**     -0.0473**
                                         [0.0172]        [0.0195]       [0.0192]       [0.0182]      [0.0185]
Beta*market index                                                       0.280***       0.276***      0.274***
                                                                        [0.0429]       [0.0422]      [0.0424]
Size                                                                    1.26           2.616**       2.619**
                                                                        [1.153]        [1.190]       [1.191]
Market/Book                                                             -1.357**       -0.965        -0.974
                                                                        [0.682]        [0.701]       [0.705]
Momentum                                                                -0.148***      -0.140***     -0.143***
                                                                        [0.0419]       [0.0419]      [0.0419]
Leverage                                                                               -34.40***     -32.60***
                                                                                       [4.753]       [6.443]
Leverage*FDI                                                                                         3.84
                                                                                                     [2.729]
Leverage*FPI                                                                                         -2.833**
                                                                                                     [1.226]
Leverage*Foreign loan                                                                                -4.154
                                                                                                     [2.739]
Sector fixed effects          No         No              Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
Observations                  3796       3823            3796           3747           3747          3747
R-squared                     0.142      0.145           0.216          0.242          0.254         0.256

Note: Dependent variable is the change of stock price (log) from July 31, 07 to December 31, 08 for manufacturing
firms in 24 emerging economies . DEF_INV is the external financial dependence for investment; and DEF_WK is
the external financial dependence for working capital. Standard errors in brackets; ***, **, and * denote p-value
less than 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the sector level.
                                                          33



                       Table 7. Role of pre-Crisis Exposure to Capital Inflows
                                        (Robustness Checks)

                                            Financial             Financial             Capital Flow        De Jure
                                            Development 1         Development 2         from 02 to 07       Openness

DEF_INV*FDI                                 3.384*                3.861**               4.186**             20.99***
                                            [1.724]               [1.786]               [1.751]             [7.856]
DEF_INV*FPI                                 -1.404*               -1.329                -1.543**            -8.745
                                            [0.821]               [0.850]               [0.612]             [7.515]
DEF_INV* Foreign loan                       -2.116                -1.824                -2.059*             -8.568
                                            [1.779]               [1.951]               [1.228]             [11.64]
DEF_WK*FDI                                  0.037                 0.0406*               0.0323              -0.00035
                                            [0.0225]              [0.0230]              [0.0220]            [0.0888]
DEF_WK*FPI                                  -0.0175**             -0.0173**             -0.0153**           -0.149*
                                            [0.00850]             [0.00850]             [0.00712]           [0.0901]
DEF_WK* Foreign loan                        -0.0499**             -0.0459**             -0.0332**           0.0841
                                            [0.0192]              [0.0195]              [0.0140]            [0.0964]
Beta*market index                           0.279***              0.280***              0.281***            0.285***
                                            [0.0426]              [0.0426]              [0.0427]            [0.0433]
Size                                        1.264                 1.225                 1.249               1.217
                                            [1.168]               [1.163]               [1.147]             [1.127]
Market/Book                                 -1.361**              -1.357**              -1.358**            -1.333*
                                            [0.678]               [0.681]               [0.680]             [0.685]
Momentum                                    -0.148***             -0.149***             -0.148***           -0.146***
                                            [0.0420]              [0.0420]              [0.0418]            [0.0422]
(Domestic Credit/GDP)*DEF_INV               -0.03
                                            [0.121]
(Domestic Credit/GDP)*DEF_WK                -0.00189
                                            [0.00124]
(Domestic Credit and Market                                       -0.0334
Capitalization/GDP)*DEF_INV
                                                                  [0.0463]
(Domestic Credit and Market                                       -0.000585
Capitalization/GDP) *DEF_WK
                                                                  [0.000415]
Sector and country fixed effects            Yes                   Yes                   Yes                 Yes
Observations                                3747                  3747                  3747                3747
R-squared                                   0.243                 0.243                 0.242               0.24

Note: Dependent variable is the change of stock price (log) from July 31, 07 to December 31, 08 for manufacturing firms
in 24 emerging economies . DEF_INV is the external financial dependence for investment; and DEF_WK is the external
financial dependence for working capital. Standard errors in brackets; ***, **, and * denote p-value less than 1%, 5%, and
10%, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the sector level.
                                                               34



                                  Table 8. Role of Pre-Crisis Exposure to Capital Inflows
                                                (More Robustness Checks)

                                Contemporary         Contemporary        Alternative          Alternative         Weighted        Weighted
                                Beta                 Beta                Price Change         Price Change        Regression      Regression

DEF_INV                         0.486                                    0.39
                                [5.623]                                  [5.583]
DEF_INV*FDI                                          3.119*                                   2.944**             1.998           2.466*
                                                     [1.672]                                  [1.399]             [1.579]         [1.491]
DEF_INV*FPI                                          -0.949                                   -1.373**            -1.012          -1.340*
                                                     [0.870]                                  [0.669]             [0.708]         [0.707]
DEF_INV* Foreign loan                                -2.152                                   -2.3                -1.167          -1.859
                                                     [1.968]                                  [1.565]             [1.614]         [1.521]
DEF_WK                          -0.122**                                 -0.109**
                                [0.0503]                                 [0.0447]
DEF_WK*FDI                                           0.032                                    0.0227              0.0214          0.027
                                                     [0.0210]                                 [0.0174]            [0.0176]        [0.0181]
DEF_WK*FPI                                           -0.0212***                               -0.0147**           -0.0128*        -0.0150**
                                                     [0.00794]                                [0.00673]           [0.00720]       [0.00690]
DEF_WK* Foreign loan                                 -0.0537***                               -0.0372**           -0.0373**       -0.0418**
                                                     [0.0197]                                 [0.0160]            [0.0165]        [0.0165]
Beta*Market Return              0.934***             0.914***            0.240***             0.215***            0.215***        0.232***
                                [0.0837]             [0.0813]            [0.0346]             [0.0334]            [0.0366]        [0.0346]
Firm size                       3.845***             3.375***            0.00959              -0.0358             -1.57           -1.266
                                [1.076]              [1.093]             [0.834]              [0.880]             [1.140]         [1.055]
Market/Book                     -1.186*              -1.266**            -0.524               -0.637              -0.611          -0.76
                                [0.606]              [0.631]             [0.482]              [0.484]             [0.461]         [0.481]
Momentum                        -0.0729*             -0.0896**           -0.115***            -0.115***           -0.129***       -0.131***
                                [0.0393]             [0.0416]            [0.0271]             [0.0278]            [0.0293]        [0.0310]
Demand Sensitivity              -9.378***                                -6.991***
                                [2.131]                                  [1.601]
Sector fixed effects            No                   Yes                 No                   Yes                 Yes             Yes
Observations                    3748                 3748                3748                 3748                3748            3683
R-squared                       0.229                0.283               0.188                0.25                0.304           0.296

Note: Dependent variable is the change of stock price (log) from July 31, 07 to December 31, 08 for manufacturing firms in 24 emerging
economies . DEF_INV is the external financial dependence for investment; and DEF_WK is the external financial dependence for working
capital. Standard errors in brackets; ***, **, and * denote p-value less than 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the
sector level.
                                                   35




       Table 9. Role of Pre-crisis Exposure to Capital Inflows in Emerging Economies
                                    (Non-financial firms)

VARIABLES                  Case 1      Case 2      Case 3       Case 4      Case 5       Case 6       Case 7

DEF_INV                    -11.34                  -7.1
                           [10.65]                 [9.070]
DEF_INV*FDI                1.429                   1.388        2.732**     2.662**      2.994**      3.044**
                           [1.487]                 [1.437]      [1.282]     [1.240]      [1.211]      [1.206]
DEF_INV*FPI                -1.272**                -1.153**     -1.549***   -1.395**     -1.464***    -1.632***
                           [0.496]                 [0.570]      [0.548]     [0.552]      [0.558]      [0.615]
DEF_INV* Foreign loan      -1.267                  -1.128       -2.530*     -2.202       -2.462*      -2.512*
                           [1.340]                 [1.442]      [1.314]     [1.344]      [1.322]      [1.328]
DEF_WK                                 -0.117**    -0.0990**
                                       [0.0572]    [0.0456]
DEF_WK*FDI                             0.0244*     0.015        0.0246**    0.018        0.0153       0.0153
                                       [0.0129]    [0.0114]     [0.0123]    [0.0119]     [0.0115]     [0.0116]
DEF_WK*FPI                             -0.00615    -0.00504     -0.00617    -0.00491     -0.00384     -0.0034
                                       [0.00518]   [0.00436]    [0.00457]   [0.00453]    [0.00441]    [0.00479]
DEF_WK* Foreign loan                   -0.0223*    -0.0165      -0.0237**   -0.0192*     -0.0162      -0.0161
                                       [0.0125]    [0.0112]     [0.0115]    [0.0114]     [0.0110]     [0.0112]
Beta*market index                                  0.297***                 0.274***     0.272***     0.269***
                                                   [0.0330]                 [0.0312]     [0.0306]     [0.0306]
size                                               2.237***                 1.922**      3.354***     3.375***
                                                   [0.842]                  [0.887]      [0.906]      [0.900]
Market/Book                                        -1.293***                -1.381***    -0.966**     -1.005**
                                                   [0.429]                  [0.437]      [0.446]      [0.446]
Momentum                                           -0.213***                -0.201***    -0.187***    -0.187***
                                                   [0.0284]                 [0.0293]     [0.0296]     [0.0297]
Leverage                                                                                 -34.64***    -31.22***
                                                                                         [4.104]      [5.568]
Leverage*FDI                                                                                          2.002
                                                                                                      [2.200]
Leverage*FPI                                                                                          -2.307**
                                                                                                      [0.924]
Leverage*Foreign loan                                                                                 -2.117
                                                                                                      [2.138]
Demand Sensitivity                                 -5.280***
                                                   [1.516]
Sector fixed effects       No          No          No           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Observations               5997        6030        5917         5997        5917         5917         5917
R-squared                  0.13        0.127       0.176        0.201       0.235        0.248        0.25

Note: Dependent variable is the change of stock price (log) from July 31, 07 to December 31, 08 for non-
financial firms in 24 emerging economies. DEF_INV is the external financial dependence for investment; and
DEF_WK is the external financial dependence for working capital. Standard errors in brackets; ***, **, and *
denote p-value less than 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the sector level.
                                                         36



                           Table 10. Placebo Test
                (Stock returns from Jan 1, 06 to June 30, 07)

                                      Case 1         Case 2         Case 3        Case 4

DEF_INV                               -0.14          -5.243         -6.905
                                      [4.629]        [4.861]        [5.129]
DEF_INV*Inflow Volume                                0.742
                                                     [0.518]
DEF_INV*FDI                                                         3.037*        2.366
                                                                    [1.647]       [1.575]
DEF_INV*FPI                                                         -0.19         -0.403
                                                                    [1.207]       [1.165]
DEF_INV* Foreign loan                                               -2.277        -0.989
                                                                    [2.40]        [2.477]
DEF_WK                                -0.0513        -0.0343        -0.0539
                                      [0.0495]       [0.0634]       [0.0708]
DEF_WK*Inflow Volume                                 -0.00241
                                                     [0.00496]
DEF_WK*FDI                                                          0.01          0.014
                                                                    [0.018]       [0.017]
DEF_WK*FPI                                                          -0.0093       -0.0008
                                                                    [0.0074]      [0.0066]
DEF_WK* Foreign loan                                                -0.013        -0.0099
                                                                    [0.018]       [0.017]
Beta*market index                     0.143**        0.141**        0.143**       0.133**
                                      [0.0603]       [0.0599]       [0.0600]      [0.0574]
Size                                  3.274***       3.250***       3.202***      2.812***
                                      [1.063]        [1.060]        [1.047]       [1.003]
Market/Book                           1.735***       1.723***       1.756***      1.791***
                                      [0.552]        [0.556]        [0.554]       [0.535]
Leverage                                                                          -18.33***
                                                                                  [6.256]
Leverage*FDI                                                                      3.785
                                                                                  [20.40]
Leverage*FPI                                                                      2.079
                                                                                  [11.62]
Leverage*Foreign loan                                                             19.61
                                                                                  [24.26]
Demand Sensitivity                    0.0694         0.0835         0.065
                                      [3.661]        [3.676]        [3.670]
Sector fixed effects                  No             No             No            Yes
Observations                          3693           3693           3693          3693
Note: Dependent variable is the change of stock price (log) from Jan 1, 06 to July 30, 07 for
manufacturing firms in 24 emerging economies. DEF_INV is the external financial dependence
for investment; and DEF_WK is the external financial dependence for working capital.
Standard errors in brackets; ***, **, and * denote p-value less than 1%, 5%, and 10%,
respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the sector level.
                                                                  37




                         Table 11. Stock Returns around Lehman Brother Bankruptcy

                                    Case 1              Case 2                Case 3             Case 4            Case 5           Case 6

DEF_INV                             -0.0895                                   -0.11              -0.164
                                    [0.622]                                   [0.597]            [0.397]
DEF_INV*FDI                         0.332**                                   0.284**            0.291**           0.316***         0.330***
                                    [0.129]                                   [0.115]            [0.116]           [0.117]          [0.121]
DEF_INV*FPI                         -0.144*                                   -0.118             -0.0708           -0.0715          -0.0767
                                    [0.0784]                                  [0.0814]           [0.0915]          [0.0993]         [0.108]
DEF_INV* Foreign loan               -0.255*                                   -0.184             -0.182            -0.201           -0.226
                                    [0.134]                                   [0.126]            [0.146]           [0.153]          [0.169]
DEF_WK                                                  -0.00177              -0.00127           0.00297
                                                        [0.00502]             [0.00509]          [0.00452]
DEF_WK*FDI                                              0.00283*              0.00233            0.00163           0.00143          0.00187
                                                        [0.00149]             [0.00148]          [0.00143]         [0.00152]        [0.00155]
DEF_WK*FPI                                              -0.00128              -0.0011            -0.00113          -0.00127*        -0.00163**
                                                        [0.000775]            [0.000731]         [0.000703]        [0.000753]       [0.000810]
DEF_WK* Foreign loan                                    -0.00373**            -0.00338**         -0.00290*         -0.00278         -0.00352*
                                                        [0.00169]             [0.00164]          [0.00161]         [0.00174]        [0.00185]
Beta*market index                                                                                0.498***          0.486***         0.472***
                                                                                                 [0.0283]          [0.0302]         [0.0315]
Firm size                                                                                        0.371***          0.368***         0.405***
                                                                                                 [0.0690]          [0.0735]         [0.0759]
Market/Book                                                                                      -0.00513          0.00548          0.00728
                                                                                                 [0.0265]          [0.0318]         [0.0331]
Leverage                                                                                                           -1.427**         -1.596**
                                                                                                                   [0.632]          [0.620]
Leverage*FDI                                                                                                       0.201            0.187
                                                                                                                   [0.185]          [0.197]
Leverage*FPI                                                                                                       -0.0545          -0.0511
                                                                                                                   [0.0900]         [0.0924]
Leverage*Foreign loan                                                                                              -0.257           -0.25
                                                                                                                   [0.191]          [0.204]
Demand Sensitivity                                                                               -0.0941
                                                                                                 [0.107]
Sector fixed effects                No                  No                    No                 No                Yes              Yes
Observations                        3775                3802                  3775               3771              3771             3644
R-squared                           0.151               0.15                  0.152              0.227             0.252            0.252

Note: Dependent variable is the change of stock price (log) from September 12 to 16, 2008. DEF_INV is the external financial dependence for
investment; and DEF_WK is the external financial dependence for working capital. Standard errors in brackets; ***, **, and * denote p-value
less than 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the sector level. Case 6 replicates Case 5 but drops stocks with illiquid
trading, which is defined as few than five days of trading in the two months of July and August, 2008, before Lehman’s bankruptcy.
                                              38



 800
        Figure 1: Capital Flow to Emerging Economies
 700    (in US$ Billions)

 600


 500


 400


 300
                 Direct Investment
 200


 100                    Portfolio
                      Investment
    0
        1999        2000    2001       2002         2003      2004         2005   2006     2007     2008       2009
-100
        Foreign Loans

-200
The sample includes 24 emerging economies listed in Table 4. Source: IMF’s World Economic Outlook
database.


     Figure 2: The Extent of Capital Reversal versus the Initial Share of FDI in
                                   Capital Flows


                                                                                         China
        0




                            Malaysia                                                                  Chile
                                                                     Pakistan  Peru Mexico         Israel
                                                                        Indonesia       Colombia
                                       SouthAfrica
                                           India                         Poland
        -2




                                           HK
                                                      Argentina                                               Egypt


                                                            Brazil
        -4




                                                   Russia
        -6




             0                       .2                     .4                  .6                               .8
                                          Initial Share of FDI in Capital Flows

                           The Extent of Capital Reversal                             Fitted values



On the vertical axis is log (capital inflow/GDP) in 2009 - log (capital inflow/GDP) in 2007, and on the
horizontal axis is the share of FDI inflow in the country’s total inflow in 2007. The volumes of capital
inflow in 2009 are estimates by the IMF. The slope coefficient is 2.64 with a standard error of 1.76.
                                                   39



    Figure 3. Change in Log Banking Stock Prices vs Pre-Crisis International Bank Loans
                                 (Conditional scatter plot)




               50
                                          Egypt                                                           SouthAfrica
                                                                            Indonesia
                              Colombia     PeruChile
                                       Czech                Brazil
                                                                            China
                                                                                                  India
                                                         Mexico
                                                          Malaysia                      HK
               0


                                 Phlippines
                                                                                                                      Turkey
                           Thailand                               Poland
                                                                                                  Singapore
                                                                   Israel
                                                                               Argentina                      Korea
               -50




                                                              Pakistan
                                                                                             Hungary

                                                                                                              Russia
               -100




                      -4                      -2                    0                        2                        4
                                                   initial international bank loans

                              change in log banking sector stock price                           Fitted values


Note: On the vertical axis is the change in log bank-sector stock price from July 1st , 2007 to December 31,
2008. On the horizontal axis is the pre-crisis inflow of loans/GDP averaged over 2002-2006. This partial
scatter plot is conditioned on pre-crisis foreign direct investments and portfolio investments over GDP. The
slope coefficient is -6.38 with a standard error of 3.24. Source: IMF’s WEO database and Datastream.
                                         40



            Appendix Table 1. De Jure Financial Openness for Year 2006
Country                Stocks     Bonds       Commercial Credit     Financial credit     FDI
Argentina              0          0           1                     0                    0
Brazil                 0          1           1                     1                    0
Chile                  1          1           1                     1                    1
China                  0          0           0                     0                    0
Colombia               0          0           0                     0                    0
Czech                  0          1           1                     1                    0
Egypt                  1          1           1                     1                    0
HK                     1          1           1                     1                    1
Hungary                1          1           1                     1                    1
India                  0          0           0                     0                    0
Indonesia              0          0           0                     1                    0
Israel                 1          1           1                     1                    1
Korea                  1          1           1                     1                    0
Malaysia               1          1           0                     0                    0
Mexico                 0          1           1                     0                    0
Pakistan               1          1           1                     1                    0
Peru                   1          1           1                     1                    1
Philippines            1          0           0                     0                    1
Poland                 1          0           1                     0                    0
Russia                 0          0           1                     0                    0
Singapore              1          1           1                     1                    1
South Africa           1          1           1                     0                    1
Thailand               0          0           0                     1                    1
Turkey                 1          1           0                     0                    1
Source: The IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions in 2006.
