                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      CAPITAL MARKET INTEGRATION AND WAGES

                                            Anusha Chari
                                           Peter Blair Henry
                                             Diego Sasson

                                        Working Paper 15204
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15204


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2009




Henry gratefully acknowledges financial support from the John A. and Cynthia Fry Gunn Faculty
Fellowship, the Stanford Institute for economic Policy Research and the Stanford Center for International
Development. We thank Sandile Hlatshwayo for excellent research assistance. We also thank Olivier
Blanchard, Steve Buser, Brahima Coulibaly, Jonah Gelbach, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Avner Greif,
Nir Jaimovich, Pete Klenow, Anjini Kochar, John Pencavel, Paul Romer, Robert Solow, Ewart Thomas
and seminar participants at Berkeley, Brookings, the Chicago Fed, Claremont McKenna, the IMF,
MIT, NIPFP-DEA, the Reserve Bank of India, and Stanford for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Anusha Chari, Peter Blair Henry, and Diego Sasson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Capital Market Integration and Wages
Anusha Chari, Peter Blair Henry, and Diego Sasson
NBER Working Paper No. 15204
August 2009, Revised July 2011
JEL No. E2,F15,F3,F41,F43,O4

                                             ABSTRACT

For three years after the typical emerging economy opens its stock market to inflows of foreign capital,
the average annual growth rate of the real wage in the manufacturing sector increases by a factor of
three. No such increase occurs in a control group of countries. The temporary increase in the growth
rate of the real wage drives up the level of average annual compensation for each worker in the sample
by 487 US dollars—an increase equal to nearly one-fifth of their annual pre-liberalization salary. The
increase in the growth rate of labor productivity in the aftermath of liberalization exceeds the increase
in the growth rate of the real wage so that the increase in workers’ incomes does not drive up unit
labor costs. Overall, the results suggest that trade in capital may have a larger impact on wages than
trade in goods.


Anusha Chari                                        Diego Sasson
301 Gardner Hall                                    Stanford University
CB#3305, Department of Economics                    dsasson@stanford.edu
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
and NBER
achari@unc.edu

Peter Blair Henry
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, 11-58
New York, NY 10012
pbhenry@stern.nyu.edu
1. Introduction

           The impact of trade on wages occupies a salient space in the collective imagination of the

economics profession. When a country opens up to trade with the rest of the world, income

shifts away from that country’s scarce factor of production and toward the one which is abundant

(Stolper and Samuelson, 1941). Inspired by the celebrated Stolper-Samuelson Theorem,

economics journals abound in articles examining the extent to which trade induces factor price

equalization.

           The evidence so far is mixed. The consensus view suggests that trade with developing

countries is, at best, a modest force behind the large decline in the relative wages of low-skilled

workers in rich countries (Krugman, 1995; Lawrence and Slaughter, 1993; Cline, 1997;

Lawrence, 2008).1 In the case of workers in developing countries, the evidence actually runs

contrary to the theory. Whereas Stolper-Samuelson predicts that trade with rich countries will

increase the relative wages of low-skilled workers in poor countries, trade liberalization during

the 1980s and 1990s actually increased wage inequality in the developing world (Goldberg and

Pavcnik, 2007).

           Moving from trade in goods to trade in factors, an extensive literature also exists on the

impact of labor flows on wage inequality. Again, the results are mixed. Some studies find that

immigration from developing countries exacerbates wage inequality in the U.S. (Borjas, Freeman

and Katz, 1997). Others find little to no effect (Card, 2009, Ottaviano and Peri, 2008).

           While many studies examine the impact of cross-border flows of goods and workers on

relative wages, the literature pays far less attention to the impact of cross-border financial flows

on the absolute level of wages. This is surprising for at least three reasons.

           First, trade in capital between nations has implications for real wages that are every bit as
1
    Feenstra and Hanson (2003) provide a dissenting view.


                                                                                                        1
important as cross-border movements of goods and people. In emerging economies where

capital is scarce and labor abundant, opening up to free trade in capital should reduce the rental

rate and increase the real wage.

        Second, examining the absolute level of wages provides information about the impact of

opening up on the distribution of income between capital and labor that is just as important as the

information that studies of wage inequality provide about the distribution of labor income

between high and low-skilled workers. For instance, many emerging economies experienced

unprecedented increases in national income as a result of globalization in the 1980s and 1990s.

If all of the income gains from globalization accrued to capital, then the rise in wage inequality

documented by Goldberg and Pavcnik (2007) necessarily implies that low-skilled workers

experienced income losses. On the other hand, if total labor income grew in line with (or faster

than) the economy as a whole, then high skilled workers may have experienced income gains

that did not result in losses for low skilled workers.

        Third, in the late 1980s emerging economies all over the world began easing restrictions

on capital inflows of all kinds, giving economists a series of before-and-after experiments with

which to study the impact of factor flows on factor rewards. A large body of research examines

the impact of capital market liberalization on asset prices, investment and the growth rate of

GDP per capita.2 But to the best of our knowledge, this literature is silent about the impact of

capital account opening on the labor market. Consequently, two decades after the onset of

capital market liberalization, we still have no systematic evidence about the impact of this sea-

change in policy on the average level of wages in the developing world.3 This paper provides the


2
 See Henry (2007) and Obstfeld (2009) for comprehensive surveys of this literature.
3
 Feenstra and Hanson (1997) explore the cost of capital but focus on its impact on relative wages. Aitken, Harrison
and Lipsey (1996), Almeida (2007), and Hale and Long (2008) examine FDI and wages, but not the general
connection between financial flows and wages vis-à-vis the cost of capital.


                                                                                                                  2
first systematic attempt to fill that gap.

         Figure 1 demonstrates that the level of the average annual manufacturing real wage in a

sample of twenty five emerging economies increased significantly after they liberalized

restrictions on inflows of foreign capital between 1986 and 1996.4 Formal estimates show that

the growth rate of the real wage in local currency terms jumped from 1.8 percent per year in the

pre-liberalization period to an average of 5.7 percent in the year liberalization occurred and each

of the subsequent three years. The 3.9 percentage-point increase in the growth rate of the real

wage growth during this window drives up the level of average annual compensation for each

worker in the sample of liberalizing countries by the local currency equivalent of 487 US

dollars—an increase equal to eighteen percent of their annual pre-liberalization salary.

         One concern about Figure 1 is that an exogenous world-wide shock unrelated to capital

market opening may drive up real wages in liberalizing and non-liberalizing countries alike. To

distinguish the country-specific impact of liberalization policy from that of a common shock, our

estimation procedure compares the difference in wage growth before and after liberalization for a

group of countries that open up, to the same difference for a group of control countries. Our

regressions also include year fixed effects to account for the possibility of common shocks that

affect only the liberalizers, and country fixed effects to allow for differences in underlying

unobservable factors that may drive variation in wage growth across countries. We also control

for the impact of contemporaneous macroeconomic reforms such as inflation stabilization, trade

liberalization, privatization and Brady Plan debt relief programs. In every specification, we find

an economically and statistically significant increase in real wage growth for countries in the

liberalization group relative to the control group.


4
  In order to have comparable measures of levels of wages across countries, we plot the natural log of the real wage
in PPP adjusted US dollar terms.


                                                                                                                   3
       An open economy interpretation of the neoclassical growth model provides the cleanest

qualitative explanation of the new facts we uncover. Opening up to capital inflows reduces the

cost of capital in developing countries, and firms respond by increasing their rate of investment.

For a given growth rate of the labor force and total factor productivity, a higher rate of

investment increases the ratio of capital per effective worker, driving up the marginal product of

labor, and in turn, the market-clearing wage. Consistent with this chain of logic, Figure 2

demonstrates that the growth rate of labor productivity also rises sharply following

liberalizations. After controlling for other factors, the average growth rate of labor productivity

is 9.72 percentage points higher during the four-year liberalization window than it is in non-

liberalization years.

       From a quantitative perspective, however, it is less clear whether the neoclassical model

captures all relevant features of the data. In the standard growth model, capital account

liberalization works strictly through its impact on capital accumulation and has no effect on the

growth rate of aggregate total factor productivity (Gourinchas and Jeanne, 2006). The increase

in real wage growth present in the data is too large to be explained exclusively by capital

deepening under conventional assumptions about capital shares and the elasticity of substitution.

One possible explanation stems from the observation that liberalizations increase the quantity of

capital goods that emerging economies import from industrial nations (Alfaro and Hammel,

2007). If technology diffuses from developed to emerging economies through the technology

embodied in capital goods imports à la Eaton and Kortum (1999, 2001a, b), then liberalizations

may indeed drive up the growth rate of total factor productivity.

       While our approach enables us to test previously unexamined real-wage implications of

capital market opening, difference-in-difference estimation requires caution because the standard




                                                                                                      4
errors are susceptible to serial correlation (Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainaithan, 2004). Opening

up to foreign capital increases investment, which in turn drives up productivity and wages.

Because wages take time to adjust, wage growth for a given country may remain elevated above

its steady-state rate for a number of years after opening, thereby inducing serial correlation in the

country’s wage-growth residuals. Similarly, many countries open up at approximately the same

time, possibly inducing cross-country correlation in the residuals. Our empirical analysis uses

the Petersen (2009) technique to simultaneously adjust the standard errors for the potential

presence of both types of correlation in the residuals. No matter how we compute the standard

errors, the impact of capital market opening on wages and productivity remains economically

and statistically significant.

        The potential endogeneity of the liberalization decision also raises some concerns. If

profit-maximizing firms in a financially closed economy face the prospect of rapidly rising labor

costs they will want to substitute capital for labor. To the extent that opening up the capital

account would reduce the cost of capital, these firms have an incentive to lobby the government

to do so. If rising wages cause governments to open up then our estimates will spuriously

indicate a strong impact of liberalization on wages, when causation in fact runs the other way

round. While theoretically plausible, the endogeneity argument has no empirical support. Figure

1 is not consistent with the view that capital market opening occurs in response to rising labor

costs. If anything, wage growth actually falls slightly prior to the opening (Section 4C shows

that mean reversion à la Ashenfelter (1978) does not drive our results). The data are also not

consistent with the explanation that governments liberalize in anticipation of higher future labor

costs. Although wages rise sharply in the aftermath of liberalization, labor productivity rises

even faster, so unit labor costs do not increase.




                                                                                                     5
       Finally, with only twenty five countries in the sample, one may worry that a few large

outliers drive the central finding. This is not the case. Sign tests show that the median growth

rate of real wages in the post-liberalization period exceeds the pre-liberalization median too often

to be explained by chance.

       The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 uses theory to generate testable

predictions and explains how we identify real-life liberalization episodes. Section 3 describes

the data, construction of the control group, and presents preliminary findings. Section 4

discusses the empirical methodology, main results, and alternative interpretations. Section 5

examines the consistency of the results with the theory. Section 6 concludes.



2. Capital Market Integration in Emerging Economies

       This section uses an open economy version of the Solow model to generate previously

untested predictions about the impact of capital flows on the time-path of the real wage ( w ).

The central theoretical point about capital market integration is that it moves emerging

economies from a steady state in which their ratios of capital to effective labor are lower (and

rates of return to capital higher) than in the industrialized world, towards a steady state in which

ratios of capital-to-effective labor and rates of return are equal in both regions.

       Because capital and labor are complements in production, the marginal product of labor

(and hence the real wage) rises as countries open up and the process of capital deepening sets in.

This fundamental insight about capital flows and the dynamic path of wages would also hold in

an open economy Ramsey model. Since the focus of the paper is on wages, not other variables

(e.g., the current account) that depend on endogenous savings decisions, the Solow model

provides the most concise exposition.




                                                                                                       6
2A. Theory

        Assume that the country produces output using capital, labor, and a constant-returns-to-

scale production function with labor-augmenting technological progress:

                                Y  F  K , AL                                                       (1)

          K                                                               Y
Let k       be the amount of capital per unit of effective labor and y     the amount of
          AL                                                              AL

output per unit of effective labor. Using this notation and the homogeneity of the production

function we have:

                                 y  f k                                                            (2)

Also assume that the country saves a constant fraction of national income each period and adds it

to the capital stock, capital depreciates at the rate  , the labor force grows at the rate n, and total

factor productivity grows at the rate g.

        When the economy is in steady state, k is constant at the level ks.state , and the marginal

product of capital equals the interest rate (r) plus the depreciation rate:

                                 f (k s.state )  r                                                (3)

Because the impact of liberalization works through the cost of capital, equation (3) has important

implications for the dynamics of k and w in the aftermath of opening up.

        Let r* denote the exogenously given world interest rate. The standard assumption in the

literature is that r* is less than r, because the rest of the world has more capital per unit of

effective labor than the developing country. It is also standard to assume that the developing

country is small, so that nothing it does affects r*. Under these assumptions, capital surges in to

exploit the difference between r* and r when the developing country liberalizes.

        The absence of any frictions in the model means that the country’s ratio of capital to



                                                                                                           7
effective labor jumps immediately from ks.state to its post-liberalization, steady-state level

( k s*.state ). In the post-liberalization steady state, the marginal product of capital equals the world

interest rate plus the rate of depreciation:

                                               f   k s*.state   r *                              (4).

Instantaneous convergence implies that interest rates equalize immediately and that the country

installs capital at the speed of light. Two remarks about this unattractive feature of the model are

in order.

           First, instantaneous capital market convergence is not an artifact of the Solow model, but

of the small open economy assumption under which liberalization gives the country access to an

infinitely elastic supply of capital at the world interest rate. The same counterfactual

phenomenon would also occur in an open economy Ramsey model. Second, although we do not

see equalization of interest rates and capital-labor ratios across countries in the real world, a large

literature documents that the cost of capital drops and investment booms when developing

countries remove barriers to capital inflows.5

           There are a variety of formal methods for slowing down the speed of transition (e.g.,

adjustment costs of capital installation), but all of these methods would belabor the exposition

without altering the model’s fundamental prediction.6 The vital point is that k is greater than 0

during the country’s transition to its post-liberalization steady-state. The temporary growth in k

has important implications for the time path of real wage growth, which we now derive.

           The growth rate of the real wage is the derivative of the natural log of w with respect to

                  w d
time, that is,       (ln w(t )) . Since workers are paid their marginal product of labor,
                  w dt

5
    See Henry (2007), Stulz (2005) and the references therein.
6
    See chapter 2 of Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995) and Section 4.1 of Henry (2007).


                                                                                                            8
w  A[ f ( k )  kf '( k )] . This means that the growth rate of the real wage is given by:

                   w d             d                          A     kf (k )k
                      (ln( w(t ))   A[ f (k )  kf (k )]                       .
                   w dt             dt                         A [ f (k )  kf (k )]

We may write this expression as
                                              .     .                    .
                                             w A 1 f ' (k )k k
                                                *         *                                    (5)
                                             w A    f (k ) k




                f (k )[ f (k )  kf (k )]
where                                    is the elasticity of substitution.
                      f (k ) f (k )k

          The right-hand-side of Equation (5) demonstrates that the growth rate of the real wage

depends on the sum of two terms. The first term, the growth rate of total factor productivity

    A
(      ), is not affected by capital account policy in the canonical version of the neoclassical growth
    A

model. In Section 5 we discuss the implications of recent work that adopts a more catholic view

of the relationship between capital account liberalization and total factor productivity. For now,

we proceed as though the impact of liberalization works strictly through the second term, which

                                                                         1
is the product of the inverse of the elasticity of substitution (            ), capital’s share in national
                                                                         
            f (k )k                                                                             k
income (             ), and the growth rate of the ratio of capital per unit of effective labor ( ).
             f (k )                                                                              k

          Prior to liberalization, the ratio of capital to effective labor is constant at the level ks.state ,

          k                                                                                   k
so that      equals 0, and w simply grows at the same rate as total factor productivity. Since    is
          k                                                                                    k

greater than 0 during the transition to k s*.state , the growth rate of the real wage also increases


                                                                                                                 9
temporarily. Figure 3 illustrates the hypothetical time paths of r and the natural logs of k and w

under the assumption that the interest rate converges immediately upon liberalization but the

ratio of capital to effective labor does not.

        Again, previous work documents that the actual responses of the cost of capital and the

quantity of capital to liberalization resemble their hypothetical time paths. Figure 1 demonstrates

that the growth rate of the real wage also behaves in accordance with the theory. In Section 5 we

examine whether the size of the real wage increase is consistent with the magnitude of the

previously documented increases in the growth rate of capital. The next subsection explains how

we identify the real-life liberalization episodes used to construct Figure 1.



2B. Reality

        An ideal test of the prediction that real wage growth will rise following the removal of

restrictions on capital inflows requires information on capital account liberalization dates that is

more precise than one can generally obtain. In theory, opening the capital account is as simple

as pulling a single lever. In reality, the capital account has many components, so trying to

determine exactly when a country liberalizes (as in Section 2A) is not a trivial task. In fact, the

difficulty of determining precise liberalization dates causes most papers in the literature to ignore

the problem (Eichengreen, 2001). Instead of asking whether opening the capital account has an

impact on a country’s growth rate (as theory clearly dictates), most published studies examine

whether openness and long-run growth are positively correlated across countries. A brief

description of the data typically employed in such studies illustrates why tests of opening and

openness are not equivalent.

        To construct measures of openness, previously published work uses the broadest




                                                                                                   10
indicator of capital account policy available, the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange

Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER). The AREAER lists the rules and

regulations governing resident and nonresident capital-account transactions in each country, a

table summarizing the presence of restrictions, and a qualitative judgment on whether the

country has an open or closed capital account. For the editions of AREAER published between

1967 and 1996, the summary table contains a single line (line E2) entitled, “Restrictions on

payments for capital transactions.” The presence of a bullet point in line E2 indicates that the

country has some form of restrictions on capital account transactions. In effect, line E2 delivers

a binary judgment on whether the IMF considers a country’s capital account to be open or

closed.

          The typical study maps the qualitative information from Line E2 into a quantitative

measure of openness by tallying the number of years that each country was free from restrictions.

Dividing that tally by the total number of years in the period produces a number called SHARE—

the fraction of years over a given period that the IMF judged the country as open. For example,

if a country was declared open for 15 of the 30 years from 1967 to 1996, then SHARE equals 0.5.

          Papers that use the variable SHARE assess the economic impact of capital account policy

by running cross-country regressions of GDP growth on SHARE. The problem with cross-

sectional regressions of growth on SHARE is that they have little statistical power to distinguish

the transitional impact of liberalization on growth from the noise in the data and can easily

generate spurious conclusions (see Henry, 2007, p, 893). The cross-sectional regression

approach is equally ineffectual for estimating the impact of liberalization on the growth rate of

wages. Because theory predicts a short-lived impact of liberalization on the growth rate of

wages, it is not enough to know the fraction of years in which a country had an open capital




                                                                                                    11
account. We need to know the exact year in which the country began opening.

        In principle, one could look for the year in which the judgment in line E2 of the

AREAER switches from “closed” to “open.” The problem is that when the AREAER changes

its assessment of a country from closed to open, it does not indicate whether the change in

judgment results from an easing of restrictions on capital inflows or outflows. The distinction

matters. Theory predicts that when a capital-poor country liberalizes restrictions on capital

inflows it will experience a permanent fall in its cost of capital and a temporary increase in the

growth rate of wages. In principle, if that same country were to liberalize capital outflows

nothing would happen to its cost of capital, investment, or GDP.7

        In contrast to the previous literature which makes no attempt to find periods of opening,

this paper identifies liberalization dates using the point in time when countries first permitted

foreigners to purchase shares of companies listed on the domestic stock market. Relative to the

most general conception of the capital account, at first blush the lifting of restrictions on foreign

investment in the stock market may seem like a narrow way to define capital account

liberalization. But deeper reflection reveals that stock market liberalizations serve as observable

de facto indicators of harder-to-pinpoint de jure policy changes.8

        For instance, the opening of a country mutual fund is the modal means through which

countries first liberalize the stock market (see Table 1). If country-fund-opening dates are valid

proxies for the occurrence of broader, undocumented liberalizations that took place in the late

1980s and early 1990s, then significant quantities of capital that are not associated with any

particular country fund may flow in to the country as a consequence of the opening. Three facts

suggest that our stock market liberalization dates provide non-specious indicators of a larger

7
  For discussions of why this may not occur in practice, see Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan, and Volosovych (2008) and
Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002).
8
  See Kose et al. (2006) for a detailed discussion of de facto versus de jure indicators.


                                                                                                                12
move towards open capital markets.

         First, a steady stream of country funds, issuances of American Depository Receipts, and

other vehicles for foreign savers to buy domestic stocks typically follow the initial stock market

liberalizations (Karolyi, 2004; Gozzi, Levine and Schmukler, 2010). As a case in point, Chile

liberalized its stock market in May 1987 through the Toronto Trust Mutual Fund, a Canadian

closed-end fund with a net asset value of 37.7 million US dollars.9 In the next five years, six

additional country funds with a cumulative net asset value of 991.8 million dollars were

established in Chile.10

         Moving beyond Chile, Figure 4 demonstrates the extraordinary change wrought by stock

market liberalizations in emerging economies. Net inflows of equity capital to the developing

world, practically non-existent in the 1970s and early 1980s, accelerated sharply after the median

stock market liberalization date in our sample (1989). Policy makers often raise concerns about

the potential volatility of portfolio capital, worrying that net inflows of equity can easily turn to

net outflows at the first sign of trouble. The facts do not substantiate this concern. While Figure

4 indicates that the pace of equity inflows to developing countries slowed following the Mexican

Crisis in 1994-95 and the Asian Crisis of 1997-98, there is nothing that remotely resembles a

reversal of equity inflows.11

         It is also important to note that stock market liberalizations account for a substantial

fraction of foreign direct investment (FDI), the most stable form of foreign capital. A common

misconception views FDI solely as green field investment where a foreign company builds from

scratch a new manufacturing plant in an emerging economy. As a matter of official statistics,


9
  See Park and Van Agtmael (1993), Price (1994), and Wilson (1992).
10
   See Park and Van Agtmael (1993), Price (1994), and Wilson (1992).
11
   Concerns about the volatility of debt flows, on the other hand, are quite well founded. See Henry (2007) and
Rogoff (1999).


                                                                                                                  13
FDI includes any stock transaction (i.e., a cross-border merger or acquisition) that results in the

purchaser owning 10 percent or more of the voting shares.12 In fact, from 1991-2000, cross-

border mergers and acquisitions accounted for 48 percent of FDI in Latin America and 61

percent in East Asia (Chari, Ouimet, and Tesar, 2004).

          Second, the facilitation of cross-border financial flows and ownership through stock

market liberalization also induces large flows of physical capital. Stock market liberalizations in

emerging economies coincide with a significant increase in their imports of capital goods. In a

sample of twenty-five countries that liberalized their stock markets between 1980 and 1997,

liberalization leads to a 9-percent increase in capital goods as a fraction of total imports, and the

share of total machine imports to GDP rises by 13 percent (Alfaro and Hammel, 2007). Because

developing countries do not produce a significant portion of the capital goods that they use, the

observation that imports of capital goods rise in concert with the advent of portfolio equity

inflows increases confidence in earlier work on liberalization and aggregate investment.

          Third, with the sole exception of Malaysia during the Asian Crisis, none of the stock

market liberalization dates from Table 1 were followed by a reversal of freedom of foreign

access.

          Taken together, these three facts confirm that stock market liberalizations signify the

beginning of a steady march toward greater freedom of capital inflows and provide the closest

empirical analogue to the textbook example in Section 2A. Accordingly, we use the stock

market liberalization dates in Table 1 as the empirical counterpart to year “0” in the model of

Section 2A (Figure 3). Standard and Poor’s Emerging Markets Database covers 53 emerging

12
  The Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) defines foreign direct investment (FDI)
as: “A category of cross-border investment made by a resident in one economy (the direct investor) with the
objective of establishing a lasting interest in an enterprise (the direct investment enterprise) that is resident in an
economy other than that of the direct investor. The “lasting interest” is evidenced when the direct investor owns at
least 10% of the voting power of the direct investment enterprise” (OECD, 2008).


                                                                                                                      14
economies with stock markets. Of these 53 countries, 25 have stock market liberalization dates

that are: (a) consistently used elsewhere in the literature and (b) verifiable from primary sources.

Column (1) of Table 1 lists these twenty five countries and the year in which they liberalized.13

Table 2 presents summary statistics on the behavior of real wages in each of the twenty five

liberalizing countries. The next section explains the source and construction of the wage data.



3. Data

           The wage data come from the Industrial Statistics Database of the United Nations

Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). UNIDO provides data on total wages and

salaries, total employment and output for the manufacturing sector. For a given year, wages and

salaries include all payments to employees in cash or in kind. Payments include: (a) direct

wages and salaries; (b) remuneration for time not worked; (c) bonuses and gratuities; (d) housing

allowances and family allowances paid directly by the employer; and (e) payments in kind.

Excluded from wages and salaries are employers’ contributions on behalf of their employees to

social security, pension and insurance schemes, as well as the benefits received by employees

under these schemes and severance and termination pay.

           Conceptually, total wages and salaries equal W*L*H, where W is the hourly wage rate, L

is the stock of labor and H is total hours worked for the year. Since UNIDO provides no data on

the number of hours worked or the hourly wage, we divide total wages and salaries by total

employment (L) to compute the average annual wage (W*H) of each worker in the

manufacturing sector of each country (more on this point in Section 3B.1). UNIDO reports the

value of wages and salaries in local currency terms. We deflate each country’s nominal annual

wage in local currency by the local consumer price index (CPI) to create a local currency-
13
     For further details about the complexities of determining liberalization dates see Section 5 of Henry (2007).


                                                                                                                     15
denominated real wage.

       In addition to information on wages, employment, and output, we would like to have data

on the manufacturing capital stock. Unfortunately, UNIDO only provides data on investment.

The standard approach to an absence of capital stock data converts investment flows to capital

stocks with the perpetual inventory method by making assumptions about the initial level of

capital in some year and using the investment flows to interpolate the subsequent time path of the

capital stock.

       Interpolation is methodologically sound when the focus is on long-run relationships

where assumptions about the initial stock of capital make little difference. In contrast, this paper

focuses on short-run dynamics and therefore requires a clear picture of the trajectory of the

capital stock during the liberalization window. Simply put, it would be inappropriate to

interpolate the growth rate of the capital stock during liberalization episodes when trying to

measure the impact of liberalization on capital stock growth. Moreover, the UNIDO data set is

missing more than 50 percent of the country-year observations for investment in the aggregate

manufacturing sector, and many of these missing observations fall within the liberalization

window. In the absence of reliable capital stock data, we will use (in Section 5) estimates of

capital stock growth from previously published work to check the consistency of our results with

the theoretical channel from capital growth to wages.

       For each country in our sample, the annual wage data generally run from 1960 to 2003,

with the exact dates differing by countries. After taking the difference of the natural log to

compute growth rates, we have a total of 758 country-year observations with which to identify

the impact of liberalization on real wage growth. Table 1 shows that the timing of liberalizations

is correlated across countries, so these 758 observations are not independent. For instance,




                                                                                                  16
liberalizations may coincide with an exogenous global productivity shock that drives up wages in

all countries, irrespective of whether or not they liberalize.

       To address whether it is the case that an exogenous shock unrelated to opening up drives

the temporary increase in real wage growth, we select a group of control countries. The control

group consists of developing countries that are similar to the liberalizing countries except that the

control countries did not open their stock markets to foreign investment. Appendix A provides a

list of countries that have stock markets but never liberalized. These nations comprise the control

group against which we compare the real wage growth of the countries in our treatment group.



3B. Descriptive Findings and Data Concerns

       Figure 1 exhibits a steep positive inflection after year [0], indicating a sharp increase in

the growth rate of the real wage. However, with only twenty five countries in the sample an

important question is whether a few outliers drive the increase.

       The descriptive statistics in Table 2 suggest that this is not the case. Only four

countries—Indonesia, Malaysia, Pakistan, and Thailand—have mean growth rates in the

aftermath of liberalization that do not exceed their full sample mean (column 2). Turning from

means to medians, for each country in the sample we also performed simple Wilcoxon sign rank

tests on the data for each country (Wilcoxon, 1945). The procedure tests the equality of matched

pairs of observations by using the Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-ranks test. Applied to the

current context, the null hypothesis is that the distributions of pre- and post-liberalization wage

growth are the same. In the three-year post-liberalization period, five countries experience

median real wage growth that falls below the median growth rate of their real wage in the pre-

liberalization period. Given the null hypothesis, the probability (p-value) of finding no more




                                                                                                      17
than five countries with wage growth rates below their pre-liberalization median is 0.0015.

       Table 2 (Panel A) also shows the following quantities: (a) for each country, Column 1

gives the change in the natural log of the wage over the liberalization window (years [0] to [3]);

we denote this variable “liberalization log wage change” as a convenient shorthand expression;

(b) Column 2 gives the liberalization log wage change for each country expressed relative to the

country's mean log wage change over the pre-liberalization window (years [-3] to [-1]); (c)

Column 3 gives the liberalization log wage change for each country expressed relative to the

contemporaneous mean log wage change for the control group over the liberalization window

(years [0] to [3]); (d) Column 4 gives the “difference-in-difference” that results from subtracting

the real log wage change for the treatment countries expressed relative to the control group in the

pre-liberalization window from the quantity in Column 3.

       The average cumulative log wage change for the treatment group during the liberalization

window is 15.8% (Column 1); Relative to the pre-liberalization window, the cumulative log

wage change is 19.1% (Column 2). Relative to the control group during the liberalization

window, the cumulative log wage change is 26% (column 3). The average difference-in-

difference of the cumulative log wage change is 20.2% (column 4).

       For each of the quantities in Columns 1-4, we test whether the mean differs significantly

from zero and report a heteroscedasticity-consistent estimate of the standard error in Table 2,

Panel B. These simple tests support the observation that liberalization leads to large effects on

the level of real wages, lending credence to the more sophisticated regression results that follow.

       To provide additional descriptive evidence, Table 3 presents estimates of the impact of

liberalization on the growth rate of real wages over time. Panel A of Table 3 presents estimates

of one coefficient only, but allowing progressively more periods after the reform (from year 2 up




                                                                                                    18
to 5). For example, the coefficient on DUMMY03 estimates the average effect of liberalization

on real wage growth in years [0], [1], [2], and [3]. The coefficient estimate of 0.0369 suggests

that the average real wage growth in that four-year span is 3.69% per year, or an overall increase

of 14.76 percentage points (3.69*4). The average estimated effect of liberalization on wage

growth differs between specifications. Consistent with the theoretical prediction that

liberalization will produce a temporary increase in wage growth, the average effect becomes

progressively smaller as we add more years subsequent to the liberalization window. We also

estimated the coefficient estimates on the liberalization dummy over the [0, 2], [2, 4], and [4, 6]

event windows. However, the interpretation of the statistical difference of the coefficients across

the different windows is difficult given their overlapping nature.

       Panel A also presents an estimate of the “Ashenfelter” dip. The variable “Dummy ([-3],

[-1]),” which takes on a value of one for the three years before liberalization, shows that the pre-

reform dip in wage growth (2.37%) is smaller and less significant than the post-reform average

real wage growth of 3.69% in the four years following liberalization.

       Panel B presents the coefficient estimates on the liberalization dummy by individual year,

ranging from the liberalization year [0] up to five years following the liberalization [5]. Columns

2 and 3 indicate that the impact of liberalization on real wages is positive and significant in both

the first [1] and second [2] years following the liberalization. The coefficient estimates on the

liberalization dummy are not significant in years [3] to [5]. The estimates in years [1] and [2] are

significantly different from the coefficients in the other years.

       Although the numbers in Tables 2 and 3 suggest a reasonably consistent increase in real

wage growth across countries, two other questions about the data remain.




                                                                                                    19
3B.1 Hours Worked

       First, the necessity of using annual data instead of hourly wages raises a potential

measurement concern. If the average number of annual hours worked per employee increases

following liberalizations, then total annual compensation may rise without any change in the

implied hourly wage. In other words, the rise in average annual labor income (W*H)

documented in Figure 1 could be the result of an increase in hours worked rather than an increase

in the hourly wage rate. To interpret the impact of liberalization on total annual compensation as

an increase in labor’s compensation per unit of time, we need to know that the average number

of hours worked does not rise significantly following liberalizations.

       In an attempt to address this concern we ran into non-trivial constraints that forced us to

rely on data for a subset of the countries in our sample. UNIDO does not provide information on

hours worked. Data available from the International Labor Organization (ILO) is also not

helpful because the ILO’s definition of hours worked is inconsistent across countries. Within a

given country, the ILO’s definition of hours worked sometimes varies across sectors and over

time as well. In the end, we used data provided by the Groningen Growth and Development

Center (GGDC) because GGDC seemed to take most seriously the problems associated with

trying to construct a consistent cross-country measure of hours worked. In their own words, the

GGDC’s estimates of hours worked are based on “…a country-by-country…judgment of which

sources made the most appropriate adjustments to achieve the preferred concept of actual hours

worked per person employed" (GGDC, 2011). The GGDC data include paid overtime and

exclude paid hours that are not worked due to sickness, vacation and holidays.

       Specifically, the data on hours worked come from GGDC’s Total Economy Database,

which extends the work of Angus Maddison (1980). Although the Total Economy Database




                                                                                                 20
contains annual numbers on GDP, population, employment, hours and productivity for about 125

countries from 1950 to 2008, the series on hours worked per person are available for only 43

countries. Twelve of those 43 countries are also in our dataset: Argentina, Brazil, Chile,

Colombia, Greece, Korea, Mexico, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, Taiwan, and Venezuela.

        To assess whether the rise in average annual compensation is driven by an increase in

hours worked, Figure 5, which plots the natural log of hours worked in liberalization time,

illustrates that hours worked are invariant to liberalization. Between years [-5] and [-1] the

average natural log of hours worked is 7.64. In years [1] through [5] the average is 7.62. In

levels these numbers translate to an average of 2094 hours worked per year prior to liberalization

and 2066 hours worked per year after. Dividing 2094 and 2066 by the number of weeks in a

year (52, not adjusting for vacation time) gives an estimate of roughly 40 hours to the average

work week in these twelve countries before and after opening up. That number seems entirely

reasonable and reinforces our confidence in the GGDC data. Looking at medians instead of

means does not alter the story. The median natural log of hours worked before liberalization is

7.59. The median after liberalization is also 7.59. In short, the number of hours worked per year

does not change with liberalization and does not drive the increase in real wage growth

documented in Figure 1.14



3B.2 Concurrent Economic Events

        A second concern is that capital market openings may coincide with major economic

events that could have a significant impact on wages independently of any effects of


14
  As a final check we also used the GGDC data to construct a measure of hourly wages for the subset of twelve
countries. Regressing the change in the natural log of the hourly wage on the same right-hand-side variables that
appear in Equation (6), we find results that are qualitatively identical to those reported in Panel A of Tables 4
through 6.


                                                                                                                    21
liberalization. Union activity provides a case in point. If agitation for higher pay by organized

labor coincides with liberalization then the estimates may be overstated. A survey of labor

market events during capital account liberalization episodes revealed that significant union

activity to secure higher wages was present in only three of the twenty five countries in our

sample—Brazil, Turkey and South Korea. When these countries are dropped, the cumulative

raw “difference-in-difference” estimate is not substantively different at 17.39%. Also, when we

control for unionization in the formal regression analysis the coefficient on the capital account

liberalization dummy remains unchanged. In two other countries—Chile and South Africa—the

government thwarted protestors demanding wage hikes. The other 20 countries in the sample

did not experience any significant union activity during their liberalization episodes.

       While union activity does not drive the increase in wages, a separate concern is that

liberalizations often coincide with major economic reforms that could have a significant impact

on wages apart from any effects of liberalization. Stabilizing inflation, removing trade

restrictions, and privatizing state-owned enterprises are all reforms that may affect real wages

through their impact on the efficiency of domestic production. Indeed, Table 1 demonstrates that

the timing of these reforms makes it plausible that they, not capital account liberalization, are

responsible for the increase in real wages apparent in Figure 1. The next section, which presents

our formal empirical methodology and results, uses the information in Table 1 to control directly

for the impact of other reforms and to address a host of lingering concerns and alternative

explanations.




                                                                                                    22
4. Empirical Methodology and Results

         We evaluate the statistical significance of the temporary increase in wage growth by

estimating the following difference in difference panel regression specification:

     ln witdif  a 0  COUNTRYi  a1 * LIBERALIZE it  a 2 * TRADEit  a3 * STABILIZE it
                                                                                                   (6)
     a 4 * PRIVATIZEit  a5 * BRADYit   it

         The left-hand-side variable,  ln witdif , is the change in the natural log of the real local

currency value of annual compensation for country i in year t minus the average change in the

natural log of the real wage for the group of control countries in year t. Moving to the right-

hand-side of equation (6), the variable LIBERALIZEit is a dummy variable that takes on a value

of one in the year that country i liberalizes ([0]) and each of the subsequent three years ([1], [2]

and [3]). This means that the coefficient a1 measures the average annual deviation of the growth

rate of the real wage in the treatment group from the growth rate of the real wage in the control

group during the three-year liberalization episode.

         The right-hand-side of equation (6) also contains four additional country-specific dummy

variables—STABILIZE, TRADE, PRIVATIZE and BRADY—that are designed to prevent country-

specific shocks in the shape of economic reforms from artificially inflating the coefficient on

LIBERALIZE. We treat reforms and liberalization symmetrically, constructing dummy variables

that take on the value one in the year a reform program begins and each of the three subsequent

years.

Turning at last to the error term,  it , it is important to note that when the residuals are correlated

across observations, OLS standard errors can be biased and may over or underestimate the true

variability of the coefficient estimates. Specifically, the standard distributional assumptions

needed for valid statistical inference will not hold in the presence of: (a) correlation of the



                                                                                                         23
residuals across countries within a given time period (cross-sectional dependence), or (b)

correlation of the residuals within a given country over time (time-series dependence). Point (a)

matters because liberalizations often occur at the same time for different countries, possibly

inducing correlation in the wage-growth residuals across countries at a given point in time. Point

(b) matters because it takes time for wages to adjust to their new trajectory; for a given country,

wage growth may remain elevated above its steady-state rate for a number of years in the post-

liberalization period, thereby inducing serial correlation in the country’s wage-growth residuals.

To compute accurate standard errors we employ various clustering procedures described below.



4A. Benchmark Estimates: A Difference in Difference Specification

       Table 4 (Panel A) presents the results from our estimate of Equation (6), restricting the

sample to data three years before the liberalization and three years after. The standard errors are

clustered by year to account for potential cross-country correlation in the wage growth residuals.

The estimate of the coefficient on LIBERALIZE ranges from 0.031 to 0.043. Relative to the

control group, the average growth rate of the typical country’s real wage exceeds its long-run

mean by 3.1 to 4.3 percentage points per year during liberalization episodes. The estimate of the

coefficient on the liberalization dummy in Panel A of Table 4 is statistically significant at the 1

percent level in nearly every specification.

       Panel B of Table 4 estimates equation (6) using data that spans the entire sample to show

that the impact of liberalization on real wage growth is robust to potential concerns about the

length of the pre-liberalization window used for estimation. The coefficient on LIBERALIZE

ranges from 0.036 to 0.047 and is significant at the 1 percent level in all but one specification.

That specification is significant at the 5% level.




                                                                                                     24
           Controlling for the other economic reforms that tend to accompany liberalization also

does not reduce the impact of capital account opening on the growth rate of the real wage.

Column (6) in Panel A of Table 4 shows that after accounting for the effects of inflation

stabilization, trade liberalization, and privatization, the coefficient on LIBERALIZE is 0.031.

The impact of other economic reforms on the growth rate of the real wage is not as robust of that

of liberalization, but we do find some significant effects of inflation stabilization and

privatization. This reinforces our confidence in the accuracy of the reform dates and the

relevance of the corresponding dummy variables as controls.

           Turning from economic reforms to statistical issues, researchers do not always know

whether the precise form of the dependence in residuals is time-series or cross-sectional in

nature. As a way of addressing this concern, Peterson (2009) suggests a less parametric

estimation approach that clusters on two dimensions simultaneously (e.g., country and time).

Peterson’s approach uses the following estimate of the variance-covariance matrix, which

combines the standard errors clustered by country with the standard errors clustered by time:

VCountry &Time  VCountry  VTime  VWhite .15

           The first matrix on the right-hand-side allows standard errors to be clustered by country,

capturing the unspecified correlation between observations on the same country in different years

(e.g., correlations between εit and εis). The second matrix on the right-hand-side, allows standard

errors to be clustered by time, capturing the unspecified correlation between observations on

different countries in the same year (e.g., correlations between εit and εkt). Since both the

country- and time-clustered variance-covariance matrix include the diagonal of the variance-

covariance matrix, the Peterson procedure subtracts off the White variance-covariance matrix to


15
     Proposed by Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2006), and Thompson (2006).


                                                                                                    25
avoid double counting. This method allows for both a country and a time effect, although

observations on different countries in different years are assumed to be uncorrelated. Peterson

(2009) demonstrates through simulation that clustering by two dimensions produces less biased

standard errors.

           Table 5 (Panel A) presents estimates of equation (6) that use Petersen’s (2009) procedure

to simultaneously cluster the standard errors by year (to adjust for cross-country correlation) and

by country (to adjust for serial correlation).16 Since it is not possible to include country fixed

effects while simultaneously clustering the standard errors by year and country, the magnitude of

the estimates in Table 5 are not identical to those in Table 4, but they are very similar. Focusing,

then, on the precision of the estimates, we see that the estimate of every coefficient in Table 5 in

both Panels A and B is significant at the one percent confidence level. This suggests that our

general finding is robust to concerns about both serial and cross-country correlation in the error

terms.



4A.1 An Alternative Specification: Country and Year Fixed Effects

           As an alternative to our difference-in-difference estimates, we regress the change in the

natural log of the real wage or a full set of country-fixed and year-fixed effects plus the reform

dummies. Specifically, we estimate:

                ln wit  a0  COUNTRYi  YEARt  a1 * LIBERALIZEit  a2 * TRADEit 
                                                                                                       (7).
               a3 * STABILIZEit  a4 * PRIVATIZEit  a5 * BRADYit   it

           The left-hand-side variable,  ln wit , is the natural log of the real local currency value of

annual compensation for country i in the treatment group in year t minus the same variable in



16
     For another discussion of multi-way clustering see Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2009).


                                                                                                        26
year t-1. The variable YEARt is shorthand for the set of year-fixed effects. The right-hand-side

of equation (7) also contains four additional dummy variables—STABILIZE, TRADE,

PRIVATIZE and BRADY. The standard errors are clustered by year.

       Table 6 (Panel A) presents the results from our estimate of Equation (7). The standard

errors are clustered by year to account for potential cross-country correlation in the wage growth

residuals. The impact of liberalization on real wage growth is economically large. The estimate

of the coefficient on LIBERALIZE ranges from 0.038 to 0.043. This means that during

liberalization episodes the average growth rate of the typical country’s real wage exceeds its

long-run mean by 3.8 to 4.3 percentage points per year. All but one estimate of the coefficient

on the liberalization dummy in Panel A of Table 6 is statistically significant at the 1 percent

level. Controlling for the other economic reforms that tend to accompany liberalization also

does not reduce the impact of capital account opening on the growth rate of the real wage.

Column (5) in Panel A of Table 6 shows that after accounting for the effects of inflation

stabilization, trade liberalization, and privatization, the coefficient on LIBERALIZE is 0.0388.



4B. Alternative Explanations

       One interpretation of the evidence says that wages rise following liberalizations because

of an increase in labor demand stemming from a capital-deepening induced rise in productivity.

Alternatively, the increase in wages may be due to a reduction in labor supply. The argument

runs as follows. If workers perceive the impact of liberalization on wages to be permanent, then

they effectively receive a positive shock to their permanent income and may reduce their labor

supply accordingly. If this is the case then the observed increase in wage growth may stem from




                                                                                                   27
a decrease in labor supply as well as an increase in labor demand.17

         The employment data are not consistent with a decrease in labor supply. There is no

discernible change in the growth rate of employment following liberalizations. The regression

specifications in Table 8 examine the change in the natural log of employment on the same right-

hand-side variables that appear in Equation (7). The liberalization dummy is never significant.

Also, if labor supply decreases then we would also expect a decline in the number of hours

worked. Again, Figure 4 demonstrates that this is not the case. Overall, the evidence does not

suggest that workers reduce their labor supply in response to liberalization. While we do not

formally estimate the labor supply decision and cannot exclude the possibility that part of the

wage increase results from a decrease in labor supply, if this alternative explanation is at work its

overall impact appears to be second order.



4C. Economic Interpretation

         There are two ways to examine the economic significance of the results. First, consider

the magnitude of the growth rate of the real wage during liberalization episodes relative to the

growth rate of the real wage over the entire sample. To do this, use the estimate of the constant

and the liberalization dummy from the regression that controls for other economic reforms

(Column 5 in Table 6). Real wage grow by an average of 1.8 percent per year over the entire

pre-liberalization sample. The estimate of the coefficient on the liberalization dummy is 0.039.

Adding the average pre-liberalization real wage growth to the coefficient on the liberalization

dummy gives the average growth rate of the real wage during liberalization episodes—5.7

percent per year. This means that in the year the liberalization occurs and each of the subsequent

17
  An alternative view is that labor supply is relatively inelastic (see Pencavel 1986 on this point). If this is the case,
workers may not reduce the number of hours that they want to work in response to the increase in their expected
future income.


                                                                                                                       28
three, the average growth rate of the real wage is almost three times as large as in non-

liberalization years (5.7 versus 1.8).

       Of course, the increase in the growth rate of the real wage is temporary, so a second way

of assessing economic significance is to compute the impact of liberalization on the permanent

level of the real wage. For the countries in the treatment group, the average level of annual

compensation in the year before liberalization (year [-1]) is 2,686 PPP-adjusted dollars. During

the three-year liberalization window the real wage grows at 5.7 percent per year, so that by the

end of year [3] the average level of the real wage is 2686e0.057*4= 3,374 PPP-adjusted dollars.

Now assume that that in the absence of liberalization the real wage would have grown at the

sample mean of 1.8 percent per year. In that case, the level of the real wage at the end of year

[3] would be 2686 e0.018*4= 2,887 PPP-adjusted dollars. In other words, by the time the impact of

liberalization has run its course, the average worker in the manufacturing sector has annual take

home pay that is 487 dollars higher (3,374 minus 2,887) than it would have been in the absence

of liberalization. This change in the level of the wage is equal to nearly one-fifth of the average

manufacturing worker’s pre-liberalization, PPP-adjusted take home pay.

       It is also important to note that the results are not an artifact of mean reversion following

a temporary fall in earnings à la Ashenfelter (1978). Figure 1 shows a decline in the level of the

real wage from an average of 2,968 PPP-adjusted dollars five years prior to liberalization to an

average of 2,686 PPP-adjusted dollars a year prior to liberalization. A few hypothetical

calculations demonstrate that the results do not simply reflect a bounce-back effect. Suppose

that instead of declining, on average, for the next four years (as they do in the data), real wages

grew at their (continuously compounded) long-run rate of 1.8 percent per year over the pre-

liberalization window. Under that scenario, the real wage in year [3] would have been 3,485




                                                                                                   29
PPP-adjusted dollars. The actual level of the average real wage in year [3] is 4,050 PPP-adjusted

dollars, roughly 20 percent higher than the level that would have prevailed had wages simply

continued to grow at their long-run rate.



4D. The Impact of Liberalization on Productivity

       The results suggest that the response of wages to capital account liberalization is large.

To scrutinize the plausibility of our estimates we cross-checked the results against data on labor

productivity. The model in Section 2 demonstrates that liberalization induces capital deepening,

and through the increase in capital per worker, drives up productivity, the demand for labor, and

the real wage. If this chain of reasoning has any empirical bite then during liberalization

episodes labor productivity should rise in concert with wages.

       To formally test the relation between liberalization and the growth rate of labor

productivity, we estimate the following difference in difference regression:

      Y
 ln( )itdif  a0  COUNTRYi  a1 * LIBERALIZEit  a2 * TRADEit  a3 * STABILIZEit
      L                                                                                       (8).
 a4 * PRIVATIZEit  a5 * BRADYit   it

Equation (8) is identical to (6) except that instead of the change in the natural log of the annual

wage, the left-hand-side variable is now the change in the natural log of the annual real value-

added per worker in local currency terms minus the average change in the natural log of real

value-added per worker in the control group. Again, to be consistent with the wage estimates we

cluster the standard errors by year.

       Table 7 (Panel A) shows that liberalization has a positive and significant impact on

productivity growth. The estimates of the coefficient on the liberalization dummy range from

0.076 to 0.097. Every estimate of the coefficient on the liberalization dummy in Panel A of



                                                                                                      30
Table 7 is statistically significant. Taken together, these results suggest that liberalization, not an

external shock or domestic economic reforms, is responsible for the increase in productivity

growth.

           In particular, Column (6) of Panel A in Table 7 demonstrates that after accounting for the

potential impact of other economic reforms, the estimate of the coefficient on the liberalization

dummy is 0.972. This means that the average growth rate of productivity is 9.72 percentage

points higher during the three-year liberalization window than in non-liberalization years. The

9.72 percentage point increase in productivity growth associated with liberalization is larger than

the 3.9 percentage point increase in wage growth. Because the increase in productivity outstrips

the increase in wage growth, manufacturing-sector profitability actually rises during

liberalizations.18

           Panel B of Table 7 shows that the results for productivity growth and liberalization are

robust to all of the statistical concerns raised about the estimation of wage growth and

liberalization examined in Sections 4A.



5. Discussion

           While the size of the increase in productivity growth more than matches the size of the

increase in real wage growth, the important unanswered question is whether the magnitude of

either increase is consistent with the model that drives the estimates. To answer the question,

begin with the standard assumption that liberalization has no impact on TFP growth and recall

                     .     .                    .
             w A 1 f ' (k )k k
Equation (5):   *         * . With no change in the growth rate of TFP, Equation (5)
             w A      k     k

implies that the change in the growth rate of the real wage equals the product of three numbers:

18
     Chari and Henry (2008) also find that the return to capital in the manufacturing sector rises during liberalizations.


                                                                                                                        31
the reciprocal of the elasticity of substitution, capital’s share in national income, and the change

in the growth rate of capital per effective worker.

         Specifically, we have:

                                     .                    .
                                    w 1 f ' (k )k k
                                      *         *                                                               (9)
                                    w      k      k

The capital share typically lie between 1/3 and 1/2.19 Obtaining an estimate of the change in

capital growth requires a little more effort. We know from previous work that aggregate capital

stock growth increases by 1.1 percentage points following liberalizations (Henry, 2003). We can

use the aggregate number to calculate a rough upper bound for the change in manufacturing

sector capital growth. For the countries in our sample, the manufacturing sector accounts for

about 1/5 of GDP. Assuming zero net growth in capital for the agriculture and service sectors,

the largest possible increase in the growth rate of capital in manufacturing is about 5.5

percentage points. This back-of-the-envelope calculation finds empirical support elsewhere in

the literature. Using a subset of the countries in this paper, Chari and Henry (2008) calculate that

the growth rate of capital in the manufacturing sector increases by 4.1 percentage points per year

following liberalizations. Increases in capital stock growth between 4.1 and 5.5 percentage

points are also consistent with the size of the fall in the cost of capital that occurs following

liberalizations.20

         Suppose the capital share is 1/2 and the change in capital growth is 5.5 percentage points.

Then for capital-deepening alone to explain the 3.9-percentage-point increase in wage growth

you need an elasticity of substitution less than or equal to 0.7. If the capital share is 1/3 and the

change in capital growth is 4.1 percentage points, then the elasticity of substitution must be less

19
   A few studies find capital shares in developing countries as high as two-thirds (See for example, Rodríguez and
Ortega, 2006). On the other hand, Gollin (2002) documents capital shares closer to a third.
20
   See Henry (2007), pp. 897-900.


                                                                                                                     32
than or equal to 0.35. There is little consensus on the size of the elasticity of substitution. Early

work estimated small elasticities that were statistically indistinguishable from zero.21 More

recent studies cannot reject the hypothesis that the elasticity of substitution is 1 (Caballero,

1994). Most relevant to the countries in this paper, Coulibaly and Millar (2007) estimate an

elasticity of substitution of about 0.8 for South Africa. With a standard error of 0.08, the

Coulibaly and Millar estimate could imply an elasticity as small as 0.64. With a change in

capital growth of 5.5 percentage points, a capital share of 1/2, and an elasticity of substitution of

0.64, Equation (9) predicts that liberalization would generate a 4.3 percentage-point increase in

wage growth.

           We do not mean to push any particular value for the capital share. And it is not clear that

we have a consensus estimate of the size of the elasticity of substitution in developed countries,

let alone emerging economies. What is clear, however, is that if you want to maintain the

assumption that liberalization has no impact on total factor productivity, then the observed

increases in wage growth are consistent with the model only if you are willing to concede that

the elasticity of substitution is substantially less than 1 (i.e., the world is not Cobb-Douglas). But

if the elasticity of substitution is significantly less than one, then it is hard to understand how

capital’s income share remains constant (or increases) following the liberalization-induced fall in

the cost of capital.

           On the other hand, if you maintain that the world is Cobb-Douglas, then our wage results

imply that liberalization has an impact on total factor productivity (TFP). In a Cobb-Douglas

world with a capital share of one half, Equation (9) implies an increase in real wage growth of

2.75 percentage points-leaving a gap of roughly one percentage point to be explained. A gap of

one percentage point per year would require a four percent increase in the level of factor
21
     For a survey of this literature see Chirinko (1993).


                                                                                                      33
productivity over four years. If opening up brings about changes that raise an economy’s

permanent level of efficiency by four percent, then this will show up as a temporary increase in

TFP growth during the transition.22 One can imagine a number of channels that lie outside the

confines of the Solow model through which liberalization raises efficiency by this magnitude

over the course of a four year window.

        For instance, liberalization may enable firms to import more efficient machines (e.g.,

tractors instead of hoes) that effectively shift the country’s production technology closer to the

world frontier. DeLong (2004) argues that after liberalizing the capital account “…developing

countries…would enjoy the benefits from technology advances and from learning-by-doing

using modern machinery.” In other words, to the extent that technological progress diffuses

from developed to developing countries, the importation of new machinery provides an

important conduit through which the diffusion may occur (Eaton and Kortum, 2001a). Almost

all of the world’s research and development (R&D) takes place in a small number of industrial

countries (Eaton and Kortum, 1999), and the same group of countries accounts for over 70

percent of the world’s machine exports in a given year (Eaton and Kortum, 2001b; Alfaro and

Hammel, 2007).

        Evidence from the literature supports the conjecture that developing countries can import

technological progress by liberalizing the capital account. In the immediate aftermath of

liberalizations, firms in the manufacturing sector of developing countries accumulate capital at a

faster rate than they did before the liberalization (Chari and Henry, 2008). Furthermore, these

countries raise their rate of capital accumulation by importing more capital goods. As a result of


22
  While endogenous growth models such as Romer (1986) certainly allow for the possibility of permanent growth
effects due to innovation, this view of the world strikes us as most relevant for countries that actually do the
innovating. Emerging economies are more likely to be adopters of technology, engaged in a periodic process of
capital upgrading and technological catch up that bears closer resemblance to periodic jumps in the level of TFP.


                                                                                                                34
liberalization, the share of capital goods imports to total imports rises by 9 percent, and the share

of total machine imports as a fraction of GDP rises by 13 percent (Alfaro and Hammel, 2007).

         The observation that both imports of capital goods and total factor productivity rise in

concert with liberalization lends credence to the notion that new capital goods embody

technological progress and that developing countries can raise their growth rates of total factor

productivity by liberalizing the capital account.23 The observation is also consistent with work

showing that cross-country variation in the composition of capital investment explains much of

the cross-country variation in total factor productivity (Caselli and Wilson, 2003).

         On the other hand, some argue that the simplest explanation of capital-account-

liberalization-induced TFP growth lies with the economic reforms that accompany liberalization.

Economic reforms improve resource allocation, essentially producing a one-time shift in the

production function that temporarily raises the growth rate of TFP, without inducing

technological process per se (Henry, 2003). Others posit that liberalization facilitates increased

risk sharing, which might encourage investment in riskier, higher growth technologies (Levine,

1997; Levine and Zervos, 1998a). Yet another explanation is that capital account liberalization

generates unspecified “collateral benefits” that increase productivity (Kose, Prasad, Rogoff, and

Wei, 2006).

         Sorting through competing explanations for the increase in total factor productivity

following liberalizations is an important research challenge that lies beyond the scope of this

paper. The bottom line of the discussion here is that the size of the increases in wage growth and

productivity we report are consistent with the model that drives our estimation. Whether the

primary source of those increases lies with capital deepening or increased total factor


23
  Also, in the spirit of Rajan and Zingales (1998), liberalization may improve domestic firms’ access to external
finance, which might in turn increase the rate at which firms import capital goods.


                                                                                                                    35
productivity depends on reasonable differences in views about the elasticity of substitution that

have yet to be resolved in the literature.



6. Conclusion

        In the process of debating the impact of trade on wages, international economists pay

relatively little attention to the impact of trade in capital. Debating the costs and benefits of

capital market liberalization on economic growth, macro and financial economists largely ignore

the implications of increased capital market integration for wages. Yet labor income typically

accounts for about two-thirds of GDP. Almost two decades after the advent of capital account

liberalization in the developing world, our paper provides the first systematic analysis of the

impact of liberalization on the level of real wages.

        Increased capital market integration in the 1980s and 1990s sharply reduced the cost of

capital for manufacturing firms in emerging economies. In response to the fall in their cost of

capital, these firms installed new machinery, much of which was imported from abroad, and may

have embodied substantial technological progress. The combination of capital deepening and

embodied technological progress drove up the productivity of workers in the manufacturing

sector. Accordingly, the demand for those workers increased, along with their real wage.24

        While the focus of this paper is on the level of real wages, our findings also provide

important clues about the rise in wage inequality in developing countries documented by

Goldberg and Pavcnik (2007). If the liberalization-induced increase in wages was evenly

distributed across skilled and unskilled workers in the manufacturing sector, then no increase in

the skill premium would have occurred. However, two observations suggest that the increase in


24
 Cragg and Epelbaum (1996) and Behrman, Birdsall, and Szekely (2000) make a similar argument for Latin
America.


                                                                                                         36
manufacturing sector wages was probably concentrated among highly skilled workers. First,

countries’ imports of machinery and equipment rise substantially in the aftermath of capital

account liberalizations and firms that import machinery and equipment generally employ a larger

share of high-skilled workers than firms that do not import such capital (Harrison and Hanson,

1999). Second, work that is characterized as unskilled from a developed country’s perspective

may be skilled-labor intensive in comparison to typical domestic production activities in a

developing country (Feenstra and Hanson, 1997, 2003).

       While it seems plausible to consider that capital market liberalization contributed to

increased wage inequality in developing countries during the 1980s and 1990s, it is no more than

a conjecture because the economic model we employ makes no distinction between skilled and

unskilled workers. Moving from conjecture to testable prediction would require a model with

skilled labor, unskilled labor, and capital as three distinct factors of production. In a three-factor

model, capital deepening could exacerbate wage inequality through a form of skill-biased

technological change if capital is more substitutable for unskilled workers and more

complementary to skilled workers. However, since we do not use such a model, and our data do

not provide information about the skill composition of the labor force, we cannot test this

prediction.

       Be that as it may, the bottom line of this paper is that increased capital market integration

raised the average standard of living for a significant fraction of the workforce in developing

countries. If labor is mobile across sectors, then over time we would expect the productivity-

driven wage gains in manufacturing to translate into higher incomes for workers elsewhere in the

economy. The extent to which the labor market in these countries functions well enough to

allow workers to respond to wage differentials across sectors is an important issue that lies




                                                                                                    37
beyond the scope of this paper.25 As the quality and breadth of data on labor markets in

developing countries continues to improve, future work may produce more definitive

conclusions.




25
  See Wacziarg and Seddon Wallack (2004) for an analysis of intersectoral mobility of labor in response to trade
reforms.


                                                                                                                   38
References

Aitken, Brian, Ann Harrison, and Robert Lipsey. 1996. “Wages and foreign ownership A
       comparative study of Mexico, Venezuela, and the United States,” Journal of
        International Economics, 40(3-4), 345–371.

Alfaro, Laura and Eliza Hammel. 2007. “Capital Flows and Capital Goods,” Journal of
        International Economics, 72(1), 128-150.

Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych. 2008. “Why
        Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation.” Review
        of Economics and Statistics, 90(2), 347-368.

Almeida, Rita. 2007. “The Effects of Foreign Owned Firms on the Labor Market,” Journal of
      International Economics, 72(1), 75–96.

Ashenfelter, Orley. 1978. “Estimating the Effect of Training Programs on Earnings,” The
      Review of Economics and Statistics, 60 (1), 47-57.

Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-I-Martin. 1995. Economic Growth, New York: McGraw Hill.

Behrman, Jere, Nancy Birdsall, and Miguel Szekely. 2000. "Economic Reform and Wage
      Differentials in Latin America," IADB Working Paper 435. Washington, DC: Inter
      American Development Bank.

Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey, and Christian Lundblad. 2001. "Emerging Equity Markets
       and Economic Development," Journal of Development Economics, 66(2), 465-504.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should We
       Trust Difference in Difference Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), 249-
       75.

Borjas, George, Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1997. “How Much Do Immigration
        and Trade Affect Labor Market Outcomes?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1,
        1-90.

Caballero, Ricardo J. 1994. "Small Sample Bias and Adjustment Costs," Review of Economics
       and Statistics, 76, 52-58.

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah Gelbach and Douglas L. Miller. 2006. “Bootstrap-Based
      Improvements for Inference with Clustered Errors,” Working Paper 06-21, Department of
      Economics, University of California -Davis.

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah Gelbach and Douglas L. Miller. 2009. “Robust Inference with Multi-
      way Clustering," NBER Technical Working Paper Number 327.



                                                                                            39
Card, David. 2009. “Immigration and Inequality,” NBER Working Paper Number 14683.

Caselli, Francesco and Daniel Wilson. 2003. “Importing Technology,” Journal of Monetary
        Economics, 51(1), 1-32.

Chari, Anusha and Peter Blair Henry. 2008. “Firm-Specific Information and the Efficiency of
       Investment,” Journal of Financial Economics, 87 (3), 636-655.

Chari, Anusha, Paige P. Ouimet, and Linda L. Tesar. 2004. “Cross Border Mergers and
       Acquisitions in Emerging Markets: The Stock Market Valuation of Corporate Control,”
       EFA 2004 Maastricht Meetings Paper No. 3479.

Chirinko, Robert S. 1993. "Business Fixed Investment Spending: Modeling Strategies, Empirical
       Results, and Policy Implications," Journal of Economic Literature, 31, 1875-1911.

Cline, William R. 1995. International Debt Reexamined. Washington, D.C.: Institute for
       International Economics.

---------. 1997. Trade and Income Distribution. Washington, D.C.: Institute for International
         Economics.

Coulibaly, Brahima and Jonathan Millar. 2007. “Estimating the Long-Run User Cost Elasticity
       for a Small Open Economy: Evidence Using Data from South Africa,” Federal Reserve
       Board of Governors, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 2007-25.

Cragg, M.I. and M. Epelbaum. 1996. “Why has Wage Dispersion Grown in Mexico? Is it the
       Incidence of Reforms or the Growing Demand for Skills?” Journal of Development
       Economics, 51, 99-116.

DeLong, J. Bradford. 2004. “Should We Still Support Untrammeled International Capital
     Mobility? Or Are Capital Controls Less Evil than We Once Believed?” The Economists’
     Voice, 1.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum. 1999. “International Technology Diffusion: Theory and
       Measurement," International Economic Review, 40(3), 1999, 537-570.

---------. 2001a. “Technology, Trade, and Growth: A Unified Framework,” European Economic
         Review, 45(4-6), 2001, 742-755.

---------. 2001b. “Trade in Capital Goods,” European Economic Review, 45(7), 2001, 1195-1235.

Eichengreen, Barry. 2001. “Capital Account Liberalization: What Do Cross-Country
      Studies Tell Us?” The World Bank Economic Review, 16(3), 341-365.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon. H. Hanson. 1997. “Foreign Direct Investment and Relative
       Wages: Evidence from Mexico’s Maquiladoras,” Journal of International



                                                                                                40
       Economics, 42(3-4), 371–93.

---------. 2003. “Global Production Sharing and Rising Inequality: A Survey of Trade and
         Wages” in Handbook of International Trade, Choi, E.K. and J. Harrigan (eds.), Malden,
         MA: Blackwell, 146-185.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. 1994. “Introduction” in The Internationalization of Equity Markets, Jeffrey
       A. Frankel (ed), Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1-20.

Goldberg, Pinelopi and Nina Pavcnik. 2007. “Distributional Effects of Globalization in
      Developing Countries,” Journal of Economic Literature, 45(1), 39-82.

Gollin, Douglas. 2002. “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy, 90, 458-
        474.

Gourinchas, Pierre Olivier and Olivier Jeanne. 2006. “The Elusive Gains from International
      Financial Integration,” Review of Economic Studies, 73(3), 715-741.

Gozzi, Juan Carlos, Ross Levine, and Sergio L. Schmukler. 2010. "Patterns of International
       Capital Raisings," Journal of International Economics, 80(1), 45-57.

Groningen Growth and Development Centre (GGDC). 2011. Total Economy Database.
      Retrieved on 10 April 2011 from http://www.ggdc.net/databases/ted.htm.

Hale, Galina and Cheryl Long. 2008. “Did Foreign Direct Investment Put an Upward
       Pressure on Wages in China?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working
       Paper, Number 2006-25.

Harrison, Ann and Gordon Hanson. 1999. "Who Gains From Trade Reform? Some Remaining
       Puzzles," Journal of Development Economics, 59(1), 125-154.

Henry, Peter Blair. 2002. “Is Disinflation Good for the Stock Market?” Journal of
       Finance, 57(4), 1617-1648.

---------. 2003. “Capital Account Liberalization, the Cost of Capital, and Economic Growth,”
         American Economic Review, 93(2), 91-96.

---------. 2007. “Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, Evidence, and Speculation,” Journal of
         Economic Literature, 45(4), 887-935.

Karolyi, Andrew. 2004. “The Role of American Depositary Receipts in the Development of
       Emerging Markets,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(3), 670-690.

Kose, Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2006. “Financial
       Globalization: A Reappraisal,” NBER Working Paper No. 12484.




                                                                                                  41
Krugman, Paul. 1995. “Growing World Trade: Causes and Consequences,” Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity, 1, 327-362.

Lawrence, Robert Z. and Matthew Slaughter. 1993. “International Trade and American Wages in
      the 1980s: Giant Sucking Sound or Small Hiccup?” Brookings Papers on Economic
      Activity: Microeconomics, 1, 161-226.

Lawrence, Robert. 2008. Blue-Collar Blues: Is Trade to Blame for Rising US Income Inequality?
      Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Levine, Ross. 1997. “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda,”
       Journal of Economic Literature, 35(2), 688–726.

Levine, Ross, and Sara Zervos. 1998a. “Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth,”
       American Economic Review, 88(3), 537–58.

---------. 1998b. “Capital Control Liberalization and Stock Market Development,” World
         Development, 26(7), 1169–83.

Maddison, Angus. 1980. "Monitoring the Labour Market: A Proposal for a Comprehensive
      Approach in Official Statistics (Illustrated by Recent Developments in France, Germany
      and the U.K.)," Review of Income and Wealth, 26(2), 175-217.

Park, Keith, and Antoine W. Van Agtmael, 1993. The World’s Emerging Stock Markets:
       Structure, Development, Regulations and Opportunities, Chicago: Probus Publishing
       Company.

Pencavel, John. 1986. "Labor Supply of Men: A Survey", in Handbook of Labor Economics,
      Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, (eds), I, 3-102.

Petersen, Mitchell. 2009. “Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets: Comparing
       Approaches,” Review of Financial Studies, January, 22: 435-480.

Price, Margaret M. 1994. Emerging Stock Markets, New York: McGraw Hill.

Obstfeld, Maurice. 2009. "International Finance and Growth in Developing Countries: What
       Have We Learned?" NBER Working Paper 14691.

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2008. OECD Benchmark
       Definition of Foreign Direct Investment, 4th Edition. Retrieved on 12 December 2009
       from http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/26/50/40193734.pdf.

Ottaviano, Gianmarco and Giovanni Peri. 2008. “Immigration and Wages; Clarifying the Theory
       and Empirics,” NBER Working Paper Number 14188




                                                                                              42
Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales. 1998. “Financial Development and Growth,”
       American Economic Review, 88(3), 559-586.

Rodríguez, Francisco and Daniel Ortega. 2006. "Are capital shares higher in poor countries?
       Evidence from Industrial Surveys," Wesleyan Economics Working Papers 2006-023,
       Department of Economics, Wesleyan University.

Rogoff, Kenneth. 1999. "International Institutions for Reducing Global Financial Instability,"
       Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13(4), 21-42.

Romer, Paul M. 1986. "Increasing Returns and Long—Run Growth," Journal of Political Economy, 94,
       1002-1037.

Sachs, Jeffrey and Andrew Warner. 1995. “Economic Reform and the Process of Global
       Integration,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 1-95.

Shleifer, Andrei and Daniel Wolfenzon. 2002. “Investor Protection and Equity Markets,”
       Journal of Financial Economics, 66, 3-57.

Stolper, Wolfgang and Paul Samuelson. 1941. “Protection and real wages,” Review of Economic
       Studies, 9, 58-73.

Stulz, René M. 2005. “The Limits of Financial Globalization,” Journal of Finance, 60(4), 1595-
        1638.

Thompson, Samuel B. 2006. “Simple Formulas for Standard Errors that Cluster by Both Firm
     and Time,” Unpublished working paper, Harvard University.

Wacziarg, Romain and Jessica Seddon Wallack. 2004. “Trade liberalization and Intersectoral
      Labor Movements,” Journal of International Economics, 64 (3), 411-435.

Wilcoxon, Frank. 1945. "Individual Comparisons by Ranking Methods," Biometrics Bulletin,
      1(6), 80–83.




                                                                                               43
                                               Figure 1. Real Wages Rise in the Aftermath of Capital Account Liberalizations.


                               8.8




                               8.6
Natural Log of the Real Wage




                               8.4




                               8.2                                                                                              Average for 25 Liberalizers




                                8




                               7.8




                               7.6
                                     ‐5   ‐4          ‐3         ‐2          ‐1            0             1      2           3             4              5

                                                                              Year Relative to Liberalization




                                                                                                                                                              44
                     Figure 2. Productivity Rises in the Aftermath of Capital Account Liberalizations.
   9.1




      9

)r
 e
 k
 r
 o
 W 8.9
 re
  p
  d
  e
  d
  d
  A
  e
  u
  l 8.8
  a
  V
  l                                                                                                      Average for 25 Liberalizers
  ae
   R
   f
   o
   g
   o
   L 8.7
   l
   ar
    u
    t
    a
    N

   8.6




   8.5
           ‐5   ‐4          ‐3          ‐2          ‐1            0             1       2           3             4              5
                                                    Year Relative to Liberalization




                                                                                                                                  45
Figure 3. Hypothetical Impact of Liberalization on the Cost of Capital, Investment and the Real Wage.



                                    Panel A: The Cost of Capital
                  Interest Rate

                              r


                              r*



                                            0                                           t




                                     Panel B: Ratio of Capital to Effective Labor
                            ln(k)

                   ln(k*s.state)




                    ln(ks.state)


                                            0                                       t




                                     Panel C: Real Wage
                         ln(w)




                                           0                                        t
                                          Figure 4. Equity Inflows Soared When Emerging Economies Liberalized their Stock Markets

                         500


                         450


                         400


                         350
Billions of US Dollars




                         300


                         250                                                                                                                                   Net Equity Inflows


                         200


                         150


                         100


                          50


                           0
                           70

                                  72

                                         74

                                                76

                                                       78

                                                              80

                                                                     82

                                                                            84

                                                                                   86

                                                                                          88

                                                                                                  90

                                                                                                         92

                                                                                                                94

                                                                                                                       96

                                                                                                                              98

                                                                                                                                     00

                                                                                                                                            02

                                                                                                                                                   04

                                                                                                                                                          06
                         19

                                19

                                       19

                                              19

                                                     19

                                                            19

                                                                   19

                                                                          19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                        19

                                                                                                19

                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                               Year




                                                                                                                                                                                47
                     Figure 5. The Average number of Hours Worked Does not Rise with Liberalization
   7.9




   7.8




)r
 a
 e
 Y 7.7
 re
  p
  d
  e
  k
  r
  o
  W                                                                                                   Subset of 12 Liberalizers
  sr
   u
   o 7.6
   H
   (
   ln




   7.5




   7.4
           ‐5   ‐4      ‐3      ‐2       ‐1         0          1        2   3        4        5

                                      Year Relative to Liberalization




                                                                                                                              48
Table 1. Capital Account Liberalizations Occur Around the Same Time as Other Major Economic Reforms.
Country           Capital Liberalization Stabilization Program          Trade Liberalization       Privatization Brady Plan Debt Relief
Argentina                  Nov-89                   Nov-89                       Apr-91                Feb-88                Apr-92
Brazil                     Mar-88                   Jan-89                       Apr-90                Jul-90                Aug-92
Chile                     May-87                    Aug-85                         1976                 1988                   NA
Colombia                   Dec-91                    NA                            1986                 1991                   NA
Egypt                      Feb-91                   Apr-91                       Apr-91                Apr-91                  NA
Greece                     Jul-94                   Jul-89                       Apr-53                Nov-90                  NA
India                      Jun-86                   Nov-81                         1994                 1991                   NA
Indonesia                  Sep-89                  May-73                          1970                 1991                   NA
Israel                     Oct-89                   Jul-85                       Feb-52                Jan-86                  NA
Jordan                     Dec-95                  May-94                          1965                Jan-95                Jun-93
Malaysia                  May-87                      NA                           1963                 1988                   NA
Mexico                    May-89                   May-89                         Jul-86               Nov-88                Sep-89
Morocco                    Dec-92                   Jan-84                       Sep-83                 1993                   NA
Nigeria                    Aug-95                   Jan-91                          NA                 Jul-88                Mar-91
Pakistan                   Feb-91                   Sep-93                         2001                 1990                   NA
Philippines               May-86                    Oct-86                       Nov-88                Jun-88                Aug-89
Portugal                   Jan-93                   Oct-90                        Jan-60               Apr-89                  NA
South Africa               Mar-95                   Mar-86                       Apr-94                Apr-94                  NA
South Korea                Jun-87                   Jul-85                         1968                  NA                    NA
Spain                      Jan-93                   Jan-78                        Jul-59                1985                   NA
Taiwan                    May-86                      NA                           1963                  NA                    NA
Thailand                   Sep-87                   Jun-85                    Always Open               1988                   NA
Turkey                     Aug-89                   Jul-94                         1989                 1988                   NA
Venezuela                  Jan-90                   Jun-89                     May 1989**              Apr-91                Jun-90
Zimbabwe                   Jun-93                   Sep-92                          NA                  1994                   NA
 Notes: The capital account liberalization dates identified in this table are the dates on which the eighteen countries in Column 1 eased
 restrictions prohibiting foreign ownership of domestic stocks. The liberalization dates in Column 2 are an amalgamation of those in
 Henry (2000), Levine and Zervos (1998b) and Bekaert and Harvey (2000). Columns 2 through 6 list the dates of major economic
 reforms that occurred around the same time as the capital account liberalizations. The stabilization program dates in Column 3 come
 from Henry (2002) and various issues of the IMF Annual Reports. Column 4 lists trade liberalization dates from Sachs and Warner
 (1995). The privatization dates in Column 5 come from the Privatization Data Base maintained by the World Bank. Finally, Column
 6 lists the month and year that each country received debt relief under the Brady Plan. The debt relief dates come from Cline (1995),
 Lexis Nexis, and various issues of the Economist Intelligence Unit. **Venezuela reversed its trade liberalization reforms in 1993.



                                                                                                                                            49
Table 2. Real Wage Growth During Capital Account Liberalization Episodes.
Panel A: Summary Statistics.
                        (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)

                                     Liberalization
                                     Wage Change         Liberalization
                 Liberalization      Relative to Pre-    Wage Change         Difference in
                  Real Wage           liberalization      Relative to         Difference
Country             Change                 Wage          Control Group       Wage Change
Argentina           -2.88%                3.10%             18.70%             16.26%
Brazil              25.15%                23.78%            38.17%              19.12%
Chile               20.18%                6.36%             30.98%               1.50%
Colombia            9.75%                 9.25%             22.76%              4.37%
Greece               9.33%                13.11%            30.19%             33.61%
India               13.18%                9.79%             23.97%              2.32%
Indonesia           -4.54%               -14.53%            12.25%              -2.16%
Israel              16.38%                14.64%            19.93%              5.51%
Jordan              14.12%               23.63%             13.39%             13.93%
Malaysia             2.57%                -3.71%            27.02%              22.98%
Mexico              23.00%               39.07%             39.80%             44.93%
Morocco             23.68%               19.77%             32.72%             22.49%
Nigeria            -51.99%                25.87%           -51.68%              0.13%
Pakistan             3.01%               -10.01%             5.54%             -22.24%
Philippines         14.15%                6.25%             27.17%              3.22%
Portugal            45.40%               59.56%             60.26%             66.57%
South Africa         6.77%                 3.06%            17.56%              -4.33%
South Korea         49.05%                27.45%            69.91%             54.30%
Spain               6.35%                 8.30%             11.01%              3.88%
Taiwan              42.79%                17.19%            57.64%             34.13%
Thailand            17.16%                -8.00%            35.18%             12.61%
Turkey              59.46%               65.14%             76.26%             73.59%
Venezuela          -13.13%                35.15%            -2.35%              17.75%
Zimbabwe            51.08%               99.55%             60.29%             87.78%
Mean                 15.83%              19.74%              28.19%             21.35%
Notes: Panel A provides summary statistics on real wage growth for each country in the
sample. Column 1 shows the log real wage change from event year [0] to [3] for each country's
liberalization episode. Column 2 presents the liberalization real wage change expressed
relative to the country's mean log real wage change from [-3] to [0]. Column 3 is the
liberalization log real wage change expressed relative to the contemporaneous mean log real
wage change for the control group countries between years [0] and [3]. Column 4 presents the
difference-in-difference log real wage change that subtracts the difference in the pre-
liberalization wage change between the treatment and control groups from the quantity in
column 3.
Table 2. Real Wage Growth During Capital Account Liberalization Episodes.
Panel B: Statistical Significance of Means in Panel A.
                        (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)

                                     Liberalization
                                     Wage Change          Liberalization
Right Hand        Liberalization     Relative to Pre-     Wage Change        Difference in
Side               Real Wage          liberalization       Relative to        Difference
Variable             Change               Wage            Control Group      Wage Change

Constant              0.158***            0.192***            0.269***           0.202***
                      (0.048)             (0.051)             (0.054)            (0.054)

Observations            25                   25                 25                 25
Notes: For columns 1-4 from Panel A, we test whether the mean differs significantly from zero
and report a heteroscedasticity-consistent estimate of the standard error in Panel B. Robust
standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, * represent 1%, 5% and 10% levels of significance,
respectively.
Table 3. The Impact of Liberalization is Temporary and Declines over Time.
Panel A: Coefficient Estimates of Liberalization Dummy, Overlapping Windows.
                                 (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
Dummy ([-3], [-1])          -0.024**
                            (0.011)
Dummy ([0], [2])                            0.034***
                                           (0.013)
Dummy ([0], [3])                                        0.037***
                                                       (0.012)
Dummy ([0], [4])                                                    0.031***
                                                                   (0.011)
Dummy ([0], [5])                                                               0.019*
                                                                               (0.011)
Dummy ([0], [6])                                                                            0.012
                                                                                           (0.011)

Constant                   0.015***        0.006       0.004       0.004       0.006        0.008
                           (0.01)          (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)

Observations               437             437         437         437         437         437
R-squared                  0.139           0.145       0.15        0.147       0.138       0.135
Notes: Panel A presents coefficient estimates on the liberalization dummy over time or the time
profile of the impact of liberalization on the growth rate of real wages. Estimates of the
coefficient on the liberalization dummy allow progressively more periods after the reform (from
2 up to 5) and for the pre-liberalization period ([-3],[-1]). The right hand side variable is log of
the real wage change. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, * represent 1%, 5% and
10% levels of significance, respectively.




                                                                                                       52
Table 3. The Impact of Liberalization is Temporary and Declines over Time.
Panel B: Coefficient Estimates of Liberalization Dummy, Individual Years.
                        (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)            (6)
Dummy 0            0.000
                   (0.02)
Dummy 1                          0.048***
                                 (0.015)
Dummy 2                                     0.072***
                                            (0.021)
Dummy 3                                                0.032
                                                       (0.02)
Dummy 4                                                             -0.005
                                                                    (0.023)
Dummy 5                                                                           -0.046
                                                                                  (0.032)

Constant           0.011**       0.006      0.008      0.010*       0.012**       0.013***
                    (0.01)       (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)

Observations       437           437        437        437          437           437
R-squared          0.132         0.149      0.152      0.136        0.132         0.139
Notes: Panel B presents the coefficient estimates on the liberalization dummy by individual
year ranging from the liberalization year [0] up to five years following the liberalization [5].
The right hand side variable is log of the real wage change. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. ***, **, * represent 1%, 5% and 10% levels of significance, respectively.




                                                                                                   53
Table 4. Difference-in-Difference Estimation of the Impact of Liberalization on Real
Wage Growth, Country Fixed Effects, Standard Errors Clustered by Year.
Panel A: Estimation window (3 years prior to 3 years following liberalization).
                             (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)             (6)
Liberalization        0.043***         0.043***         0.042***          0.031**          0.041***           0.031***
                      (0.011)          (0.011)          (0.01)            (0.011)          (0.009)             (0.011)

Trade                                  0.022                                                                    0.005
                                       (0.019)                                                                 (0.021)

Stabilization                                           0.046*                                                  0.023
                                                        (0.024)                                                (0.023)

Privatization                                                            0.034*                                 0.029
                                                                         (0.019)                               (0.023)

Brady Plan                                                                                 0.055                0.041
                                                                                           (0.035)             (0.031)

Constant              0.025            0.021            0.019            0.018             0.018                0.010
                      (0.016)          (0.013)          (0.014)          (0.017)           (0.015)             (0.014)

Observations          152              152              152              152               152                   152
R-squared             0.34             0.35             0.36             0.36              0.36                  0.38
Notes: The estimation procedure is ordinary least squares. The estimation window utilizes data from three years
before and after liberalization. All specifications cluster the standard errors by year to account for the possibility that
shocks to wage growth are correlated across countries within a given year. Standard errors appear in parentheses
and are clustered by year. The symbols (***), (**), and (*) represent significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10%,
respectively. For the regressions reported in Panel A, the left-hand-side variable is the change in the natural log of
the real wage relative to the control group over the window three years prior to three years following the
liberalization date. LIBERALIZE is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one in the year that country i
liberalizes (year [0]) and each of the subsequent three years ([1] [2] and [3]). TRADE, STABILIZE, PRIVATIZE, and
BRADY are dummy variables that take on the value one whenever a trade liberalization, inflation stabilization,
privatization or Brady plan program takes place during country i’s capital account liberalization episode. All
specifications contain twenty five country-specific dummy variables.




                                                                                                                              54
Table 4. Difference-in-Difference Estimation of the Impact of Liberalization on Real Wage Growth,
Country Fixed Effects, Standard Errors Clustered by Year.
Panel B: Estimation Window (Full Sample)
                            (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)            (6)
Liberalization       0.046***        0.044***         0.047***        0.039***         0.045***          0.036**
                     (0.012)         (0.011)          (0.012)         (0.014)          (0.012)           (0.014)

Trade                                0.017                                                                 0.017
                                     (0.014)                                                              (0.014)

Stabilization                                         -0.020                                              -0.030
                                                      (0.018)                                             (0.02)

Privatization                                                         0.015                                0.017
                                                                      (0.015)                             (0.016)

Brady Plan                                                                             0.008               0.017
                                                                                       (0.024)            (0.025)

Constant             0.021***        0.020***         0.022***        0.020***         0.021***          0.021***
                     (0.006)         (0.006)          (0.006)         (0.006)          (0.006)            (0.006)

Observations         722             722              722             722              722                 722
R-squared            0.11            0.11             0.11            0.11             0.11                0.12
Notes: The estimation procedure is ordinary least squares. All specifications cluster the standard errors by year to
account for the possibility that shocks to wage growth are correlated across countries within a given year. Standard
errors appear in parentheses and are clustered by year. The symbols (***), (**), and (*) represent significance
levels of 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. For the regressions reported in Panel B, the left-hand-side variable is the
change in the natural log of the real wage relative to the control group for the full sample of data around the
liberalization date. LIBERALIZE is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one in the year that country i
liberalizes (year [0]) and each of the subsequent three years ([1] [2] and [3]). TRADE, STABILIZE, PRIVATIZE,
and BRADY are dummy variables that take on the value one whenever a trade liberalization, inflation stabilization,
privatization or Brady plan program takes place during country i’s capital account liberalization episode. All
specifications contain twenty five country-specific dummy variables.




                                                                                                                       55
Table 5. Difference-in-Difference Estimation of the Impact of Liberalization on Real Wage Growth,
Standard Errors Clustered by Year and Country.
Panel A: Estimation window (3 years prior to 3 years following liberalization).
                             (1)            (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
Liberalization        0.047***         0.048***        0.048***         0.038***         0.048***            0.039**
                      (0.012)          (0.012)         (0.013)          (0.014)          (0.014)             (0.015)

Trade                                  0.019                                                                  0.021
                                       (0.021)                                                               (0.021)

Stabilization                                          -0.033                                                -0.029
                                                       (0.026)                                               (0.022)

Privatization                                                           0.029                                 0.030
                                                                        (0.025)                              (0.027)

Brady Plan                                                                               -0.033             -0.027**
                                                                                         (0.023)             (0.012)

Constant              0.023            0.019           0.027*           0.017            0.027*               0.020
                      (0.017)          (0.016)         (0.014)          (0.019)          (0.015)             (0.016)

Observations          152              152             152              152              152                   152
R-squared             0.05             0.055           0.062            0.066            0.062                0.092
Notes: The estimation procedure is ordinary least squares. The estimation window utilizes data from three years
before and after liberalization. All specifications simultaneously cluster the standard errors in two dimensions: (1) by
year to account for the possibility that shocks to wage and productivity growth are correlated across countries within
a given year, and (2) by country to account for the possibility that shocks to wage and productivity growth are
correlated over time within a given country. Standard errors appear in parentheses. The symbols (***), (**), and (*)
represent significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. For the regressions reported in Panel A, the left-
hand-side variable is the change in the natural log of the real wage relative to the control group over the window
three years prior and three years following the liberalization date. LIBERALIZE is a dummy variable that takes on
the value of one in the year that country i liberalizes (year [0]) and each of the subsequent three years ([1] [2] and
[3]). TRADE, STABILIZE, PRIVATIZE, and BRADY are dummy variables that take on the value one whenever a
trade liberalization, inflation stabilization, privatization or Brady plan program takes place during country i’s capital
account liberalization episode.




                                                                                                                            56
Table 5. Difference-in-Difference Estimation of the Impact of Liberalization on Real Wage Growth,
Standard Errors Clustered by Year and Country.
Panel B: Estimation Window (Full Sample).
                            (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)
Liberalization        0.049***         0.048***         0.051***         0.047***         0.053***         0.047***
                      (0.015)          (0.014)          (0.014)          (0.016)          (0.013)          (0.015)

Trade                                  0.013                                                               0.020
                                       (0.017)                                                             (0.015)

Stabilization                                           -0.028                                             -0.029
                                                        (0.02)                                             (0.023)

Privatization                                                            0.006                             0.010
                                                                         (0.015)                           (0.016)

Brady Plan                                                                                -0.031           -0.023
                                                                                          (0.028)          (0.025)

Constant              0.021***         0.020**          0.023***         0.020**          0.021***         0.022***
                      (0.008)          (0.008)          (0.008)          (0.008)          (0.008)          (0.008)

Observations          722              722              722              722              722              722
R-squared             0.021            0.022            0.026            0.021            0.024            0.03
Notes: The estimation procedure is ordinary least squares. All specifications simultaneously cluster the standard
errors in two dimensions: (1) by year to account for the possibility that shocks to wage and productivity growth are
correlated across countries within a given year, and (2) by country to account for the possibility that shocks to wage
and productivity growth are correlated over time within a given country. Standard errors appear in parentheses. The
symbols (***), (**), and (*) represent significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. For the regressions
reported in Panel B, the left-hand-side variable is the change in the natural log of the real wage relative to the control
group over th full sample around the liberalization date. LIBERALIZE is a dummy variable that takes on the value
of one in the year that country i liberalizes (year [0]) and each of the subsequent three years ([1] [2] and [3]).
TRADE, STABILIZE, PRIVATIZE, and BRADY are dummy variables that take on the value one whenever a trade
liberalization, inflation stabilization, privatization or Brady plan program takes place during country i’s capital
account liberalization episode.




                                                                                                                             57
Table 6. Estimation of the Impact of Liberalization of Real Wage Growth, Time and Country
Fixed Effects.
                           (1)              (2)            (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)
Liberalization       0.043***        0.043***         0.043***        0.042***        0.043***           0.039**
                     (0.013)         (0.013)          (0.013)         (0.015)         (0.013)            (0.015)

Trade                                0.014                                                                 0.017
                                     (0.013)                                                              (0.014)

Stabilization                                         -0.021                                              -0.028
                                                      (0.016)                                             (0.017)

Privatization                                                         0.004                                0.006
                                                                      (0.018)                             (0.019)

Brady Plan                                                                            0.004                0.016
                                                                                      (0.022)             (0.023)

Constant             0.016**         0.016**          0.019***        0.016**         0.016**           0.018***
                     (0.007)         (0.007)          (0.006)         (0.006)         (0.007)            (0.006)

Observations         758             758              758             758             758                   758
R-squared            0.169           0.17             0.171           0.169           0.169               0.1730
Notes: The estimation procedure is ordinary least squares. All specifications contain year-specific and country-
specific dummy variables. All specifications cluster the standard errors by year to account for the possibility that
shocks to wage growth are correlated across countries within a given year. Standard errors appear in parentheses.
The symbols (***), (**), and (*) represent significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. For the
regressions reported, the left-hand-side variable is the change in the natural log of the real wage over the full
sample. LIBERALIZE is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one in the year that country i liberalizes (year
[0]) and each of the subsequent three years ([1] [2] and [3]). TRADE, STABILIZE, PRIVATIZE, and BRADY are
dummy variables that take on the value one whenever a trade liberalization, inflation stabilization, privatization or
Brady plan program takes place during country i’s capital account liberalization episode.




                                                                                                                        58
Table 7. Difference-in-Difference Estimation of the Impact of Liberalization on
Productivity Growth, Standard Errors Clustered by Year.
Panel A: Estimation window (3 years prior to 3 years following liberalization).
                            (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)            (6)
Liberalization       0.076*           0.077*          0.080*          0.094**          0.079*            0.097***
                     (0.043)          (0.044)         (0.042)         (0.034)          (0.039)            (0.034)

Trade                                 0.028                                                                0.051
                                      (0.047)                                                             (0.045)

Stabilization                                         -0.068                                              -0.058
                                                      (0.11)                                              (0.099)

Privatization                                                         -0.064                              -0.060
                                                                      (0.054)                             (0.049)

Brady Plan                                                                             -0.045             -0.001
                                                                                       (0.136)            (0.116)

Constant             -0.047           -0.052          -0.038          -0.033           -0.043              -0.033
                     (0.073)          (0.075)         (0.082)         (0.079)          (0.086)             (0.09)

Observations         146              146             146             146              146                  146
R-squared            0.17             0.17            0.18            0.18             0.17                 0.19
Notes: The estimation procedure is ordinary least squares. In Panel A, all specifications cluster the standard errors
by year to account for the possibility that shocks to wage growth are correlated across countries within a given year.
Standard errors appear in parentheses. The symbols (***), (**), and (*) represent significance levels of 1%, 5%,
and 10%, respectively. For the regressions reported, the left-hand-side variable is the change in the natural log of
the real value added per worker relative to the control group over the window three years prior and three years
following the liberalization date. LIBERALIZE is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one in the year that
country i liberalizes (year [0]) and each of the subsequent three years ([1] [2] and [3]). TRADE, STABILIZE,
PRIVATIZE, and BRADY are dummy variables that take on the value one whenever a trade liberalization, inflation
stabilization, privatization or Brady plan program takes place during country i’s capital account liberalization
episode. All specifications contain twenty five country-specific dummy variables.




                                                                                                                         59
Table 7. Difference-in-Difference Estimation of the Impact of Liberalization on Productivity
Growth, Standard Errors Clustered by Year and Country.
Panel B: Estimation window (3 years prior to 3 years following liberalization).
                            (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)            (6)
Liberalization       0.084***         0.084***        0.087***        0.096***         0.088***          0.103***
                     (0.024)          (0.026)         (0.022)         (0.014)          (0.019)            (0.016)

Trade                                 0.027                                                              0.069***
                                      (0.024)                                                             (0.024)

Stabilization                                         -0.091                                              -0.062
                                                      (0.08)                                              (0.067)

Privatization                                                         -0.045                              -0.043
                                                                      (0.04)                              (0.041)

Brady Plan                                                                             -0.099              -0.068
                                                                                       (0.095)             (0.09)

Constant             -0.051           -0.056          -0.038          -0.041           -0.041             -0.036
                     (0.067)          (0.067)         (0.069)         (0.071)          (0.069)            (0.071)

Observations         146              146             146             146              146                  146
R-squared            0.03             0.03            0.05            0.04             0.05                 0.07
Notes: The estimation procedure is ordinary least squares. In Panel B, standard errors are clustered by year and
country. Standard errors appear in parentheses. The symbols (***), (**), and (*) represent significance levels of
1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. For the regressions reported, the left-hand-side variable is the change in the natural
log of the real value added per worker relative to the control group over the window three years prior and three years
following the liberalization date. LIBERALIZE is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one in the year that
country i liberalizes (year [0]) and each of the subsequent three years ([1] [2] and [3]). TRADE, STABILIZE,
PRIVATIZE, and BRADY are dummy variables that take on the value one whenever a trade liberalization, inflation
stabilization, privatization or Brady plan program takes place during country i’s capital account liberalization
episode. All specifications contain twenty five country-specific dummy variables.




                                                                                                                         60
Table 8. Estimation of the Impact of Liberalization on Employment, Time and Country Fixed
Effects.
                         (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)             (6)
Liberalization          -0.015           -0.014            -0.015           -0.019            -0.006         -0.011
                        (0.021)          (0.022)           (0.021)          (0.023)           (0.02)        (0.021)

Trade                                    -0.016                                                              -0.010
                                         (0.083)                                                            (0.089)

Stabilization                                              -0.015                                            0.011
                                                           (0.019)                                          (0.028)

Privatization                                                               0.012                            0.017
                                                                            (0.02)                          (0.027)

Brady Plan                                                                                    -0.120         -0.126
                                                                                              (0.079)       (0.087)

Constant                -0.044**         -0.042**          -0.045**         -0.046**          -0.021         -0.020
                        (0.019)          (0.021)           (0.019)          (0.019)           (0.027)        (0.03)

Observations            783              783               783              783               783             783
R-squared               0.12             0.12              0.12             0.12              0.12            0.12
Notes: The estimation procedure is ordinary least squares. All specifications contain year-specific and country-
specific dummy variables. Standard errors appear in parentheses. The symbols (***), (**), and (*) represent
significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. For the regressions reported, the left-hand-side variable is
the change in the natural log of employment over the full sample. LIBERALIZE is a dummy variable that takes on
the value of one in the year that country i liberalizes (year [0]) and each of the subsequent three years ([1] [2] and
[3]). TRADE, STABILIZE, PRIVATIZE, and BRADY are dummy variables that take on the value one whenever
a trade liberalization, inflation stabilization, privatization or Brady plan program takes place during country i’s
capital account liberalization episode.




                                                                                                                         61
Appendix A

     Countries that had not liberalized as of 1997: Algeria, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
     Chad, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote D'Ivoire, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
     Honduras, Iceland, Iran, Jamaica, Kenya, Kuwait, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Paraguay,
     Peru, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uruguay, Zambia.

     Countries that liberalized before 1980: Australia, Austria, Denmark, Finland, Ireland, Norway.

     Countries that liberalized between 1980 and 1997: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Egypt, Greece, India, Indonesia, Israel, Jordan,
     Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Turkey,
     Venezuela, Zimbabwe.




                                                                                                                                               62
