                    NBER WORKING PAPERSERIES




               IMPLICATIONS OF GOVERNMENT DEFICITS
                FOR INTEREST RATES, EQFJIT RETURNS
                     AND CORPORATE FINANCING


                       Benjamin M. Friedman



                      Working Paper No. 1520




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December l981




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. This paper was pre-
sented at a conference held in Williamsburg, Virginia, on September
20 — 21, 1984, as part of the NBER's project on Corporate Capital
Structures in the United States which is sponsored by the American
Council of Life Insurance. ny opinions expressed are those of the
author and not necessarily those of the NBER or the ACLI.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #1520
                                                  December 1984




                      Implications of Government Deficits for

               Interest Rates, Equity Returns and Corporate Financing



                                     PBSTRACT


         How the financing of government budget deficits affects the structure
of expected asset returns depends on assets' relative substitutabilities in
investors' aggregate portfolio, and these substitutabilities in turn depend
on how investors perceive the risks associated with the respective assets'
returns.  The empirical results reported in this paper, based on three different
ways of representing investors' risk perceptions, consistently indicate that
government deficit financing raises expected debt returns relative to expected
equity returns, regardless of the maturity of the government's financing.
More specifically, financing government deficits by issuing short-term debt
lowers the return on long—term debt, and lowers the return on equity by even
more, relative to the return on short—term debt, Financing deficits by issuing
long-term debt raises the return on long—term debt, but lowers the return on
equity, again in comparison to the return on short-term debt.

       The indicated magnitudes of these effects differ according to the
method used to represent investors' risk perceptions, but the qualitative
results are consistent throughout. Moreover, many of the indicated magnitudes
are large enough to matter economically. These results imply that continuing
large government deficits at full employment lead to market incentives for
individual business corporations to emphasize reliance on equity (including
retentions), and reduce reliance on debt, in comparison with the composition
of corporate financing that would prevail in the absence of the need to finance
the   government budget deficit.


                                      Benjamin M. Friedman
                                      Harvard University
                                      Department of Economics
                                      Littauer Center 127
                                      Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
                                      (617) 495—4246
                                                                           Revised
                                                                           November, 1984



                      ILICATIONS OF COVEPIO1ENT DEFICITS FOR
               INTEREST RATES, EQUITY RETURNS AND CORPORATE FINANCING


                                  Benjamin N. Friedman


          Corporate financial officers in the United States have traditionally
regarded choices affecting their companies' debt—equity structures as
central       to the management of the modern business enterprise, and they have

also recognized the critical importance for these choices of the market

environment. The decision to issue new debt securities or new equity, and

indeed the decision to raise external funds at all or to rely on internal

equity additions, are key ways in which individual business corporations

respond to the incentives and signals provided by the financial markets.

These   incentives,     and the responses they call forth, are basic aspects of

how the financial markets steer the allocation of the economyTs scarce saving.

In a fundamental sense, this process is a large part of why an economy like

that of the United States has such highly developed capital markets in the

first   place.
          A   major new factor affecting the U.S. financial environment in the

1980s is the need to finance federal government budget deficits far in excess

of any prior U.S. peacetime experience. Federal expenditures exceeded

federal   revenues by more than $100 billion for the first time during the
recession year 1982, and the budget gap widened to nearly $200 billion, or
6% of the nation's gross national product, as the        business expansion began

in   1983. The limited narrowing of the deficit to about $170      billion in 1984,

despite the continuing vigorous      economic expansion, has now represented the
emergence of unprecedentedly large deficits on a high—err1oyrrnt basis as well.
                                            —2—




Prospects   for the remainder of the 1980s depend both on the economy's

further expansion and on future legislative action, of course, but as of

the time of writing neither the Administration nor the Congress foresees

a significant shrinking of the federal deficit before 1989.1

         Because of the central role of the market environment in affecting

corporate financial decisions, this dramatic change in the stance of U.S.

fiscalpolicy bears potentially significant irrlications not only for
market interest rates but also for corporate financing, and hence for the
quantity and allocation of physical capital formation undertaken by the
U.S. business sector overall. In assessing these impacts, it is essential
at the outset to judge the effects of continuing large government deficits

on the structure of interest rates and equity returns confronting individual

bi.asiness corporations. That structure of asset returns depends, in turn,

on the portfolio behavior of investors who collectively must hold whatever

securities corporations, the government, and other borrowers may       issue.
         when   investors   are averze to bearing risk, as most investors

plausibly are, their willingness to hold different kinds of securities

depends on their assessments of the respective risks to which holding

these securities exposes them. Investors typically prefer assets that they

expect to bear higher returns when the associated risks are equivalent, but

excessive risk can lead investors to shun even assets that they expect to

bear very large returns. Similarly, investors' willingness to treat some

kinds of securities as substitutes for others in their portfolios depends on

the relationships that investors perceive among the associated risks to holding

these   securities as well as others. If two      assets expose holders to

essentially     the same set of risks — to inflation, for example, or to the
price of some raw commodity like oil or copper — investors typically treat
                                              —3—




the    two as close substitutes anl allocate their portfolios accordingly.

            The object of the research summarized in this paper is to determine,

on the basis of the plausible behavior of investors in the U.S. financial

markets,       how the   emergence of continuing large federal government deficits

at   high   employment is likely to affect the market environment for corporate

financing.        In particular, the specific question addressed here is how issues
of   either short— or long—term debt, to finance the government deficit, affect

the structure of market         returns   on both debt   and equity securities.
Because investors'        perceptions of risks on these various assets are unobservable,

and hence must be indirectly inferred from data describing information that

investors presumably have, the approach taken here is to examine the

ansrs to this question generated by several different ways of representing

the all—ixrortant risk perceptions.

          Section I briefly reviews the relationship between investors' demands

for various assets and the respective risks that they associate with these

assets. An aspect of this relationship that is of crucial importance in the

context     of the question addressed here is that not just the magnitude but
even    the direction of the effect of government bond issues on debt and

equity returns is an empirical question, not answerable on the basis of theory

alone. Sections II, III and IV present evidence on this question based on

three    different methods of inferring investors' risk perceptions from
available      data. Section V summarizes the conclusions        implied by these three
forms of evidence, and calls attention to several important caveats.

          To   anticipate, the evidence presented here consistently indicates
that    financing government deficits by issuing short-term debt lowers the

return on long—term debt, and lowers the return on equity by even more, in

relation to the benchmark of the return on short—term debt; and that issuing
                                    —4—




long-term debt raises the return on long—term debt, and lowers the return on

equity, again in relation to the benchmark of the return on short—term

debt. Hence either form of deficit financing alters the structure of

returns so as to render equity a more attractive form of finance from the

issuer's perspective. This conclusion emerges from all three ways of

inferring investors' risk perceptions considered here.
                                          —5 —




I.   Government Debt Issues and Debt and Equity Returns

         In light of the radical change in U.S. fiscal policy that occurred

at the outset of the l9SOs, it is iirortant to know what effects the

financing of government budget deficits has on the structure of asset

returns. The U.S. Government's budget deficit has become unprecedentedly

large —even on a high—employment basis —in comparison to the economy's

gross national product, to its supply of private saving, and to the ordinary

financing requirements of business corporations and households. In the

absence of a change from current tax and spending policies, this trend

appears likely to continue. In addition, for the first time ever in U.S.

peacetime experience, the federal government's outstanding debt is rising,

steadily and rapidly, in comparison to gross national product. This trend

too appears likely to continue for some time.

         If   these trends do continue, then the amount,    and   probably also the

composition, of both business and household financing will be different in

the 1980s than in previous cyclically comparable periods. From the

perspective of the balance of saving and investment, only a half-again

increase in the economy's net private saving rate would be sufficient to

accommodate government deficits of the current magnitude plus the usual

amount   of   private sector investment.2 Similarly, because the economy's

total   of government plus private sector debt outstanding has typically been
a stable multiple of gross national product, a rising government debt ratio
suggests   that   private sector borrowers will not be able to increase their
outstanding     debt in pace with economic growth.3

         To what extent — indeed, whether — government deficit financing

"crowds out"    private financing1 and hence     private capital formation, depends
                                          —6—




in   the first instance on how deficit financing affects the market returns

on   private securities .   Neither   coorations nor individuals voluntarily
bDrrow less, or issue fewer equities (or retain less earnings), out of any

innate desire to make the national accounts balance. Instead, private

financing decisions depend on incentives and disincentives provided by

market returns. Lower required rates of return (higher securities prices)

presumably encourage borrowers and equity issuers, but higher required

returns (lower securities prices) discourage private financing, changes

in the structure of relative returns        for example, between debt and equity —

provide incentives    to issi more of one kind of security and less of another.

         How   market returns respond to such developments as issues of government
debt depends, in turn, on how investors perceive the risks associated with
different   kinds of securities. For any given set of risk assessnnts

that market participants hold —       including   not just the riskiness of each

asset individually but, importantly, the set of relationships connecting the

risk on any one asset to that on any other — investors choose what assets

to hold on the basis of the respective returns they expect various assets

to bear. e pattern of expected returns will lead investors to allocate

their portfolios in one way, while an alternative pattern of expected returns

will lead them to choose a different allocation. No one investor ever holds

all of the various assets available in the market, of course, but collectively

all investors together must allocate their aggregate portfolio in just the

composition corresponding to the assets outstanding in the market as a whole.

Under ust circumstances, only one unique pattern of expected returns will lead

all   investors   collectively to choose exactly that allocation of their

aggregate portfolio.
                                          —7—




         when the corrposition of the assets outstanding in the market
changes, therefore, the pattern of expected asset returns must change also,
shifting    to whatever configuration will induce investors collectively to

hold exactly this new composition of assets. In this way, changes in

the composition of assets outstanding —         for   example, as a result of

government deficit financing —    bring   about changes in the market—clearing

structure   of expected asset returns. Moreover, because the economic
function of these changes in expected returns is to induce investors to change
their portfolio allocations, and   because investors' demands for different

assets depend on their perception of the associated risks, what changes

in expected returns follow from any specific change in the composition of

outstanding assets also depends on investors' risk perceptions.

         Under most circumstances, increasing the market supply of any

specific asset raises that asset's market-clearing expected return.5 If

expected returns did not change at all, investors would have to hold "too

much"   of the asset with increased supply. Their efforts to "trade out of"
that   asset depress its price, and raise its subsequent expected return.

         By contrast, an increase in the supply of any one asset may either

raise or lower the expected return on any other asset. As that one asset's

expected return rises, the expected returns on assets that investors regard

are close substitutes for it —    for   example, government debt and high-

grade corporate debt of comparable   maturity     — will rise in step. If
investorsare trying to "trade out of' the asset with increased supply, however,
they must be trying to "trade into" sonEthing else, presumably assets that

they do not regard as close substitutes for the asset with increased supply.
Investors' effects to "trade into" such other assets bid i. their         respective

prices, so that their respective expected returns do not rise but fall.
                                           —8—




          This distinction, based on whether investors regard different

securities as close or distant substitutes! and hnce based on the risks

that investors associate with holding different assets, is crucial to the

question of whether government deficit financing "crowds out" private

capital formation. Forcing investors collectively to absorb into their

aggregate portfolio an increased SUpply of government debt presumably raises

the market-clearing expected return on government debt and on closely

similar   corporate debt instruments. Whether it raises or lowers the
expected return on equity, or the expected return on dissimilar debt
instruments, depends on the relative substitutabilities aIong debt, equity,
and other classes of assets in     investors' portfolios.
       If   government deficit financing raises the expected returns on both

debt and equity,   its   economic effect is to reduce incentives for corporate
financing in any form (unless,    of   course,   the   additional government spending
or reduced taxes increase expected profits, as would be expected when the
econon's resources are less than fully euployed) In this case deficit
financing would indeed "crowd out' corporate capital formation, and would
have uncertain effects on the composition of the remaining (smaller) amount
of corporate financing.
       Alternatively, if governrrnt deficit financing raises the expected
return on debt but lowers the expected return on equity, it changes the
incentives for corporate financing in importantly different ways. In this
case, the deficit financing would give corporations a clear incentive to
substitute equity financing (including retentions) for debt financing.
Whether it would "crowd out" or "crowd in" overall corporate financing, and
hence overall corporate capital formation, depends on the relative magnitudes
of the induced movements in debt and equity returns, as well as on the relative
                                    —9—




shares of debt and equity in the resulting overall corporate financing
package.
       The evidence examined here, based on the relative substitutabilities

among short-term debt, long-term debt and equity that follow from these

three assets' respective risk properties, cannot by itself answer the

question of the extent to which the returns on all assets together rise

in response to government deficit financing. Such xrcvexnents of the overall

return structure depend not only on relative asset substitutabilities but

also on monetary policy, which lies beyond the scope of this paper.

       The evidence examined here does answer the question of how the

returns on specific assets move in relation to one another, however. In

particular, the evidence presented in Sections II, III and IV below

consistently indicates that government deficit financing lowers the expected

return on equity in comparison to the expected return on either short— or

long-term debt. Morever, this relative reduction of the equity return

consistently emerges regardless of whether the government finances its

deficit by issuing short— or long—term debt.
                                          —10—




II.    Evidence   Based on Sirtle Inspection of Beturns6
         Individual investors, either on their own or through intermediaries,
are   the ultimate holde of the great majority of all corporate and
government securities issued in the United States. Table 1 indicates the
corrosition   of the aggregate portfolio of financial assets.held directly

by U.S. householdsr as of yearend 1980, arranged according to three major

asset classes that differ from one another according to the risks associated

with holding them: Short-term debt includes all assets bearing real returns

that are risky, over a single year or calendar quarter, only because of

uncertainty about inflation. By contrast, long—term debt is risky because

of uncertainty not only about inflation but also about changes in asset prices

directly reflecting changes in market interest rates. Similarly, equity is

risky because of uncertainty     about inflation and   about changes in stock

prices.

          The first column of Table 2 shows the per annum mean nominal return

borne by each of these three classes of assets during 1960—1980, including

percentage capital gains or losses on both long—term debt and equity.7

After allowance for what proved to be capital losses on average, over two

decades in which interest rate levels were typically rising, the return on

long-term debt differed only trivially from that on short-term debt despite

a pically tward sloping yield curve. s is familiar, the return on equity

was substantially greater than on either maturity of debt.

          The returns that investors ultimately care about, however, are not

these observed nominal returns but instead the corresponding returns after

both inflation and taxes. The second column of Table 2 shows the mean           real
returns    on these three assets, calculated in each case by sinly subtracting

the per annum change in the consumer price index. Only equity bore a positive
                                       TABLE 1

        THREE-CLASS DISAGGREGATION OF HOUSEHOLD SECTOR FINANCIAL ASSETS



Asset Class                                                         1980:Iv Value

Short-Term Debt (S)                                                      $1,777.0
        Money                                             268.0
        Regulated-Return Time and Saving Deposits         624.7
        Corretitive-Return Time Deposits                  669.7
        Mney Market Fund Shares                            74.4
        U.S. Government Securities                        102.0
        Open Market Paper                                  38.2

Long-Term Debt (L)                                                          464.3
        U.S. Government   Securities                      180.2
        State and Local Government Ct)ligaticns            74.2
        Corporate and Foreign Bonds                        86.9
        Irt   gages                                       122.5

Equity (E)                                                               1,215.6
        Mutual Fund Shares                                 63.7
        Directly Held Equity Shares                     1,151.8


Total                                                                    $3,456.9




Notes: Values in billions of dollars.
        Detail may not add to total because      of rounding.
         Source: Board of   Covernors   of the Federal Reserve System.
                                                   TABLE 2

                              MEAN RETURNS ON   FINANCIAL ASSETS, 1960-1980




                                             Historial   Means                      Forecast Mean
                                Nominal                Real              Peal           Real
                              Be fore -Tax         Be fore —Tax        Afte r-Tax     After-Tax
                                Return                Return            Return         Return

Short—Term Debt                 3.81%                 --1.62%           —2.80%         —2.40%
                  (r5)
Long—Term   Debt (rL)           3.83                  —1.60             —3.83          —4.40

Equity                        10.64                      5.21                           3.73
         (rE)




Note:    Values in percent per annum.
                                         —11—




real return on average during these years. The third column of the table
shows the corresponding mean after-tax real return on each asset, calculated
by applying the household sector's average effective marginal tax rates in

each year for interest, dividends and capita gains to the respective

nominal components of the before-tax returns.8 Only equity bore a positive

real after—tax return on average during this period. Moreover, because of

the differential tax rates applicable to interest payments and capital

gains (which, for bonds, were capital losses on average) ,       the mean after—
tax real return on long-tern debt was about 1% per annum more negative than

that on short-term debt.

          The crucial aspect of these returns that determines the effect of

government    deficit financing is the set of risks investors associate with
holding various assets. These perceptions presumably bear at least some
relationship to the actual experience of asset returns over time. The heavy
solid lines in the three panels of Figure 1 plot the quarter-by-quarter
experience of the annualized after—tax real returns on these three broad
classes of assets during 1960—1980. because of the greater volatility
of long-term debt and especially equity returns, the three panels are drawn
with different scales.
          The return on short-term debt, plotted in the top panel of the figure,

experienced some volatility over this period, but its chief characteristic

was a general downward trend after the mid      1960s,   due to the taxation of

nominal rather than real interest payments. The return on long-term debt,

plotted in the middle panel, experienced much more volatility, together with

a modest overall do'vmward trend. The major bond market swings during this
period,   including the "credit crunches" and subsequent rallies in 1966, 1970

and 1974, the reaction to the Federal Reserve System's new monetary policy
                                            FIGURE 1

                      ACTUAL RETURNS AND REGRESSION-BASED FORECASTS, 1960-1980




  C.




— IU.

        zs•C   a... a4        .•.    a...   a7C
                                             VEA*
                                                       a?a    a.vs   27S    IS?.   aSS



  rL




        ISSC   1555   1554   IUS     1555    3W?       I•?S   IS74   £W?S   1W75   ISSC




  r




        &RC    z..a   104    *a•     SSS     IaV       1S7           *. 2TS        3SD
                                               —12-




 procedures in 1979,       and   the iIrosition of credit controls in 1980, are readily

 visible.        The return on equity, plotted in the    panel, experienced
                                                        bottom
 still     more volatility, and again a modest downward trend. The periods
 major stock       market swings are also readily visible, including  the crash
 jr     1962,   the response to thc 1966 and 1970 "crediL-ci rctres, and   especiIT
 the response to the combination of 'credit crunch" and OPEC in 1974.
            Even a sixrle eyeball—level inspection of Figure 1 immediately indicates
 that the returns on these three broad classes of assets tend to move
together over time, and it is plausible to suppose that          investors are

aware of these comovements in at least some respects. The upper panel of
Table 3 shows the actual variances and covariances among these three
returns,        on the same quarter—by—quarter basis plotted in Figure 1. The
variance of 11.18 shown for the return on short-term debt, for exairle,
means that approximately two-thirds of the time this return was within

 (the    square root of 11.18) of the —2.80% mean shown in Table 2. The
corresponding two-thirds probability ranges for the more volatile returns on
long-term debt and equity are -3.18%±14.47% and 3.13%±24.45%, respectively.
The three off—diagonal elements in this panel of the table give the analogous
pairwise covariances among the three assets.
           For a given structure of variances and covariances describing investors'
perceptions of asset return risks, it is straightforward to derive from the
standard theory of risk-averse portfolio selection how investors' asset
demands respond to movements in expected asset returns, and therefore how
the pattern of expected returns must change in response to a change in the
market coirposition of assets that investors collectively must hold.9 The
lower    panel of Table 3 summarizes the effects of government deficit financing

on the specific assumption that the variances and covariances reported above,
                                         TABLE 3

                   IMPLICATIONS OF SILE INSPECTION OF RETURNS



Variance—Covariance Matrix




                                11.18
                                     -
                                     r                r          r


                                 29.91              209 .35
          rL

                                 30.24              161 .77      597.86
          rE



Effects of Government Deficit Financing (per $100 billion)
                                               Short-Term Debt   Long-Term Debt
          Effect on (rL   -
                              re).                 —.17%               .22%

          Effect   on (rE - r5)                    — .63             — - 35


          Effect   on (rE - rL)                    -.46              — .57
                                       —13—




simply calculated from the observed experience of asset returns during

1960—1980, describe investors' risk perceptions. Because the effects of

government deficit financing depend on what kind of securities the

Treasury issues,1° the table reports separate sets of effects following

from changes in the respective supplies of short— and long-term debt.

          If the Treasury finances a deficit by issuing short—term debt,

the expected return on short—term debt presumably rises in comparison

to the expected returns on other assets.11 put the other way around,

in this case the   expected returns on   other assets fall in comparison to

that   on short—term debt. Viich   other assets' returns fall by more and

which    by less depends on the relative asset substitutabilities that
depend, in turn, on investors' risk perceptions. The results shown in
Table 3 indicate that the expected differential between the returns on long—
and    short-term debt, (which is presumably positive on the basis of past

experience) narrows by .17%, while the expected differential between the

returns on equity and short-term debt (also presumably positive) narrows

by .63%, in response to each $100 billion additional supply of short—

term government debt to be held in investors' aggregate portfolio. In other

words, if the short—term debt return is held fixed by monetary policy,

the    expected returns on long-term debt and equity fall    by .17% and .63%,

respectively. The expected differential between the returns on equity

and long—term debt (also presumably positive) therefore narrows by .46%.

For a $200 billion deficit, the effects are exactly double these magnitudes.

         Similarly, if   the Theasury finances a deficit by issuing long—
term debt, the expected return on long—term debt presumably rises in
conarison to the expected returns on other assets. If the short—term
debt return is    fixed, the long-term debt return then rises absolutely,

and the returns on   other   assets may either rise or   fall.   Which other
                                           —14—




assets' returns rise and which fall again depends on relative asset

substitutabilities, and hence on investors' risk perceptions. The

results shown in Table 3 indicate that the differential between the

returns on long- and short-term debt widens by .22%, while the expected

differential between the returns on equity and short—term debt narrows

by .35%, in response to each $100 billion additional supply of long-term

term debt. In other words, if the return on short—term debt is fixed,

the expected return on long-term debt rises by .22% and the expected

return on equity falls by .35%. The expected differential between the

returns on equity and long-term debt therefore again narrows, in this case

by .57%. Once again, for a $200 billion deficit the effects would be

twice as large.

         The   finding that financing the government deficit by either short—
or long—term debt lowers the expected return on equity, in corrparison
to the expected returns on both classes of debt instruments, bears
potentially     important implications for corporate financing. Nevertheless,

these estimated effects directly depend on the assumed underlying variance-

covariance structure, and simply using the observed historical pattern

of   asset   return movements to represent investors' perceptions presumably

overstates     the amount of uncertainty investors actually attach to their
expectations of uncertain asset returns. although the emphasis here is
on the direction rather than the magnitude of the effects of government
deficit financing, incorrectly represented risk perceptions may lead not
just   to incorrect estimated magnitudes but to incorrect inferences about

direction    as well. Some more satisfactory representation of investors'
risk perceptions is clearly needed.
                                                 —15—




III.       Evidence Based on Continually Idated Forecasting Regressions12

            The   simple procedure used in Section II to represent investors'
risk perceptions suffers from attributing to investors both too little
information        and,   for some   applications, too much. Aslong as the object
of   the analysis is to         describe investors' behavior at any time after
year—end 1980, it is satisfactory to assume that investors know the
actual experience of asset return means, variances and               covariances   during

1960-1980.         By contrast, if the goal is to describe investors' behavior
on average during this period, then the procedure used in Section II
attributes to investors information which they did not have at the outset
but gradually acquired as time passed.
            This procedure also attributes too little information to investors
by disregarding their knowledge, at each point in time, of the most

recent realizations of security returns and               the principal determinants of
these      returns. During the 1960-1980        period the after—tax real returns
on   all   three    classes of assets considered here ethibited substantial serial

correlation,        because the underlying movements of inflation, interest rates
and stock prices were themselves serially correlated.13 When                returns   are

serially     correlated over tine, information           about the most recent actual

values is a useful ingredient in forming            expectations about returns in the
immediate future. Ignoring that information can lead to excessively large
estimates of the uncertainty surrounding these               expectations, as is apparently

the problem with the results presented in Table 3. Table 4 presents a set of

analogous results based on a procedure that takes much more careful account

of what information investors did and            did    not have any particular time.

           As of the beginning of each calendar quarter, investors presumably

kn the stated interest rates on short—term debt instruments, the current
                                             T?BLE 4

          IrLICATIONS OF CONTINUALLY UPDATED FORECASTING REGRESSIONS



Variance-CoVariance Matrix




                                      1.25


           r                          3.62                 76.61


            r                         6.45                 48.09           317.27
                E



Effects   of GovernntDefici Financing (per $100 billion)
                                                  Short-Term Debt   Long-Term Debt

            Effect   on (rL —   r)                     —.06%               .10%


            Effect Ofl (r —                            —.33            —   .24
                                r5)
                                                       — .27               .34
            Effect on (rE —
                                rL)
                                            —16-




prices and the coupon rates     on long—term   debt instruments, the current prices
and (approximately) the dividends on equities, and the relevant tax rates.
The three uncertain elements that they must forecast over the coming
quarter, in order to form expectations of the after—tax real returns on the
three broad classes of assets considered here, are inflation, the capital
gain or loss due to changing bond prices, and the capital gain or loss
due to changing stock prices.
         The procedure underlying the results reported in Table 4       represents

investors as forming expectations of these three uncertain return elements,
at   each point in time, by estimating a linear regression model relating

each element to past values of itself and the other two, using all data

observed through the immediately preceding period. In addition to providing

forecast    values of the three uncertain elements for the period ahead, the
linear regression model at each point in time also directly indicates the
variances   and covariances associated with the forecasts derived in this way.

After each period elapses, investors can then repeat the same procedure,

incorporating the one new observation on inflation and on long-term debt and

equity capital gains into the data used to re—estimate the linear regression

model to make forecasts for the next period.

         Given the sinple arithmetic connection between asset returns and

these underlying uncertain elements, and given investors' presund knowledge
of   the other elements   comprising   returns, these one-period—ahead forecasts

of inflation and the respective capital gains on long-term debt and equity

directly inply one—period-ahead forecasts of the after-tax real returns on

all three classes of assets at each point in time. Similarly, the variances

and covariances associated with the forecasts of inflation and         the   two   capital
gains directly iuly the variances and        covariances   associated with the
                                        —17—




corresponding   forecasts of the three asset returns. The key advantage
of representing investors' expectations in this way, in contrast to the
simple procedure used in Section II, lies in focusing strictly on information
that investors actually had at each point in time,    and   in making a not
implausible   assumption about how they might have used it.

       The heavy solid lines in the three panels of Figure 2 show the

quarter-by-quarter movements during 1960-1980, of the per annum rates of

inflation, capital gains on long-term debt, and capital gains on equity.

(As in Figure 1, the scales differ.) The corresponding broken lines plot

the successive one—period-ahead forecasts generated by this continually

dated linear regression procedure, for each quarter during this twenty-one

year period. For 1960:1 the three forecasts are based on the linear

regression model relating each uncertain element to a constant term, four

lagged values of itself, and four lagged values of each of the other two

uncertain elements, estimated using data for l953:II—l959:IV. For 1960:11

the procedure is the same except that the data used to estimate the linear

regression model cover l953:II-l960:I. The procedure is analogous for

subsequent periods, ending with the use   of   data for 1953:11-1980:111 to

generate the one-period-ahead forecasts for l980:IV.

       The degree of success achieved by these one—step—ahead forecasts

naturally varies according to the extent of the serial correlation in the

series being forecast. The sinle correlation between the actual outcomes

and the corresponding forecasts derived in this way is .88 for inflation,

.42 for long-term debt capital gains, and .23 for equity capital gains. As

is clear from the figure, this inherently backward-looking forecast procedure

enjoys the advantages, and suffers the shortcomings, of eecting the irmnediate

future to be like the inmEdiate past.
                                            FIGURE 2

               ACTUAL ELEMENTS OF RETURNS AND REGRESSION-BASED FORECASTS, 1960-1980

IB.      Inflation
a a.

10.

 7.
 B.



 a.
—B.

       s.ec    a..a   ID4    3BS             16v0   *a?B    1B74   IB7     IB7S       IBBO
                                              VBA




         Bond Capital Gain




              vj.
       a..a    a.ea   3w*4           s.a     a.va   IB?B    *B74   B7B     b7D    aBBO




       Equity Capital Gain




       a.o     Lasa   a..    a.•a   IB•B            a      a
                                             VBA
                                              —18—




        The broken lines in the three panels of Figure 1 plot the successivve
one-period—ahead forecasts of the three after-tax real returns corresponding
to these forecasts of the underlying uncertain elements. Here, too, the
backward-looking procedure represents the immediate future as resembling
the immediate     past, so that the success achieved by the forecasts varies

according    to the serial correlation in the different asset returns.          The

simple correlation between the actual returns and the corresponding
forecasts    is   .83 for short-term debt, .51 for long-term debt, and .30
for   equities. The    final coluirsi of   Table 2 shows the 1960—1980 means of these

one-period—ahead forecasts of the three after-tax real returns. Comparison

with the actual means shown in      the irmrdiately preceding column indicates
that,   on   average, these forecasts were somewhat too optimistic about the
returns   on   short-term debt and equity,        and somewhat too pessimistic about

the return on long—term debt.

          The upper panel of Table 4 shows the variances and covariances

associated with these three asset return forecasts, on arage for l960_l980.l1

These values are much smaller than those shown in Table 3, indicating the

irrortance     of investors' having (and using) information about recent actual
returns. The two-thirds probability ranges for the three after-tax real
returns are             for short-term debt,              for long-term debt, and
for equity.
          The lower panel of Table 4 shows the irr1ied affects of government

deficit financing that follow from assuming that the variances and covariances

shown above represent investors' perceptions of the risks associated with the

respective returns on these three broad classes of assets. s is to be

expected, the smaller uncertainty          than   in Table 3 makes investors more

readily willing to re-allocate their portfolios in response to any given
                                         —19—




movement of expected asset returns, and therefore reduces the movement of

returns (in absolute value) needed to induce investors collectively to

accommodate a given change in the composition of assets to be held. Even

so,the estimated effects are hardly negligible. For example, for the
expected differential between the returns on equity and long-term debt
the difference between a $200 billion deficit and a balanced budget is
.54% under short-term financing and .68% under long-term financing.

       In each case the direction of the implied effect shown in Table 4

is identical to that shown in Table 3.   Financing government deficits by
issuing short-term debt lowers the return on long-term debt, and lowers

the return on equity by even more, in comparison to the return on short—

term debt. Financing deficits by issuing long-term debt raises the

return on long-term debt, and lowers the return on equity, again in comparison

to the return on short—term debt. Under either form of deficit financing,

therefore, the return on equity falls in comparison to the return on

debt securities of either maturity.
                                               —20—




IV.     Irrlications of Survey Expectations
          Because the risk perceptions that determine the effects of government
deficit    financing are inherently unobservable, so that any procedure for

representing them is necessarily only tentative, it makes sense to examine

the implications of several different representations rather than rely on

only one. inion surveys provide a further source of information about

what    investors thought at specific times in the past. Although the available
surveys    typically just ask respondents to forecast specific economic variables,

without also asking         for them to state the     uncertain that they associate

with   their    forecasts, it is nevertheless possible to use survey

expectations to infer perceptions of uncertainty in a variety of ways.

          The upper panel of Table 5 summarizes the forecasting performance

of    the Livingston survey of inflation and stock price expectations,
and the Goldsmith—Nagan survey of long-term interest rate expectations, by
                                                                                         15
showing the survey means and the corresponding actual means for 1969 :1V1980:IV.

On average, the Livingston respondents underpredicted inflation and overpredicted

stock prices bj substantial margins, while the Goldsmith-Nagan respondents

only    ndestly tderpredicted the long-term interest rate. Figure           3   shows

these    actual outcomes (heavy solid lines) and the corresponding survey
expectations (broken lines) for each quarter during this period. Especially
for the long-term interest rate, but to some extent for inflation and stock
prices as well, survey respondents typically did forecast the immediate
future    as    if   it would resemble   the immediate past. The resulting single
correlation between        the actual values and the corresponding survey expectations

is .74 for inflation, .84 for the long—term interest rate, and .50 for stock

prices.

          The   lower panel of Table 5 shows the l969:IV-l980:iV means of the
                                   ThBLE 5

                 MEAN SURVEY EXPECTATIONS, 1969 :IV—1980 :IV



Expected Asset Return Coironents

                                        Historical Mean        Survey an
          Inflation                           7.94%               5.87%

         Aaa Bond Yield                       8.95%               8.74%

          S&P Stock Price Index              98.77              108.14



Inlied Expected al After—Tax Returns

                                        Historical Mean        Survey Mean

         Short-Term Debt (r5)                —4.86%              —2.78%


         Long—Term Debt (rL)                 -1.97                4.03


         Equity (rE)                           .44               28.36
                                                               FIGURE_3
                                  ACTUAL ELEMENTS OF RETURNS AND SURVEY-BASED FORECASTS, 1969-1980


17.
         Inflation
S •.

SR.




       S.... •       I R7 I • 0        SR7R a                                         1R77. 0             IRSO. a
                                                                    YRA




         Long-Irin Intcrcct Ptc




            C        SR?S. a           Sa7R. C     Za?4. R                            3a77. a   *a?R. C   a.eo. a




 iao-    Stock Price Index
 I=
 I 10
 a D-

   =

   vo.

                                                                    - JJ-. _._y_r_,
                     171.D              I*7*.S
                                                   ,-w I
                                                   aR74 a
                                                           -   -;
                                                                         IS?R. N      SW??. 0             asa. a
                                             —21—




actual    after—tax real returns on the three classes of assets considered
here, and the means of the corresponding expected returns calculated on
the basis   the Livingston survey expectation of inflation, the long-
               of

term debt capital gain or loss implied by the Goldsmith-Nagan survey
expectation of the long—term interest rate, and the equity capital
gain   (never a loss) implied by the Livingston survey expectation of stock
          16
prices.         The average underprediction of inflation implies too

optimistic an average expectation of the return to short-term debt. The

average underprediction of both inflation and the long-term interest rate

implies    an average expectation of the long-term debt return that is    too

optimistic by a wider margin. The average underprediction of inflation

and especially the average overprediction of stock prices implies an

average expectation of the equity return that is too optimistic by a still

wider margin.

          Figure 4 shows the actual outcorrs (heavy solid lines) and corresponding

survey-based        expectations (broken lines) of these three after—tax real
returns, for each quarter during 1969:IV-1980:IV.17 Here it is interesting
that, for each return, the survey—based expectations are less successful
predictors than the regression—based forecasts examined in       Section III.

The   simple correlation between the actual     values and the corresponding    survey-
based expectations is .62 for the short-term debt return, .26 for the long-
term   debt return, and     -.13 (that is, an inverse relationship) for the equity
return.

          The upper panel of Table 6 shows the variances and covariances of the

errors associated with these survey—based expectations over 1961:IV-l980:IV.

As comparison to Tables 3 and 4       shows, the variance associated with the
return on short-term debt here is smaller than that itrlied by the simple
                                                   FIGURE 4

                          ACTUAL RETURNS ANt) SURVEY-BASED FORECASTS, 1969-1980
 S
  C


 —C


 —4




 —S



—io

—is
                                                                                      *SSC. C




      1SSS. S      2•C                   1574. C        1_7a. C   2577. C   1575. 5
                                                     VSA




      i.e.. S   3571. 0      3575. S                    1S7. S    1_77. a   2575. 5
                                        TABLE 6

                       INPLICATIONS OF SURVEY EXPECTATIONS



Variance-Covariance   Matrix



                                      6.22

                                       7.09           1075.86
              rL
                                      32,50                207.23    1332.35




Effec of   Cove rnnnt Deficit Financing (per $100 billion)

                                              Short-Term Debt       LQng-Terrn Debt

            Effect on Cr L—    rS )                —.40%                1.62%

            Effect on (rE — r5)                    —.56                 —.63


           Effect   on (r F— r L)                   .16                2.25
                                              —22—




inspection     procedure used in Section II, but larger than         that   implied by

the regression procedure in Section III. The two-thirds probability

range for the short-term debt return is                     By contrast, the

respectivE variances associated with the returns on long—term debt and

equity are larger than the corresponding variances implied by either the

simple inspection procedure or the         regression   procedure. The two—thirds

probability ranges are               and             for the long-term debt return

and the equity return, respectively.18 Asset returns were more volatile

on average during the 1970s than they were during the l960s (and hence,

on average, during 1960—1980), but the major part of the explanation for

the larger variances shown in Table 6 is the weaker correlations between the

survey expectations and the corresponding actual outcomes)9

           The lower panel of Table 6 shows the implied effects of government

deficit financing that     follow   from assirning that the error variances and

covariances    of the survey-based expectations represent investors'            perceptions

of   the   risks associated with the respective returns on these three classes

of assets.2° These large variances and covariances imply effects on

expected returns that are much larger (in absolute valt) than those reported

in Tables 3 and 4 — indeed, perhaps too large to be entirely credible.

Once again, however, the implied direction of these effects is in each

case identical to that reported in Tables 3          and   4.   Financing   goverrutent

deficits    by issuing short-term debt lowers the return on long-term debt, and
lowers the return on equity by even more, in comparison to the return on
short-term debt. Financing deficits by issuing long—term debt raises the return
on long-term debt, and lowers the return on equity, again in comparison
to the return on short-term debt. In both cases the return on equity
falls in comparison to the return on either maturity of debt.
                                            —23—




V. Conclusions and Caveats
          How the financing of government budget deficits affects the structure

of expected asset returns depends on assets' relative sabstitutabilitjes in

investors' aggregate portfolio, and these substitutabilities in turn depend

on how investors perceive the risks associated with the respective

asset returns. Increasing the siply that investors collectively must

hold of any asset raises that asset's market-clearing expected return.
By contrast, an increase in the supply of any one asset may either raise
or lower the expected return on any other asset.
          The empirical results reported in this paper, based on three different
ways of representing investors' risk perceptions, consistently indicate
that   government deficit financing raises expected debt returns relative

to expected equity returns, regardless of the maturity of the government

financing. MDre      specifically,   financing government deficits by issuing

short—term debt lowers the return on long—term debt, and lowers the return

on equity by even more, relative to the return on short-term debt. Financing

deficits by issuing long-term debt raises the return on long-term debt, but

lciiers   the return on equity,   again in coiarison to the return on short—

term debt. The indicated magnitudes of these effects differ according to

the method used to represent investors' risk perceptions, but the qualitative

results    are consistent throughout. rbreover, many of the indicated magnitudes
are large enough to matter     economically.21

          These   results in1y that continuing large government deficits at full
employment lead to market incentives for individual business corporations
to emphasize reliance on equity       (including retentions), and reduce reliance

ondebt, in comparison with the conosition of corporate financing that
would prevail in the absence of the need to finance the government budget
deficit. Because these results describe effects only on relative returns,
                                               —24—




rather   than effects on absolute levels of returns,       they answer questions
about   the composition of corporate financing but not about its total.

vertheless, in conjunction with some further assumption to anchor the

overall return structure —      for   example, that monetary policy accommodates

the deficit so as to keep expected short-term real returns unchanged,

or, alternatively, that monetary policy is not accorrnodative and hence

lets   expected short—term real returns rise if the deficit is large
enough — these results also bear straightforward implications for the
volume of corporate financing and,        turn, corporate capital formation.
                                         in

          Finally, at least three caveats are potentially important in
evaluating these results. First, as           the discussion through this paper

has    repeatedly emphasized, investors' perceptions of asset risk are not
directly observable. It is therefore necessary to use           some   operational
procedure    to represent them. It is significant that qualitatively identical

results follow from each of the three quite different procedures used

for this purpose here. Even so, no data—based procedure can ever represent

investors perceptions' perfectly, and each of the three procedures used

here may go astray in some way that matters importantly for the consequent

results.

          The second caveat, also noted in the discussion above, is that         the analysis
in    this paper focuses only on the financing effects associated with government

deficits.     The deficit   is just the difference between government expenditures
and tax revenues, however, and each has effects on          nonfinancial   economic

activity. When the economy's resources are less then fully employed,
greater eenditures and/or lower taxes stimulate real spending, incomes

and output. At full employment the chief result is inflation. In either
                                            —25—




case   the associated nonfinancial effects of government deficits typically

create indirect financial pressures that interact with the direct

financing   effects studied here.
         The third caveat is that the analysis in this paper focuses only
on   financial assets and,   since   some 90%   of all borrowing by U.S. households
takes place to finance purchases of nonfinancial assets, ignores
households' liabilities. Not taking household liabilities into account
is probably not a major concern in the context of this paper's focus (it
could be in other contexts), but the omission of nonfinancial assets
potentially is. Whether two assets are close or distant substitutes can
depend importantly on what other assets are also in the investor's portfolio,
or at least available for purchase. Moreover, nonfinancial assets bulk
large in households' aggregate portfolio. s of year—end 1980, U.s.
households owned $2.8 trillion of residential real estate and $1.0 trillion
of consumer durables — together more than the $3.5 trillion of financial
assets   shown in Table 1. Including these nonfinancial assets and their

returns in an analysis like that undertaken here is an important subject for

further   research.
                                   Footnotes


*    Professor of Economics, Harvard University. This paper was prepared
     for the National Bureau of Economic Psearch conference on Corporate

     Capital Structures in the United States, held in Williamsburg, Virginia,

     in September 1984. It draws on my earlier research conducted as a

     part of the National Bureau project on The Changing Roles of Debt and

     Equity in Financing U.S. Capital Formation, sponsored by the znerican

     Council of Life Insurance. I am grateful to Jeffrey Fubrer for research

     assistance and helpful discussions; to Jeffrey Frankel and lawrence Summers

     for    useful comments on and corrections to an earlier draft; and to the
     National Bureau, the National Science Foundation, and the Alfred P. Sloan
     Foundation for research support.
1.   The Office of Management and Budget 's "Mid—Session view of the 1985
     Budget,' published in August 1984, projects deficits (in billions) of
     $172, $167, $166, $173, $160 and $139 for fiscal years 1984—89,
     respectively. The Congressional Budget Office's "The Economic arid
     Budget Outlook: n Update," also published in August 1984, projects
     deficits (again in billions) of $174,     $178,   $195, $216, $238 and $263
     for    the same series of years.

2.   The U.S. economy's net private saving rate has been roughly steady at

     about 7% of gross national product for decades.        (Thus far during the

     1980s it has averaged less than 6%, but this decline was probably a

     result of the 1981—82 business recession.) The federal government

     deficit averaged less than 1% of gross national product in the 195Os

     and l96Os, and less than 2% in the 1970s.

3. See Friedman (1982) for a discussion of the long-run behavior of the

     U.S.   economy's debt—to-income ratio. The typical value for this ratio
     is a1xut 1.45. The ratio normally rises modestly during recession,
     but the increase during 1981-82 was larger than usual. What has
     been even more unusual about the mest recent business cycle is that
     the    ratio did not promptly decline toward 1.45 during the recovery,

     and the ratio still remained above 1.50 at midyear 1984. As of the

     time    of   writing, it is too soon to determine whether this atypical

     debt issuing behavior represents a lasting break from prior experience.

4. For a formal presentation of the ideas at issue here, see Friedman

     (1978). The discussion both there and here is much in the spirit of

     Tobin    (1961, 1969).
5.   It necessarily does so when all assets are (imperfect) substitutues in

     investors' portfolios, and for plausible values of the relevant

     parameters it may do so even when some assets are complements.

6. See Friedman (forthcoming) for the details of the specific procedures

     underlying the results summarized in this section.

7. The nominal returns associated with these real returns are zero for

     Irney; a weighted-average yield for time and savings deposits; the

     four-to—six month prime commercial paper yield for other short-term

     debt;   the Moody's Baa corporate bond yield, plus annualized percentage

     capital gains or losses inferred by applying the consol pricing formula

     to changes in the Baa yield, for long-term debt; and the dividend-price

     yield, plus annualized percentage capital gains or losses on the

     Standard and Poor's 500 index, for equity.

8. The marginal tax rates applied to interest and dividends are values

     estimated by Estrella and Fuhrer (1983), on the basis of Internal

     Revenue Service data, to reflect the marginal tax     bracket of the average
     recipient     of these two respective kinds of income in each year. The

     marginal tax rate applied to capital gains is an analogous estimate,
      including allowances for deferral and loss offset features, due   to
      Feldstein et al. (1983).

9.    The specific assumption made throughout this paper is that investors'

      behavior exhibits constant relative risk aversion, with value equal to

      four. Bodie et al. (forthcoming) also assumed constant relative

      risk aversion equal to four. This value is about in the middle of

      the range of available empirical estimates. (Friend and Blume (1975)

      suggested a value in excess of two, Grossman and Shiller (1981)

      suggested four, and Friend and Hasbrouck (1982) suggested six.) See

      Friedman (forthcoming) for details of the calculations.

10. re precisely, the effects depend on issues by the Treasury less net

      purchases by the Federal Reserve System.

11. See again the discussion in Section I, especially footnote 5.

12. See Friedman (1984) for the details of the specific procedures underlying

      the results summarized in this section.

13. The first-order serial corilation coefficients are .86 for the short—

      term debt return, .51 for the long-term debt return and .33 for the equity

      return. Corresponding coefficients for inflation, bond capital gains and

      equity capitals are .90, .44 and .31, respectively.

14. The values shown are the simple means of the variances and covariances

      for each of the eight-four quarters.

15. The first Goldsmith-Nagan survey took place in September, 1969. The

      Livingston data are available for a much longer period. I am grateful

      to Peter Nagan for providing his unpublished data for use in this and

      other research.

16.   once again, as of the beginning of each period investors presumably know
      the stated interest rates on short-term debt instruments, the current
      prices and coupons on long—term debt instruments, and the current prices
      and dividends on equity. For short-term debt and equity, the actual
      returns here are the same as those analyzed in Sections II and III.
      For long-term debt the return is based on the Ma utility rate used
      in    the Coldsmith-Nagan survey,   rather   than on the Baa corporate rate
      as    in Sections II and III.

17.   It is necessary to interpolate quarterly values of the inflation

      and    stock pr$ Ce expectations, because the Livingston survey asks
      for six—month-ahead expectations twice per year.         (The Goldsmith-
      Nagan survey asks for three—month—ahead expectations four times
     per year.)
18. The error variance for the return on long-term debt is dominated by
      the sharp drop in the Ma (new iss) rate when credit controls were
      imposed in 1980:11.     (The Baa seasoned rate, used in Sections II and

      III, fell only slightly in 1980:11). For the l969:IV-l980:IV period

      omitting this one quarter, the corresponding error variance is 687.52.

19. The variances for 1969:IV-l980:IV, computed as in Table 3, are

      (from upper left to lower right) 9.82, 293.90 and 763.33. The

      corresponding variances conuted as in Table 4 are 1.54, 89.97 and

      353.64.

20.         alternative use of these survey data in this context would be to

      use each period's dispersion of individual survey responses to proxy

      that periods uncertainty. The potential shortcomings of assuming a

      relationship between dispersion among different individuals' point

      estimates and the   uncertainty perceived by the representative individual
      are   well known, however.

21. The magnitudes reported here are larger than those found by Frankel
(forthcoming) in a study that in some respects parallels the work
described here. One source of this difference is that Frankel assumed
a risk aversion value of two, instead of four as assumed here. inother
is that Frankel included tangible assets in household wealth (while
still excluding all liabilities), instead of focusing only on financial
assets as here.
                                       Re ferences



Bodie, Zvi, Kane, Alex, and McDonald, Robert. Forthcoming. Inflation and

       the role of bonds     in   investor portfolios. In Friedman, Benjamin

       M., ed., Corporate capital structures in the United States. thicago:

       University of icago Press.

Estrella, Arturo, and Fuhrer, Jeffrey. 1983. Average effective marginal

       rates on interest and       dividend   income in the United States,

       1960-1979. National Bureau of Economic Research. Mimeographed.

Foldstein, Martin, Poterba, James, and Dicks-Mireau, Louis. 1983. The

       effective tax rate and the pretax rate of return. Journal of

       Public Economics, 21: 129—158.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. Forthcoming. A test of portfolio crowding-out and

       other issues in finance. Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Friedman, Benjamin N. 1978. Crowding out or crowding in? Economic

       consequences of financing government deficits. Brookings Papers on

       Economic Activity: 593—641.

__________•   1982.   Debt and economic activity in the United States. In

       Friedman,   Benjamin N., ed., The      changing   roles of debt and equity
       in financing U.S. capital formation. icago: University of
       Chicago   Press.

__________•   1984.   Crowding out or crowding in? Evidence on debt-equity

       substitutability. National Bureau of Economic Research. Mimeographed.

__________•   Forthcoming.    The substitutability of debt and equity securities.

       In Friedman, Benjamin M., ed., Corporate capital structures in

       the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Friend, Irwin, and Blume, Marshall E. 1975. The demand for risky assets.

       American Economic Review, 65: 900—923.

_________ and Hasbrouck, Joe].. 1982. Effect of inflation on the
      profitability and valuation of U.S. corporations. In M. Sarnat

      and G. Szego, eds., Savings, investment and capital markets in

      an inflationary economy. Cambridge: Ballinger.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Shiller, 8obert J. 1981. The determinants of

      the variability of stock market prices. American Economic Review,

      71: 222—227,

ibbin, James. 1961. Money, capital and other stores of value. American

      Economic Review   51:   26-37.

_________ 1969.      A general equilibrium approach to monetary theory. Journal

      of bney, Credit and BankinS, 1: 354-371.
