                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 A NEW DATA SET ON MONETARY POLICY:
       THE ECONOMIC FORECASTS OF INDIVIDUAL MEMBERS OF THE FOMC

                                         David H. Romer

                                       Working Paper 15208
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15208


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2009




This paper is an outgrowth of joint work with Christina Romer, who provided invaluable suggestions
and comments. In addition, David Small answered numerous inquiries, Donald Kohn and Vincent
Reinhart provided helpful comments, Ioannis Tokatlidis provided research assistance, and the National
Science Foundation provided financial support. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect the
views of the International Monetary Fund or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by David H. Romer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
A New Data Set on Monetary Policy: The Economic Forecasts of Individual Members of
the FOMC
David H. Romer
NBER Working Paper No. 15208
July 2009
JEL No. E52,E58

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper describes a new data set of the forecasts of output growth, inflation, and unemployment
prepared by individual members of the Federal Open Market Committee. The paper discusses the
scope of the data set, possibilities for extending it, and some potential uses. It offers a preliminary
examination of some of the cross-sectional features of the data.


David H. Romer
Department of Economics
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and International Monetary Fund
and also NBER
dromer@econ.berkeley.edu
    Since 1979, the Federal Reserve has regularly published forecasts of inflation, output growth, and

unemployment. The forecasts reflect the views of the members of the Board of Governors and the

presidents of the regional Federal Reserve Banks. The published forecasts, however, include only simple

summary statistics.

    The Federal Reserve generally releases documents and background material related to monetary

policymaking, such as transcripts of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings and staff

forecasts, with a five-year lag. In August 2007, in the course of another project (Romer and Romer, 2008),

we pointed out to the Federal Reserve that the economic forecasts of FOMC members were part of the

policymaking process, and that the logic of the disclosure policy therefore suggested that the forecasts

underlying the summary statistics should be released with the same five-year lag. In May 2009, the Federal

Reserve released some of these forecasts—though, as described below, not the full set of forecasts more

than five years old.

    This note describes the coverage of the data, possibilities for extending them, and some of their

possible uses.   It also briefly examines the relationships among the members’ forecasts of different

variables. The current form of the full data set is available as an on-line appendix to the paper.



I. COVERAGE

    The FOMC forecasts followed a relatively fixed format during the period currently covered by the new

data set. The forecasts were prepared in conjunction with the Federal Reserve’s semi-annual Monetary

Policy Reports to Congress, which were submitted in February and July. Four variables were forecast:

nominal GDP growth, real GDP growth, CPI inflation, and the unemployment rate. The forecasts of the

first three variables were for the four quarters ending in the fourth quarter of the year; the forecasts of the

unemployment rate were for the fourth quarter. The February forecasts were for the current year; the July
                                                                                                             2

forecasts were for both the current year and the following year.

    The members of the FOMC (including the regional bank presidents who were not voting members of

the FOMC) initially prepared their forecasts prior to the FOMC meeting preceding the release of the

Monetary Policy Report. In preparing their forecasts, the members had access to considerable information,

including the staff forecast prepared for the FOMC meeting. The members were not given any specific

assumptions about the conduct of monetary policy, but instead conditioned their forecasts on their

judgments of “appropriate” policy. After the meeting, the members had an opportunity to revise their

forecasts. The materials released by the Federal Reserve do not include any forecasts from the chair;

whether the chair prepared any forecasts during the period currently covered by the data set is unclear.

    The individual forecasts released by the Federal Reserve are the final forecasts that it has for each

Monetary Policy Report for the period 1992-1998. The ending date reflects a decision by the FOMC to

release the data with a ten-year lag rather than the standard five-year lag. The starting date reflects gaps in

the Federal Reserve’s documentation. There are two problems with the materials prior to 1992. First, for

some meetings, the forecasts of some or all of the members are simply missing. Second, in some cases the

Federal Reserve has members’ initial forecasts but not their final forecasts, or it is not clear whether the

forecasts are the initial or final ones. For some meetings, for example, the materials the Federal Reserve

now has do not indicate when the forecasts were prepared, and summary statistics computed from the

materials do not match the statistics published in the Monetary Policy Reports.

    The on-line appendix includes several small items in addition to those supplied by the Federal Reserve,

including the names of the regional bank presidents, whether they were voting or non-voting members of

the FOMC at the time of each forecast, and real-time figures for the realized values of the variables that

were forecast.



II. PROSPECTS FOR EXTENDING THE DATA SET

    In principle, the data could be extended in three directions: backward in time, in greater depth for the

period already covered, and forward in time. With regard to the first of these, as noted above, the Federal
                                                                                                                       3

Reserve has some data for the period 1979-1991, although they are incomplete. With regard to the second,

the forecasts released by the Federal Reserve are the final forecasts for which it has documentation,

completed after the associated FOMC meeting and after members have seen one another’s forecasts.

Whether the Federal Reserve has information about the initial forecasts is unclear. There may also be

background memos containing additional information about such issues as the exact timing of the forecasts.

Finally, with regard to the third direction, the Federal Reserve obviously has the forecasts from 1999 to the

present.

    The only direction in which extensions will occur largely automatically is forward in time: each year,

the Federal Reserve will be willing to release an additional year of forecasts. Given its trend toward greater

transparency, however, the Federal Reserve might decide at some point to release additional data,

particularly if researchers express interest in them. For example, the Federal Reserve already releases

verbatim transcripts of FOMC meetings, which often include explicit discussions of members’ views about

the outlook for the economy, with a five-year lag. It might therefore decide at some point that the same lag

is appropriate for the members’ forecasts. Similarly, it might decide that there was a potential benefit and

little cost to releasing the data prior to 1992, despite their incomplete coverage. 1



III. SOME POTENTIAL USES

    There are a variety of issues one could examine using data on the forecasts of individual monetary

policymakers. In many cases, the seven years of data that are currently available will not be enough to

provide substantial insight. For this reason, this section simply lists some possibilities, recognizing that in

most cases serious analysis will have to await the availability of additional data.

    In studying the data, one issue that could be important is that the forecasts may not always reflect the

FOMC members’ best judgments about the likely outcomes, for two reasons. First, because they believed


1
  If the Federal Reserve released these data, it would be likely to identify any uncertainties and imperfections in them.
If not, researchers could perform the task, noting cases where it was unclear whether the forecasts were the members’
initial or final forecasts and where summary statistics computed from the forecasts that were released differed from
those in the Monetary Policy Reports.
                                                                                                                  4

that only summary statistics would be released, some members may have put little effort into their

forecasts. Second, in some cases the members’ objective may not always have been to report their best

estimates. For example, a member who favored lower interest rates than other members of the committee

might have erred on the side of reporting forecasts of output and inflation lower than his or her actual point

estimates.

   The issues one could investigate using the new data include:

       •     Are the disagreements among members mainly about aggregate demand or aggregate supply?

             That is, when one member forecasts higher output growth than another, does he or she typically

             forecast higher inflation than the other, lower inflation, or is there no systematic relationship?

       •     Are there systematic differences in forecast accuracy across different types of members of the

             FOMC? Possible comparisons include regional bank presidents versus members of the Board

             of Governors, members with Ph.D.s in economics versus ones without Ph.D.s, and more

             experienced versus less experienced members.

       •     Do the forecasts pass standard tests of forecast rationality?        For example, are members’

             forecasts biased or excessively volatile?

       •     What are the characteristics of forecast revisions (either revisions from before to after the

             FOMC meetings, if those data become available, or from one Monetary Policy Report to the

             next)? For example, do members appropriately account for the informational content of other

             members’ forecasts and of the staff forecast?

       •     Do forecasts have predictive power for dissenting votes?

       •     Are the forecasts of the regional bank presidents for the economy as a whole correlated with

             conditions in their Federal Reserve districts?

       •     What do the forecasts reveal about specific episodes? For example, one could ask to what

             extent the members were surprised by the low unemployment and low inflation of the 1990s. If

             earlier data become available, one could ask how broadly the members believed the Volcker
                                                                                                             5

              disinflation would succeed in reducing inflation, and what they believed about the output and

              unemployment costs of doing so.



IV. EXAMPLE: CROSS-SECTIONAL CORRELATIONS

    As noted above, seven years of semi-annual data is of limited value in addressing time-series issues.

For example, it is almost certainly too short a sample to provide useful information about forecast accuracy

or forecast revisions.

    The data have a substantial cross-section component, however: for each Monetary Policy Report, there

are between sixteen and eighteen individual forecasts.         This section therefore looks briefly at the

relationships among the forecasts of different variables. That is, it examines whether, if one sees a member

forecasting a higher value of some variable than other members, this provides any information about his or

her forecasts of other variables.

    The analysis focuses on the relationships between three pairs of variables: output growth and CPI

inflation, output growth and the unemployment rate, and CPI and GDP inflation. For the July Monetary

Policy Reports, where the members make forecasts for the current year and the next year, the analysis uses

the forecasts of cumulative output growth and inflation over the two years and of the level of the

unemployment rate at the end of the second year. The forecasts of GDP inflation are computed from the

forecasts of nominal and real GDP growth. Throughout, only the cross-section variation in the forecasts is

considered.     Specifically, the forecasts of each variable are regressed on dummy variables for each

Monetary Policy Report, and the analysis is performed on the resulting residuals.

    Table 1 shows the standard deviations and correlations of the residuals, and Figure 1 presents the

scatter plots corresponding to the three focal correlations. One message is that there is substantial variation

in the forecasts. The standard deviation of the growth forecasts is 0.37 percentage points; that of the

unemployment rate is 0.16 percentage points; and that of CPI and GDP inflation are 0.39 and 0.45

percentage points, respectively. Figure 1 shows that these numbers are not driven by a handful of outliers,

but reflect genuine heterogeneity. The case where outliers are most important is CPI inflation, where
                                                                                                             6

dropping the three most extreme observations (the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland in July 1993 and

July 1994, and the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis in July 1994) lowers the standard deviation from 0.39

to 0.34 percentage points.

    A second message is that there is no clear relationship between forecasts of real variables and inflation.

None of the correlations between either real GDP growth or unemployment and either of the inflation

measures is close to statistically significant. Panel a of Figure 1 displays this lack of correlation visually.

(The analysis focuses on CPI inflation because it was the measure of inflation that was explicitly reported

in the forecasts during this period.) To the extent that there is any relationship, it is slightly positive. A

member’s growth forecast at a meeting being higher by 1 percentage point than those of other members is

on average associated with his or her inflation forecast being higher by 0.08 percentage points (standard

error = 0.07). Dropping the observation at the lower right of the figure (the Federal Reserve Bank of

Cleveland forecast in July 1995) raises the coefficient to 0.15 and makes it marginally significant (s.e. =

0.07). On the other hand, also dropping the observation at the upper right (the Federal Reserve Bank of St.

Louis in July 1992) lowers the coefficient back to 0.10 (s.e. = 0.07).

    The final message is that the forecasts of concepts that are closely related are strongly correlated in the

expected directions, but that there is nonetheless substantial independent variation.         The correlation

between the forecasts of GDP growth and the unemployment rate is –0.40. That between the two inflation

measures is 0.65. Both are overwhelmingly significant. A member’s forecast of GDP growth being higher

by one percentage point is associated with his or her forecast of the unemployment rate being lower by 0.18

percentage points (s.e. = 0.03). The CPI inflation forecast being higher by 1 percentage point is associated

with the GDP inflation forecast being higher by 0.75 percentage points (s.e. = 0.06).

    Panels b and c show, however, that knowing a member’s forecast of one of the variables still leaves

considerable uncertainty about his or her forecast of the related variable. Adding the GDP growth forecast

to the regression of the unemployment forecast on the dummy variables for each Report reduces the

standard deviation of the residuals only from 0.159 to 0.146 percentage points. Similarly, adding the CPI

inflation forecast to the regression for GDP inflation reduces the standard deviation of the residuals from
                                                                                                        7

0.450 to 0.341 percentage points.      Again, these results are not driven by outliers.   Discarding the

observation at the upper right of panel b (Governor John Laware’s forecast in February 1995) moves the

correlation of the forecasts of GDP growth and unemployment from –0.40 to –0.45; discarding the

observation at the lower right (the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland in July 1995) moves it from –0.40 to

–0.37. In panel c, excluding the observation at the upper right (the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis in

July 1994) only lowers the correlation from 0.65 to 0.63.

   As this example suggests, the Federal Reserve’s decision to release the forecasts of the individual

FOMC members provides researchers with a potentially valuable new data set on monetary policy.

Particularly as the time period covered by the data is extended, the data set will allow a variety of new

questions about monetary policy to be addressed.
                                                                                                8

REFERENCE

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2008. “The FOMC versus the Staff: Where Can Monetary

       Policymakers Add Value?” American Economic Review 98 (May): 230-235.
                                     Table 1
                Cross-Sectional Standard Deviations and Correlations




                                Growth     Unemp.     π (CPI)    π (GDP)

Real GDP Growth                  0.37

Unemployment Rate               –0.40       0.16

CPI Inflation                    0.08      –0.05        0.39

GDP Inflation                    0.02      –0.04        0.65       0.45


Entries on the diagonal are standard deviations of residuals of regressions of the
forecast of the variable on dummy variables for each Monetary Policy Report, in
percentage points. Off-diagonal entries are correlations between residuals.
                                                         Figure 1
                                   Relationships between Forecasts of Different Variables



                                               a. Real GDP Growth and CPI Inflation
                    2.5
                      2
                    1.5
CPI Inflation




                      1
                    0.5
                      0
                    -0.5
                     -1
                    -1.5
                           -1          -0.5           0             0.5           1         1.5       2
                                                          Real GDP Growth


                                              b. Real GDP Growth and Unemployment
                    0.7

                    0.5
Unemploymnet Rate




                    0.3

                    0.1

                    -0.1

                    -0.3

                    -0.5
                            -1         -0.5           0             0.5           1         1.5       2
                                                          Real GDP Growth


                                                      c. Inflation Measures
                    2.5
                      2
                    1.5
GDP Inflation




                      1
                    0.5
                      0
                    -0.5
                     -1
                    -1.5
                           -1.5   -1           -0.5        0          0.5     1       1.5         2   2.5
                                                           CPI Inflation
