NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LOW LIFE EXPECTANCY IN THE UNITED STATES:
IS THE HEALTH CARE SYSTEM AT FAULT?
Samuel H. Preston
Jessica Y. Ho
Working Paper 15213
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15213

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2009

This research was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #10-M-98363-1-01
to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium.
The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views
of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER. We are grateful to Beth Soldo, Jason
Schnittker, and Eileen Crimmins for comments and suggestions.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Samuel H. Preston and Jessica Y. Ho. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Low Life Expectancy in the United States: Is the Health Care System at Fault?
Samuel H. Preston and Jessica Y. Ho
NBER Working Paper No. 15213
July 2009
JEL No. I0,I1,I12,I18,J1,J11,J14,J18
ABSTRACT
Life expectancy in the United States fares poorly in international comparisons, primarily because of
high mortality rates above age 50. Its low ranking is often blamed on a poor performance by the health
care system rather than on behavioral or social factors. This paper presents evidence on the relative
performance of the US health care system using death avoidance as the sole criterion. We find that,
by standards of OECD countries, the US does well in terms of screening for cancer, survival rates
from cancer, survival rates after heart attacks and strokes, and medication of individuals with high
levels of blood pressure or cholesterol. We consider in greater depth mortality from prostate cancer
and breast cancer, diseases for which effective methods of identification and treatment have been developed
and where behavioral factors do not play a dominant role. We show that the US has had significantly
faster declines in mortality from these two diseases than comparison countries. We conclude that the
low longevity ranking of the United States is not likely to be a result of a poorly functioning health
care system.

Samuel H. Preston
School of Arts and Sciences
289 McNeil Building
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6298
and NBER
spreston@sas.upenn.edu
Jessica Y. Ho
3718 Locust Walk, Rm 239
Population Studies Center
Philadelphia, PA 19104
yjho@sas.upenn.edu

The United States falls well behind the world’s leaders in life expectancy at birth. Some
of the discrepancy is attributable to relatively high infant mortality and some to high mortality
from violence among young adults. But the bulk of the discrepancy is attributable to mortality
above age 50, an age to which 94% of newborns in the United States will survive according to
the 2006 US life table. Life expectancy at age 50 in the United States ranks 29th highest in the
world in 2006 according to the World Health Organization (WHO 2009). It falls 3.3 years behind
the leader, Japan, and more than 1.5 years behind Australia, Canada, France, Italy, Iceland,
Spain, and Switzerland. About 4 million Americans reach age 50 each year, so that an average
loss of 1.5 years of life years per person means that some 6 million years of potential life are
being lost annually. At the conventional value of $100,000 per additional year of life (Cutler
2004), the relative loss of life in the US above age 50 is valued at roughly $600 billion annually.
Using Japan as a standard, the loss is $1.3 trillion.
Analysts often juxtapose the poor ranking of the United States in life expectancy and the
very high percentage of its gross national product that is spent on health care. In 2007, the United
States spent 16% of its GDP on health care, by far the highest fraction of any country
(Congressional Budget Office 2007). The conclusion that is often drawn from this combination is
that the United States’ health care system is extremely inefficient (e.g., Anderson and Frogner
2008).
But measures of population health such as life expectancy do not depend only on what
transpires within the health care system – the array of hospitals, doctors and other health care
professionals, the techniques they employ, and the institutions that govern access to and
utilization of them. Such measures also depend upon a variety of personal behaviors that affect
an individual’s health such as diet, exercise, smoking, and compliance with medical protocols.
The health care system could be performing exceptionally well in identifying and administering
treatment for various diseases, but a country could still have poor measured health if personal
health care practices were unusually deleterious. This is not a remote possibility in the United
States, which had the highest level of cigarette consumption per capita in the developed world
over a 50-year period ending in the mid-80’s (Forey et al. 2002). Smoking in early life has left an
imprint on mortality patterns that remains visible as cohorts age (Preston and Wang 2006;
Haldorsen and Grimsrud 1999). One recent study estimated that, if deaths attributable to
smoking were eliminated, the ranking of US men in life expectancy at age 50 among 20 OECD

1

countries would improve from 14th to 9th, while US women would move from 18th to 7th (Preston,
Glei, and Wilmoth 2009). Recent trends in obesity are also more adverse in the United States
than in other developed countries (OECD 2008; Cutler, Glaeser, and Shapiro 2003).
This paper begins with a review of previous international studies of the comparative
performance of health care systems. The review is focused on the major diseases of adulthood,
cancer and cardiovascular disease, in the belief that disease-level analyses are more likely to
reveal the forces at work than more highly aggregated studies (Garber 2003). In 2005, cancer and
major cardiovascular diseases were responsible for 61.0% of deaths in the US at ages 45+ (US
National Center for Health Statistics 2008). Because our concern is with mortality per se, the
criterion we employ is effectiveness at preventing death, rather than cost-effectiveness or
efficiency of resource deployment. These latter criteria have been used in several other recent
comparative studies with a financial focus (Garber and Skinner 2008; McKinsey Global Institute
2008).
Health systems can prevent death from a particular disease either by preventing a disease
from developing or by effectively treating it once it has developed. A key element in effective
treatment is accurate diagnosis. Unfortunately, almost no internationally comparable data exist
on the actual incidence of various diseases, which is the appropriate measure of the success of
prevention. While cancer appears to be an exception because “incidence” data are published for
various cancer registry sites (e.g., at the website of the International Agency for Research on
Cancer), the data refer not to the origin of a disease but to its detection, a process that combines
actual patterns of incidence with the mechanics of identification. And even if pure measures of it
were available, actual disease incidence reflects not only features of a health system but also
many other factors of behavioral, social, and genetic origin.
Disease prevalence – the proportion of the population that has been diagnosed with a
disease – is even more difficult to interpret. The United States has a higher prevalence than
Europe of the major adult diseases, including cancer, heart disease, and diabetes (Thorpe et al.
2007a; Avendano et al. 2009). But higher prevalence could reflect higher incidence, better
detection, or longer survival resulting from more successful treatment. Because of these
limitations of data and interpretation, our review will focus primarily on disease identification
and treatment, elements that are customarily considered to be the provenance of health care
systems.

2

A valuable but not unimpeachable indicator of the effectiveness of treatment is the
comparative survival rate of individuals once a disease has been detected. Relatively high
survival rates imply either that the disease has been detected unusually early or that treatment is
unusually successful. Early detection is valuable to the extent that it permits better therapy.
However, if early detection did not alter the clinical course of a disease but only increased the
expected length of time from detection to death (so-called “lead time bias”), then it would not be
associated with reductions in mortality at the population level despite raising 5-year survival
rates (e.g., Gatta et al. 2000).
Because they are not subject to this potential bias, we pay special attention to mortality
rates. In particular, in the second half of the paper we investigate comparative mortality trends
for prostate cancer and breast cancer. We document that
•

effective methods of screening for these diseases have been developed relatively
recently;

•

these diagnostic methods have been deployed earlier and more widely in the US
than in most comparison countries;

•

effective methods are being used to treat these diseases; and

•

the US has had a significantly faster decline in mortality from these diseases than
comparison countries.

International Studies of Cancer
The United States does well in international comparisons of the frequency of cancer
screening. The OECD (2006, 2007) provides 2000-05 data on the percentage of women aged 2069 in 15 countries who had been screened for cervical cancer during the preceding three years.
The US has the highest percentage of women who have been screened in both tabulations.1 We
present evidence below that the US also has exceptionally high screening rates for prostate
cancer and breast cancer. Quinn (2003) reports colorectal screening rates in the US that are
“quite high” in comparison to Europe but does not provide comparative data. Gatta et al. (2000:
899) also suggest that access to and use of sigmoidoscopy, colonoscopy, and fecal occult blood
tests are more common in the US than in Europe. This difference is supported by the finding that
1

Ages vary somewhat but the variation is thought to be a “minor threat” to the validity of comparisons (OECD
2006:69). The 15 countries include 6 for whom the recall period is greater than 3 years, the period used in the US.

3

colorectal cancer patients in the US have less advanced disease at diagnosis than patients in
Europe (Ciccolallo et al. 2005).
A higher rate of screening for cancer would produce a higher prevalence of everdiagnosed cancer in the population, ceteris paribus. The elevated prevalence would occur simply
because a higher fraction of the population would know about their disease. An additional boost
to prevalence would be provided if early detection resulted in reduced mortality. Thus, in view of
the higher frequency of screening in the US, we would expect its reported prevalence of
diagnosed cancer to be higher than in Europe.
That expectation is confirmed by data from the Health and Retirement Survey and its
English and European counterparts. Thorpe et al. (2007a) find that 12.2% of Americans over age
50 report having been diagnosed by physicians with cancer, compared to only 5.4% in a
composite of 10 European countries. Avendano et al. (2009) report similar figures for the age
range 50-74, with England intermediate between the US and Europe but closer to Europe. Some
fraction of these very large differences in prevalence could, of course, be attributable to real
differences in disease incidence or to reporting differences, which are discussed briefly below.
Thanks to a large number of cancer registries that record new cancer diagnoses and
follow individuals forward from the point of diagnosis, 5-year survival rates for people initially
diagnosed with cancer are widely available to provide evidence about the success of detection
and treatment. Because of their relative comparability and pertinence to a major disease process,
these data are among the best indicators of comparative health system performance. In this
summary, we use 5-year relative survival rates, which compare the survival of those diagnosed
with cancer to that of an average person of the same age and sex as the person diagnosed.
International comparisons of cancer survival rates show a distinct advantage for the US.
Using cancer registry data, researchers from the Eurocare Working Group compare 5-year
survival rates for cancers of 12 sites that were diagnosed between 1985 and 1989 (Gatta et al.
2000). The aggregate of 41 European registries, which were drawn from 17 countries, had lower
survival rates than the US from all cancer sites except the stomach, where differences were small
and attributed to differences between the distributions of sites within the stomach. The US data
were drawn from the National Cancer Institute’s Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results
(SEER) database, a population-based cancer registry covering approximately 14% of the US
population. For the major sites of lung, breast, prostate, colon, and rectum cancers, US survival

4

rates were the highest of any of the 18 countries investigated. Cancers first diagnosed on the
death certificate (5% in Europe and 1% in the US) were excluded from analysis; if they had been
included, the US survival advantage would have increased. The authors discount the possibility
that the US advantage was attributable to statistical or registration artifacts.
An updated analysis reached similar conclusions. Based upon period survival data for
2000-02 from 47 European cancer registries, 5-year survival rates were found to be higher in the
US than in a European composite for cancer at all major sites (Verdecchia et al. 2007). Table 1
presents the comparative data for all sites for which the US 95% confidence interval was <0.025.
For men (all sites combined), 47.3% of Europeans survived 5 years, compared to 66.3% of
Americans. For women, the contrast was 55.8% vs. 62.9%. The male survival difference was
much greater than the female primarily because of the very large difference in survival rates
from prostate cancer.
Thus, the US appears to screen more vigorously for cancer than Europe and people in the
US who are diagnosed with cancer have higher 5-year survival probabilities. Scattered data for
cancer of various sites indicate that tumors are typically detected at an earlier stage in the US
(Gatta et al. 2000; Sant et al. 2004; Ciccolallo et al. 2005). Of course, all of these phenomena
could be the exclusive product of lead-time bias if early detection afforded no benefit for the
clinical course of the disease. Below, we present evidence that innovations in diagnosis and
treatment of prostate and breast cancer were associated with faster declines in mortality in the
US than in OECD countries. Such a pattern would not be observed if lead time bias were the
only factor at work, i.e., if early detection conferred no advantage.

International Studies of Cardiovascular Disease
In contrast to cancer, nations do not have registries for heart disease and stroke. So
information about the comparative performance of medical systems in respect to cardiovascular
disease is not as systematic and orderly as it is for cancer. One useful source of comparative data
is the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) and its European counterparts, the Survey of Health,
Aging, and Retirement in Europe (SHARE). Thorpe et al. (2007a) compare the US to a
composite of 10 European countries on the frequency with which people with a particular
diagnosis report using medication. Of people aged 50+ diagnosed with heart disease, 60.7% of
Americans and 54.5% of Europeans report being on medication. The proportions using

5

medication after a stroke are comparable at 45.1% and 44.6%. Of those reporting high
cholesterol levels, 88.1% of Americans report being medicated vs. 62.4% of Europeans.2
Crimmins, Garcia, and Kim (2009) show that a much higher fraction of Americans are using
lipid-lowering drugs at a particular age than in Japan, the Netherlands, or Italy, even though
proportions with elevated cholesterol in these countries are similar to or higher than that in the
US.
Among those reporting high blood pressure in HRS and SHARE, the proportions
reporting taking medication for the condition are similar in the US (88.0%) and Europe (88.9%)
(Thorpe et al. 2007a). However, when actual measures of blood pressure are used rather than self
reports, the position of the US improves. Wolf-Maier et al. (2004) employ regional or national
samples in the US, Canada, and five European countries. Hypertension is defined as the
population of persons who have systolic blood pressure of 160+ or diastolic blood pressure of
95+ or who are using antihypertensive medication. Of persons aged 35-64 with hypertension,
77.9% were being treated in the US, compared to a range of 41.0% - 62.4% in the other six
countries. Among those with hypertension, 65.5% were being successfully treated in the US (i.e.,
their levels were reduced below the hypertension-defining threshold), compared to 24.8% to
49.1% in the other countries.
Survival data for cardiovascular disease start not from the point of diagnosis but from an
acute event of heart attack or stroke. An OECD study, following up on a study by the TECH
network, computed one-year case fatality rates for people hospitalized for acute myocardial
infarction (AMI) in Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Sweden, Great Britain, and the US.
The samples were sometimes regionally rather than nationally representative. Among the seven
countries in 1996, the US had the third lowest case-fatality rate for males aged 40-64 and the
second-lowest rate for men aged 85-89. For women at these ages, the US ranked fourth and first
(Moise 2003). Part of the explanation of the better performance of the US may be related to its
unusually aggressive treatment regime. Of the seven countries, the US had the highest proportion
of male and female patients in both age intervals undergoing revascularization operations
(percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty or coronary artery bypass graft) (Ibid.; see also

2

The US figure for cholesterol is drawn from the Medicare Expenditure Panel Survey because HRS did not gather
this information.

6

Technological Change in Health Care (TECH) Research Network 2001).3
One study has explicitly linked more aggressive surgical treatment in the US to better
outcomes. It compared Canadians and Americans who had just experienced an AMI and who
enrolled in a drug trial (Kaul et al. 2004). Data are not nationally representative but rather reflect
the patient-base of hospitals participating in the trial. Americans had a small but statistically
significant advantage in 5-year survival. Controlling many baseline characteristics, the hazard
rate was 17% higher in Canada. When revascularization was added to the model, it was
associated with a 28% reduction in the hazard rate and its addition reduced the international
difference to an insignificant 7%. The authors conclude that “…our findings are strongly
suggestive of a survival advantage for the US cohort based on more aggressive
revascularization” (Ibid., p. 1758).
OECD (2003) has conducted a large international study of ischaemic stroke, which
accounts for roughly 88% of stroke cases except in Japan, where it represents about 70%. They
calculate in-hospital 7-day and 30-day survival rates for patients newly admitted with ischaemic
stroke. For both men and women aged 65-74, the US ranking on 7-day survival rates was 3rd out
of 9; at ages 75+, it was 2nd out of 9 for both sexes. For 30-day hospital survival rates at ages 6574, the US was 2nd for women and tied for 2nd with two others among men. At ages 75+, the US
30-day survival rate was 1st for men and 2nd for women. Counting all deaths and not simply
deaths in the hospital, and limiting comparison to six regions including two in Canada, the US
survival rate ranked 1st for men aged 65-74 and 75+ and second for women in these ages.
However, the US one-year survival rate among this set of populations was considerably poorer,
ranking 5th of 6 for men aged 65-74 and 4th of 6 for men aged 75+. For women at these two ages,
the rankings were 4th and 3rd. Consistently in these rankings, the US position was better at 75+
than at 65-74.
Carotid endarterectomy (surgical removal of plaque from inside the carotid artery) is used
to prevent stroke or the recurrence of stroke. Such surgery is much more common in the US than
in any of 11 comparison OECD countries (OECD 2003). We are unaware of any studies linking
this surgery to international patterns of stroke mortality, but a randomized clinical trial reports a
large survival advantage for persons undergoing the procedure (Halliday et al. 2004).

3

Data on treatments at ages 85-89 were not available for Spain or the United Kingdom.

7

Contrary Evidence? “Mortality Amenable to Medical Care”
The Commonwealth Fund (2008) has recently issued a “scorecard” on US health system
performance that consists of 37 indicators. The highly publicized report concludes that the
United States lags far behind its peers in measures of health system performance. Most of the
indicators use benchmarks that are established by consultation with experts or by values in bestperforming states. But several are based on international comparisons. The international index
that receives the most attention is “Mortality amenable to medical care”, on which the US
currently ranks last among 19 countries. This index is developed and applied in Nolte and
McKee (2008), where amenable deaths are described as “deaths from certain causes that should
not occur in the presence of timely and effective health care” (p. 59). Only deaths below age 75
are included, which constitute 43.2% of deaths in the US in 2005 (US National Center for Health
Statistics 2008). For some causes of death, an earlier age cutoff is used.
The distribution of major causes of death included among the “amenable causes” is
provided for the US, the United Kingdom, and France (Nolte and McKee 2008). A majority of
amenable deaths in all three countries is attributed to ischemic heart disease and other circulatory
diseases, even though only half of ischemic heart disease deaths are included because some are
believed not to be amenable to health care. That rule of thumb is clearly a poor substitute for an
effort to attribute international variation in mortality from ischemic heart disease to its various
components, including health care systems and behavioral and social factors.4 The authors note
that a similar rule of thumb could have been introduced for cerebrovascular diseases, which
constitute at least a quarter of the “amenable” deaths in the US and UK. But it would have been
no more satisfactory for that cause of death.
In view of the studies that show that the US does relatively well in treating cardiovascular
disease, it seems inaccurate to attribute its high death rates from these causes to a poorly
performing medical system. And these diseases contribute a majority of their set of amenable
deaths, rendering the totality of amenable causes problematic. A related objection could be raised
to the inclusion of diabetes deaths in the set. On the other hand, prostate cancer is excluded from
the list of amenable causes despite the fact that the 5-year survival rate from prostate cancer in
the US is above 99% and the disease can be readily identified (see below).
4

The strategy adopted by Nolte and McKee is no different from saying that genetic factors play some role in
cardiovascular mortality and, as a consequence, attributing half of international variation in cardiovascular mortality
to genetic factors.

8

According to Nolte and McKee (2008), males in the United States had a faster fall in
mortality from non-amenable causes of death (an 8% decline) than from amenable ones (4%)
between the latest two readings, 1997/8 and 2002/3. This anomaly suggests either flaws in the
index or the unimportance of medical care relative to other factors that are operating.
Causes of death whose inclusion in Nolte and McKee’s list of amenable causes at older
ages is more defensible are influenza and pneumonia. Mortality from both causes is heavily
influenced by smoking (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2002), so the international
distribution of mortality is a product of factors beyond the health care system. On the other hand,
influenza is partially immunizable and death from pneumonia can often be avoided through
administration of vaccines or antibiotics or improvements in hospital sanitation.
The US ranks 9th of 23 OECD countries in the proportion of the population above age 65
offered an annual influenza vaccination (OECD 2007). Figure 1 demonstrates that the 2000-04
age-standardized death rate from influenza at ages 50+ in the United States is among the lowest
of the 16 countries investigated. The US fares less well in mortality from pneumonia, ranking 6th
worst among the 16 countries investigated (Figure 2). However, the ranking is somewhat
deceiving because its death rate is closer to all but one of the better-ranked countries than to the
five countries with higher rates. The US death rate from pneumonia at ages 50+ is actually below
the weighted or unweighted mean for the other 15 countries.

Disease Prevention
Medical procedures and survival rates are indicators of what happens to individuals
whose health problems come to the attention of the health care system. But a health care system
can also help prevent serious health problems from occurring in the first place. Of course, early
identification of a disease is also preventative medicine in the sense that it may prevent death.
But access to preventive medicine would appear to be an especially problematic area in the
United States because 47 million people lack any form of health insurance (DeNavas-Walt,
Proctor, and Smith 2007).5 Such people are less likely to see a doctor and thus to receive routine
testing that might detect the early stages of a disease and prevent its clinical manifestations
(Institute of Medicine 2001). They are also less likely to receive advice about health maintenance

5

It has been claimed that this number includes 10 million people who are in fact covered by Medicaid insurance but
who fail to report it (Ohsfeldt and Schneider 2006).

9

and disease prevention (Ibid.).
An additional factor that may inhibit disease prevention in the US is the shortage of
primary care physicians. The US scores in the bottom group of 6 out of 18 OECD countries on a
scale of the adequacy of primary care (Macinko, Starfield, and Shi 2003). The scale is built from
items relating to policy, finances, and personnel. In turn, the adequacy of primary care may be
related to disease prevention (Ibid.)
The best indication of the success of prevention is disease incidence. But international
data on disease incidence are nil. As noted earlier, disease prevalence is higher in the US than in
a European composite for cancer, heart disease, stroke, chronic lung disease, and diabetes
(Thorpe et al. 2007a). However, such a difference could result from higher incidence in the US,
better detection, or longer survival after detection. It could also result from reporting differences,
e.g., a greater inclination to report disease in the US. But a careful study by Banks et al. (2006)
using biomarkers suggests that morbidity differences between England and the US at ages 55 to
64 are real and not a result of differences in reportage. One related study found that, faced with
the same set of health-related vignettes, Americans were less likely to report themselves as
disabled than the Dutch (Kapteyn, Smith, and van Soest 2007).
Even if incidence data were available, analysts would have to disentangle the role of
personal behavioral and social histories from that of health system performance. And these are
not always readily distinguishable. Are the historically high rates of smoking in the US
attributable to the failure of the US public health system to stem the smoking tide? The fact that
Canada had for many years the second highest consumption of cigarettes per adult (Forey et al.
2002) makes it appear that geographic factors, perhaps related to conditions for growing or
importing tobacco, had more to do with consumption patterns than did health systems. And
public health authorities were not passive in the US. The US Surgeon General’s (1964) report on
the health hazards of cigarette smoking was the first major indictment of the habit by a
government authority and it was quickly followed up with a massive anti-smoking media
campaign (Cutler and Glaeser 2006). The US had the largest reduction in manufactured
cigarettes consumed per adult of any country between 1970 and 2000 (Forey et al. 2002). Some
of that decline was likely attributable to public health efforts (Cutler and Glaeser 2006).
However it is achieved, the high prevalence of disease in the US adds considerably to
health expenditure. Thorpe et al. (2007b) combine comparative prevalence data on 10 conditions

10

in HRS (in the US) and SHARE (in Europe) with Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
data on expenditure per medical condition for the population aged 50+. Their 95% confidence
intervals on the per capita cost of higher disease prevalence in the US are $1,195 to $1,750 per
year, or 12.7 to 18.7% of total personal health care spending among those aged 50+.
Inefficiencies in the health care system are not solely responsible for high per capita health
expenditures in the US; the high prevalence of major diseases is also substantially implicated
(see also Michaud et al. 2009).

Case Study I. Prostate Cancer
Accounting for 31,000 deaths in 2000, prostate cancer was, after lung cancer, the second
leading cause of cancer deaths among US men that year (US National Center for Health
Statistics 2002). Unlike most chronic diseases, it is not associated with cigarette smoking
(Lumey et al. 1997). A link with exercise has been suggested in several studies but a review
article found that “conclusions were quite variable… odds ratios [of developing prostate cancer]
for men engaged in high levels of activity ranged from 0.2 to over 2.0” (Torti and Matheson
2004). Dietary risk factors are suspected but not well established. The risk of prostate cancer is
somewhat higher for men with a high body mass index, but the risk is less than for other cancers
(Crawford 2003). Genetic factors, some of them associated with race, appear to be important in
the risk of developing prostate cancer (Li et al. 2007). Its relatively flat landscape of behavioral
risk factors, together with its medical preventability, make mortality from prostate cancer a purer
indicator of health system performance than mortality from many other chronic diseases of
adulthood.

A. Prostate Cancer Screening
The Digital Rectal Examination (DRE) and Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) test are the
primary screening tools for prostate cancer. As a screening test, DRE is of limited value because
it cannot investigate the entire prostate gland (Ilic et al. 2006). It is more difficult to detect cancer
with DRE than with the PSA test (Harris and Lohr 2002). The PSA test has the added benefits of
being easy to perform, relatively inexpensive, and reproducible (Constantinou 2006).
The PSA blood test for the presence of prostate cancer was approved by the Food and
Drug Administration in 1986 (Shampo 2002). The test enables the detection of high and/or

11

rapidly increasing levels of an antigen that often signals the presence of prostate cancer. High
levels of the antigen can also be produced by other conditions; confirmation of cancer is made by
transrectal ultrasound-guided biopsy (TRUS).
The PSA test is somewhat controversial. One reason is that, like many other medical
screens, the PSA test can produce a false positive – a report of potential cancer when it is not
present. According to a summary of studies of the sensitivity and specificity of PSA testing, an
average of 75% of those with PSA readings above 4.0 ug/l have prostate cancer and 71% of men
with prostate cancer have a PSA reading above 4.0 ug/l (Bunting 2002). However, the main
reservation about the use of the PSA test is that treatment for prostate cancer can produce
impotence and/or incontinence. Because of these side effects, several organizations have
recommended against PSA testing for men over 75 (U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 2008).
On the other hand, the American Cancer Society and the American Urological Association
recommend that the PSA test should be offered annually to men over 50 with at least a 10-year
life expectancy.
By reputation the US has been the world leader in PSA testing, especially in the early
years after the test was developed (Hsing, Tsao, and Devesa 2000; Levi et al. 2000; Vercelli et
al. 200; De Koning et al. 2002; Bouchardy et al. 2008). Table 2 compiles the latest data that we
were able to locate on the frequency of PSA testing in various countries or regions. The age
ranges used and the survey dates are not identical from country to country, preventing exact
comparisons. The United States has the highest recorded percentage ever tested at older ages
(prevalence) as well as the highest percentage tested in a recent period (incidence).6
Evidence about the efficacy of PSA testing from randomized controlled trials has been
mixed. The Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial began in
1993 and involved 76,693 US men aged 55-74. After 7 to 10 years of follow up, the death rate
from prostate cancer did not differ significantly between the study and control group. As noted
by the authors, one possible explanation of the negative result is that PSA testing is already so
frequent in the US (see Table 2) that high levels of screening were already present among the
control group. Furthermore, many cancers had already been identified in both treatment and
control groups (Andriole et al. 2009). Results of the study are most reasonably interpreted as

6

Of the two sources of US data presented in Table 2, the BRFSS data are less reliable because they are based on a
telephone survey with a low response rate.

12

addressing the question of whether mortality advantages would pertain to extending PSA testing
in a population in which half of men are already being tested every two years.
The second trial, the European Randomized Study of Screening for Prostate Cancer, was
more than twice as large and was conducted in a region where prostate cancer screening is much
less common. The trial began in the early 1990’s in 7 European countries and included a total of
162,243 men between the ages of 55 and 69. The study found that offering PSA screening to the
treatment group reduced the death rate from prostate cancer by 20% (rate ratio of 0.73, 95% CI,
0.56 to 0.90). The absolute reduction was 0.71 prostate-cancer deaths per 1,000 men. The median
and average follow up times were 9 and 8.8 years, respectively; death rates in the two study
groups began diverging after 7 to 8 years and continued to diverge subsequently (Schröder et al.
2009).
The Goteborg, Sweden component of the European trial followed 20,000 randomly
selected men aged 50–66 for 10 years. Half were invited for biennial PSA testing, with 10,000
men serving as passive controls for whom diagnosis of metastatic prostate cancer was monitored
by using the Swedish Cancer Registry. The risk of being diagnosed with metastatic, i.e.,
advanced, prostate cancer was reduced by 48.9% in the PSA treatment group relative to controls
(p < .01) (Aus et al. 2007).
According to SEER, after the PSA test was introduced in the late 1980s, the recorded
incidence of prostate cancer in the US rose from 119/100,000 in 1986 to a peak of 237/100,000
in 1992 (SEER 2008).7 The proportion of tumors that are metastatic was 25% of newlydiagnosed tumors in 1980 and only 4% in 2002 (Etzioni et al. 2008). Consistent with more
extensive screening, the United States identifies prostate cancer at an earlier stage, on average,
than Sweden (Stattin et al. 2005), Japan (Ogawa et al. 2008), or the United Kingdom (Collin et
al. 2008). Stage at diagnosis is particularly important in prognosis – if detected at an early stage,
prostate cancer can be treated by radical prostatectomy or radiotherapy.

B. Prostate Cancer Treatment
Once prostate cancer is detected, a variety of treatments can be employed, including
radical prostatectomy, radiation by beam (external beam radiotherapy) or implanted seeds
(brachytherapy), or hormone therapy. “Watchful waiting” is also an option. Since 1991, radical
7

The data are for males and refer to the age-adjusted rates for all ages.

13

prostatectomy has been the most common treatment for localized prostate cancer in the US. It
serves as the initial treatment for over a third of newly-diagnosed patients (Harris and Lohr
2002). Observational studies have described apparent survival advantages from radical
prostatectomy and radiation therapy (e.g., Wong et al. 2006; Trock et al. 2008) but not always
from hormone therapy alone (Lu-Yao et al. 2008). The questions of possible selection bias that
are always present in observational studies add uncertainty to these results.
Uncertainty has been reduced by several recent reports of randomized clinical trials. A
key study of Scandinavian men examined survival after diagnosis of prostate cancer. Men were
randomly assigned to radical prostatectomy or to watchful waiting (Bill-Axelson et al. 2005).
Some of those assigned to prostatectomy did not have the operation, and some of those assigned
to watchful waiting pursued radiation or hormonal therapy. Nevertheless, after a median followup period of 8.2 years, the group assigned to prostatectomy had cumulative proportions dead
from prostate cancer that were lower by 44%, rates of disease progression that were lower by
67%, and rates of distant metastasis that were lower by 40%. All comparisons were statistically
significant (Ibid.).
A randomized trial of variation in radiation dosage reported a highly significant
beneficial effect on survival of heavier doses (Pollack et al. 2002). Another randomized trial of
adjuvant radiotherapy enrolled 425 men with pathologically advanced prostate cancer who had
undergone radical prostatectomy between 1988 and 1997. Adjuvant radiotherapy significantly
reduced the risk of PSA relapse and disease recurrence, although improvements in survival were
not statistically significant (Thompson et al. 2006).
Several randomized clinical trials evaluate the use of hormone therapy as an adjunct to
surgery or radiation in high risk patients; the value of hormone therapy used alone or as primary
therapy has only been assessed by observational studies. A population-based cohort study found
that primary androgen deprivation therapy does not improve survival in elderly men compared
with conservative management (no surgery, radiation, or hormone therapy) (Lu-Yao et al. 2008).
However, three phase III randomized trials have shown that a combination of radiotherapy and
androgen suppression improve survival relative to radiotherapy alone (Bolla et al. 2002, Hanks et
al. 2003, and Pilepich et al. 2005).
Population-based information about the frequency of various treatments of prostate
cancer is much skimpier than information about the use of the PSA test. Among US men aged

14

65-80 in SEER who were diagnosed with low grade tumors between 1991 and 1999, 25.5%
received no treatment within six months of diagnosis, 9.6% received hormone therapy, and the
remaining 64.8% received either radiation or prostatectomy (Wong et al. 2006).
Scandinavian countries rarely use radical therapies – radical prostatectomy or radiation –
and rely primarily on watchful waiting or hormone therapy for palliation (Fleshner, Rakovitch,
and Klotz 2000; Sandblom et al. 2000). For example, the fraction of patients treated with
curative intent in Norway was only 3% in 1985-1989 and rose to 6% in 1990-1994. In 19901994, radical prostatectomy was used to treat only 3.0 and 3.3% of all patients diagnosed with
prostate cancer in Norway and Sweden, respectively (Kvåle et al. 2007). Low levels of surgery
and radiation therapy are also reported in Japan (Ogawa et al. 2008).
Differences in treatment approach also exist between the US and the UK, with US
approaches generally being more aggressive, particularly in the use of surgery (Collin et al.
2008). A survey of American and Canadian urologists indicated that American urologists tended
to have a more aggressive approach to case identification and surgical intervention. They were
also more likely to perform radical prostatectomy on patients over the age of 70 (Fleshner,
Rakovitch, and Klotz 2000).

C. Prostate Cancer Survival
The combination of earlier detection and aggressive treatment in the US has produced
greatly improved survival chances for men diagnosed with prostate cancer. 5-year relative
survival rates in the US increased from 71% to 83% between 1984-86 and 1987-89, whereas
European rates improved from 55% to 59% during the same period (Post et al. 1998). According
to SEER (2008), the US 5-year relative survival rate had increased to 99.2% for those diagnosed
in 2000.
Gatta et al. (2000) compared international survival rates for cancers diagnosed between
1985 and 1989. All of the European countries considered had lower prostate cancer survival rates
than the US. European patients had a 4.1 times greater risk of dying in the first year after
diagnosis, suggesting that earlier diagnosis plays an important role in these survival differences
(Ibid.). The updated study whose results are presented in Table 1 found that 5-year survival rates
for prostate cancer in 2000-02 were 99.3% in the US compared to 77.5% in Europe.

15

D. Prostate Cancer Mortality
Population-level data on mortality have one distinct advantage over data on survival rates
among those newly diagnosed: they are not subject to lead-time bias. If one country is
diagnosing cancer sooner than another but early diagnosis does not alter the clinical course of the
disease and delay or prevent death, then that country will enjoy no advantage in mortality as a
result of its earlier diagnoses. When early diagnosis improves prognosis, population-level
mortality is responsive to the timeliness of diagnosis. It is also responsive to the efficacy of
treatments employed regardless of stage at diagnosis. Mortality data has a similar advantage
relative to recorded incidence and prevalence data, both of which are subject to lead-time bias.
In order to investigate whether the relatively aggressive use of PSA testing and therapy in
the United States has produced an unusually rapid decline in mortality from prostate cancer, we
have used World Health Organization data on deaths by cause and population by five-year age
groups. We have chosen a group of 15 economically developed OECD countries for purposes of
comparison: Australia, Austria, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, the
Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and United Kingdom.
Figure 3 compares levels of age-standardized death rates per 100,000 (all ages combined)
in the United States to the unweighted mean death rate in these 15 comparison countries.8 With
the exception of 1985, the US had higher deaths rates each year from 1980 to 1995. Beginning in
1996, the US had lower rates and the US advantage grew every year thereafter. By 2003, the US
had death rates that were 20.4% lower than the mean of the comparison countries. Mortality rates
among men 60-79 were lower in 1997 than in any year since 1950 (Tarone, Chu, and Brawley
2000). Baade, Coory, and Aitken (2004) note that changes in risk factors and in the accuracy of
or procedures for recording cause-of-death information are unlikely to be responsible for the
observed trends.
Declines in prostate cancer mortality have been attributed to both PSA screening and
improvements in treatment (Baade et al. 2004; Potosky, Feuer, and Levin 2001; Bouchardy et al.
(2008), Kvåle et al. (2007), Collin et al. (2008).) An individual-level population model that used
counterfactuals to simulate US mortality and incidence of advanced-stage prostate cancer
concluded that two-thirds of the decline in mortality between 1990 and 1999, and 80% of the
8

These rates are taken from the International Agency for Research on Cancer (http://www-dep.iarc.fr/), which
extracts the World Health Organization mortality data and standardizes the rates to the world population in 1960
(Segi world standard).

16

decline in distant-stage incidence, was attributable to expanded PSA testing (Etzioni et al. 2008).
To test whether the faster mortality decline in the US was statistically significant, we use
a negative binomial regression in a fixed-effects model applied to data for these 16 countries for
the period 1982 to 2005. The dependent variable is the log of the number of deaths from prostate
cancer in a particular age, country and year cell, with population size in a particular cell used as
the exposure. Independent variables are a set of age group identifiers, a set of period identifiers, a
dummy variable for the US, and a set of US/period interactions. Six 4-year-wide time periods are
used, beginning with 1982-85 and ending with 2002-05. 1982-1985, the period before PSA
testing was begun, is chosen as the reference period. Significance tests recognize the clustering
of observations by country. Results are presented in Table 4.
The coefficient of the interactive variable for US observations during the period 2002-05
is -0.274, which is significant at p < .001. Compared to expectations based upon country and
year, the US had roughly 27% lower mortality in 2002-05 than it did in 1982-85. (The US/20022005 variable is always significant at p < 0.001 regardless of reference period used). Likewise,
the coefficient of the US/period interactive variable for the 1998-2001 period is -0.215 and is
also significant at p < .001. So the US had significantly faster declines in mortality than did
comparison countries between 1982-85 and both 1998-2001 and 2002-05.
Mortality trends from prostate cancer may be affected by “attribution bias”: people who
have had prostate cancer detected may be more likely to have their death ascribed to it even
though some other morbid process were actually responsible (Feuer et al. 1999). Such bias,
combined with more aggressive screening, would produce a rise rather than a fall in prostate
cancer mortality. This bias may account for the rise in prostate cancer mortality in the late 80s
and early 90s (Figure 3), but it obviously would minimize rather than accentuate the actual
decline that is observed between 1982-85 and 2002-05.
African Americans have prostate cancer death rates that are among the highest in the
world (Crawford 2003). Perhaps the most prominent explanation of the racial disparity is that
dark skin inhibits the absorption of Vitamin D, which is highly protective against prostate cancer
(Li et al. 2007). A more tenuous connection to the health care system among African Americans
is probably also a factor. Nevertheless, a sharp decline in prostate cancer mortality in the US is
evident among both whites and African Americans. Both whites and blacks had rates that peaked
in the early 1990s. Between 1992/3 and 2004/5, the death rate declined by 32.2% for African

17

Americans and by 36.3% for whites (Ibid.). The absolute decline in rates was much larger for
African Americans. The 5-year survival rate for blacks increased from 68.4% for those
diagnosed in 1986, the year when PSA testing was approved, to 97.0% for those diagnosed in
2000. Among whites, the improvement was from 79.0% to 99.8% (SEER 2008).

Case Study II. Breast Cancer
Breast cancer is the most common cause of cancer death among women in a majority of
high income countries (Vainio and Bianchini 2002). In contrast to prostate cancer, there are
important behavioral risk factors for breast cancer. These include childlessness or low parity, late
age at first birth, obesity, and use of hormone replacement therapy (Das et al. 2005; Levi et al.
2005). Thus, trends in mortality are more difficult to interpret as exclusively reflecting medical
factors. But, like prostate cancer, breast cancer is highly amenable to medical intervention
through screening and therapy.

A. Breast Cancer Screening
Mammography, breast self-examination, clinical breast examination (CBE), and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are used to screen for breast cancer. No randomized trials of
CBE alone have been completed, and case-control and ecological studies have provided only
limited evidence for its efficacy in reducing mortality from breast cancer (Vainio and Bianchini
2002). Breast self-examination is an appealing screening method because it is noninvasive, but it
has weak ability to detect breast cancer (Elmore et al. 2005). Two randomized trials of breast
self-examination have been conducted, and neither found evidence of mortality reduction. The
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) has concluded that there is inadequate
evidence for the efficacy of CBE and breast self-examination in reducing breast cancer mortality
(Vainio and Bianchini 2002). The US Preventive Services Task Force also found evidence from
trials involving CBE and breast self-examination to be inconclusive (Humphrey et al. 2002). The
third technique, MRI, is mainly employed in high risk patients and after conventional diagnostic
procedures have already been conducted (Veronesi et al. 2005). Because of its high cost
(approximately 10 times that of mammography) and its relatively low specificity, MRI is not a
feasible tool for routine screening in the general population (Elmore et al. 2005).
Thus, mammography is currently the most important diagnostic tool for breast cancer. It

18

is the only screening test that has been shown to reduce mortality from breast cancer in
randomized trials and population studies (Veronesi et al. 2005; Wells 1998). The International
Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) concluded that there is sufficient evidence from
randomized trials that offering of mammography to a treatment group reduces breast cancer
mortality in women aged 50-69, by an average of 25%. After adjusting for the effect of nonacceptance of the screening invitation, this figure rises to 35% (Vainio and Bianchini 2002). The
US Preventive Services Task Force reviewed eight randomized controlled trials of offering
mammograms to treatment groups and concluded that, for studies of that were designated as of
fair quality or better, the relative mortality risk for women aged 40-74 was 0.84 (95% CI, 0.77 to
0.91) (Humphrey et al. 2002; see also Gøtzsche and Nielsen 2009). While some concerns have
been raised concerning flaws in the trials’ design and execution, in-depth independent reviews
have concluded that they do not negate the trials’ results (Quinn 2003).
The National Cancer Institute and the American Cancer Society (ACS) issued the first
formal guidelines for mammography in 1977, advocating screening for all women over the age
of 50 (Wells 1998). Currently, all major US medical organizations recommend screening
mammography for women over the age of 40 (Elmore et al. 2005; Ahern and Shen 2009). The
US is the only country that strongly endorses screening mammography for women under age 50
(Jatoi and Miller 2003); recent evidence has supported the efficacy of screening in the age group
40-49 (Humphrey et al. 2002).
Use of mammographic screening in the United States increased very rapidly; the
percentage of women aged 50-64 who reported having a mammogram in the past 2 years
increased from 31.7% in 1987 to 73.7% in 1998 (Breen et al. 2001). Screening programs
generally began later in Europe than in the US (Møller et al. 2005). The start dates for organized
screening programs in the countries under investigation range from 1986 to 1999 (Shapiro et al.
1998; Jatoi and Miller 2003).
Table 3 presents international data on the frequency of screening for breast cancer in
recent years. In the early-to-mid 90s, the United States had the highest frequency of
mammograms in the nine countries for which we are able to locate data. The OECD has
collected more recent data which shows that, while the frequency of mammograms has increased
in the US, it has grown faster in a number of other countries. Of the 19 countries shown in Table
2, the United States ranks 6th in the proportion of women in or around the age interval 50-69 who

19

had received mammograms in the previous two years.
Consistent with the relatively high frequency of mammograms in the US, Sant et al.
(2004) found that breast cancer is diagnosed at what is, on average, a later stage in Europe than
in the US.

B. Breast Cancer Treatment
In OECD countries, the large majority of cases of breast cancer are treated surgically.
Surgery is often supplemented with some combination of radiotherapy, hormone therapy, and
chemotherapy (i.e., adjuvant therapy). Descriptions of the Halsted mastectomy, which served as
the treatment of choice for breast cancer for almost a century, were first published in 1894
(Veronesi et al. 2002). It was later replaced by the modified radical mastectomy, which was
popular in the 1980s (Cotlar et al. 2003). Neither the original Halsted radical mastectomy nor the
modified radical mastectomy were introduced on the basis of evidence from randomized clinical
trials; however, observational studies confirm an enormous survival advantage for surgery
relative to no surgery (e.g., Sant et al. 2004).
In most high income countries, breast conserving surgery (BCS, also known as
lumpectomy) is currently the most common primary treatment for breast cancer (Veronesi et al.
2005). Relative to total mastectomy, its advantages are reduced disfigurement and morbidity
rather than mortality (Wood 1994). After 20 years of follow-up in a randomized trial, Fisher et
al. (2002) report finding no differences in disease-free survival, distant-disease-free survival, or
overall survival between women who underwent lumpectomy alone compared to those having a
total mastectomy (see also Veronesi et al. 2002). In 1990, the National Institutes of Health
Consensus Development Conference recommended breast conservation therapy for the majority
of women with Stage I or II breast carcinoma.
Radiation treatment of breast cancer was first used in 1896, but equipment and techniques
have improved substantially, particularly since the 1960s (Ragaz et al. 1997). The Early Breast
Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group conducted a meta-analysis of 36 trials of radiotherapy.
They found that the local recurrence rate with radiotherapy and surgery was three times lower
than with surgery alone, and that radiotherapy was associated with 6% reduction in the relative
risk of death due to breast cancer (odds ratio, 0.94) (Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative
Group 1995). Ragaz et al. (1997) found that, after 15 years of follow-up, women assigned to

20

chemotherapy plus radiotherapy had a 33% reduction in the recurrence rate and a 29% reduction
in mortality from breast cancer compared to women treated with chemotherapy alone.
Adjuvant systemic multi-agent chemotherapy and tamoxifen have been estimated to
reduce mortality (in terms of the relative reduction of the annual odds of death) by 27% and
47%, respectively (Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group 1998a, 1998b). These
figures are derived from the meta-analyses of all randomized trials of any aspect of treatment for
early breast cancer that began before 1990. There were 47 trials of adjuvant polychemotherapy
involving 18,000 women (Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group 1998a). Greater
benefits were reported in women under the age of 50, who experienced with significant
reductions in recurrence and mortality of 35% and 27%. For women between 50 and 69, these
figures were 20% and 11% (Ibid.).
Cole et al. first reported the clinical efficacy of tamoxifen for disseminated breast cancer
in 1971. The Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group summarized the results of 55
randomized controlled trials involving more than 37,000 women. Compared to a placebo,
adjuvant tamoxifen resulted in annual reductions of 26% in recurrence and 14% in death. Among
women treated for five years, these figures rose to 50% and 28%, respectively (Early Breast
Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group 1998b; Osborne 1998) Tamoxifen produces significant
benefits in women of all age groups (Jaiyesimi et al. 1995; Early Breast Cancer Trialists’
Collaborative Group 1998b). Following pharmacologic and clinical evaluations, the US Food
and Drug Administration approved tamoxifen for the treatment of metastatic breast cancer in
postmenopausal women in 1977. Tamoxifen was also approved as the initial endocrine therapy
for disseminated breast cancer in premenopausal women.
Information on international differences in breast cancer treatment is limited. A
comparison of the Eurocare and SEER registry data found that 97% of women in SEER were
treated surgically compared to 90% in the Eurocare registries. Lymphadenectomy rates were
slightly more extensive in the US, and more axillary lymph nodes were examined in the US
(Sant et al. 2004). Hughes (2003) compared patterns of breast cancer care in Belgium, Canada
(Manitoba and Ontario), France, Italy, Norway, Sweden, United Kingdom (England), and the
United States. During the latest period investigated, 1990-93, at least 90% of women diagnosed
with breast cancer received a mastectomy or breast-conserving surgery in all areas except
Ontario, where the figure was 82%, and England (71%). The use of radiotherapy with BCS has

21

also risen over time and varied considerably among countries. Among women receiving BCS in
1995-97, Belgium, France, Canada and the UK had the highest proportions of women receiving
radiation therapy. The US ranked below these countries and above Sweden and Italy (Ibid.)
Adjuvant chemotherapy became standard treatment for breast cancer patients in the US in
the late 1970s (Ragaz et al. 1997). Tamoxifen began to be widely used in the late 1970s and early
1980s after the Nolvadex Adjuvant Trial Organization trials demonstrated its effectiveness
(Mariotto et al. 2002). It has since become the most widely prescribed antineoplastic agent for
treatment of breast cancer in the United States and Great Britain (Jaiyesimi et al. 1995). Between
1975 and 2000, the percentage of breast cancer patients receiving chemotherapy in the US
increased from essentially 0 to 80%, while tamoxifen use increased from 0 to 50% (Berry et al.
2006). Starting in the mid-1980s, tamoxifen use in the UK also increased rapidly. By 1990, 50%
of women with breast cancer over the age of 50 in the Thames region were receiving tamoxifen
(Blanks et al. 2000). Unfortunately, we have not found comparable international data on the use
of chemotherapy and tamoxifen. Variations in stage and type of tumor, age of patient, type of
surgery, and other factors make it impossible to reliably compare the few national or regional
data that exist.

C. Breast Cancer Survival
Several studies have compared international survival rates from breast cancer. As
noted above, the survival advantage of US breast cancer patients compared to their European
counterparts is well documented. The US survival advantage is particularly sharp among older
women (Hughes 2003). International differences in survival are challenging to interpret, but
three studies using cancer registry data for European and American women cancer survival have
attributed the survival differences from breast cancer to earlier diagnosis and more aggressive
care in the US. These factors have also been introduced to explain better breast cancer survival
rates in the US than in Canada (Ugnat et al. 2005).
Gatta et al. (2002) found that European breast cancer patients diagnosed 1985-89 had
significantly lower five-year relative survival rates than American patients (73% vs. 82%). None
of the 17 European countries had higher five-year relative survival than the US. In the first year
after diagnosis, the risk of death from breast cancer was much higher in European than American
patients. Survival rates fell with increasing age at diagnosis in both the US and Europe, but the

22

fall was more marked in Europe. Gatta et al. suggest that the survival rate differences may be
attributable to earlier diagnosis in the US.
The most thorough study compared American and European women diagnosed with
breast cancer between 1990 and 1992 (Sant et al. 2004). The five-year survival rate was higher in
the US than in Europe (89% vs. 79%), and survival for each stage-at-diagnosis category was also
higher in the US. Early-stage tumors were more frequent in the US (41% of cases) than in
Europe (29%). Treatment was more aggressive in the US, where 97.1% of women underwent
surgery compared to 90.2% in Europe. In the US, 50.7% of women had 15+ lymph nodes
evaluated for metastasis, compared to 27.8% in Europe. The overall relative risk of death was
37% higher among European women (95% confidence interval 25-50%). The excess risk was
reduced to 20% by adjustment for surgical intervention, which was associated with a 90%
reduction in mortality. Adjustment for stage at diagnosis reduced the relative risk to 12% and
further adjustment for the number of lymph nodes evaluated to determine cancer progression
reduced the excess risk of death among the European women to an insignificant 7%. Introducing
information on the use of radiotherapy did not alter the relative risk of European women. Thus,
the higher survival rate in the US appears to be a result both of earlier diagnosis and more
aggressive treatment.
The most recent study compared cancer survival differences between Europe and the US
in 2000-2002 based on period rather than cohort survival data. As shown in Table 1, the fiveyear survival rate for breast cancer was 79.0% in Europe, compared with 90.1% in the US.
Verdecchia et al. (2007) hypothesize that these differences were most likely due to differences in
timeliness of diagnosis.
Trends in screening and in survival in the US are consistent with the idea that earlier
screening improves survival. The increase in the percentage of American women aged 50-64
with a mammogram in the previous two years from 32% in 1987 to 74% in 1998 was
accompanied by an increase in five-year survival rates from 79% for those diagnosed in 1985 to
91% for those diagnosed in 2000 (SEER 2008).

D. Breast Cancer Mortality
In many developed countries, breast cancer mortality rates began declining around 1990
(Veronesi et al. 2005; Botha et al. 2003). It is unlikely that the declines in mortality were caused

23

by changes in the major risk factors for the disease. In fact, the risk factor profile of women in
high income countries has, if anything, become less favorable over the past few decades as a
result of rising obesity and delayed and reduced childbearing (Levi et al. 2005). Reductions after
2002 in the use of hormone replacement therapy could work in the opposite direction but the risk
is sufficiently small (Writing Group for the Women’s Health Initiative Investigators 2002;
Chlebowski et al 2003), and lags sufficiently long, that the decline should not be reflected in a
data series that ends in 2005. Chu et al. (1996) rule out changes in coding or ascertainment as
contributors to the mortality decline in the US, noting that there had been no coding changes
affecting breast cancer and that no systematic problems with ascertainment were identified after
1989.
Studies of trends in breast cancer mortality have attributed the declines mainly to earlier
detection – in particular, rising rates of mammographic screening – and improved treatment
(Veronesi et al. 2005; Levi et al. 2005; Chu et al. 1996). A careful, detailed simulation for the US
by Berry et al. (2006) concluded that “We can say with high probability that both screening and
adjuvant therapy have contributed to the reductions in U.S. breast cancer mortality observed
from 1975 (and especially from 1990) to 2000. Our best estimate is that about two-thirds of the
reduction is due to therapy and one-third to screening” (Berry et al. 2006:36). Using less precise
methods, Blanks et al. (2000) reached a similar conclusion about the decline in breast cancer
mortality in England and Wales from 1990 to 1998. Evidence that states with greater use of
mammography had greater mortality declines between 1992 and 1999 supports the link between
screening and mortality (Das et al. 2005).
We hypothesize that the US has had a faster decline in breast cancer mortality than the
comparison countries because it took better advantage of technological advances in screening
and treatment. Mortality data alone do not permit us to distinguish between the effects of
screening and treatment, but that distinction is not central to judging the effectiveness of a health
care system.
Figure 4 shows the annual age-standardized death rate in the United States and the
average for our 15 OECD countries since 1980. Clearly, the US has had a faster decline in breast
cancer mortality than average among the comparison countries. Is the faster decline in the US
statistically significant? To answer this question, we repeat the approach used for prostate
cancer, using WHO data files on deaths by cause and population by five-year age groups. We

24

employ negative binomial regression on data at ages 50+ (in five-year wide age groups until
85+). The dependent variable is the log of the number of deaths from breast cancer in a certain
age group for a particular country and time period. Independent variables are a set of age group
identifiers, a set of period identifiers, a dummy variable for the US, and a set of US/period
interactions. We designate six 4-year-wide time periods, beginning with 1982-85 and ending
with 2002-05, and choose 1982-85 as the reference period. Because of the rapid increase in the
proportion of women receiving mammograms from less than a third in 1987 to 74% in 1998, a
reference period in the early 1980s appears appropriate. Significance tests recognize the
clustering of observations by country. Results are presented in Table 4.
Using 1982-85 as the reference period, we find that the US/2002-05 interaction term is
significant at .01. With a coefficient of -.126, the coefficient implies that mortality in the US has
fallen 13% faster since 1982-85 than in other countries. US interactive coefficients for 1994-97
and 1998-2001 are also negative and significant at 5%. The interactive variable, US/2002-2005,
is always significant at p < 0.01 regardless of which date is selected as reference period (not
shown). Thus, the US has experienced a significantly faster decline in breast cancer mortality
than comparison countries.

Summary
We have demonstrated that mortality reductions from prostate cancer and breast cancer
have been exceptionally rapid in the United States relative to a set of peer countries. We have
argued that these unusually rapid declines are attributable to wider screening and more
aggressive treatment of these diseases in the US. It appears that the US medical care system has
worked effectively to reduce mortality from these important causes of death.
This conclusion is consistent with other evidence that we have reviewed on the
performance of the US health care system: screening for other cancers also appears unusually
extensive; 5-year survival rates from all of the major cancers are very favorable; survival rates
following heart attack and stroke are also favorable (although one-year survival rates following
stroke are not above average); the proportion of people with elevated blood pressure or
cholesterol levels who are receiving medication is well above European standards.
These performance indicators pertain primarily to what happens after a disease has
developed. It is possible that the US health care system performs poorly in preventing disease in

25

the first place. Unfortunately, there are no satisfactory international comparisons of disease
incidence. Individuals report a higher prevalence of cancer and cardiovascular disease in the
United States than in Europe, and biomarkers confirm the higher prevalence of many disease
syndromes in the US compared to England and Wales. Higher disease prevalence is prima facie
evidence of higher disease incidence, although it could also be produced by better identification
(e.g., through screening programs) or better survival. The history of exceptionally heavy
smoking in the US, and the more recent massive increase in obesity, suggest that a high disease
incidence in the US could not be laid entirely at the feet of the health care system.
Evidence that the major diseases are effectively diagnosed and treated in the US
does not mean that there may not be great inefficiencies in the US health care system. A list of
prominent charges include fragmentation, duplication, inaccessibility of records, the practice of
defensive medicine, misalignment of physician and patient incentives, limitations of access for a
large fraction of the population, and excessively fast adoption of unproven technologies (Garber
and Skinner, 2008; Cebul et al. 2008; Commonwealth Fund 2008). Some of these inefficiencies
have been identified by comparing performance across regions of the United States. Of course,
the fact that certain regions do poorly relative to others does not imply that the US does poorly
relative to other countries. And many of the documented inefficiencies of the US health care
system add to its costs rather than harm patients.
Just as we are not addressing issues of efficiency on the production side, we are not
treating patient welfare as the main outcome. Practices that produce greater longevity do not
necessarily enhance well-being. This potential disparity is central to the controversy involving
PSA testing, which uncovers many cancers that would never kill patients but whose treatment
often produces adverse side effects.
The question that we have posed is much simpler: does a poor performance by the US
health care system account for the low international ranking of longevity in the US? Our answer
is, “no”.

26

References
Ahern, Charlotte Hsieh and Yu Shen. 2009. “Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Mammography and
Clinical Breast Examination Strategies: A Comparison with Current Guidelines.” Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev Vol. 18(3): 718–25.
Anderson, Gerald F. and Bianca K. Frogner. 2008. “Health Spending in OECD Countries:
Obtaining Value Per dollar.” Health Affairs Vol. 27(6): 1718-1727.
Andriole, Gerald L., Robert L. Grubb, Saundra S. Buys, David Chia, et al. 2009. “Mortality
Results from a Randomized Prostate-Cancer Screening Trial.” New England Journal of
Medicine Vol. 360: 1310-19.
Aus, Gunnar, Svante Bergdahl, Pär Lodding, Hans Lilja, et al. 2007. “Prostate Cancer Screening
Decreases the Absolute Risk of Being Diagnosed with Advanced Prostate Cancer—
Results from a Prospective, Population-Based Randomized Controlled Trial.” European
Urology Vol. 51: 659-664.
Avendano, Mauricio, Maria Glymour, James Banks, and Johan P. Mackenbach. 2009. “Health
Disadvantage in US Adults Ages 50 to 74 Years: A Comparison of the Health of Rich
and Poor Americans with That of Europeans.” American Journal of Public Health Vol.
99(3): 540-548.
Baade, P.D., M.D. Coory, and J.F. Aitken. 2004. “International Trends in Prostate-Cancer
Mortality: The Decrease Is Continuing and Spreading.” Cancer Causes & Control Vol.
15(3): 237-241.
Banks, James, Michael Marmot, Zoe Oldfield, and James P. Smith. 2006. “Disease and
Disadvantage in the United States and in England.” Journal of the American Medical
Association Vol. 295(17): 2037-2045.
Berry, Donald A., Kathleen A. Cronin, Sylvia K. Plevritis, Dennis G. Fryback, et al. 2005.
“Effect of Screening and Adjuvant Therapy on Mortality from Breast Cancer.” New
England Journal of Medicine Vol. 353: 1784-92.
Berry, Donald A., Lurdes Inoue, Yu Shen, John Venier, et al. 2006. “Modeling the Impact of
Treatment and Screening on U.S. Breast Cancer Mortality: A Bayesian Approach.”
Journal of the National Cancer Institute Monograph Vol. 36: 30-36.
Bill-Axelson, A., L. Holmberg, M. Ruutu, M. Haggman, S Andersson, S. Bratell, A. Spangberg,
C. Busch, S. Nordling, H. Garmo, J. Palmgren, H. Adami, B. Norlen, and J. Johansson,
2005. “Radical Prostatectomy versus Watchful Waiting in Early Prostate Cancer.” New
England Journal of Medicine. Vol. 352(19): 1977-84.
Blanks, R.G., S.M. Moss, C.E. McGahan, M.J. Quinn, et al. 2000. “Effect of NHS Breast
Screening Programme on Mortality from Breast Cancer in England and Wales, 1990-8:
Comparison of Observed with Predicted Mortality.” British Medical Journal Vol. 321:
665-669.
Bolla, Michael, Laurence Collette, Léo Blank, Padraig Warde, et al. 2002. “Long-term Results
with Immediate Androgen Suppression and External Irradiation in Patients with Locally
Advanced Prostate Cancer (an EORTC Study): a Phase III Randomised Trial.” Lancet
Vol. 360(9327): 103-8.
Botha, J.L., F. Bray, R. Sankila, and D.M. Parkin. 2003. “Breast cancer Incidence and Mortality
Trends in 16 European Countries.” European Journal of Cancer Vol. 39: 1718–1729.
Bouchardy, Christine, Gerald Fioretta, Elisabetta Rapiti, Helena Maria Verkooijen, et al. 2008.
“Recent Trends in Prostate Cancer Mortality Show a Continuous Decrease in Several

27

Countries.” International Journal of Cancer. Vol. 123: 421-429.
Breen, Nancy, Diane K. Wagener, Martin L. Brown, William W. Davis, et al. 2001. “Progress in
Cancer Screening Over a Decade: Results of Cancer Screening From the 1987, 1992, and
1998 National Health Interview Surveys.” J Natl Cancer Inst Vol. 93(22): 1704-13.
Bunting, P. 2002. “Screening for Prostate Cancer with Prostate-specific Antigen: Beware the
Biases.” Clinica Chimica Acta Vol. 315: 71-97.
Cebul, R.D., J.B. Rebitzer, L.J. Taylor, and M.E. Votruba. 2008. “Organizational Fragmentation
and Care Quality in the U.S. Healthcare System.” Journal of Economic Perspectives Vol.
22(4): 93-113.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2002. “Annual Smoking-Attributable Mortality,
Years of Potential Life Lost, and Economic Costs- United States, 1995-1999.” Morbidity
and Mortality Weekly Report Vol 51(14): 300-303.
Chlebowski R.T., S.L. Hendrix, R.D. Langer, et al. 2003. “Influence of Estrogen Plus Progestin
on Breast Cancer and Mammography in Healthy Postmenopausal Women: the Women’s
Health Initiative Randomised Trial.” Journal of the American Medical Association Vol.
289: 3243–53.
Chu, Kenneth C., Robert E. Tarone, Larry G. Kessler, Lynn A. G.Ries, et al. 1996. “Recent
Trends in U.S. Breast Cancer Incidence, Survival, and Mortality Rates.” Journal of the
National Cancer Institute Vol. 88: 1571-9.
Ciccolallo, L., R. Capocaccia, M.P. Coleman, F. Berrino, et al. 2005. “Survival Differences
Between European and US Patients with Colorectal Cancer: Role of Stage at Diagnosis
and Surgery.” Gut Vol. 54(2): 268-273.
Collin, Simon M., Richard M. Martin, Chris Metcalfe, David Gunnell, et al. 2008. “Prostatecancer Mortality in the USA and UK in 1975–2004: an Ecological Study.” Lancet
Oncology Vol. 9: 445-52.
Commonwealth Fund Commission on a High Performance Health System. 2008. Why Not the
Best? Results from the National Scorecard on U.S. Health System Performance, 2008.
Commonwealth Fund. New York.
Congressional Budget Office. 2007. The Long-Term Outlook for Health Care Spending: A CBO
Study. CBO Publication No. 3085. U.S. Government Printing Office. Washington, DC.
Constantinou, J. and M.R. Fenely. 2006. “PSA Testing: an Evolving Relationship with Prostate
Cancer Screening.” Prostate Cancer and Prostatic Diseases Vol. 9: 6–13.
Cotlar, Alvin M., Joseph J. Dubose, and D. Michael Rose. 2003. “History of Surgery for Breast
Cancer: Radical to the Sublime.” Current Surgery Vol. 60(3): 329-337.
Crawford, E. David. 2003. “Epidemiology of Prostate Cancer.” Urology Vol. 62(6 suppl 1): 312.
Crimmins, Eileen, K. Garcia, and J.K. Kim. 2009. “Are International Differences and Trends in
Life Expectancy in Sync with Differences and Trends in Health and/or Disability?”
Forthcoming in Eileen Crimmins and Samuel Preston, Divergent Trends in Life
Expectancy. National Research Council. Washington, D.C.
Cutler, David. 2004. Your Money or Your Life. Oxford University Press. New York.
Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2003. “Why Have Americans
Become More Obese?” Journal of Economic Perspectives. Vol. 17(3): 93-118.
Cutler, David M. and Edward L. Glaeser. 2006. “Why do Europeans Smoke More than
Americans?” NBER Working Paper 12124.
Das, Barnali, Eric J. Feuer, and Angela Mariotto. 2005. “Geographic Association Between

28

Mammography Use and Mortality Reduction in the US.” Cancer Causes and Control
Vol. 16: 691–699.
De Koning Harry J., Michael K. Liem, Caroline A. Baan, Rob Boer, et al. 2002. “Prostate
Cancer Mortality Reduction by Screening: Power and Time Frame with Complete
Enrollment in the European Randomised Screening for Prostate Cancer (ERSPC) Trial.”
International Journal of Cancer Vol. 98(2): 268–73.
DeNavas-Walt, Carmen, Bernadette D. Proctor, and Jessica Smith. 2007. Income, Poverty, and
Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2006. U.S. Census Bureau, Current
Population Reports, P60-233. U.S. Government Printing Office. Washington, DC.
Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group. 1995. “Effects of Radiotherapy and Surgery
in Early Breast Cancer: An Overview of the Randomized Trials.” New England Journal
of Medicine Vol. 333(22): 1444-55.
Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group. 1998a. “Polychemotherapy for Early Breast
Cancer: an Overview of the Randomised Trials.” Lancet Vol. 352: 930-42.
Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group. 1998b. “Tamoxifen for Early Breast Cancer:
an Overview of the Randomised trials.” Lancet Vol. 351: 1451-1467.
Elmore, Joann G., Katrina Armstrong, Constance D. Lehman, and Suzanne W. Fletcher. 2005.
“Screening for Breast Cancer.” Journal of the American Medical Association Vol. 293:
1245-1256.
Etzioni, Ruth, R. Gulati, S. Falcon, and D. Penson. 2008. “Impact of PSA Screening on the
Incidence of Advanced Stage Prostate Cancer in theUnited States: A Surveillance
Modeling Approach: Medical Decision Making. Vol. 28: 323-331.
Fisher, Bernard, Stewart Anderson, John Bryant, Richard Margolese, et al. 2002. “Twenty-year
Follow Up of a Randomized Trial Comparing Total Mastectomy, Lumpectomy, and
Lumpectomy Plus Irradiation for the Treatment of Invasive Breast Cancer.” New
England Journal of Medicine Vol. 347(16): 1233-41.
Fleshner, Neil, Eileen Rakovitch, and Laurence Klotz. 2000. “Differences Between Urologists in
the United States and Canada in the Approach to Prostate Cancer.” Journal of Urology
Vol. 163: 1461-466.
Forey, Barbara, J. Hamling, P. Lee, and N. Wald, editors. 2002. International Smoking Statistics:
A Collection of Historical Data from 30 Economically Developed Countries. Oxford
University Press. London.
Feuer, Eric J., R.M. Merrill, and B.F. Hankey. 1999. “Cancer Surveillance Series: Interpreting
Trends in Prostate Cancer—Part II: Cause of Death Misclassification and the Recent Rise
and Fall in Prostate Cancer Mortality.” Journal of the National Cancer Institute. Vol.
91(12): 1025-32.
Garber, Alan. 2003. “Comparing Health Systems from the Disease-specific Perspective” pp. 95106 in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2003. A DiseaseBased Comparison of Health Systems: What is Best and at What Cost? OECD. Paris.
Garber, Alan M. and Jonathan Skinner. 2008. “Is American Health Care Uniquely Inefficient?”
Journal of Economic Perspectives Vol. 22(4): 27-50.
Gatta, Gemma, Riccardo Capocaccia, Michel P. Coleman, Lynn A. Gloeckler Ries, et al. 2000.
“Toward a Comparison of Survival in American and European Cancer Patients.” Cancer
Vol. 89(4): 893-900.
Gøtzsche, P.C. and M. Nielsen. 2009. “Screening for Breast Cancer with Mammography
(Review).” Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews Issue 2: 1-90.

29

Haldorsen, Tor and Tom K. Grimsrud. 1999. “Cohort Analysis of Cigarette Smoking and Lung
Cancer Incidence among Norwegian Women.” International Journal of Epidemiology
Vol. 28(6): 1032-1036.
Halliday, A., A. Mansfield, J. Marro, C. Peto, et al. 2004. “Prevention of Disabling and Fatal
Strokes by Successful Carotid Endarterectomy in Patients Without Recent Neurological
Symptoms: Randomised Controlled Trial.” Lancet Vol. 363(9420): 1491-502.
Hanks, Gerald E., Thomas F. Pajak, Arthur Porter, David Grignon, et al. 2003. “Phase III Trial
of Long-Term Adjuvant Androgen Deprivation After Neoadjuvant Hormonal
Cytoreduction and Radiotherapy in Locally Advanced Carcinoma of the Prostate: The
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group Protocol 92– 02.” Journal of Clinical Oncology Vol.
21(21): 3972-3978.
Harris, Russell and Kathleen N. Lohr. 2002. “Screening for Prostate Cancer: An Update of the
Evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.” Annals of Internal Medicine Vol.
137(11): 917-29.
Hsing, Ann W., Lilian Tsao, and Susan S. Devesa. 2001. “International Trends and Patterns of
Prostate Cancer Incidence and Mortality.” International Journal of Cancer Vol. 85(1):
60-67.
Hughes, Melissa. 2003. “Summary of Results from Breast Cancer Disease Study” pp. 77-94 in
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2003. A Disease-Based
Comparison of Health Systems: What is Best and at What Cost? OECD. Paris.
Humphrey, Linda L., Mark Helfand, Benjamin K.S. Chan, and Steven H. Woolf. 2002. “Breast
Cancer Screening: A Summary of the Evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force.” Annals of Internal Medicine Vol. 137(5,1): 347-360.
Ilic, Dragan, Denise O’Connor, Sally Green, and Timothy Wilt. 2006. “Screening for prostate
cancer.” Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews Issue 3.
International Agency for Research on Cancer. 2008. Website presenting World Health
Organization mortality data. Lyon, France. Accessed June-August 2008.
Institute of Medicine. 2001. Coverage Matters: Insurance and Health Care. National Academy
Press. Washington, DC.
Jaiyesimi, Ishmael A., Aman U. Buzdar, David A. Decker, and Gabriel N. Hortobagyi. 1995.
“Use of Tamoxifen for Breast Cancer: Twenty-Eight Years Later.” Journal of Clinical
Oncology Vol. 13:513-529.
Jatoi, Ismail, and Anthony B. Miller. 2003. “Why is Breast-Cancer Mortality Declining?” Lancet
Oncology Vol. 4: 251-254.
Kapteyn, Arie, James P. Smith, and Arthur van Soest. 2007. “Vignettes and self-reports of work
disability in the United States and the Netherlands.” American Economic Review Vol.
97(1): 461-473.
Kaul, P., P. Armstrong, W. Chang, C. Naylor, C. Granger, K. Lee, I. Peterson, R. Califf, E.
Topol, and D. Mark. 2004. “Long-term Mortality of Patients with Acute Myocardial
Infarction in the United States and Canada.” Circulation Vol. 110: 1754-60.
Kvåle, Rune, Anssi Auvinen, Hans-Olov Adami, Åsa Klint, et al. 2007. “Interpreting Trends in
Prostate Cancer Incidence and Mortality in the Five Nordic Countries.” Journal of the
National Cancer Institute Vol. 99(24): 1881 – 7.
Levi, Fabio, Cristina Bosetti, Franca Lucchini, Eva Negri, et al. 2005. “Monitoring the Decrease
in Breast Cancer Mortality in Europe.” European Journal of Cancer Prevention Vol. 14:
497-502.

30

Li, H., M. Stampfer, J. Hollis, L. Mucci, J. Gaziano, D. Hunter, E. Giovannucci, and J. Ma.
2007. “A Prospective Study of Plasma Vitamin D Metabolites, Vitamin D Receptor
Polymorphisms, and Prostate Cancer.” Public Library of Science Vol. 4(3): 562-571.
Lumey, L.H., B. Pittman, E.A. Zang, and E.L. Wynder. 1997. “Cigarette Smoking and Prostate
Cancer: No Relation with Six Measures of Lifetime Smoking Habits in a Large CaseControl Study Among U.S. Whites.” Prostate Vol. 33(3): 195-200.
Lu-Yao, G., P. Albersen, D. Moore, W. Shih, Y. Lin, R. DiPaola, and S. Yao. 2008. “Survival
Following Primary Androgen Deprivation Therapy among Men with Localized Prostate
Cancer.” Journal of the American Medical Association Vol. 300(2): 173-81.
Macinko, James, Barbara Starfield, and Leiyu Shi. 2003. “The Contribution of Primary Care
Systems to Health Outcomes within Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) Countries, 1970–1998.” Health Services Research Vol. 38(3):
831-865.
Mariotto, A, E.J. Feuer, L.C. Harlan, L.M. Wun, et al. 2002. “Trends in Use of Adjuvant
Multiagent Chemotherapy and Tamoxifen for Breast Cancer in the United States: 1975–
1999.” Journal of the National Cancer Institute Vol. 94: 1626–34.
McKinsey Global Institute. 2008. Accounting for the Cost of US Health Care: A New Look at
Why Americans Spend More. McKinsey & Company. NP.
Michaud, P.C., D. Goldman, D. Lakdawalla, A. Gailey, and Y. Zheng. 2009. “International
Differences in Longevity and Health and their Economic Consequences.” Manuscript,
RAND Corporation. Santa Monica, California.
Moise, Pierre. 2003. “The Heart of the Health Care System: Summary of the Ischaemic Heart
Disease Part of the OECD Ageing-Related Diseases Study” pp. 27-52 in Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development. 2003. A Disease-Based Comparison of Health
Systems: What is Best and at What Cost? OECD. Paris.
Møller, B., H. Weedon-Fekjær, T. Hakulinen, L. Tryggvadóttir, et al. 2005. “The Influence of
Mammographic Screening on National Trends in Breast Cancer Incidence.” European
Journal of Cancer Prevention Vol. 14(2): 1117-128.
Nolte, Ellen and C. Martin McKee. 2008. “Measuring the Health of Nations: Updating an Earlier
Analysis.” Health Affairs Vol. 27(1): 58- 71.
Ogawa, Kazuhiko, Katsumasa Nakamura, Tomonari Sasaki, Hiroshi Onishi, et al. 2008. “Radical
External Beam Radiotherapy for Prostate Cancer in Japan: Differences in the Patterns of
Care among Japan, Germany, and the United States.” Radiation Medicine Vol. 26: 57-52.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2003. Stroke Care in OECD
Countries: A comparison of Treatment, Costs and Outcomes in 17 Countries. Health
Working Paper #5.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2006. Health Care Quality
Indicators Project: Initial Indicators Report. OECD Health Working paper #22.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2007. Health Care Quality
Indicators Project 2006: Data Collection Update Report. Working paper #29.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2008. OECD Health Data
2008: How Does the United States Compare? Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development. Paris.
Osborne, C. Kent. 1998. “Tamoxifen in the Treatment of Breast cancer.” New England Journal
of Medicine Vol. 339(22): 1609-1618.
Pilepich, Miljenko V., Kathryn Winter, Colleen A. Lawton, Robert E. Krisch, et al. 2005.

31

“Androgen Suppression Adjuvant to Definitive Radiotherapy in Prostate Carcinoma –
Long-term Results of Phase III RTOG 85–31.” International Journal of Radiation
Oncology*Biology*Physics Vol. 61(5): 1285-1290.
Pollack, Alan, G. Zagars, G. Starkschall, J. Antolak, J. Lee, E. Huang, A. von Eschenback, D.
Kuban, and I. Rosen. 2002. “Prostate Cancer Radiation Dose Response: Results of the
M.D. Anderson Phase III Randomized Trial.” International Journal of Oncology,
Biology, Physics Vol. 53(5): 1097-1105.
Post, P.N., R.A.M. Damhuis, A.P.M. van der Meyden, and the EUROCARE Working
Group. 1998. “Variation in Survival of Patients with Prostate Cancer in Europe Since
1978.” European Journal of Cancer Vol. 34(14): 2226-2231.
Potosky, Arnold L., Eric J. Feuer, and David L. Levin. 2001. “Impact of Screening on Incidence
and Mortality of Prostate Cancer in the United States.” Epidemiologic Reviews Vol.
23(1): 181-186.
Preston, Samuel and Haidong Wang. 2006. “Changing Sex Differentials in Mortality in the
United States: The Role of Cohort Smoking Patterns.” Demography Vol. 43(4): 413-34.
Preston, Samuel, Dana Glei and John Wilmoth. 2009. “Contribution of Smoking to International
Differences in Life Expectancy.” Forthcoming in Eileen Crimmins and Samuel Preston,
Divergent Trends in Life Expectancy. National Research Council. Washington, D.C.
Quinn, M.J. 2003. “Cancer Trends in the United States—A View From Europe.” Journal of the
National Cancer Institute Vol. 95(17): 1258-1261.
Ragaz, Joseph, Stewart M. Jackson, Nhu Le, Ian H. Plenderleith, et al. 1997. “Adjuvant
Radiotherapy and Chemotherapy in Node-Positive Premenopausal Women with Breast
Cancer.” New England Journal of Medicine Vol. 337(14): 956-62.
Sandblom, Gabriel, Monika Dufmats, Kerstin Nordenskjöld, and Eberhard Varenhorst. 2000.
“Prostate Carcinoma Trends in Three Counties in Sweden 1987–1996: Results from a
Population-based National Cancer Register, South-East Region Prostate Cancer Group.”
Cancer Vol. 88(6): 1445-53.
Sant, Milena, Claudia Allemani, Franco Berrino, Michel P. Coleman, et al. 2004. “Breast
Carcinoma Survival in Europe and the United States: A Population-Based Study.” Cancer
Vol. 100(4):715–22.
Schootman, Mario, Donna Jeffe, Anat Reschke, and Rebecca Aft. 2004. “The Full Potential of
Breast Cancer Screening Use to Reduce Mortality Has Not Yet Been Realized in the
United States.” Breast Cancer Research and Treatment Vol. 85(3): 219-222.
Schröder, Fritz H., Jonas Hugosson, Monique J. Roobol, Teuvo L.J. Tammela, et al. 2009.
“Screening and Prostate-Cancer Mortality in a Randomized European Study.” New
England Journal of Medicine Vol. 360: 1320-8.
Shampo, Mark. 2002. “Development of the PSA Test.” Journal of Pelvic Surgery Vol. 8(2): 123126.
Shapiro, Sam, Elizabeth Ann Coleman, Mireille Breeders, Mary Codd, et al. 1998. “Breast
Cancer Screening Programmes in 22 Countries: Current Policies, Administration and
Guidelines.” International Journal of Epidemiology Vol. 27: 735-742
Stattin, Pär, Robert Johansson, Ronald Lodnert, Andrén Ove, et al. 2005. “Geographical
Variation in Incidence of Prostate Cancer in Sweden.” Scandinavian Journal of Urology
and Nephrology Vol. 39(5): 372-379.
Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER). 2008. Website of the United States
National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute. Accessed June-August, 2008.

32

Tarone, Robert E., Kenneth C. Chu, and Otis W. Brawley. 2000. “Implications of Stage-Specific
Survival Rates in Assessing Recent Declines in Prostate Cancer Mortality Rates.”
Epidemiology Vol. 11(2): 167-170.
Technological Change in Health Care (TECH) Research Network. 2001. “Technological Change
around the World: Evidence from Heart Attack Care.” Health Affairs Vol. 20(3): 25-42.
Thompson, Ian M., Catherine M. Tangen, Jorge Paradelo, M. Scott Lucia, et al. 2006. “Adjuvant
Radiotherapy for Pathologically Advanced Prostate Cancer: A Randomized Clinical
Trial.” Journal of the American Medical Association Vol. 296(19): 2329-2335.
Thorpe, Kenneth E., David H. Howard and Katya Galactionova. 2007a. “Differences In Disease
Prevalence As a Source of the U.S.-European Health Care Spending Gap.” Health Affairs
Vol. 26(6): 678-686.
Thorpe, Kenneth E., David H. Howard and Katya Galactionova. 2007b. “Technical Appendix.”
On-line data supplement to Thorpe et al. 2007a.
Torti, D.C. and G. O. Matheson. 2004. “Exercise and Prostate Cancer.” Sports Medicine Vol.
34(6): 363-69.
Trock, B., M. Han, S. Freedland, E. Humphreys, T. DeWeese, A. Partin, and P. Walsh. 2008.
“Prostate Cancer-Specific Survival Following Salvage Radiotherapy vs. Observation in
Men with Biochemical Recurrence after Radical Prostatectomy.” Journal of the American
Medical Association Vol. 299(23): 2760-69.
Ugnat, A-M, L. Xie, R. Semenciw, C. Waters, et al. 2005. “Survival Patterns for the Top Four
Cancers in Canada: the Effects of Age, Region and Period.” European Journal of Cancer
Prevention Vol. 14: 91–100.
United States National Center for Health Statistics. 2008. Deaths: Final Data for 2005. National
Vital Statistics Reports. Vol. 56(10). Nat. Center for Health Statistics. Hyattsville, MD.
United States National Center for Health Statistics. 2002. Deaths: Final Data for 2000. National
Vital Statistics Reports. Vol. 50(15). Nat. Center for Health Statistics. Hyattsville, Md.
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. 2008. “Screening for Prostate Cancer: U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force Recommendation Statement.” Annals of Internal Medicine Vol.
149(3): 185-91.
Vainio, H. and F. Bianchini. 2002. Breast Cancer Screening. IARC Handbooks of Cancer
Prevention, Vol. 7. Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer Press and
World Health Organization.
Vercelli, M., A. Quaglia, E. Marani, and S. Parodi. 2000. “Prostate Cancer Incidence and
Mortality Trends Among Elderly and Adult Europeans.” Critical Reviews in
Oncology/Hematology Vol. 35: 133–144.
Verdecchia, Arduino, Silvia Francisci, Hermann Brenner, Gemma Gatta, et al. 2007. “Recent
Cancer Survival in Europe: a 2000–02 Period Analysis of EUROCARE-4 Data.” Lancet
Oncology Vol. 8: 784–96.
Veronesi, Umberto, Natale Cascinelli, Luigi Mariani, Marco Greco, et al. 2002. “Twenty-year
Follow-up of a Randomized Study Comparing Breast-conserving Surgery with Radical
Mastectomy for Early Breast Cancer.” New England J of Medicine Vol. 347(16): 122732.
Veronesi, Umberto, Peter Boyle, Aron Goldhirsch, Roberto Orecchia, et al. 2005. “Breast
Cancer.” Lancet Vol. 365: 1727-41.
Wells, J. 1998. “Mammography and the Politics of Randomised Controlled Trials.” British
Medical Journal Vol. 317(31): 1224-30.

33

Wolf-Maier, K., R. Cooper, H. Kramer, J Banegas, S. Giampaoli, M. Joffres, N. Poulter, P.
Primastesta, B. Stegmayr, and M. Thamm. 2004. “Hypertension Treatment and Control
in Five European Countries, Canada, and the United States.” Hypertension Vol.
43(10):10-17.
Wood, William C. 1994. “Progress from Clinical Trials on Breast Cancer.” Cancer Vol. 74(S9):
2606-9.
Wong, Yu-Ning, Nandita Mitra, Gary Hudes, Russell Localio, et al. 2006. “Survival Associated
With Treatment vs. Observation of Localized Prostate Cancer in Elderly Men.” Journal of
the American Medical Association Vol. 296: 2683-2693.
World Health Organization. 2009. World Health Organization Statistical Information System.
Website accessed July 2009.
Writing Group for the Women’s Health Initiative Investigators. 2002. “Risks and Benefits of
Estrogen Plus Progestin in Healthy Postmenopausal Women: Principal Results from the
Women’s Health Initiative Randomized Controlled Trial.” Journal of the American
Medical Association Vol. 288: 321–33

34

Table 1. Five-Year Relative Survival Rates for Cancer of Different Sites, US and European
Cancer Registries*

5-year survival rate (%)
Site

United States

Europe

Prostate
Skin melanoma
Breast
Corpus uteri
Colorectum
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Stomach
Lung

99.3
92.3
90.1
82.3
65.5
62.0
25.0
15.7

77.5
86.1
79.0
78.0
56.2
54.6
24.9
10.9

All malignancies (men)
All malignancies (women)

66.3
62.9

47.3
55.8

*Based on period survival data for 2000-02

Source: Verdecchia et al. (2007).

35

Table 2. Indicators of Frequency of PSA Testing Among Males
A. Percent of Men Ever Receiving a PSA Test

Country
Australia
Austria
Canada
France
Italy
Netherlands
(Rotterdam)
Switzerland
(Vaud and Neuchâtel
Cantons)
United States

Percentage of Men Ever
Receiving a PSA Test

Year

Age Group

Source

49%
54.6%
47.5%6
36%
31.4%
12.7%6

2003
2006-2007
2000-2001
2005
2003
1994

40+
40+
50+
40-74
50+
55-74

1
2
3
4
5
6

10%

“Early 1990s”

65+

7

75% (BRFSS)
62.7% (NHIS)1

2001
2005

50+
50-79

8
9

B. Percent of Men Recently Receiving a PSA Test

Country
Australia
Austria
Belgium
(Limburg Province)
Canada
Italy
Netherlands
(Rotterdam)
Norway
(3 counties)
Spain
(Getafe City)
Sweden
United Kingdom
United States
1
2

Percentage of Men
Receiving a PSA Test in
the Past x Years

x

Year

Age
Group

Source

27%
31.1%

2
1

1995/1996
2006-2007

50+
40+

10
2

23%

1

1996-1998

40+

11

26%
15.9%

1
1

2000-2001
2002

40+
50+

12
5

20.2%

3

1997-2000

55-74

13

7%

1

1999

50-65

14

20.9%

2

1997-1999

55+

15

2

1
1
1
2

2002
1999-2001
2001
2005

50+
45-84
50+
50-79

16
17
8
9

25.3%
7%
57% (BRFSS)
48.4% (NHIS)1

This figure does not include men with a history of prostate cancer.
According to Sennfalt, Carlsson, and Varenhorst (2006), 430,000 PSA tests were performed in Sweden in 2002.
We assume that all were performed on men aged 50+. The UN Population Division’s estimates for Sweden’s male

36

population (aged 50+) for 2000 and 2005 were retrieved from the UN Statistics Division’s Common Database and
interpolated to give a figure for 2002 of 1,699,442.

References to Table 2:
(1) Holden, Carol A., Damien J. Jolley, Robert I. McLachlan, Marian Pitts, Robert Cumming,
Gary Wittert, David J. Handelsman, and David M. de Kretser. 2006. “Men in Australia
Telephone Survey (MATeS): Predictors of Men’s Help-seeking Behaviour for Reproductive
Health Disorders.” Medical Journal of Australia Vol. 185(8): 418-22.
(2) Klimont, Jeannette, Josef Ktir, and Barbara Leitner. 2007. Österreichische
gesundheitsbefragung 2006/2007: hauptergebnisse und methodische Dokumentation.
Statistik Austria. Federal Ministry of Health, Family and Youth. http://www.bmgfj.gv.at
(accessed July 15, 2008).
(3) Beaulac, Jennifer A., Richard N. Fry, and Jay Onysko. 2006. “Lifetime and Recent Prostate
Specific Antigen (PSA) Screening of Men for Prostate Cancer in Canada.” Canadian Journal
of Public Health Vol. 97(3): 171-6.
(4) Eisinger, François, Jean-Yves Blay, Jean- François Morère, Olivier Rixe, Anne CalazelBenque, Laurent Cals, Yvan Coscas, Sylvie Dolbeault, Moïse Namer, Daniel Serin, Claire
Roussel, and Xavier Pivot. 2008. “Cancer Screening in France: Subjects’ and Physicians’
Attitudes.” Cancer Causes and Control Vol. 19(4): 431-434.
(5) D’Ambrosio, G., F. Samani, M. Cancian, and C. De Mola. 2004. “Practice of Opportunistic
Prostate-Specific Antigen Screening in Italy: Data from the Health Search Database.”
European Journal of Cancer Prevention Vol. 13(5): 383-6.
(6) Beemsterboer P.M.M., H.J. de Koning, R. Kranse, T.H. Trienekens, P.J. van der Maas, and
F.H. Schröder. 2000. “Prostate Specific Antigen Testing and Digital Rectal Examination
Before and During a Randomized Trial of Screening for Prostate Cancer: European
Randomized Study of Screening for Prostate Cancer, Rotterdam.” Journal of Urology Vol.
164: 1216-1220.
(7) Levi, F., C, La Vecchia, L. Randimbison, G. Erler, V.-C. Te, and S. Franceschi. 1998.
“Incidence, Mortality, and Survival from Prostate Cancer in Vaud and Neuchatel,
Switzerland, 1974-1994.” Annals of Oncology Vol. 9(1): 31-5.
(8) Sirovich, Brenda E., Lisa M. Schwartz, and Steven Woloshin. 2003. “Screening Men for
Prostate and Colorectal Cancer in the United States: Does Practice Reflect the Evidence?”
Journal of the American Medical Association Vol. 289: 1414-1420.
(9) Ross, Louie E., Zahava Berkowitz, and Donatus U. Ekwueme. 2008. “Use of the ProstateSpecific Antigen Test Among U.S. Men: Findings from the 2005 National Health Interview
Survey.” Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention Vol. 17(3): 636-44.
(10) Smith, David P. and Bruce K. Armstrong. 1998. “Prostate-Specific Antigen Testing in
Australia and Association with Prostate Cancer Incidence in New South Wales.” Medical
Journal of Australia Vol. 169: 17-20.
(11) Lousbergh, D., F. Buntinx, G. Geys, M. Du Bois, D. Dhollander, and G. Molenberghs.
2002. “Prostate-Specific Antigen Screening Coverage and Prostate Cancer Incidence Rates in
the Belgian Province of Limburg in 1996-1998.” European Journal of Cancer Prevention
Vol. 11(6): 547-549.
(12) Gibbons, Laurie, and Chris Waters. 2003. “Prostate Cancer – Testing, Incidence, Surgery
and Mortality.” Health Reports Vol. 14(3): 19-20.

37

(13) Otto, Suzie J., Ingrid W. Van der Crusijen, Michael K. Liem, Ida J. Korfage, Jan J. Lous,
Fritz H. Schröder, and Harry J. De Koning. 2003. ”Effective PSA Contamination in the
Rotterdam Section of the European Randomized Study of Screening for Prostate Cancer.”
International Journal of Cancer Vol. 105(3): 394-399.
(14) Zappa, M., C. Visioli, E. Crocetti, C. Buonamici, A. Baccini, S. Taddei, and S. Ciatto.
2003. “Practice of Opportunistic PSA Screening in the Florence District.” Cancer Prevention
Vol. 12: 201-204.
(15) Páez, Alvaro, Marcos Luján, Luis Llanes, Ignacio Romero, M. Angel de la Cal, Elena
Miravalles, and Antonio Berenguer. 2002. “PSA-Use in a Spanish Industrial Area.”
European Urology Vol. 41: 162-166.
(16) Sennfalt, Karin, Per Carlsson, and Eberhard Varenhorst. 2006. “Diffusion and Economic
Consequences of Health Technologies in Prostate Cancer Care in Sweden, 1991–2002.”
European Urology Vol. 49: 1028-1034.
(17) Melia, Jane, Penny Coulson, Louise Johns, and Sue Moss. 2003. Report to the
Department of Health: Study to Assess the Rate of PSA Testing in Men with No Previous
Diagnosis of Prostate Cancer. Cancer Screening Evaluation Unit. Surrey, England.
http://www.cancerscreening.nhs.uk/prostate/psa-tests.html (accessed July 22, 2008).

38

Table 3. Percentage of Women Receiving a Mammogram in Previous Two Years: 1994 and
20031
Country

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Finland
France
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Luxembourg
Netherlands
New
Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland2
United
Kingdom3
United
States

Earlier Year

Later Year

%
Screened

Year

Age
Group

Source

%
Screened

Year

Age
Group

Source

51.4

1996-7

50-69

1

55.6

20032004

50-69

10

54.0
70.6
87.7
72.8
60.2
62.0
79.5
29.0
2.6
62.4
79.0

2003
2003
2003
2003
2003
2003
2003
2000
2003
2003
2003

50-69
50-69
50-59
50-69
45-65
40-69
50-64
55-69
50-69
50-69
50-75

10
10
10
10
10
10
10
11
10
10
11

62.3

2003

50-64

10

98.0
60.1

2003
2003

50-69
50-69

10
10

23.1
35.7
49.2
50

53.2

1997
1994

40-79
50-54
50-69
50+

3
4

1994

50-69

5

1995

2

28

1994

40-70

6

20

1992-3

50-64

7

83.6
27.0

2004
2002

50-74
50-69

10
11

63.9

1995

50-64

8

74.7

2003

50-64

10

66.5

1994

50-64

9

76.0

2003

50-69

10

1

For later years, when there are two observations for the same country we use survey rather than program data in
order to maximize comparability with the US (this affected only Canada and the Netherlands).
2
For 1992-93, the data for Switzerland is for the canton of Vaud only, and the screening interval is 1 year.
3
For the UK, the recall period is 3 years.

References to Table 3:
(1) Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. 2008. BreastScreen Australia monitoring report
2004–2005. Cancer series no. 42. Cat. no. CAN 37. Australian Institute of Health and
Welfare. Canberra.
(2) Vutuc Ch, G. Haidinger, T. Waldhoer. 1998. “Prevalence of self-reported screening
mammography and impact on breast cancer mortality in Austria.” Wien Klin Wschr 110:

39

485–490.
(3) Capet, Francis, Marc Arbyn, and Marisa Abarca. 2003. Mammografische opsporing van
borstkanker in België: analyse van de gezondheidsenquêtes 1997 en 2001. IPH / EPI –
REPORTS Nr. 2003- 008. Brussels.
(4) Snider, Judy, Janet Beauvais, Isra Levy, Paul Villeneueve, and Jennifer Pennock. 1997.
“Trends in Mammography and Pap Smear Utilization in Canada.” Chronic Diseases in
Canada 17(3): 1-15.
(5) Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek. 2009. Website accessed June-August 2009
(http://statline.cbs.nl/StatWeb/default.aspx).
(6) Luengo, S., P. Lazrao, R. Madero, F. Alvirac, et al. 1996. “Equity in the access to
mammography in Spain.” Social Science & Medicine 43(8): 1263-1271.
(7) Bulliard, J.-L., J.-P. De Landtsheer, and F. Levi. 2003. “Results from the Swiss
mammography screening pilot programme.” European Journal of Cancer 39: 1761–1769.
(8) Department of Health. 1999. “Breast Screening Programme, England 1997-98.” Website
accessed June-August 2009
(http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Statistics/StatisticalWorkAreas/Statistical
healthcare/DH_4016216).
(9) National Center for Health Statistics. 2000. Health, United States, 2000. National Center for
Health Statistics. Hyattsville, MD.
(10) OECD Health Data 2008. 2008. Website accessed June-August 2009.
(11) Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2006. Health Care Quality
Indicators Project: Initial Indicators Report. OECD Health Working paper #2.

40

Table 4. Coefficients of Negative Binomial Regression Predicting the Log of the Number of
Deaths from Prostate and Breast Cancer

Variable

Coefficient
(standard error)
Prostate Cancer Breast Cancer

Constant

-10.37***
(0.079)

-7.657***
(0.067)

0.000
(-)
1.166***
(0.026)
2.159***
(0.026)
3.013***
(0.032)
3.744***
(0.034)
4.384***
(0.038)
4.942***
(0.041)
5.455***
(0.047)

0.000
(-)
0.247***
(0.013)
0.413***
(0.019)
0.550***
(0.024)
0.721***
(0.029)
0.925***
(0.032)
1.157***
(0.038)
1.520***
(0.046)

0.000
(-)
0.0586***
(0.010)
0.103***
(0.016)
0.0837***
(0.023)
0.0242
(0.029)
-0.0529
(0.036)

0.000
(-)
0.0350***
(0.011)
0.0276
(0.015)
-0.00241
(0.028)
-0.0741*
(0.037)
-0.114**
(0.042)

0.125
(0.080)

0.108
(0.082)

Age
50-54
55-59
60-64
65-69
70-74
75-79
80-84
85+
Period
1982-1985
1986-1989
1990-1993
1994-1997
1998-2001
2002-2005

Observation from US

41

Observation from US in
1982-1985
1986-1989
1990-1993
1994-1997
1998-2001
2002-2005
*

0.000
(-)
-0.0229*
(0.010)
-0.00278
(0.015)
-0.0850***
(0.023)
-0.215***
(0.029)
-0.274***
(0.036)

0.000
(-)
-0.0216*
(0.011)
-0.0225
(0.015)
-0.0585*
(0.028)
-0.0892*
(0.036)
-0.126**
(0.040)

p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001

42

Figure 1. Age Standardized Death Rates at Ages 50+ From Influenza, 2000-2004
3

2

1.5

1

0.5

C
R
G

BR
G

EU
D

AU
S

JP
N

U
SA

T
AU

ES
P

FR
A

AN
C

IT
A

N
FI

LD
N

E
H
C

N

O

E

R

0

SW

Death Rate (p. 100,000)

2.5

43

Figure 2. Age Standardized Death Rates at Ages 50+ From Pneumonia, 2000-2004
120

80

60

40

20

C
R
G

IT
A

T
AU

FR
A

ES
P

AN
C

S
AU

E
H
C

SW
E

EU
D

SA
U

R
O
N

LD
N

FI
N

G
BR

0
JP
N

Death Rate (p. 100,000)

100

44

Figure 3. Age-Standardized Death Rates From Prostate Cancer, 1980-2005
United States

Average for 15 countries

18.0

17.0

15.0

14.0

13.0

12.0

11.0

20
04

20
02

20
00

19
98

19
96

19
94

19
92

19
90

19
88

19
86

19
84

19
82

10.0

19
80

Death Rate (p. 100,000)

16.0

Year

45

Figure 4. Age-Standardized Death Rates From Breast Cancer, 1980-2005
United States

Average for 15 Countries

24.0

Death Rate (p. 100,000)

22.0

20.0

18.0

16.0

14.0

12.0

10.0
80
19

82
19

84
19

86
19

88
19

90
19

92
19

94
19

19

96

98
19

20

00

02
20

04
20

Year

46

