NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE AMERICANIZATION OF EUROPEAN HIGHER EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
Lex Borghans
Frank Cörvers
Working Paper 15217
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15217

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2009

We thank Daniëlle Claassens and Jesper van Thor for their statistical assistance. We benefited from
the comments of Charles Clotfelter and Hugo Sonnenschein and the participants of the NBER conferences
September 2007 in Cambridge MA and October 2008 in Woodstock, Vermont on earlier versions
of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Lex Borghans and Frank Cörvers. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Americanization of European Higher Education and Research
Lex Borghans and Frank Cörvers
NBER Working Paper No. 15217
August 2009
JEL No. I23
ABSTRACT
Over the past two decades there has been a substantial increase in the mobility of students in Europe,
while also research has become much more internationally oriented. In this paper we document changes
in the structure of research and higher education in Europe and investigate potential explanations for
the strong increase in its international orientation. While higher education started to grow substantially
around 1960, only a few decades later, research and higher education transformed gradually to the
American standard. Decreased communication costs are likely causes for this trend. This transformation
is most clearly revealed in the change of language used in research from the national language, Latin,
German and French to English. Smaller language areas made this transformation earlier while there
are also clear timing differences between research fields. Sciences and medicine tend to switch to English
first, followed by economics and social sciences, while for law and arts only the first signs of such
a transformation are currently observed. This suggests that returns to scale and the transferability of
research results are important influences in the decision to adopt the international standard.

Lex Borghans
Department of Economics and ROA
Maastricht University
PO Box 616
NL-6200 MD Maastricht
The Netherlands
lex.borghans@maastrichtuniversity.nl
Frank Cörvers
ROA
Maastricht University
PO Box 616
NL-6200 MD Maastricht
The Netherlands
frank.corvers@maastrichtuniverity.nl

1 Introduction
Over the past two decades there has been a substantial increase in the mobility of
students in Europe, while also research has become much more internationally
oriented. Student mobility has increased between European countries as well as
between Europe, the United States and the rest of the world. This seems to hold at
bachelor, master and PhD level. Compared to the past, European researchers publish
more in foreign journals, and there is more international travel, more migration and a
strong increase in international cooperation in research. These trends have strong
implications for international cooperation and competition in higher education and
research.
The aim of this paper is to document changes in the structure of research and
higher education in Europe and to investigate potential explanations for the strong
increase in its international orientation. The theoretical perspective we take is that the
decision to study or to do research in either the home country market or the
international market depends on cost and benefits, determined by the size of the
market, communication costs, the transferability of knowledge between countries and
financial regulations. We argue that several dimensions of this trade-off have shifted
in favor of international cooperation: cheaper travel possibilities, European
integration, and the use of email and internet. A shift of the priorities in research from
discussing and analyzing national policies towards measuring scientific output in
international journals could also have stimulated this transition. An increase in the
size of the home research market would have an opposite effect. The convergence of
country specific habits and institutions towards the global (US) standards has further
facilitated the internationalization of research and higher education in Europe.
Using a variety of indicators we show the changes in the structure of higher
education and research in Europe. While higher education started to grow
substantially around 1960, only a few decades later, research and higher education
transformed gradually to the American standard. Decreased communication costs are
likely causes for this trend. This transformation is most clearly revealed in the change
of language used in research from the national language, Latin, German and French to
English. Smaller language areas made this transformation earlier while there are also
clear timing differences between research fields. Sciences and medicine tend to switch
to English first, followed by economics and social sciences, while for law and arts

2

only the first signs of such a transformation are currently observed. This suggests that
returns to scale and the transferability of research results are important influences in
the decision to adopt the international standard.
To analyze the developments in European higher education and research, the
paper compares the developments in research in several European countries in
different research areas using long time series. To illustrate some trends in more
detail, particular attention will be paid to both the case of economics research and the
case of the Netherlands. The developments in economics research and the Netherlands
may serve as good examples of what has been or will be happening in other fields
across different European countries.
Drèze and Esteban (2007) show that the US outperforms Europe in economics
research by a factor of the order three, and conclude that the Lisbon goal set by the
European Union, to become the most dynamic and competitive economy in the world,
is out of sight. Cardoso and Zimmermann (2008) find that the quality of research by
PhDs from US universities is better than the research of European PhDs.1 The
contribution of this paper is that we take another perspective on the comparison
between Europe and the US. Our paper documents the transformation of European
higher education and research not just as a change in quality, but in the first place as a
change in the nature of the research performed in Europe. We include a theoretical
exposition to explain the decision to adopt the American standard in research. This
framework explains why the adoption of the superior American standard goes faster
in some countries than in others. We argue that it is important to take account of the
costs of adopting the American standard to explain how countries perform. Costs as
well as benefits of the Americanization of European higher education and research
seem to be to a large extent related to the acceptance of English as the lingua franca
and to the specific content of what is taught and investigated. We argue that Drèze
and Esteban (2007) as well as previous empirical studies in this area pay much
attention to the benefits of publishing in the English language in American journals,
and ignore or underestimate the productive value of publishing in the home language
on European topics.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In section 2 we explain
1
Other papers on evaluating the performance of European and US economics research are e.g. Amir
and Knauf (2008), Coupé (2003), Frey and Eichenberger (1993), Kirman and Dahl (1994), Neary et al.
(2003), Portes (1987). However, notice that economists typically analyze their own discipline and tend
to generalize their results to draw conclusions on the overall position of Europe vis-à-vis the US.

3

our theoretical framework. Section 3 provides data about the development of higher
education in Europe and the US. Section 4 describes the changes that have been taken
place in the Dutch higher education and research system during the last few decades,
with focus on economics. Section 5 deals with changes in the language used in
research as an indicator of change of the structure of higher education and research in
Europe. Section 6 concludes.

2 Theory of internationalization

Higher education and research is not a homogeneous good. Different countries teach
other things in science, economics or law, and the aims and focus of research can be
rather different across countries. One important dimension of the differences is
whether a country’s higher education and research system builds on national
structures and traditions, or adopts and perhaps interferes with international standards.
This implies that universities/researchers/students can decide to join the national
research discussion or to join the international discussion. The value of each choice
depends on the quality of the research, its relevance to the country concerned and the
costs of research. For national oriented research this value equals:

Vnat = v q Q( n) + v r R − k ,

In which Q(n) is the quality of the research and n the size of the research community.
The quality depends on the size of the community. R represents the relevance of
research and k the costs. v q and v r are the weights attached to quality and relevance.
For international oriented research the value equals:
Vint = v q Q( N ) + v rτR − K .

N is the size of the international research community. If the benefits from research

are subject to returns to scale, a researcher who joins the international debate profits
from a larger peer group. These benefits are counterbalanced however by a reduced
benefit of the research findings for the situation in the home country and higher
communication costs. τ represents the degree of transferability of research findings
4

to the national situation ( 0 ≤ τ ≤ 1 ). The transferability might depend on the research
area. In some fields the relevance of research will not depend on the country that is
investigated, while for other fields of research this might be very country specific.
Furthermore, international oriented research might incur higher costs, due to higher
travel and communication costs. These costs are indicated by K (K>k).
The trade-off between national or international research might also be
influenced by the value attached to quality versus relevance. A researcher will choose
to join the international research community when Vint > Vnat . Given the difference in
quality of research but also the costs in the international versus the national context,
the threshold level of transferability can be calculated for which researchers are
indifferent between joining the national or the international debate:

τ = 1−

v q Q ( N ) − Q ( n) K − k
+
vr
R
R

If the actual transferability exceeds this threshold, the international debate will be
chosen. So if the transferability of research findings increases, the costs of
international research decrease or the scale effects increase, researchers participating
in the national debate will switch to the international debate when this threshold is
reached. Also a change in the valuation of quality versus relevance might lead to this
change. At the point of transition, the value of research will change only gradually.
The move from the national to the international debate will affect quality and
relevance substantially, though. In Figure 1 we show for certain parameters of this
model what would happen to the quality and relevance of research per unit of costs
when transferability increases (1a) and the costs of international research decrease
(1b). Panel a shows that the transition from the national to the international debate is
associated with a decrease in relevance and an increase in quality. Once the transition
is made, a further increase in transferability will not affect the research quality but
will increase relevance. When costs of international research are reduced (panel b), a
similar shift towards higher quality and lower relevance is observed. A further
reduction of the costs of international research will benefit both quality and relevance
per unit costs.
If the size of the market, communication costs, transferability and incentives

5

determine the choice for either national or international oriented research, the
following predictions can be made:

Size of the market

The growth of higher education in Europe and the process of European integration
will shift the attention of researchers towards the European market. This will imply a
decrease of the importance of research aimed at specific European countries, but
would also reduce the focus on international research.

Communication cost

There are many reasons to assume that communication costs are decreasing. Travel is
cheaper, internet and email provided important tools for long distance communication
between researchers while European integration (the use of English and the
introduction of the BA-MA system) improved comparability and therefore facilitated
communication.

Transferability

Differences in transferability of research in the first place might predict differences
between research fields. For sciences it will be relatively easily to join one
international research discussion, while e.g. for literature and law national differences
might be too large to allow for international cooperation, because of the importance of
distinctive national institutions, cultural traditions and history. Economics and social
sciences will be an intermediate case. Although these disciplines apply general
theories, specific circumstances and institutions within countries might affect the
relevance of certain research questions and limit international comparability.

Finance

In many European countries there is a trend towards subsidies based on research
output, e.g. the number of publications, number of diplomas and number of PhDs.
Such financial incentives will also affect decisions with respect to research, although
the direction of these influences is sometimes difficult to predict.

To facilitate cooperation between researchers in either the national or the
international research discussion, it is likely that conventions will be adjusted towards
6

a common standard. The most obvious case of this is the language, but one could also
think about a standardization of other aspects to facilitate comparability.
Standardization of diplomas, both in terms of names and content is such an example.
The adoption of the BA-MA structure in place of historically unique European
degrees can be interpreted in this way, but also the use of terminology such as
assistant professor, associate professor and full professor and the role of a PhD thesis
could be affected by changes in the values of the research community.
In this paper we will therefore look at trends in the language used in research,
the nationality of researchers who publish in national journals, the country of origin of
research that is cited, but also at the age at which the PhD thesis is typically finished.

3 Developments in higher education

Like in the USA many of the richer European countries faced a rapid increase of
participation in higher education in the 60s.2 Universities were transformed from
small elite schools to mass universities.3 Figure 2 shows the increase in participation
in higher education in Western European countries and the US from 1970 onwards.
There is a huge difference in gross enrollment ratios between the US and Western
Europe. This does partly reflect differences in the educational system, such as a strong
emphasis on a solid system of intermediate vocational education in many European
countries. Between 1970 and 1975 gross enrollment in higher education in Western
Europe and the US increased by 5 to 10 percent points. The trend in gross enrollment
was almost flat between 1975 and 1985 and started to accelerate around 1985. The US
achieved a maximum of approximately 80 percent gross enrollment from 1991
onwards (with the exception of 1999-2001). The Scandinavian countries more or less
caught up with the US in recent years. Other countries still have gross enrollment
ratios that are 15 to 30 percent points lower than the US.
The rising participation in higher education in Western Europe may be one of
2
See Eurydice (2000) for the developments in higher education since the 1960s in 18 Western
European countries. See for the development of the highest level of educational attainment in the US
from 1940 to 2007 Figures 3 and 4 in the Digest of Education Statistics: 2007 of the National Center
for Education Statistics (2008).
3
Windolf (1997) discusses the educational expansion in Germany, the US, Japan and some other
European countries between 1870 and 1990. To explain the expansion of higher education he refers to
human capital theory and the needs of society, and theories from educational sociology that are based
on competition for status between individuals or between social groups. He also discusses the relevance
of the increasing enrollment of women for educational expansion.

7

the explanations for the rising trend of European students going to the US. This is
indeed confirmed by Figure 3. The enrollment of Western European students slowly
increased between 1949 and 1970, then dropped till 1975, and accelerated from 1975
onwards. Around 1993 the growth of the number of Western European students in the
US leveled off, to stabilize at the level of about 50.000 students. After 2000 the
enrollment of students coming from Western Europe to study in the US dropped
slightly, probably due to stricter regulations in the US after 9/11. For students in the
rest of Europe (including Central and Eastern Europe) Figure 3 shows that outbound
mobility in absolute numbers was rather low until the second half of the 80s. After
then outbound mobility sharply increased, to reach a maximum of more than 30.000
students in 2002. During the last two years of the time series the outbound mobility
from Europe as a whole to the US decreased. For the total number of foreign students
going to the US the decrease started in 2004.
One could suppose that the rising number of European students going to the
US can be explained by rising ‘globalization’. Figure 4 shows that this can only be
partly true. The figure shows outbound mobility of Western European students to the
US as a percentage of the number of students enrolled in higher education in 10
different Western European countries. For most countries the percentage of outbound
mobility is relatively high in 1970, even higher than in 2006, the last year of the time
series. With 1975 as the reference year, all countries show up an upturn, but sooner or
later outbound mobility starts to fall again for each country. Thus there is no clear
upward trend of outbound mobility since 1970. Almost all countries show a
downward trend during the last 5 to 10 years. For the UK the share started to fall in
1988, for Norway even in 1985. The percentages remain relatively high for the
Scandinavian countries till the end of the time series. Italy, and to a lesser extent
Spain, typically have low shares of outbound mobility to the US.
It may be argued that EU inner mobility flows compensated for the decline in
outbound mobility from Western Europe to the US. On the one hand, the inner EU
programs, such as the Erasmus program, indeed seem to be expanding over time
(European Commission, 2008).4 On the other hand, Figure 5 suggests that outbound

4
One has to notice that mobility in the European Union is typically so called ‘horizontal mobility’. In
programs like the Erasmus program students spend a substantial time (from 3 to 12 months) at another
European institution of higher education, having all the academic credits recognized by and transferred
to the home institution. As is remarked by Spinelli (2005), students in the US practice ‘vertical

8

mobility as the percentage of home enrollment declined after 2002 in all countries of
our sample. An explanation for this difference is that enrollment data from the Unesco
does not include mobility flows of students collecting credits in another European
country, nor student exchange programs within the European Union. From Figure 5,
we can conclude that Norway, Austria and Sweden have the highest numbers of
students enrolled in foreign countries relative to home enrollment.
A higher students’ participation in inner EU programs fits into the ambition of
the European Union of establishing a European Higher Education Area (EHEA) by
2010, which has been agreed upon in the Bologna Declaration of June 1999. This
agreement was originally signed by the education ministers of 29 European countries
and developed into a major reform encompassing 45 countries. It has put in motion a
series of new agreements and reforms (the ‘Bologna Process’, see European
Commission, 2007 and NAFSA, 2007) to make European higher education more
compatible and attractive for students in Europe and from other continents. The
European Union considers these reforms as a requirement to match the performance
of the best performing systems in the world, notably the United States and Asia. The
objectives of the Bologna Declaration include the adoption of a system of easily
readable and comparable degrees, the adoption of a system essentially based on two
main cycles, the establishment of a system of credits, the promotion of mobility, the
promotion of European cooperation in quality assurance, the promotion of the
European dimension in higher education.
For stimulating transatlantic mobility in particular the adoption of a system
based on two main cycles, undergraduate and graduate, is important,5 as well as the
establishment of a system of credits (such as the ECTS). Before the Bologna Process,
the higher education system of continental European countries generally had one
integrated tier only, leading to the title necessary for entering PhD courses. In the
Bologna Declaration it has been agreed that the bachelor degree awarded after the first
cycle, lasting a minimum of three years, shall become relevant on the European labor
market as an appropriate level of qualification. Access to the second cycle requires
mobility,’ i.e. they mainly pursue a graduate degree at a different institution from where they have
received their undergraduate degree.
5
For example, Spinelli (2005) refers to difficulties for US administrators to understand the level of
European students who had not completely finished their European degree in the one-tier system. There
were problems even for students who graduated from a five-year integrated course (i.e. master’s level),
to whom U.S. administrators generally offered admission to master instead of PhD courses since they
were holding one degree only.

9

successful completion of first cycle studies. The second cycle leads to the master’s
degree. Initially only two cycles were mentioned, equivalent to undergraduate and
graduate. Later the doctoral (or doctorate) degree was introduced as the third cycle.6
Although European countries are committed to convert their existing higher education
programs to a three-year bachelor’s and two-year master’s, in reality there is a large
variation between countries in the length of the cycles and in the intermediate
credentials traditionally offered (Adelman, 2009).
Figure 6 shows the percentage of outbound students per country who are going
to the US for the period 1999-2006. The percentages are relatively high for the UK
and Sweden, with about one quarter to one third of their outbound students enrolling
in the US. Italy and Austria have low shares of students enrolling in the US. The
shares dropped relatively much for students from Norway and Germany between 1999
and 2006. On average the market share of the US in total outbound mobility of the 10
Western European countries in our sample was approximately 15% in this period. We
can conclude that the US has not become less attractive for European students that
want to study abroad, either within or outside Europe. However, since enrollment of
Western European students outside their own country seems to have decreased during
the last years or more for many countries, this also holds for the number of Western
European students studying in the US. This development may be caused by the
increasing popularity of mobility programs like the Erasmus program that stimulate
European students to study in another European country, which is not counted as
enrollment in the Unesco figures.
Figure 7 depicts the number of US students abroad between 1955 and 2003.
Total study abroad of Americans increased between 1955 and 1990, then dropped
slightly and started to accelerate after 1992. The share of Europe in study abroad
decreased due to the rise of Asian countries. US students hardly go to European
countries outside Western Europe. Whereas the number of Western European students
in the US accelerated from 1975 onwards, the number of US students in Western
Europe only started to grow strongly after 1992, thus much later.
Table 1 shows the number of US students relative to the number of students
enrolled in the country they go to. The table does not reveal a clear general trend for
all countries between 1970 and 1996. After 1996 there is an upward trend. The UK is

6

See Witte (2006) for a detailed account and analysis of the evolution of the three cycles.

10

the most attractive country for American students because of the English language.
Remarkably, during recent years Austria, Spain and Italy have become the most
popular countries after the UK. Obviously these countries succeed in attracting
American students by reforming their university system in line with the Bologna
Process and by offering good quality courses in English. Moreover, the relatively
large communities with a Spanish or Italian family background in the US may induce
American students from these communities to study in Spain or Italy. So while in the
80s the number of European students that went to the USA increased – in line with the
increased participation in higher education in Europe – only recently European
universities became more open to foreign students.

4 Americanization: The case of the Netherlands

To illustrate the outcomes of the theoretical model in more detail, we discuss the
developments in higher education and research for the case of the Netherlands, and
where useful refer to other European countries or the US. Figures 8 and 9 summarize
some basic facts about the size and growth of higher education in the Netherlands.
Figure 8 depicts the growth in the country’s two major higher education sectors,
distinguishing the number of students in universities from students in professional
higher education (Hoger Beroeps Onderwijs, or HBO). Dutch universities are always
research universities, and incorporate business schools, law schools and medical
schools. HBO institutions are typically not engaged in research, and teach
professional skills, e.g. for nurses, teachers, therapists, accountants and practically
oriented engineers. The strongest increase in the number of students is in the 60s, but
the number keeps increasing until the early 80s. From the 80s on the growth in
participation at the universities stagnates, while participation at the professional
colleges continues to grow. Fluctuations in participation rates for universities from
the 80s onward mainly reflect new regulations that aim at a reduction of the years
spent at university.
Figure 9 focuses on universities and compares the enrollments with the size of
the faculty. In line with the growth of the number of students also the number of
teachers and researchers grows. The growth rate of faculty is about 50% of the growth
rate in student population, implying an increase in the student-faculty ratio from 3 to 7
between 1960 and 1990. The break between 1990 and 1991 is due to a change in
11

definition.
The internationalization of Dutch higher education is evident in the growing
numbers of Dutch university students going to the US to study and American students
going the other way, to study in the Netherlands. Figure 10 shows the participation of
Dutch students in American higher education. For comparison, the corresponding
trend is shown for German participation, which, as shown in Figure 3 above, is
representative of Western Europe as a whole. For both countries the start of this
growth in the early 60s coincided with the growth of higher education in Europe.
Around 1975 there was a sharp decline in the participation of Dutch and German
students at US universities, but after 1975 this trend recovered. From 1975 until 1992
the participation of Dutch students in the USA grew faster than the German
participation, after which Dutch enrollment fell. The same happened to German
participation after 2001, as it did in many other Western European countries during
the last decade, as has been revealed in the discussion of Figures 3 and 4.
Initially only a very small fraction of foreign students in the Netherlands came
from the US, but this changed in the 90s when some universities started to provide
courses in English in some fields. Figure 11 shows the increase of US students in the
Netherlands in those years. Between 1995 and 1998 the participation of US students
more than doubled and has continued to increase since then. Participation of Dutch
students in the USA increased much earlier, and was related to the rise of higher
education in the Netherlands. Similar trends can be seen for other Western European
countries (compare Figure 4 and Table 1 of the previous section). Significantly, the
magnitudes of these mobility flows differ by discipline, with disciplines such as law
being more nationally oriented than others. This fact is clearly demonstrated in Figure
12, which shows that the percentages of foreign students are lowest in fields like
health care, law, education and language and culture. The more science-oriented
studies and economics display a much higher influx of foreign students. Finally, note
that the total number of foreign students enrolled in Dutch higher education has been
increasing since 2004, as has the percentage of US students (see Table 1).
“Americanization” of Dutch higher education is more starkly evident in the
transformation that has taken place in the very degrees, titles, and objectives that
define academic institutions. Table 2 describes several key characteristics of Dutch
universities in 1980 and 2008. The focus is on economics. In 1980 a degree program
in economics nominally required 5 years, but in fact most students spent much as
12

much as 6 to 10 years to complete their study. The diploma was called “drs.” and was
regarded as equivalent to a MA diploma. In 1982 the nominal duration was reduced to
4 years, although the diploma remained officially unchanged. Furthermore, measures
were taken to reduce the time spent at university to a maximum of 6 years. Later
further measures were taken to reduce the length of stay. In 2002 – following the
Bologna Declaration of 1999 – the structure was changed into a BA-MA-structure,
with 3 years of bachelor and 1 (sometimes 2) years of MA.
In the 80s it was very common for members of the faculty not to have a PhD.
Some wrote a “proefschrift” (PhD thesis) as a member of the faculty. Some of them
used this thesis as an opportunity to bring together all their research at the end of their
career as a magnus opus. Others never wrote a PhD thesis, but could nevertheless
become full professor. Famous professors in economics at that time were often
involved in the national political discussion about economics. Many were affiliated
with a political party and joined national committees advising the Dutch government
about economic policy. Gradually this situation shifted. Obtaining a PhD became a
prerequisite to become assistant professor, and an official PhD program was
implemented (aio). Initially, aio’s just had to write their thesis, but gradually course
work was introduced in these programs. Joining the national debate and publishing in
national journals became less important while success in international publications
gradually became the measure of success.
Initially there was not one European system for higher education. Like the
Netherlands, most countries in Europe had their own specific characteristics.
Germany had and has a ‘habilitation’, a kind of second thesis after PhD, required to
become full professor. France distinguishes many different diplomas for different
levels obtained in higher education, and has a distinction between universities that
focus mainly on teaching, and écoles superieure. In international comparisons such
differences are not always acknowledged, for several reasons. First, international
communication about higher education is clearly affected by selection bias: those who
go to international conferences prefer the international system and therefore behave
most of the time in accordance with the American standard and tend to describe their
home situation by using the American terminology. Secondly, for international
statistics, degrees are translated to facilitate comparison, hiding the obvious
differences between degrees in different countries. Thirdly, when norms change about
what is good research, there is a tendency to judge research in the past using these
13

new norms. Consequently researchers who do not publish in international journals are
easily considered to be lazy: differences in the system are therefore regarded as a lack
of appropriate incentives.
To show how the PhD has changed in the Netherlands, we constructed a time
series on doctoral dissertations defended at Dutch universities before 1990 using
information from the library of Maastricht University that holds all these titles. Figure
13 compares the number of PhDs awarded with total university enrollment. The figure
makes clear that these two indicators follow very different patterns. Initially, writing a
PhD thesis was not a requisite for faculty, as shown in Table 2. There were many full
professors who did not obtain a PhD and some wrote their PhD later in their career as
a summary of all their main research. Only in the mid-seventies did this start to
change and nowadays for most positions as an assistant professor a PhD is required.
Figure 14 shows the average age of PhDs by discipline for the doctoral
dissertations in our library sample from 1970 till 1995. As has been argued before, we
expected that the age at which candidates received their PhDs would fall over time
due to the transition of the Dutch to the Anglo-American system. After 1980 the
average age did indeed fall for all disciplines except arts. The decrease was most
prominent for science, and for economics. In these disciplines the transition to the
Anglo-American system may have been most prominent.

5 Importance of language for research

One way to illustrate the increasing dominance of Anglo-American academic research
is to look at the language in which Continental European researchers are publishing.
Nowadays it is common in many research fields and countries to publish in English.
However, for some fields, like law and national history, this seems to be less relevant
due to a lack of international academic audience that is interested in country-oriented
research. In contrast, for areas like physics, chemistry and medicine the international
academic community is more or less dealing with the same questions everywhere.
Therefore in these areas the interest to understand each other and to communicate in
the same language is much bigger. Moreover, due to globalization and converging
institutions – think of financial markets, international law, the end of communism in
many countries, but also the higher education system – societies may have become
more similar over time. Therefore the interest in sharing the knowledge that emerges
14

from research is probably increasing. Communicating in one instead of different
languages makes it easier to ensure that research output gets feedback from others all
over the world, and that new knowledge will be generalized and used for practice.

5.1 Doctoral dissertations

International

To illustrate the growing dominance of the English language in academic research on
the European continent we use data of the foreign doctoral dissertation database of the
Center for Research Libraries (CRL) in Chicago.7 For nine Continental European
countries in the database we analyzed to what extent the doctoral dissertation have
been written either in the home language or in English, and how the share of
dissertations in the home language has evolved over the last hundred years. The CLRcollection includes doctoral dissertations submitted to institutions outside the U.S. and
Canada. A list of these institutions is available at the CLR-website (see footnote 5).
The subjects of the dissertations are very mixed, but the database contains no
variables to categorize the dissertations by discipline. We did some provisional
analyses on recent years of databases from French, Danish, German and Austrian
national libraries to check our results. We found that the CLR-data are reasonably
well in line with those in other national data sources.
Figure 15 presents by country the percentages of home language dissertations
in the total of home and English language dissertations. The percentages are averages
for 10-years periods between 1908 and 2007 (see the Annex). The figure shows that in
many Continental European countries the development of increasingly writing
dissertations in English started as far back as the beginning of the previous century.
This holds in particular for the Scandinavian countries. The Netherlands had a
somewhat slower start, but caught up with these countries. Italy seems to follow the
Netherlands till the 1960s, but then remained more or less constant. During the last 10
to 20 years, PhDs in Spain and Austria increasingly wrote their thesis in English. In
7
The CRL is a consortium of North American universities, colleges and independent research libraries.
The consortium acquires and preserves newspapers, journals, documents, archives and other traditional
and digital resources for research and teaching. These resources are then made available to member
institutions cooperatively, through interlibrary loan and electronic delivery. The CRL-website for
foreign dissertations is:
http://www.crl.edu/content.asp?l1=5&l2=23&l3=44&l4=25

15

Germany this process seems to have started up only recently. Based upon the CRLdatabase, 5% of the doctoral dissertations in Germany were written in English by
1998-2007.
In France there is only the barest indication of movement toward English. 8 It
seems that countries that are part of big language areas (i.e. French, German and
Spanish) have small incentives to switch to publishing in English. Moreover, France
is known for its language policies in many different areas of life.9 As has been argued
in Section 2 of this paper, the costs of switching to publishing in English are the
largest for countries that are part of big language areas due to economies of scale.
However, Drèze and Estevan (2007) conclude that the big four Continental countries
(France, Germany, Italy and Spain) should accept English as the lingua franca to
catch up in performance in economics research with the UK and the small countries in
Western Europe. Although their paper is measuring the performance in economics
research only, their conclusion may hold for other fields as well.

The Netherlands

Figure 16 shows the language that was used in the doctoral dissertations in our sample
of dissertations in the Maastricht University library system. We distinguished among
the five languages that appear to have a substantial frequency: Latin, Dutch, German,
French and English. The figure shows the cumulative shares of these languages. Until
about the 1850s Latin was the main language in doctoral dissertations at Dutch
universities. After the 1850s this changed very rapidly, and Dutch became the main
language. Also the importance of German and later on French increased. The share of
English dissertations began to increase only after the First World War. This share
started to increase very rapidly in the 1960s. Latin was still used in a number of Dutch
doctoral dissertations till the 1960s.
The use of English in doctoral dissertations differs very much between
disciplines, as Figures 17 reveals. Science and medicine have the largest share of
doctoral dissertations in English, followed by economics and social sciences. In law
8
From the extensive ‘Système universitaire de documentation’ of French academic libraries we found
that till 1997 almost all doctoral dissertations in France had been written in French. In 2002 1% of the
dissertations were written in French and in 2007 this percentage increased to 3%.
9
For example the use of French is required by law in commercial and workplace communications
(Toubon Law). However, we do not know exactly how French governmental language policies can
affect the use of language in academic publications.

16

the use of English is even smaller than in arts. The figure also reveals that the share of
dissertations in English increased very much in medicine. Substantial increases are
also evident for science, economics and social sciences. The increase for arts and law
was only moderate.

5.2 Economics journals

International

The switch to the use of the English language can also be analyzed for
academic journals. We looked at the publishing language of many Continental
European and Anglo-American economics journals since the emergence of the first
academic journals in economics around 1850. We follow these journals from the year
of foundation, and noted when they switched from their home language to English.
The selection of economics journals in different Continental European and AngloAmerican countries is based on the overview by Gonçalo L. Fonseca. The list of
selected journals has been published on the website ‘Economics Journals: A
Chronological Account’.10 Only journals founded before 1990 were included on this
website. We checked the year of foundation and the year when the journal stopped
publishing with other data sources.
For none of the twelve Continental European countries in our dataset English
is a native language. Countries can have more than one national languages (like
German and French in Switzerland), and obviously the same language can be spoken
in different countries. Journals may start in English from the foundation year (like an
Italian and two Soviet journals), or switch to English at a later stage (see the Annex
for detailed data). Information on the year of switching to English was drawn from
data sources such as home pages of journals, national libraries, and EconLit. Journals
need to publish all regular articles (i.e. excluding book reviews, etc.) in English to be
considered as an English language journal. The first year in which this happens is
noted as the transition year (this can also be after 1990).

10

http://cepa.newschool.edu/het/essays/journal.htm . We selected the period from 1850 onwards, when
the first academic economics journals emerged. We excluded the light and news oriented journals, or
journals not principally dedicated to economics, which are all marked as such on the website.

17

In Figure 18 the emergence of Continental European economics journals and
their language use is presented. The total number of journals has gradually increased
since 1844. After World War II did the number of journals suddenly increase, and the
first English language journal on the Continent was published (the Italian Banca
nazionale del lavoro quarterly review). This journal was a new journal, as were also

two Soviet journals founded in 1958 and 1964. The first old economics journal that
switched to English was the Swedish Ekonomisk Tidskrift in 1964. In the same year it
also changed its name into Scandinavian Journal of Economics. Starting from the first
half of the 1990s the use of German (in journals from Germany, Austria and
Switzerland) and other languages (Italian, Spanish) seriously declined. By 2001 only
four German and two other language journals were left. Many economics journals in
these languages switched to English or disappeared. On the contrary, all French
language journals from France as well as from Belgium and Switzerland, kept
publishing in French. It has to be noticed that some French journals are bilingual,
publishing French as well as English articles. These journals are not counted as
English language journals in our dataset. Even taking this strict definition the English
language journals on the European continent outnumber the French language journals
during the last few years (13 versus 12 in the year 2001).
Figure 19 shows the development of the number of English language
economics journals in Anglo-American countries since 1859 until 1990. For some
years there was only one serious academic economics journal according to our source
(the British Macmillan's Magazine, 1859-1907; see the Annex). In 1886 the first US
journal was founded (Quarterly Journal of Economics), and in 1891 the first well
known British economics journal emerged (Economic Journal). Only after World War
II the US journals began to outnumber the journals in the UK and other English
speaking countries (Australia, Canada, South Africa). The first international journal
(i.e. without a real home country) was published in 1921. Around 1970 the number of
international journals suddenly increased. In 1990 there were 26 international
journals, 28 US journals and 14 English journals in the UK and other English
speaking countries.

The Netherlands, Austria and Italy

18

To show the development in international orientation of economics journals in more
detail, we analyzed three general interest journals. These journals are De Economist,
founded in 1852 in the Netherlands, the Journal of Economics, founded in 1892 in
Austria as the Zeitschrift für Nationalökonomie, and Research in Economics founded
in 1947 in Italy as Ricerche Economiche. For these journals we drew information
from databases on the internet with respect to the language of articles, the nationality
of the authors, and the language of the references to other publications.11
Figure 20 shows the decline of the use of the home language in the
Netherlands, Austria and Italy. For the Netherlands the decline went rather fast after
the beginning of the 70s. Within less than a decade the language switched from Dutch
to English. From 1983 onwards no regular articles have been published in Dutch
anymore. For Austria, Figure 20 shows that the switch from German to English in the
Austrian Journal of Economics started about a decade earlier compared to De
Economist. However, it took about two decades to transform the journal from German

to English. From 1982 onwards no regular articles have been published in German
anymore. In Italy, as in the Netherlands, the switch from Italian to English was
accomplished in about a decade. Figure 26 shows that the switch for Research in
Economics took place later than for De Economist in the Netherlands and the Journal
of Economics in Austria. From 1993 onwards no regular articles in this journal have

been published in Italian anymore.
The language change in De Economist certainly coincided with the nationality
of the authors. The decline of the fraction of Dutch authors, however, developed more
gradually than the decline of the fraction of articles in Dutch, as is shown in Figure
21. Moreover, the fraction of articles by German or Austrian authors in the Journal of
Economics declined rapidly after World War II. The fraction reaches a level below
20% in the late 80s and the early 90s. In recent years the fraction of German and
Austrian authors however increased again. Figure 21 also provides information about
the nationality of the authors in Research in Economics. Since the 80s the fraction of
Italian authors gradually decreased, reaching a level of about 20% in recent years.

11
For De Economist and the Journal of Economics we used the website of Springer, for Research in
Economics we used the Elsevier website for the years after 1996, and the following website for the
period from 1960 to 1996:
http://www.biblio.liuc.it/essper/schedper/p78.htm

19

Figure 22 shows the developments in the language of the references in
English written papers published in De Economist and the Journal of Economics. The
change in international orientation of De Economist had a clear impact on the
language of the publications to which was referred to in the articles. In the 1960s
between 40% and 50% of the references were in the Dutch language. During the last
decades this share was less than 10% for most years. Also for the Journal of
Economics the change in international orientation had a clear impact on the fraction of

references to publications in the home language. The fraction decreased over years. In
particular after 2000 this fraction is very low.

6 Conclusions

In this chapter we document the shift of the European research and higher education
system from a national to an international – and American – orientation. This gradual
process did not start immediately after the expansion of higher education, but
developed over time. Smaller countries with smaller language areas were the first to
adopt English as a research language and to adjust their system to American standards
suggesting that returns to scale are an important factor in the decision to join the
international research society. Comparing between fields of study, sciences and
medicine turn out to make this change earlier than economics and social sciences,
while in arts and law the majority of the work still is focused on the home country.
Differences in the transferability of research outcomes may account for these
differences.
These trends might imply that mobility of students and researchers in Europe
will increase substantially in the years to come. The standards used, the use of English
and a focus on American research, go hand in hand. So once these changes start, it
becomes increasingly beneficial to continue this process. At the same time, when
more researchers join the international society, the scale of the national research
communities shrinks, which further stimulates internationalization. When research in
Europe becomes more harmonized and more focused on American research, the need
for European students to study in the US might be reduced while at the same time the
system will become more attractive for students and researchers from outside Europe.
Until now the inflow of students from outside Europe is still relatively small, so we
can only speculate about the potential size of these developments. Another remaining
20

question is whether law and arts will follow other disciplines in their shift towards the
American/international standard.
Further progress in the establishment of a European Higher Education Area
(EHEA), which is part of the Bologna Process, can create an American-like
competitive European standard for higher education, in particular when the European
Union succeeds in the full adoption of a system based on two main cycles for
undergraduates and graduates with a transparent system of credits. As is noticed by
Drèze and Estevan (2007), the introduction of English as the lingua franca of
universities, particularly in the big four continental countries, is a prerequisite to
increase European competitiveness. Other conditions for increasing its
competitiveness (see also Mas-Colell, 2003) are better governance at European
universities and concentrating PhD programs at fewer universities.
In our analysis of student mobility flows between Europe and the US we found
the first indications of a declining enrollment of European students in the US, whereas
studying abroad in Europe by US students seems to be on the rise. In the long term
similar developments could occur for the number of PhD students and researchers
going to the US. Only if international/American standards are adopted in European
higher education and research can Europe as a whole become more attractive for
students and researchers all over the world, and challenge the US as the number one.

21

References

Adelman, C. (2009), The Bologna Process for U.S. Eyes: Re-learning Higher
Education in the Age of Convergence, Institute for Higher Education Policy,

Washington, DC.

Amir, R. and M. Knauff (2008), Ranking Economics Departments Worldwide on the
Basis of PhD Placement, Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 90(1), pp. 185-190.

Cardoso, A.R., P. Guimarães and K.F. Zimmermann (2008), Comparing the Early
Research Performance of PhD Graduates in Labor Economics in Europe and the
USA, IZA Discussion Paper No. 3898, Institute for the Study of Labor, Bonn.

Center for Research Libraries, Catalog of Foreign Doctoral Dissertations Database:
http://www.crl.edu/content.asp?l1=5&l2=23&l3=44&l4=25

Coupé, T. (2003), Revealed Performances: Worldwide Rankings of Economists and
Economics Departments, 1990-2000, Journal of the European Economic Association,
Vol. 1(6), pp. 1309-1345.

Drèze, J.H. and F. Estevan (2007), Research and Higher Education in Economics: Can
We Deliver the Lisbon Objectives? Journal of the European Economic Association,
Vol. 5 (2-3), pp. 271-304.

European Commission (2007), THE BOLOGNA PROCESS, Towards the European
Higher Education Area:

http://ec.europa.eu/education/policies/educ/bologna/bologna_en.html

European Commission (2008), Erasmus - Statistics, Erasmus student and teacher
mobility:

http://ec.europa.eu/education/programmes/llp/erasmus/statisti/table1.pdf

22

Eurydice (2000), Two Decades of Reform in Higher Education in Europe: 1980
Onwards, Education and Culture Directorate General, European Commission,

Brussels.

Fonseca, G.L., Economics Journals: A Chronological Account:
http://cepa.newschool.edu/het/essays/journal.htm

Frey, B. and R. Eichenberger (1993), American and European Economics and
Economists, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 7(4), pp. 185-193.
Institute of International Education, Open Doors 1948-2004, Report on International
Educational Exchange: CD-ROM, Sewickley, PA.
Kirman, A. and M. Dahl (1994), Economic Research in Europe, European Economic
Review, Vol. 38, pp. 505-522.

Mas-Colell, A. (2003), The European Space of Higher Education: Incentive and
Governance Issues, Rivista di Politica Economica, Vol. 93(11–12), pp. 9–27.

NAFSA (2007), The Bologna Process, International Educator Bologna 2007
Supplement:

http://www.nafsa.org/_/Document/_/bolognaprocess_ie_supp.pdf

National Center for Education and Statistics (2008), Digest of Education Statistics:
2007, March, Washington DC:

http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d07/index.asp

Nuffic (2008), Internationalization in Education in the Netherlands 2007, The Hague.

Neary, P.J., J.A. Mirrlees and J. Tirole (2003), Evaluating Economics Research in
Europe: an Introduction, Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 1(6),
1239-1249.

Periodicals Service Company & Schmidt Periodicals GmbH:
http://www.periodicals.com/download.html

23

Portes, R. (1987), Economics in Europe, European Economic Review, Vol. 31(6), pp.
1329-1340.

Spinelli, G. (2005), Mobility and Admission of Graduate Students Across the
Atlantic: New Challenges with the Bologna Process, IIENetworker Magazine, Spring:
http://www.iienetwork.org/?p=Spinelli

Unesco Institute for Statistics, Data for 1970-1996:
http://www.uis.unesco.org/pagesen/ed.htm
Unesco Institute for Statistics, Data for 1999-2006:
http://stats.uis.unesco.org/unesco/tableviewer/document.aspx?ReportId=143
Windolf, P. (1997), Expansion and Structural Change: Higher Education in
Germany, United States and Japan 1870 -1990, Westview, Boulder.

Witte, J. K. (2006), Change of Degrees and Degrees of Change: Comparing
Adaptations of European Higher Education Systems in the Context of the Bologna
Process, Doctoral dissertation, University of Twente, Netherlands.

24

Table 1
US students as percentage of enrollment in Western European countries, 1970-2003
1970
1986
1992
1996
2003
Germany
0.16
0.17
Austria
0.42
0.95
0.69
0.51
1.22
Netherlands
0.06
0.05
0.12
0.15
0.34
France
0.94
0.51
0.53
0.38
0.62
Spain
0.64
0.44
0.52
0.48
1.02
Italy
0.24
0.33
0.33
0.42
0.99
Denmark
0.12
0.41
0.36
0.27
0.56
Sweden
0.27
0.14
0.13
0.20
Norway
0.31
0.06
0.05
0.13
UK
0.35
1.33
1.52
1.06
1.39
Source: Institute of International Education and the Unesco Institute for Statistics
Note: The percentages have been calculated by dividing the number of US students
that study in a particular country (Open Doors, see Figure 7) by the number of
enrolled degree students in that country (Unesco). The percentages in the 1992
column refer to 1990 for France and the UK. The percentages in the 1996 column
refer to 1995 for France and Denmark.

25

Table 2
Characteristics of education and research in economics at Dutch universities in 1980
and 2008
1980
2008
Drs-diploma, 5-8 years of study

BA and MA, 3+1 years of study

A drs could become member of the

Then “aio” = employee who writes a

faculty

thesis

Some wrote a thesis

Gradual shift:

Often as a magnus opus

From employee to student
Introduction of course work
Use of term PhD rather than aio

Aim: Participation in national

Aim: Publish in international

discussion

(American) journals

Some researchers have an

Most researchers have an international

international focus

focus

26

Figure 1
Quality and relevance of research per unit costs as a function of transferability (a) and
costs of international research (b).

1.4
1.2
1
0.8

Quality
Relevance

0.6
0.4
0.2
1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

Transferability

3.5
3
2.5
2

Quality
Relevance

1.5
1
0.5
5

4.6

4.2

3.8

3.4

3

2.6

2.2

1.8

1.4

1

0
Cost of international research
Note: The figure is based on the following parameters: v q = v r = 1 , Q( n) = 1 ,
Q ( N ) = 3 , k=1, and K=3 in panel a and τ = 0.5 in panel b.

27

Figure 2
Gross enrollment ratios in Western European countries and the US, 1970-2006
%
90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

Germany
France
Denmark
United Kingdom

Austria
Spain
Sweden
United States

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

1978

1976

1974

1972

1970

0

Netherlands
Italy
Norway

Source: Unesco Institute for Statistics
Notes: The gross enrollment ratio is defined as the number of students enrolled in
tertiary education expressed as a percentage of the population in the theoretical age
group for tertiary education. There may be changes in the measurement of the gross
enrollment ratio between 1996 and 1999 for some countries, like the US. There also
seems to be a break in the series for the US and Austria between 2001 and 2002. For
Germany data is only available from 1990 to 1996.

28

Figure 3
Total number of European and foreign (non-US) students in the US, 1949-2004
700,000

90,000
80,000

600,000

70,000
500,000
60,000
50,000

400,000

40,000

300,000

30,000
200,000
20,000
100,000

European students

Western European students

2003

2000

1997

1994

1991

1988

1985

1982

1979

1976

1973

1970

1967

1964

1961

1958

1955

1952

0

1949

10,000

0

Foreign students (right axis)

Source: Institute of International Education
Notes: The data has been drawn from the Open Doors database of the Institute of
International Education. For international students in the US, Open Doors counts both
enrolled degree students as well as students who are taking shorter non-degree
courses.

29

Figure 4
Students of Western European countries in the US as percentage of enrollment in
home country, 1970-2006
% 2.0

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

Germany
France
Denmark
UK

Austria
Spain
Sweden

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

1978

1976

1974

1972

1970

0.0

Netherlands
Italy
Norway

Source: Institute of International Education and the Unesco Institute for Statistics
Note: The percentages have been calculated by dividing the number of students of a
particular country in the US (Open Doors, see Figure 2) by the number of enrolled
degree students in the respective home country (Unesco).

30

Figure 5
Outbound mobile Western European students as percentage of enrollment in home
country, 1999-2006
%

9.0
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
1999

2000

Germany (n.a.)
France
Denmark
United Kingdom

2001

2002

2003

Austria
Spain
Sweden
Aggregate of 9 countries

2004

2005

2006

Netherlands
Italy
Norway

Source: Unesco Institute for Statistics
Notes: Unesco counts the number of degree students enrolled in the home country and
in foreign countries. Home enrollment data is not available for Germany.

31

Figure 6
Outbound mobile students that study in the US as percentage of total outbound
mobility per country, 1999-2006
%

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Germany

Austria

Netherlands

France

Spain

Italy

Denmark

Sweden

Norway

United Kingdom

Aggregate of 10 countries

2006

Source: Unesco Institute for Statistics
Note: Unesco counts the number of degree students enrolled in the home country and
in foreign countries.

32

Figure 7
Total number of US students abroad, 1955-2003
200,000
180,000
160,000
140,000
120,000
100,000
80,000
60,000
40,000

Europe

Western Europe

2003

2000

1997

1994

1991

1988

1985

1982

1979

1976

1973

1970

1967

1964

1961

1958

0

1955

20,000

Total

Source: Institute of International Education
Notes: The data has been drawn from the Open Doors database of the Institute of
International Education. For Americans overseas, Open Doors counts the number of
students that study abroad. This consists of short-term programs of one year or less
which are held in another country, but which the American student receives credit for
towards their US degree. There are far more Americans participating in these types of
study abroad programs than are enrolled in degree courses overseas. The Unesco
measures this enrollment, which equals about 48,000 students in 2006.

33

Figure 8
Growth of higher education in the Netherlands, 1950-2006
350,000
300,000
250,000
200,000
150,000
100,000
50,000

University education

2004

2001

1998

1995

1992

1989

Higher professional education

Source: Statistics Netherlands
Note: The data concerns students in full-time education.

34

1986

1983

1980

1977

1974

1971

1968

1965

1962

1959

1956

1953

1950

0

200

40

180

35

1,000 students

160

30

140
120

25

100

20

80

15

60

10

40

Students

Source: Statistics Netherlands
Note: See Figure 8.

35

Faculty

1992

1989

1986

1983

1980

1977

1974

1971

1968

0
1965

0
1962

5
1959

20

1,000 teachers and researchers

Figure 9
Students versus faculty at universities in the Netherlands, 1959-1994

Figure 10
Dutch and German students in the USA, 1949-2004
12,000

2,500

Dutch students

8,000
1,500
6,000
1,000
4,000

500

2,000

Dutch students

German students

Source: Institute of International Education
Notes: See Figure 3

36

2003

2000

1997

1994

1991

1988

1985

1982

1979

1976

1973

1970

1967

1964

1961

1958

1955

1952

0
1949

0

German students

10,000

2,000

250,000

2,500

200,000

2,000

150,000

1,500

100,000

1,000

50,000

500

Dutch university students

Dutch students in the USA

US students in the Netherlands

Sources: Statistics Netherlands and Institute of International Education
Notes: See Figures 3, 7 and 8

37

2006

2003

2000

1997

1994

1991

1988

1985

1982

1979

1976

1973

1970

1967

1964

1961

1958

1955

1952

0
1949

0

Dutch student in the USA and
US students in the Netherlands

Dutch university students

Figure 11
Dutch university students and mobility flows between the Netherlands and the USA,
1949-2006

Figure 12
Foreign students as percentage of Dutch enrollment per discipline, 2004-2008
%

25

20

15

10

5

0
Agriculture, Economics Technology Behaviour &
natural
Society
surroundings

2004

Nature

2005

Language & Education
Culture

2006

2007

Law

Health Care

Total

2008

Source: Nuffic (2008)
Note: Data concerns foreign students enrolled at publicly funded Dutch universities.

38

Figure 13
Number of PhDs and total enrollment at universities in the Netherlands, 1950-2005
1,000

250

800
700

150

600
500

100

400
300

50

200
100

Total enrollment

PhDs

Sources: Statistics Netherlands and library of Maastricht University

39

2004

2001

1998

1995

1992

1989

1986

1983

1980

1977

1974

1971

1968

1965

1959
1962

1953
1956

0
1950

0

PhDs

1,000 University students

900
200

Average age

Figure 14
Average age of graduating PhDs by discipline in the Netherlands, 1970-1995

42
41
40
39
38
37
36
35
34
33
32
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Year

Arts
Social Sciences

Science
Economics

Source: Library of Maastricht University

40

Medicine
Law

Figure 15
Percentage of doctoral dissertations in the home language, 1908-2007
%
100

80

60

40

20

0
19081917

19181927

19281937

19381947

19481957

19581967

19681977

19781987

19881997

Germany/German

Austria/German

Netherlands/Dutch

France/French
Danmark/Danish

Spain/Spanish
Sweden/Swedish

Italy/Italian
Norway/Norwegian

Source: Center for Research Libraries

41

19982007

Figure 16
Shares of languages of doctoral dissertations in the Netherlands, 1674-1995
1
0.9
0.8

Fraction

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

Year
Latin

Dutch

German

Source: Library of Maastricht University

42

French

English

1995

1975

1955

1935

1915

1895

1875

1855

1835

1815

1795

1775

1755

1735

1710

1690

1670

0

Figure 17
The fraction of doctoral dissertations published in English by discipline, the
Netherlands 1945-1995
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

Fraction

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1945

1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

Year
Arts

Science

Medicine

Social Sciences

Economics

Law

Source: Library of Maastricht University

43

1990

1995

Figure 18
Language of Continental European Journals in Economics, 1844-2001
35

nu mber of jo urn als

30
25
20
15
10
5

French

German

other

2001

1996

1991

1986

1981

1976

1971

1966

1961

1956

1951

1946

1941

1936

1931

1926

1921

1916

1911

1906

1901

1896

1891

1886

1881

1876

1871

1866

1861

1856

1851

1846

1841

0

English

Sources: Fonseca, Periodicals Service Company & Schmidt Periodicals GmbH and
some additional sources

44

Figure 19
Country of origin of English language economics journals in Anglo-American
countries, 1859-1990
80
70

number of journals

60
50
40
30
20
10

Britain and other countries

USA

1991

1986

1976
1981

1971

1966

1956
1961

1951

1946

1936
1941

1931

1926

1916
1921

1911

1906

1901

1891
1896

1886

1881

1871
1876

1866

1861

1851
1856

1846

1841

0

International

Sources: Fonseca, Periodicals Service Company & Schmidt Periodicals GmbH and
some additional sources

45

2005

2000

1995

1990

1985

1980

1975

1970

1965

1960

1955

1950

1945

1940

1935

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1930

Fraction

Figure 20
The fraction of articles written in home language in De Economist (Dutch), Journal of
Economics (German) and Research in Economics (Italian), 1930-2007

Year

De Economist
Research in Economics

Journal of Economics

Sources: Springer, Elsevier and website of Research in Economics for 1960-1996
http://www.biblio.liuc.it/essper/schedper/p78.htm

46

Figure 21
The fraction of articles written by native authors in De Economist (Netherlands),
Journal of Economics (Austria/Germany) and Research in Economics (Italy), 19302007

1

Fraction

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
2005

2000

1995

1990

1985

1980

1975

1970

1965

1960

1955

1950

1945

1940

1935

1930

0

Year

De Economist
Research in Economics

Journal of Economics

Sources: Springer, Elsevier and website of Research in Economics for 1960-1996
http://www.biblio.liuc.it/essper/schedper/p78.htm

47

Figure 22
The fraction of references in English articles to publications in home language for De
Economist (Dutch) and Journal of Economics (German), 1960-2007

0.5

Fraction

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

Year

De Economist
Source: Springer

48

Journal of Economics

2005

2000

1995

1990

1985

1980

1975

1970

1965

1960

0

Annex to Figures 15, 18, 19

49

Numbers of dissertations by country and language, 10-year periods 1908-2007

Austria

1908-

1918-

1928-

1938-

1948-

1958-

1968-

1978-

1988-

1998-

1917

1927

1937

1947

1957

1967

1977

1987

1997

2007

German

86

112

245

191

375

302

336

205

79

22

English

0

2

1

1

6

6

6

6

16

11

100

98

100

99

98

98

98

97

83

67

1908-

1918-

1928-

1938-

1948-

1958-

1968-

1978-

1988-

1998-

1917

1927

1937

1947

1957

1967

1977

1987

1997

2007

35326

34764

60550

11833

11020

42177

63229

63253

70751

24594

year

% German

Germany,
West

year
German
English

56

10

23

13

21

80

269

514

1042

1222

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

99

99

95

1908-

1918-

1928-

1938-

1948-

1958-

1968-

1978-

1988-

1998-

1917

1927

1937

1947

1957

1967

1977

1987

1997

2007

622

1207

1978

1448

1643

1648

1796

1360

1169

435

English

13

57

183

201

630

1243

2551

3342

4287

2771

% Dutch

98

95

92

88

72

57

41

29

21

14

1998-

%German

Netherlands

year
Dutch

France

1908-

1918-

1928-

1938-

1948-

1958-

1968-

1978-

1988-

year

1917

1927

1937

1947

1957

1967

1977

1987

1997

2007

French

7148

10187

8733

6808

4861

10331

18213

6993

18120

7591

50

English

6

5

17

9

4

22

87

17

24

21

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1908-

1918-

1928-

1938-

1948-

1958-

1968-

1978-

1988-

1998-

1917

1927

1937

1947

1957

1967

1977

1987

1997

2007

Spanish

4

28

41

11

20

188

436

59

234

32

English

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

6

15

100

100

100

100

95

100

100

100

98

68

1908-

1918-

1928-

1938-

1948-

1958-

1968-

1978-

1988-

1998-

1917

1927

1937

1947

1957

1967

1977

1987

1997

2007

Italian

8

5

18

21

23

49

31

60

56

8

English

0

0

1

2

10

29

13

36

65

6

100

100

95

91

70

63

70

63

46

57

1908-

1918-

1928-

1938-

1948-

1958-

1968-

1978-

1988-

1998-

1917

1927

1937

1947

1957

1967

1977

1987

1997

2007

Danish

112

133

213

247

249

256

260

260

222

66

English

2

20

60

113

198

280

342

438

696

377

98

87

78

69

56

48

43

37

24

15

1908-

1918-

1928-

1938-

1948-

1958-

1968-

1978-

1988-

1998-

1917

1927

1937

1947

1957

1967

1977

1987

1997

2007

% French

Spain

year

% Spanish

Italy

year

% Italian

Danmark

year

% Danish

Sweden

year

51

Norway

Swedish

240

249

243

267

294

288

622

842

1411

1084

English

27

68

84

177

469

864

2102

3854

5440

4695

% Swedish

90

79

74

60

39

25

23

18

21

19

1908-

1918-

1928-

1938-

1948-

1958-

1968-

1978-

1988-

1998-

1917

1927

1937

1947

1957

1967

1977

1987

1997

2007

5

7

22

12

9

13

15

34

6

0

year
Norwegian
English
% Norwegian

0

0

13

5

9

27

127

206

153

51

100

100

63

71

50

33

11

14

4

0

Source: Center for Research Libraries (CRL)

52

Language of Continental European academic journals in economics

Year of
publishing
Original

English journal

solely English

Country

language

National journal name

name

Publishing years

articles

Austria

German

Zeitschrift für Nationalökonomie

Journal of Economics

1892-

1982

Belgium

French

Revue économique internationale

-

1904-1940

------

Recherches Economiques de

Louvain Economic

Louvain

Review

Belgium

French

------ Still partly
1929-

in French
------ Still mix of
French and

Brussels Economic

English

Belgium

French

Cahiers économiques de Bruxelles

Review

1958-

language

Europe

English

European Economic Review

-

1969-

1969

-

1844-1899

------

Annuaire de l'économie politique et
France

French

de la statistique

------ Still in
France

French

Annales d'Économie Politique

-

1846-

French

France

French

Revue d'économie politique

-

1887-

------ Still

53

mainly in
French
------ Still in
France

French

Les Etudes Social

-

1881-

French
------ Still in

France

French

Histoire, économie et société

-

1908-

Annales d'histoire économique et
France

French

sociale

French
------ Still in

-

1929-

French
------ Still
mainly in

France

French

Économie appliquée

1948-

French
------ Still
mainly in

France

French

Revue économique

1950-

French
------ Still in

France

French

Economies et sociétés

-

1967-

French
------ Still mix of
French and
English

France

French

Cahiers d'économie politique

-

1974-

language

1844-

1993

Journal of Institutional

Germany

German

Zeitschrift für die gesamte

and Theoretical

Staatswissenschaft

Economics JITE

54

Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie
Germany

German

und Statistik

------ Still in
-

1863-

German

Journal of Applied
Social Science
Germany

German

Schmollers Jahrbuch

------ Still partly

Studies

1871

in German

-

1883-1923

------

-

1888-1933

------

1913-

1995

Die Neue Zeit: Revue des geistigen
Germany

German

und öffentlichen Lebens
Archiv fur Sozialwissenschaft und

Germany

German

Sozialpolitik

Review of World
Germany

German

Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv

Economics

------ Still in
Germany

German

Kredit und Kapital

-

1968-

German

-

1875

2000

1947-

1947

Giornale degli Economisti e Annali
Italy

Italian

di Economia

Previously: Quarterly
review. Banca
nazionale del lavoro;

Italy

English

Banca nazionale del lavoro

Nowadays: BNL

quarterly review

Quarterly Review
Research in

Italy

Italian

Ricerche Economiche

Economics

1947-

1993

Italy

Italian

Economia internazionale

-

1948-

2001

55

De Economist
Netherlands
Netherlands

Dutch

De Economist

Economic Review

1852-

1983

------ Still in
Norway

Norwegian

Norsk Økonomisk Tidsskrift

-

1887-

Norwegian

Problems of Economic Transition

-

1958-

1958

Matekon

-

1964-1998

1964

1971-

1999

English
Soviet Union

translations
English

Soviet Union

translations

Spanish Economic
Spain

Spanish

Revista Española de Economía

Review

-----Submissions in

Spain

Spanish

Revista de Historia Económica

Journal of Iberian and

English,

Latin American

Spanish or

Economic History

1945-

Portuguese

Statsvetenskaplig tidskrift för politikSweden

Swedish

statistik-ekonomi

-

1897-1963

------

Sweden

Swedish

Ekonomisk Tidskrift

Scandinavian Journal

1899-

1964

56

of Economics

Kyklos International
Review for Social
Switzerland

German

Kyklos

Sciences

1947-

1993

Switzerland

French

Revue Économique et Sociale

-

1943-

------

Sources:
Fonseca, Periodicals Service Company & Schmidt Periodicals GmbH, home pages of journals, national libraries, econlit, etc
Notes:
Continental European Journals selected from 1850 onwards (emergence of academic economics journals, excl. light and news oriented journals,
or journals not principally dedicated to economics). Only journals that were founded until 1990 have been included.

English language journals (only English speaking countries)

Publishing
Country

National journal name

years

Australia

Economic Record

1924-

Australia

Australian Economic Papers

1962-

Britain

Macmillan's Magazine

1859-1907

Britain

Economic Journal

1891

Britain

Economic Review

1891-1914

Britain

Economica

1921-

57

Britain

Economic History Review

1927-

Britain

The Manchester School of Economic and Social Studies

1929-

Britain

Lloyds Bank Review

1930-

Britain

Review of Economic Studies

1933-

Britain

Oxford Economic Papers

1938-

Britain

Scottish Journal of Political Economy

1953-

Britain

Journal of Development Studies

1964-

Britain

Cambridge Journal of Economics

1977-

Canada

Canadian Journal of Economics*

1935-

International

International Labour Review

1921-

International

Econometrica

1933-

International

Metroeconomica

1949-

International

Journal of Industrial Economics

1952-

International

IMF Staff Papers

1954-

International

International Economic Review

1960-

International

Journal of Economic Theory

1969-

International

History of Political Economy

1969-

International

Journal of International Economics

1971-

International

International Journal of Game Theory

1971-

International

Journal of Public Economics

1972-

International

Journal of Monetary Economics

1972-

International

Journal of Econometrics

1973-

International

Atlantic Economic Journal

1973-

58

International

Journal of Mathematical Economics

1974-

International

Journal of Development Economics

1974-

International

Economics Letters

1978-

International

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control

1979-

International

Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization

1980-

International

Mathematical Social Sciences

1981-

International

The New Palgrave: A dictionary of economics

1987-

International

Review of Austrian Economics

1987-

International

Economic Systems Research

1988-

International

Games and Economic Behavior

1989-

International

Structural Change and Economic Dynamics

1990-

International

Journal of Evolutionary Economics

1990-

South Africa

South African Journal of Economics

1933-

US

Quarterly Journal of Economics

1886-

US

Journal of American Statistical Association

1888-

US

Journal of Political Economy

1892-

US

Bulletin of the American Economic Association**

1908-1910

US

American Economic Review

1911-

US

Review of Economics and Statistics

1919-

US

Journal of Business

1922-

US

Southern Economic Journal

1933-

US

Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences

1937-

US

Journal of Economic History

1941-

59

US

American Journal of Economics and Sociology

1941-

US

Review of Social Economy

1944-

US

Journal of Finance

1946-

US

International Organization

1947-

US

Monthly Review

1948-

US

Economic Development and Cultural Change

1952-

US

Journal of Law and Economics

1958-

US

Western Economic Journal

1962-

US

Journal of Economic Issues

1967-

US

Journal of Economic Literature

1969-

US

Review of Radical Political Economy

1969-

US

Journal of Money, Credit and Banking

1969-

US

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity

1970-

US

Bell Journal of Economics***

1970-1973

US

Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy

1973-

US

RAND Journal of Economics

1974-

US

Eastern Economic Journal

1974-

US

Journal of Post Keynesian Economics

1978-

US

Journal of Economic Perspectives

1987-

US

Review of Political Economy

1989-

*

Formerly published as Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science

**

Predecessor of American Economic Review

***

Predecessor of RAND Journal of Economics

Sources:

60

Fonseca, Periodicals Service Company & Schmidt Periodicals GmbH, home pages of journals, national libraries, econlit, etc
Notes:
Continental European Journals selected from 1850 onwards (emergence of academic economics journals, excl. light and news oriented journals,
or journals not principally dedicated to economics). Only journals that were founded until 1990 have been included.

61

