NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INPUT CONSTRAINTS AND THE EFFICIENCY OF ENTRY:
LESSONS FROM CARDIAC SURGERY
David M. Cutler
Robert S. Huckman
Jonathan T. Kolstad
Working Paper 15214
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15214

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge,
MA
We thank seminar participants at the American
Society
of 02138
Health Economists, Duke University, Harvard
August
2009
University, the International Health Economics Association, the National Bureau of Economic Research,
the University of Illinois at Chicago, the University of Pennsylvania, and Washington University-St.
Louis for helpful comments. We acknowledge financial support from the National Institute on Aging
(Grant P01 AG005842) and the Harvard Business School Division of Research and Faculty Development.
The data used in this analysis were obtained from the Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment
Council (PHC4), which requests the following disclaimer: The Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment
Council (PHC4) is an independent state agency responsible for addressing the problem of escalating
health costs, ensuring the quality of health care, and increasing access to health care for all citizens
regardless of ability to pay. PHC4 has provided data to this entity in an effort to further PHC4’s mission
of educating the public and containing health care costs in Pennsylvania. PHC4, its agents and staff,
have made no representation, guarantee, or warranty, express or implied, that the data -- financial,
patient, payor, and physician specific information -- provided to this entity, are error-free, or that the
use of the data will avoid differences of opinion or interpretation. This analysis was not prepared by
PHC4. This analysis was done by David M. Cutler, Robert S. Huckman, and Jonathan T. Kolstad.
PHC4, its agents and staff, bear no responsibility or liability for the results of the analysis, which are
solely the opinion of the authors. The views expressed herein also do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by David M. Cutler, Robert S. Huckman, and Jonathan T. Kolstad. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Input Constraints and the Efficiency of Entry: Lessons from Cardiac Surgery
David M. Cutler, Robert S. Huckman, and Jonathan T. Kolstad
NBER Working Paper No. 15214
August 2009
JEL No. I10,I11,I18,L1,L15,L23,L5,L8
ABSTRACT
Prior studies suggest that, with elastically supplied inputs, free entry may lead to an inefficiently high
number of firms in equilibrium. Under input scarcity, however, the welfare loss from free entry is
reduced. Further, free entry may increase use of high-quality inputs, as oligopolistic firms underuse
these inputs when entry is constrained. We assess these predictions by examining how the 1996 repeal
of certificate-of-need (CON) legislation in Pennsylvania affected the market for cardiac surgery in
the state. We show that entry led to a redistribution of surgeries to higher-quality surgeons and that
this entry was approximately welfare neutral.

David M. Cutler
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dcutler@harvard.edu
Robert S. Huckman
435 Morgan Hall
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rhuckman@hbs.edu

Jonathan T. Kolstad
University of Pennsylvania
108 Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
jkolstad@wharton.upenn.eduu

The classic welfare analysis of firm entry involves a tradeoff between the benefits
of competition and losses from rent seeking. The benefits of competition are
straightforward; the rent-seeking losses stem from the fact that part of an entrant’s profit
is generated by stealing business from incumbent firms. These transferred profits are not
a social benefit, but the fixed outlays associated with entry represent a social cost. Under
these conditions, Gregory Mankiw and Michael Whinston (1986) show that excessive
entry is likely. This standard model, however, does not address a key feature of many
industries: the inelastic supply of certain factors of production, such as labor or land. We
consider the impact of such constrained inputs on the welfare economics of entry by
studying hospital entry into the provision of coronary artery bypass graft (CABG)
surgery. CABG represents a natural case study for two reasons: the supply of cardiac
surgeons is roughly fixed in the short term and the quality of output is at least partially
measurable.
With imperfectly supplied inputs, entry is less likely to be excessive than when
inputs are more elastically supplied. A more subtle implication of constrained inputs
relates to the level of quality at which firms will enter. In our setting, a surgeon may be a
leader in the field or a novice, and when a hospital decides to enter the CABG market, it
must decide which surgeons to employ. More generally, the decision about quality
depends on the supply elasticity of factor inputs. Entry is likely to occur at high quality if
high-quality labor is in relatively inelastic supply. In such a setting, oligopsonistic firms
will ration use of high-quality workers prior to free entry, and new entrants will find such
workers valuable. In contrast, entry will occur at lower quality if the supply of highquality labor is relatively elastic.

To examine these implications empirically, we consider CABG entry by hospitals
in Pennsylvania, which in 1996 eliminated its certificate of need (CON) policy that
restricted entry by hospitals into expensive clinical programs, such as CABG.1 Repeal of
CON was associated with significant hospital entry into CABG—from 1996 to 2003 the
number of hospitals providing this service in Pennsylvania increased from 43 to 63.2 We
rely on this growth to estimate the welfare effects of entry in this market.
The overall volume of CABG in Pennsylvania remained roughly flat for several
years after CON repeal. We find that, as new programs entered the market, volume
shifted from incumbent programs to entrants and from lower- to higher-quality surgeons.
The repeal of CON in Pennsylvania thus appears to have had a salutary effect on the
market for cardiac surgery by directing more volume to better doctors and increasing
access to treatment. Offsetting this benefit are the fixed costs paid by new entrants of
about $13 million per program. On its own, the benefit of reduced mortality from the
increased use of high-quality surgeons roughly offsets the fixed costs associated with free
entry. Given our conservative assumptions and the fact that these estimates do not capture
other gains from the repeal of CON (e.g., reductions in morbidity due to the reallocation
of patients or reductions in administrative costs), our results suggest entry due to the
repeal of CON was approximately welfare neutral.

1

CON regulation has been studied in some detail (see Christopher J. Conover and Frank A. Sloan, 1998).
The primary focus of this literature, however, has been on the cost implications of restricted entry. A
smaller number of recent papers in both the health economics and medical literatures examine the impact of
CON regulation on clinical quality (e.g., Vivian Ho, 2006; Verdi J. DiSesa et al., 2006; Robert H. Jones,
2006), as we do in this study.
2
Our data include an additional hospital that entered the market in late 2003 performing a total of 31
surgeries by the end of 2003. Because entry occurred well after the repeal of CON—and we observe only a
very small number of procedures from that hospital in our data—we exclude this facility from the
remaining analysis.

2

Our paper is structured as follows. Section I discusses entry decisions in the
presence of fixed factors of production. Section II describes the cardiac surgery setting.
Section III presents our results concerning the impact of repealing CON, Section IV
estimates the welfare implications of this repeal, and Section V concludes.

I. FIRM ENTRY IN MARKETS WITH CONSTRAINED INPUTS
In general, firm entry into a market increases welfare by lowering prices (and
thereby increasing volume) or increasing product variety (Avinash K. Dixit and Joseph E.
Stiglitz, 1977; Spence, 1980; Roger W. Koenker and Martin K. Perry, 1981; Mankiw and
Whinston, 1986). These gains, however, come at the social cost of redundant fixed
investments in setting up additional firms (Mankiw and Whinston, 1986). In the standard
model, a tradeoff thus exists between the benefits of competition and the losses from
additional costs of entry.
In healthcare, where demand is uncertain and insured consumers tend not to face
full prices, entry can have additional welfare costs. These losses come from people
getting too many or too few services or changes in quality that cannot be observed due to
asymmetric information (Kenneth Arrow, 1963; Martin Gaynor, 2006; Mark V. Pauly,
2004).3 We begin by examining the more standard effect of competition and return to
moral hazard below.
The nature of competition in the input market affects the welfare costs of entry,
and we explore these effects when input supply is not perfectly elastic. We adopt a simple
model of monopolistic competition in the input market. We refer to a “wage” for a

3

The combination of these factors can lead to firms competing in a “medical arms race” with excess
services provided to cover fixed entry costs (Robinson and Luft, 1985).

3

surgeon but note that compensation is more likely set by a bargain in which the hospital
and surgeon agree to an appropriation of the rents from performing surgery. In the
monopolistically competitive input market, supply elasticity effectively captures the
market power held by the surgeon and hospital, respectively.4 Relying on this framework
allows us to capture the basic predictions of a Nash bargaining solution while also
considering the welfare impact of entry in the same model employed by Mankiw and
Whinston (1986).
The first prediction is relatively straightforward. Suppose that surgeons are a
scarce input, available in imperfectly elastic supply. Such input scarcity raises the cost
of entry, thereby reducing the profits of new firms. The less elastic is labor supply, the
smaller is the predicted entry associated with opening up markets.5
Less straightforward is the situation where inputs vary in quality, and the
elasticity of input supply differs by quality. Quality effects are particularly relevant in a

4

The particular nature of the bargain may alter the explicit predictions of the model. However, to the extent
that the bargaining framework results in each party being paid a reservation wage, the equilibrium
converges to the monopolistically competitive outcome. For example, Oliver Hart and Jean Tirole (1990)
show that, under a reasonable set of assumptions, the Nash bargaining solution between upstream and
downstream firms results in Cournot prices and quantities in the output market (even if the upstream party
is a monopolist). This situation also resembles our setting in that the mark-up due to market power is
declining in the number of downstream firms (Patrick Rey and Tirole, 2007).
5

In monopolistic competition, where firms maximize profit subject to demand and input elasticities, the
condition for the equilibrium number of firms is related to the familiar Lerner equation:

L=

⎛ 1
P − MC
1 ⎞
= α N ⎜ − + ⎟ , where α N is a measure of per firm market share, η q is the elasticity of
⎜ η η ⎟
P
L ⎠
⎝ q

demand and η L is the labor supply elasticity. The term

1

ηL

captures the decrease in the markup resulting

from higher factor costs with inelastic labor supply. Because
inclusion of

1

ηL

causes

α N is declining in N by definition, the

∂L
to be larger in magnitude (i.e., more negative). That is, the mark up dissipates
∂N

faster with entry when inputs are not perfectly supplied.

4

setting such as health care, where the technical skill of labor is important.6 A firm
seeking to produce at a given level of quality must hire labor with the requisite skills.
The cost of achieving a given level of output quality is thus determined by the relative
scarcity of the inputs required to produce at that level of quality
A variety of considerations suggest that high-quality surgeons will have less
elastic labor supply than standard-quality surgeons. Surgery is a skill that takes time to
produce; thus, training of high-quality surgeons cannot occur very rapidly. Further, by
definition the country as a whole has fewer superstar surgeons than average surgeons. In
any given area, the supply of standard-quality surgeons thus will be more elastic than the
supply of high-quality surgeons.
The negotiation that determines the allocation of rents between surgeons and
hospitals depends—on one side—on the relative strength of a hospital’s threat to
substitute between surgeons at a given level of quality and—on the other—on the
countervailing threat of a surgeon transferring volume to a different hospital. In this way,
changes in the number of hospitals on equilibrium quantities and wage offers will
differentially impact high-quality and standard-quality surgeons. 7
To see this more precisely, consider the equilibrium quality and quantity choices
made by hospitals when entry is prohibited. If hospitals act as oligopsonists in the input
market, they will demand standard-quality (i.e., “acceptable”) surgeons more than highquality surgeons. The reason is that the supply of high-quality surgeons is less elastic,
6

For example, the average mortality rate for the worst-performing 20 percent of bypass surgeons in our
sample in 1994-1995 was 2.5 times that of the top 20 percent.
7
John Sutton (1991) argues that firms can make investments that limit the degree of subsequent entry. His
theory of endogenous sunk costs focuses primarily on investments, such as those in R&D or brands, that
are difficult for new entrants to replicate. To the extent that our model hinges on firms capturing a scarce
input (i.e., high-quality labor) as a limiting factor in subsequent entry, it can be seen as an application of
Sutton’s model. Specifically, one may consider the recruitment of high-quality labor to be akin to R&D
aimed at improving the quality of a firm’s product.

5

causing hospital profits to dissipate more rapidly by employing them. In the limit with
only one high-quality surgeon, that surgeon would earn all of the rents associated with his
or her superior quality.
The entry of new firms reduces the ability of any one firm to influence the input
market by withholding capacity, as each firm accounts for a smaller share of total output.
In short, entry moves the market from its equilibrium oligopsony quantity to a larger
near-competitive quantity. This increase in quantity will be larger in markets that are
further from the competitive equilibrium under restricted entry – that is, markets where
labor supply is less elastic. To the extent that high-quality surgeons supply labor less
elastically than standard-quality surgeons, we would thus expect to see a differentially
larger increase in the use of high-quality surgeons under free entry.

II. EMPIRICAL SETTING AND DATA
A. CABG Surgery
CABG surgery was developed in the late 1960s and entered mainstream use in the
United States during the 1970s. The procedure involves surgically isolating a section of
vein (from the leg) or artery (from the chest) and grafting it to create a bypass of
blockage in the coronary artery. In a traditional CABG, the patient is placed on a heartlung bypass machine, which performs the functions of the heart during the grafting
process. Following the procedure, the patient remains in the hospital for several days to
allow caregivers to monitor the recovery process.
The use of CABG grew substantially during the technology’s first three decades.
Among the United States population age 50 or greater, the number of CABG procedures

6

grew from a nationwide total of 15,000 in 1971 to a peak of 552,000 in 1997 before
falling to 424,000 by 2003 (National Center for Health Statistics, 2006). This decline in
CABG has been attributed to increased competition from less-invasive treatments, such
as percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) (David M. Cutler and Robert
S. Huckman, 2003). PTCA is a less intensive way of fixing coronary occlusions, but
failure during the procedure can require emergency CABG surgery. As a result, many
states, including Pennsylvania, require the presence of CABG back-up for the
performance of PTCA.8 Because PTCA is less intensive but still well reimbursed, its use
spread over the 1990s and early 2000s. Thus some of the hospitals in our sample may
have entered the CABG market with the primary aim of providing CABG itself while
others may have done so with the primary aim of developing a strong PTCA program.
We exploit this difference in entry motives as a robustness check later in our analysis.
CABG is an expensive procedure to provide, and the fixed costs of setting up a
CABG facility are significant. Huckman (2006) finds the average fixed cost to establish
a CABG program in New York State to be $14 million. Further, Jamie Robinson et al.
(2001) present reported setup costs of $13.4 and $12 million for two programs entering
the Pennsylvania market in 2000. To put such an investment in perspective, we note that
the average net income between 1996 and 2005 for hospitals entering the CABG market
in Pennsylvania was $3.5 million.9 In addition, the ongoing costs of a CABG program are
significant, as hospitals offering the procedure typically employ a staff of nurses,
perfusionists, and other technicians dedicated to cardiac surgery.

8

In certain “low-risk” cases, PTCA may be conducted at a Pennsylvania hospital without CABG back-up.
Nevertheless, the majority of PTCA cases occurring during our sample period would have required the
presence of CABG at the hospital.
9
Authors calculation using data from the Medicare Cost Reports 1996-2005.

7

Despite its high cost, CABG is very profitable for hospitals. Roughly half of
CABG patients are covered by Medicare, which pays relatively generously. Most of the
remainder is privately insured. Further, a large number of people have coronary artery
disease, so resources rarely sit idle. It is generally believed that, along with orthopedics
and oncology, cardiac care accounts for the bulk of many hospitals’ profit. Thus, the
impact of CON regulation on CABG surgery has important implications for overall
hospital profitability.

B. The Hospital-Surgeon Relationship
Our model assumes that firms choose the quality of the employees they hire.
With few exceptions, however, hospitals tend not to employ surgeons. Rather, they
provide them with surgical privileges and access to facilities, such as operating rooms.
Still a hospital may provide a surgeon with various non-pecuniary benefits that may
influence the degree to which the surgeon performs procedures at that facility. For
example, one way for a hospital to lure a physician is through preferred scheduling: the
physician might be promised his or her choice of operating rooms and a dedicated time to
use the room. The quantity and composition of the surgeon’s clinical support staff, such
as nurses and anesthesiologists, represents another means by which hospitals may attract
surgeons. In addition, there may be intangible benefits such as preferred access to
parking, office space, and administrative support. Effectively, the hospital and physician
enter an at-least-implicit contract that specifies how the joint benefits of surgery are to be
split, without any direct money changing hands between the two parties. As such, we
think of this relationship as akin to employment, even without a direct monetary

8

transaction. In this case, the “wage” paid by the hospital is reflected in the value of the
various benefits conveyed to the surgeon.

C. CABG and CON Regulation in Pennsylvania
With encouragement from the federal government, individual states instituted
CON regulations for hospitals during the 1970s. These regulations required state
approval before hospitals could invest in costly technologies, such as cardiac surgery.
CON was instituted as a reaction to concerns that competition between hospitals would
lead to a “medical arms race” (James Robinson and Harold Luft, 1985) characterized by
excessive service provision and increased cost. During the 1980s, a push toward
deregulation reduced federal funding for CON programs, and states responded by
dismantling or scaling back these regulations. On December 18, 1996, Pennsylvania
repealed its CON law, effectively allowing free entry into a broad range of hospital
services, including cardiac surgery.
At the time Pennsylvania repealed its CON law, 43 hospitals were licensed to
provide CABG surgery in the state. This figure represented 16 percent of all acute-care
hospitals in the state and 33 percent of all acute-care hospitals with 200 or more beds—
the threshold hospital size that is often assumed necessary to support a bypass program.
Following the repeal of CON, entry into CABG was swift, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Four programs entered in each of the years 1997 and 1998, and there were 23 total
entrants by 2003. In 2000, post-CON entrants accounted for 10 percent of
Pennsylvania’s total CABG volume. This figure grew to 20 percent by 2003. All

9

together, there was a 46 percent net increase in the number of CABG programs in the
state between 1996 and 2003.10
To determine how much of the above growth was due to the repeal of CON,
Figure 2 presents the total number of CABG programs in Pennsylvania, New York, and
New Jersey for the period from 1995 to 2003. Because New York and New Jersey
maintained CON regulation throughout the study period, we use them as controls for the
rate of growth in new CABG programs that would have occurred between 1995 and 2003
under regulated entry. Based on these controls, the repeal of CON led to the entry of
between 10 and 16 of the 23 new CABG programs in Pennsylvania.11
A majority of hospitals that entered the CABG market after the repeal of CON
were in the suburbs of major cities. Figure 3 plots incumbent and entrant programs on a
map of Pennsylvania. Thirteen of the 23 entrants were in the suburbs of either
Philadelphia or Pittsburgh. The remaining new programs were distributed throughout the
state but tended to be located in medium-sized cities where an incumbent program had a
virtual monopoly on CABG surgery prior to the repeal of CON. For example, both
Johnstown and Altoona had one incumbent program each before 1996, and each faced
one entrant following CON repeal. The Wilkes-Barre and Scranton area moved from two
incumbent programs—one in each town—to a total of five programs. Some areas of the
state, particularly the less-densely-populated northern interior, had few or no new
programs.

10

Between 1996 and 2003, three existing CABG programs exited the Pennsylvania market.
We return to this estimate later when computing the welfare impact of the repeal of CON in
Pennsylvania. We bound the cost in the welfare calculations between the fixed cost associated with the 20
new entrants (without controlling for New Jersey and New York) and the lower bound of 10 new entrants
attributable to the policy change including controls from nearby states.

11

10

Table 1 presents information on the size of new programs. On average, entrant
programs are smaller than incumbents in terms of both total procedures and procedures
per surgeon (160 procedures per year over the 2000-2003 period compared to 349 for
incumbent programs). The relatively low volumes at entrant programs are not surprising
given the time required for a new program to reach an “equilibrium” level of volume. For
example, the three hospitals that entered the market in 1997 averaged 174 total surgeries
in their first year of operation. By 2003, however, those same programs performed an
average of 305 surgeries (relative to the 2003 average of 296 procedures per incumbent
program) despite a decline in the statewide CABG volume between 1997 and 2003.
Many new programs aimed to establish themselves by contracting with surgeons
who were already licensed in Pennsylvania and practicing at incumbent hospitals. Of the
225 surgeons performing at least one CABG procedure in Pennsylvania in the years 2000
through 2003,12 122 split their time across hospitals. Over half of the surgeons
performing CABG surgery at entrant hospitals during the 2000-2003 period worked at a
different institution under CON; the remainder were new to the market.
Despite the entry of new surgeons, the net supply of surgeons did not change
much during the study period. Between 1994 and 2004, there was a net increase of only
10 physicians, or 5 percent,13 despite the addition of many new programs.

D. Data

12

This figure excludes surgeons who performed surgeries only in 2001, as Pennsylvania did not make data
on CABG procedures available for that year.
13
Entry and exit are defined by the year of licensure in the state of Pennsylvania. Exit year is determined
by the last available year that a surgeon was licensed to practice if a license was not renewed. Entry is the
first year a surgeon was licensed to practice in the state.

11

The primary source of data for our analysis is the Pennsylvania Health Care Cost
Containment Council (PHC4), which has collected patient-level records for every
individual receiving CABG at a hospital in Pennsylvania in 1994, 1995, 2000, 2002, and
2003.14 These data cover 89,406 procedures performed by 303 physicians at 67 hospitals.
The PHC4 data identifies both the surgeon and hospital associated with each procedure.
In addition, it provides a wide range of patient-level covariates such as age, gender, and
several clinical measures of illness severity.
For some descriptive analyses, we use another PHC4 database that reports the
total number of CABG patients over the entire period from 1993 to 2003. These data,
however, are from standard discharge abstracts and, as such, do not include the same
patient-level clinical information that is found in the first database described above. In
addition, these latter data do not have the validated surgeon identifiers that are present in
the former dataset. Finally, we use data from the Medicare Cost Reports for the period
from 1993 to 2003 to examine the profitability of various categories of Pennsylvania
hospitals around the repeal of CON.

E. Measuring Provider Quality
We distinguish high-quality from standard-quality surgeons using data on the
risk-adjusted, in-hospital mortality of their CABG patients. To adjust binary mortality
outcomes for patient severity, we estimate the following logistic regression:

⎛ morti ,s ,h ⎞
⎟ = α0 + α1⋅Xi + εi,s,h
ln⎜⎜
⎟
1
mort
−
i ,s ,h ⎠
⎝

14

(1)

These data are not available for the years 1996-1999 and 2001.

12

where i indexes patients, s surgeons, and h hospitals. The indicator morti,s,h, equals one if
patient i died in the hospital and zero otherwise. Xi is a matrix of covariates that includes
controls for several patient characteristics and existing clinical conditions that could
affect a patient’s underlying probability of dying in the hospital.15 We calculate the riskadjusted mortality rate (RAMRs,h) for each surgeon-hospital pair as:
RAMRs,h=(OMRs,h/EMRs,h)*OMRPA

(2)

where OMRs,h is the observed mortality rate for surgeon s at hospital h, and EMRs,h is the
expected mortality rate – the average predicted probability of mortality from (1)—for the
same surgeon-hospital pair. The final term, OMRPA is the average observed mortality rate
for the entire state over the sample period; this multiplication normalizes risk-adjusted
mortality to the statewide average.

III. RESULTS
We report our results in four parts. First, we look at the impact of entry on the
volume of cases and profit for entrant and incumbent hospitals. Second, we consider how
market share shifts among surgeons of different quality levels following entry. Third, we
examine whether these changes in volume have spillover effects – positive or negative –
due to scale effects at the level of the hospital or surgeon. Finally, we look at the impact
of entry on the distances patients travel for care.

A. Changes in Quantity and Profit

Examples of the variables included in Xi are patient age, gender, complicated hypertension, heart failure, heart
attack, kidney failure, and cardiogenic shock. A full list of the covariates included in this regression, as well as
the resulting coefficient estimates, can be found in various PHC4 publications. For instance, the covariates and
results for the 1994 and 1995 data can be found in Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council (1998).
15

13

Standard models predict that free entry will lower prices and raise volume,
thereby increasing consumer surplus. In health care, however, the situation is somewhat
more complex. Because consumers often are not well informed about their needs for
particular services and are insured for much of the cost, it is not obvious that increased
quantities of care are welfare enhancing. Indeed, many models of health care predict
overconsumption in equilibrium (Arrow, 1963; Joseph P. Newhouse, 1970; Richard
Zeckhauser, 1970), with greater service provision potentially reducing welfare.16
Determining the welfare impact of entry-related changes in volume thus requires
empirical analysis.
Figure 4 shows per capita CABG volume in Pennsylvania between 1990 and
2003, as well as similar figures for New York and New Jersey—nearby states where
CON regulation remained in place throughout the sample period. Though Pennsylvania
provides significantly more CABG procedures per capita than either of the two control
states, this relative difference does not change following the repeal of CON. In all three
states, volume per capita increases in the early to mid-1990s and then declines, consistent
with the national trend. Regression analysis confirms the impression from the figure.
Relating CABG volume to a post-1996 indicator, state indicator variables, and a post1996 Pennsylvania-specific indicator yields a coefficient on the differential impact in
Pennsylvania after 1996 of -417 (standard error=2,234).17 In addition to being
statistically insignificant, the estimated value of this coefficient is actually negative
suggesting, if anything, a slightly greater decline in total CABG volume following the
repeal of CON.
16
17

In fact, this argument is commonly offered as a reason for the institution of CON regulation.
Our results are similar when the denominator of the CABG rate is limited to population age 45 and older.

14

In addition to analyzing the effect of entry across states, we use variation in the
timing and extent of entry across markets within Pennsylvania to estimate the effect of
entry on the volume of CABG procedures at incumbent hospitals. We define markets
using the hospital referral regions (HRRs) developed by John Wennberg et al. (1999) –
groups of zip codes in which residents travel to roughly the same hospitals for acute
care.18 Wennberg et al. (1999) group Pennsylvania into 15 HRRs. We form semi-annual
CABG volumes for incumbent and entrant hospitals and estimate longitudinal models for
incumbent volume as a function of market fixed effects, year fixed effects, and entrant
volume in the preceding six months. The results suggest that each additional surgery at
an entrant program is associated with a reduction of 1.72 (standard error=0.14) surgeries
at incumbent hospitals in the same HRR. This coefficient is significantly different not
only from zero but also from one, suggesting that incumbent hospitals may substitute
angioplasty for CABG in markets where entry is more prevalent. Taken together, the
evidence both across states and within Pennsylvania suggests no increase in overall
CABG utilization in conjunction with free entry.19
The complement to volume is price. Our data do not include information on prices
paid to hospitals, as negotiated rates are proprietary. Nevertheless, some things are
known. Fifty-four percent of the procedures in our data are performed on patients
covered by Medicare. As a result of Medicare’s administered pricing system—with
reimbursement depending on the diagnosis of the patient, the teaching status of the
hospital, local wage rates, and the level of low-income patients the hospital serves—
18

Specifically, the areas are defined by the hospitals visited for cardiac care by 80 percent of Medicare
beneficiaries in that zip code (Wennberg et al.1999).
19
These results are consistent with Steven T. Berry and Joel Waldfogel’s (1999) study of free entry in radio
broadcasting in which roughly eighty percent of new entry leads to the transfer of customers between firms
without expanding demand.

15

Medicare prices are not a direct choice variable for a hospital. Further, prices for patients
with private insurance tend to vary with Medicare rates, making most hospitals pricetakers, at least in the short term.20
With no change in overall quantity but a shift of volume to new entrants, the
short-run allocation of profits thus moves away from incumbent hospitals and toward
entrants. Ordinarily, shifting profits is not a policy concern, as all profits count equally in
social welfare calculations. This assumption may not be true in health care, however,
where private firms provide varying levels of public goods. Most hospitals—at least notfor-profit hospitals—have an explicit goal of subsidizing less-profitable care with the
returns from treating more-profitable patients. If incumbent CABG providers accounted
for a disproportionately large share of the provision of public goods, free entry could thus
result in welfare losses from the redistribution of rents.
A common measure of less-remunerative care is the share of uninsured people
seen at a given hospital. Unfortunately, we are not able to obtain this information for the
institutions in our sample. Nevertheless, the level of Medicaid patients at a hospital is
likely to be correlated with its level of uninsured patients. Thus, we examine how
incumbent and entrant hospitals compare in terms of Medicaid admissions. We find that
incumbent CABG hospitals have a larger proportion of Medicaid patients (across all
diagnoses) than eventual CABG entrants. In 1994-1995, 15 percent of admissions at
incumbent hospitals were insured by Medicaid, compared to 10 percent at eventual

Chernew et al. (2002) find evidence of variation in the profitability of CABG surgery across payer types.
They also find that competition reduces the profitability of CABG performed on managed care patients. We
cannot investigate these effects directly without price data. We note, however, that our hospital-level profit
analysis (below) addresses the welfare impact of changes in prices and payer mix to the extent they affect
overall hospital profit.

20

16

CABG entrants (p-value for difference<0.01) and 16 percent for those hospitals that
never introduced CABG (p-value for difference=0.54).
Of course, hospital operations are not static, and these firms can react to a loss of
profitable volume in many ways. For example, salaries might be lowered or services cut.
To examine the impact of CON repeal on overall profitability, we consider the long-run
impact of entry on profits. Hospitals are required to file cost reports with Medicare that
list net patient revenues and operating expenses, from which we derive operating margins
(i.e., operating income divided by net patient revenues).
We present data on trends in hospital profits, but note an obvious caveat: CABG
is but one service offered by these hospitals, and overall profitability depends on the total
portfolio of services provided by an institution. Still, two features argue for the relevance
of this analysis. First, cardiac care is a large part of hospital profits, as noted earlier.
Second, with the lessons learned from studying CABG may inform a hospital’s
understanding of markets for similarly intensive services.
Figure 5 presents the time series of operating margins for incumbent and entrant
hospitals, as well as other Pennsylvania hospitals that never entered the CABG market.
All hospitals that eventually developed a cardiac program, either incumbents or entrants,
are more profitable than those that never entered the market. Margins for incumbent
hospitals were negative in much of the late 1990s—the period immediately following
CON repeal. However, these institutions regained profitability by 2002 and were, in fact,
the most profitable hospitals by the end of the observation period.21 The specific steps

21

To examine the significance of these changes, we ran a regression of operating margin for incumbent
hospitals against the share of new entrants in the incumbent’s hospitals HRR, a time trend, and hospital
fixed effects. We found no significant effect of entry; the coefficient on entry share is negative but
insignificant. The same was true for the profitability of entrants.

17

incumbent hospitals took to regain profitability cannot be observed in our data, but the
results suggest that, overall, these hospitals were not put in a precarious position by the
elimination of CON.

B. Changes in Quality from Redistribution of Inputs
Our earlier theoretical discussion posits that free entry may increase the demand
for relatively inelastic factors – in this case, high-quality surgeons. To evaluate the direct
effect of entry on the input decisions of firms, we rely on variation in the level of entry
across markets (i.e. HRRs) in Pennsylvania following the repeal of CON. We estimate
the following specification:

surgshares , j ,t = β 0 + β1entrantshare _ group j ,t + β 2 highquals * entrantshare _ group j ,t

(3)

+ β 3 newdocs * entrantshare _ group j ,t + α t + I s , j + ε s , j ,t

We define surgshares,j,t as the share held by surgeon s in market j in quarter t. We relate
this variable to entrantshare_groupj,t, a vector of indicators for whether the share of
CABG procedures in market j occurring at entrant hospitals is in the following
categories: 1-10%, 11-20%, or above 20%; highquals, an indicator for whether surgeon s
is a high-quality surgeon;22 and newdocs, an indicator for surgeons who entered the
Pennsylvania market after CON repeal and, as a result, could not be distinguished by
hospitals as being either standard- or high-quality in the period before CON repeal. We
also interact entrantshare_groupj,t with both highqual and newdocs. The coefficients on
these interactions capture the differential share changes following entry for high-quality
and new surgeons, respectively, compared to standard-quality surgeons.
22

We discuss our definitions of high- and standard-quality surgeons later in the manuscript.

18

We note that our specification of the entrant share variable enables us to capture a
potential non-linear relationship between entry and the demand for particular categories
of surgeons. Our theory suggests such non-linearity may exist, as the marginal effect of
entry on oligopsony power in the market is declining in the number of firms.23
We define highquals in four ways. Our base estimates define highquals as the top
10 percent of surgeons with at least 50 operations in the CON period (1994-95). All
other surgeons who performed at least one procedure in Pennsylvania in 1994-95 are
considered standard-quality surgeons and represent the excluded category in our analysis.
In subsequent estimates, we define highquals as the top 20, 30, and 40 percent of
surgeons, respectively, using a similar methodology. As noted above, surgeons entering
the Pennsylvania market after CON repeal are not eligible for the highquals category and
instead are included in the newdocs category.
Control variables in (3) include fixed effects for quarter ( α t ) and surgeon-market
pairs ( I s , j ). Our model predicts β 2 > 0 : when more firms enter a market, the share of
surgeries performed by high-quality surgeons should rise relative to the share held by
standard-quality surgeons.
Estimates of β1 are negative and precisely estimated over all ranges of entrant
share in Column 1 of Table 2. The sign of these coefficients suggests that gains in share
by entrant hospitals are associated with reductions in share for standard-quality surgeons.

23

General models of entry with imperfect competition also predict a non-linear relationship between entry
and competition. Timothy F. Bresnahan and Peter C. Reiss (1991) study entry empirically and find most of
the competitive effect comes from the second and third entrants, with diminishing impact on market
conduct beyond that level. Jean M. Abraham et al. (forthcoming) also find a non-linear effect of entry on
competition in hospital markets.

19

As we relax the definition of a high-quality surgeon in Columns 2 and 3, this relationship
remains negative and significant for entrant shares between one and 10 percent.
Consistent with our predictions, the estimates of the β 2 coefficients are positive
and significant in Column 1 for markets with up to 20 percent share held by entrant
hospitals. The magnitude of the coefficients suggests that increasing entrant share
beyond zero and up to 10 percent is associated with an increase of 2.6 percentage points
for the average high-quality surgeon relative to the impact for the average standardquality surgeon. For entrants holding between 10 and 20 percent share, this increase is
2.1 percentage points greater than the 1.2 percentage point decline for standard-quality
surgeons. The magnitude of these effects is economically significant. The average highquality surgeon (based on the top 10 percent definition) had an average market share of
4.9 percent between 2000 and 2003. The reallocation associated with entry is thus
equivalent to a 53 percent increase (relative to the mean) in share for high-quality
surgeons in markets with positive entrant share less than 10 percent and a 44 percent
increase for the same surgeons in markets with entrant share between 10 and 20 percent.
In Columns 2 and 3, the coefficient estimates for β 2 are positive for entrant shares
between one and 10 percent, though the point estimates are smaller and significant at
only the 10% level.
The effect of new entry on reallocation to high-quality surgeons falls off in all
specifications as entrant market share grows beyond either 10 or 20 percent. This
tapering suggests entry up to that point may be sufficient to push demand for high-quality
surgeons from its regulated level to the competitive equilibrium. Indeed, above these
threshold entrant shares, additional share seems to go to surgeons who are new to the

20

Pennsylvania market, as shown by the positive and relatively large (though statistically
insignificant) β 3 coefficients for entrant shares above 10 percent. Finally, we note that
both the magnitude and significance of the relative share increase for high-quality
surgeons declines as we move from the most-restrictive definition of a high-quality
surgeon (i.e., top 10 percent in Column 1) to the least restrictive (i.e., top 40 percent in
Column 4). This tapering supports our contention that the top surgeons are in relatively
high demand following entry.
Our analysis to this point has treated all entrants as similar. As noted earlier,
however, this assumption may not be appropriate, as some hospitals may enter the CABG
market because they want to do a significant number of CABG surgeries while others
may enter primarily as backup for angioplasty (i.e., PTCA) services. Hospitals entering
the CABG market primarily as backup for PTCA may place less of a premium on a highquality CABG surgeon and, in turn, may be more likely to contract with standard-quality
surgeons.
As a robustness check, we test for this distinction by measuring the degree to
which each entrant hospital is “focused” on either CABG or PTCA. Our measure of focus
is CABG’s share of all revascularization procedures (i.e., CABG plus PTCA) at a
hospital after it enters the CABG market. For each entrant, we compare the actual value
of this CABG share measure to its predicted value based on a regression for all entrants,
controlling for calendar time and years since entry. Hospitals with higher-than-predicted

21

CABG shares are classified as CABG focused while those with lower-than-predicted
shares are classified as PTCA focused.24
There are two potential concerns with this measure. First, ex post CABG volume
may be affected by quality after entry. Second, entering hospitals may not reach their
“equilibrium” focus immediately. We attempt to minimize both concerns by computing a
hospital’s CABG share during its second year in the CABG market. This timing is long
enough to reduce the noise in CABG share due the initial ramp up of new programs but
short enough to minimize a program’s ability to adjust volume endogenously. Further,
even a noisy approximation of CABG focus provides a useful measure to test the
robustness of our estimates for the overall effects of entry from equation (3). Using this
methodology, 13 of the 23 entrants were CABG focused.
After determining each entrant’s focus, we estimate the following model:
surgshares , j ,t = β 0 + β 1CABGentrantshare _ group j ,t + β 2 highquals * CABGentrantshare _ group j ,t
+ β 3 newdocs * CABGentrantshare _ group j ,t + β 4 PTCAentrantshare _ group j ,t

(4)

+ β 5 highquals * PTCAentrantshare _ group j ,t + β 6 newdocs * PTCAentrantshare _ group j ,t
+ α t + I s , j + ε s , j ,t

where CABGentrantshare_groupj,t and PTCAentrantshare_groupj,t are separate vectors of
entrant share indicators—analogous to entrantshare_groupj,t in (1)—for CABG-focused
and PTCA-focused entrants, respectively. Our theory suggests that CABG-focused
entrants should be more likely than PTCA-focused entrants to view CABG surgeons as
differentiated inputs. As such, our base results should be strongest among CABG-focused
entrants, suggesting that we should expect β2 > 0 and β2 > β5.
24

Formally, we regress the share of cardiac procedures (i.e., CABG plus PTCA) that were CABGs at
hospital h in quarter t on the number of years since hospital h entered the CABG market and indicators for
calendar quarter.

22

Table 3 illustrates that the effect of entry by PTCA-focused hospitals has no
differential effect on the shares of surgeries held by high-quality or new surgeons ( β 5 and

β 6 , like β 4 , are small and statistically insignificant). This is true over the full range of
definitions for high-quality surgeons. In contrast, entry by CABG-focused hospitals leads
to a statistically significant reallocation of surgeries toward top surgeons. Initial entry
(i.e., up to 10 percent of the market held by CABG-focused entrants) leads to an average
increase of 2.7 percentage points in market share for high quality surgeons relative to the
average effect for standard quality surgeons. These effects continue to be positive and
significant with subsequent entry. Entry resulting in 10 to 20 percent market share for
CABG-focused entrants results in a 2.0 percentage point increase in share for highquality relative to standard-quality surgeons; entrant share in excess of 20 percent leads
to a relative increase of 3.1 percentage points for high-quality surgeons.25

C. Changes in Quality from Volume-Outcome Effects
The redistribution of cases from standard- to high-quality surgeons may have a
secondary effect on quality due to within-surgeon changes in volume that could
themselves induce changes in quality. This effect, commonly referred to as the volumeoutcome relationship, is based on the premise that higher volume is associated with better
surgical outcomes (Luft et al., 1979).26 Edward L. Hannan et al. (2003) estimate that inhospital mortality rates were significantly lower for hospitals with between 200 and 800
25

We note, however, that we cannot reject the joint test for all entrant share groups that β 2 = β 5 (p-value

of .22). Despite this, the relative magnitudes of the coefficients for CABG- and PTCA-focused programs
are consistent with our general model and suggest that entry by CABG-focused firms is more likely to lead
to increased demand for high-quality inputs than is entry by PTCA-focused firms.
26
See David M. Shahian and Sharon-Lise T. Normand (2003) and Gaynor et al. (2005) for discussions of
the literature on the volume-outcome relationship.

23

surgeries annually and for surgeons performing more than 125 surgeries annually (see
Shahian and Normand (2003), Eric D. Peterson et al. (2004) and Ethan A. Halm et al.
(2002) for additional discussion of appropriate volume thresholds). In this section, we
use these cutoffs to distinguish high- and low-volume providers. Table 4 shows the share
of hospitals and surgeons in our sample below recommended volume levels in different
years. In 1994, 23 percent of hospitals and 65 percent of surgeons failed to meet these
levels. In 2000, a year with approximately the same total CABG volume as 1994, these
shares were higher for hospitals (27 percent) and lower for surgeons (60 percent). By
2003, the share of patients seen by below-threshold providers increased with respect to
both hospitals and surgeons.
We are interested not simply in the share of hospitals and surgeons working at an
efficient scale but also in the likelihood that a patient actually receives CABG from such
a provider (i.e., one with annual volume above the threshold level). To address this issue
we estimate a model of the following form:

⎛ highvoli ,s ,h,t
ln⎜⎜
⎝ 1 − highvoli ,s,h,t

⎞
⎟ = β 0 + β 1entrantshare j ,t + β 2 Z i + I t + I j + ε i , s ,h,t
⎟
⎠

(5)

In (5), highvoli,s,h,t is an indicator equal to one if patient i received CABG from a highvolume surgeon, at a high-volume hospital, or from a high-volume surgeon-hospital pair
(depending on the specification). Entrantsharej,t is the share of volume in market j in
quarter t going to hospitals that entered the market following the repeal of CON. Zi is a
matrix of clinical and demographic characteristics for patient i similar to that included in
(1). In addition, we include quarter and market fixed effects and cluster standard errors at

24

the market level. Given the binary dependent variable, we estimate (5) as a conditional
logit model.
Column 1 of Table 5 presents estimates of the likelihood that a patient sees a
high-volume surgeon. We define a high-volume surgeon according to several different
thresholds for annual volume, ranging from 200 down to 75 cases per year. Column 2
repeats this analysis with respect to high-volume hospitals, again using multiple volume
thresholds. Finally, Column 3 presents results based on threshold volumes for surgeonhospital pairings (i.e., the number of surgeries performed by a given surgeon at a specific
hospital). This last specification is motivated by the potential for firm-specific volumeoutcome effects in cardiac surgery (Huckman and Gary P. Pisano, 2006). For each
volume threshold, we present the coefficient estimate for β 1 in (5) as well as the marginal
effect estimated at the patient-weighted-mean value of entrant share (19 percent).
The only statistically significant effects are found with respect to the likelihood
that a patient is seen at a hospital performing in excess of 150 or 200 surgeries annually
or that a patient is seen by a surgeon performing in excess of 100 surgeries annually. The
hospital-level results suggest that a 10 percentage point increase in entrant share is
associated with roughly a five percentage point reduction in the probability of CABG
occurring at a hospital performing more than 200 CABGs in that year and a one
percentage point reduction in the probability of CABG occurring at a hospital performing
more than 150 procedures. These results, however, may reflect the fact that entrant
hospitals are not operating at their equilibrium volumes shortly after entry. We also note
that the same 10 percentage point increase in entrant share is associated with an 11
percentage point increase in the probability that CABG is provided by a surgeon

25

performing at least 100 surgeries in that year. The estimates in Table 4 are sensitive to the
choice of volume threshold. Given that fact, and the offsetting effects on physician and
hospital volume, these results do not suggest a strong volume-related effect of entry on
surgical quality.

D. Changes in Travel Distance
A final potential benefit of entry is reduced travel time for patients. Studies of
consumer choice in health care consistently find that distance or travel time are important
determinants of provider choice (Luft et al., 1990; Lawton R. Burns and Douglas R.
Wholey, 1992; Mark McClellan et al., 1994; Michael E. Chernew et al., 1998). Travel
time in medical care is particularly important in emergency settings, as longer travel can
increase the probability of mortality. A large portion of CABGs, however, are elective.
In the aftermath of a heart attack, a patient will be stabilized, and medications or PTCA
will be used to open the blocked artery. CABG might be performed later – either during
the initial admission or a subsequent one. For CABG, the issue of travel time is thus less
one of survival than of convenience.
We address the impact of entry on travel distance by estimating the following
equation:

disti , s ,h,t = β 0 + β 1entrantshare j ,t + β 2 Z i + I t + I j + ε i , s ,h,t

(6)

26

Disti,s,h,t is the distance (in miles) from the center of the patient’s zip code to the center of
the hospital’s zip code.27 The estimate of β1 is -0.12 (standard error=.02), which suggests
that, at the mean entrant share, the average CABG recipient traveled 2.3 fewer miles
following entry. This represents a nine percent reduction in travel distance relative to the
patient-weighted average travel distance prior to entry of 27 miles. Nevertheless, for a
one-time intervention lasting only a few days, such as CABG, this decrease may not have
a large effect on consumer welfare. We return to this issue in the next section.

IV. THE WELFARE IMPACT OF FREE ENTRY
Our results allow for a rough calculation of the gains and losses from free entry
associated with the repeal of Pennsylvania’s CON law. The cost of free entry is the fixed
cost of the new programs. Estimates of the average fixed cost per new program vary
between $12 and $14 million (Robinson et al., 2004; Huckman, 2006), yielding a total
social cost of between $120 million and $280 million for the 10-to-20 new CABG
programs we attribute to CON repeal.28
As noted above, a key benefit of entry is the improvement in quality as surgeries
are transferred from standard- to high-quality surgeons. To estimate the number of
deaths averted, we rely on coefficient estimates reported in Table 2. The average entrant
share was 13 percent in 2000 and 19 percent in 2003. We apply these entry shares to the
coefficients in Table 2 to compute the additional share of surgeries done by high-quality
27

Perhaps the best measure of distance is how far relatives and caregivers have to travel. Unfortunately,
this information is not available.
28
The lower bound is computed by comparing the number of new programs that entered in Pennsylvania in
the five years between the repeal of CON and 2000 to the entry rate in New York and New Jersey (states
that maintained CON) over the same period. During that period, an additional 12 programs entered in
Pennsylvania compared to 3 in New York and 2 in New Jersey. We use the larger difference (10 programs)
to ensure that our estimates are conservative. The upper bound assumes that all entry over our entire
sample period (20 programs from 1995 to 2003) was due to the repeal of CON.

27

surgeons following entry. Specifically, we compute the difference in average RAMR
between the surgeons whose market share was increased (the top 10 percent), those who
saw no change in volume (those in the 10th-to-30th percentiles), and those who would
have otherwise performed the surgery (the bottom 70 percent of surgeons). Taking this
change and scaling it by the average number of surgeries in Pennsylvania suggests that
about 11 additional patients per year survived CABG because of the share redistribution
following CON repeal.
The average Medicare beneficiary who survives bypass surgery lives another
eight years. Assuming this applies to all CABG patients (54 percent are Medicare
beneficiaries), the redistribution of volume across surgeons is associated with an increase
of 88 life years for each calendar year. Quality of life during those years, however, is not
perfect; Tammy O. Tengs and Amy Wallace (2000) estimate that patients receiving
CABG who are still alive 10 years later have a quality of life of 0.9 on a scale of death
(0) to perfect health (1). Thus, the above figure translates into 79 additional qualityadjusted life years (QALYs).29 The cost per QALY is therefore between $101,000 and
$236,000.30 Typical estimates of the value of a year of life in good health are between
$100,000 and $250,000 (Cutler, 2004; Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel, 2006), a
figure that is roughly equal to our estimate of the cost per QALY.31 Thus, our estimates

29

A quality-adjusted life year (QALY) is a year of life in perfect health. We use the available QALY
weight of 0.9 (Tengs and Wallace, 2000) for the patient population that most closely resembles that of
interest in our study—patients receiving CABG who are alive 10 years after surgery.
30
The fixed costs of entry are amortized over the lifespan of a new CABG operating room. Discussions
with hospital executives suggest 15 years is an appropriate length of time.
31
The reduction in travel time also improves welfare but only by a small amount. Scaling the average
reduction in travel distance (2.3 miles) by an estimate for the number of visitors and the median wage in
Pennsylvania suggests a value of roughly $7.50 per patient.

28

suggest that gains from mortality reductions due to the redistribution of cases from
standard- to high-quality surgeons approximately offset the fixed cost of free entry.
Our calculations involve several uncertainties. In addition to the issues noted
above, we only account for quality improvements associated with in-hospital mortality.
Entry and redistribution of volume may yield gains in patient outcomes other than
mortality (e.g., reduced morbidity). Our calculations also do not account for the reduced
cost associated with eliminating the administrative infrastructure required to operate
Pennsylvania’s CON program. Finally, our estimates are based on attributing all of the
fixed costs associated with a new CABG program to CABG alone when, in all likelihood,
some portion of these costs should be attributed to a hospital’s PTCA program (for which
CABG represents a necessary backup).32 Given that all of these qualifications either
lower the fixed costs attributable to CABG or increase the benefits of CABG entry, our
cost-per-QALY estimates likely overestimate the true cost of CON repeal. With these
caveats and given the range of welfare estimates, our results suggest on net that the repeal
of CON was roughly welfare neutral.

V. CONCLUSION
The well-known potential for free entry to be inefficient is realized when firms
make entry decisions without internalizing the costs associated with the business they
“steal” from incumbent firms. We show that input scarcity materially affects this
conclusion. Theoretically, adding firms to a market with input scarcity is less likely to
lead to excessive entry because entry is both inherently limited by factor supply and
likely to increase demand differentially for high-quality factors of production.

29

In the setting we consider – the entry of CABG programs in Pennsylvania – this quality
effect is apparent. Market share is distributed to higher-quality surgeons following entry,
thereby improving the overall quality of surgical outcomes. The resulting welfare gains
from entry are about equal to the losses from increased fixed costs, making free entry
approximately welfare neutral.
Our setting is specific in at least three ways. First, the technology we consider is
relatively mature. It is possible that the volume-outcome effects associated with
transferring volume in settings with more nascent technologies—which are not toward
the “flat” of the learning curve—might have different effects (either positive or negative)
on welfare. In addition, we lack information on the impact of entry on price. While the
lack of price information does not pose an obstacle for our analysis—due to the presence
of a significant amount of administered pricing for CABG—changes in price may play a
more meaningful role in welfare calculations in other settings. Finally, our study period
coincides with the introduction of quality reporting for CABG in Pennsylvania (David
Dranove, et al., 2003). We do not feel that the presence of these public reports should
bias our findings, as reporting occurred simultaneously across the entire state while our
empirical identification exploits the fact that different markets experienced varying levels
and timing of entry. If, however, reporting facilitated the differentiation of inputs (e.g..
without quality reporting high quality surgeons could not be identified by hospitals), the
effects of entry we observe may be more muted in markets with less information on
quality.
Even with these limitations, we suspect that the pattern underlying our results
may be general. Many professions rely on highly- and variably-skilled individuals.

30

Consider, for example, a new firm looking to enter investment banking. In addition to
setting up a physical facility, the firm needs to hire or contract with specialized labor (i.e.,
investment bankers). In the short term, the supply of these factors is relatively inelastic.
Even in manufacturing—where the supply of production workers may be more elastic—
industry-specific managerial talent may be specialized, and land of appropriate quality
may be in fixed supply. As such, examining the welfare implications of entry in other
markets represents a natural avenue for future research.

31

References
Abraham, Jean M., Martin S. Gaynor, and William B. Vogt. Forthcoming. “Entry and
Competition in Local Hospital Markets.” Journal of Industrial Economics.
Arrow, Kenneth. 1963. “Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care.”
American Economic Review , 53(3): 941-73.
Berry, Steven T. and Joel Waldfogel.1999. “Free Entry and Social Inefficiency in Radio
Broadcasting.” RAND Journal of Economics, 30(3): 397-420.
Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Peter C. Reiss. 1991. “Entry and Competition in
Concentrated Markets.” Journal of Political Economy, 99(3): 977-1009.
Burns, Lawton R., and Douglas R. Wholey. 1992. “The Impact of Physician Characteristics in
Conditional Choice Models for Hospitals.” Journal of Health Economics, 11 (1), 43-62.
Chernew, Michael E., Dennis Scanlon and Rod Hayward. 1998. “Insurance Type and
Choice of Hospital for Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery.” Health Services
Research, 33 (3), 447-466.
Chernew, Michael E., Gautam Gowrisankaran, and A. Mark Fendrick. 2002. “Payer Type
and the Returns to Bypass Surgery: Evidence from Hospital Entry Behavior.” Journal
of Health Economics, 21(3), 451-474.
Conover, Christopher J. and Frank A. Sloan. 1998. “Does Removing Certificate-of-Need
Regulations Lead to a Surge in Health Care Spending?” Journal of Health Politics,
Policy and Law, 23(3): 455-481.
Cutler, David M. 2004. Your Money or Your Life: Strong Medicine for America’s Health
Care System. Oxford University Press. Oxford, UK.
Cutler, David M. and Robert S. Huckman. 2003. “Technology Development and Medical
Productivity: The Diffusion of Angioplasty in New York State.” Journal of Health
Economics, 22(2): 187-217
DiSesa, Verdi J., Sean M. O’Brien , Karl F. Welke, Sarah M. Beland, Constance K.
Haan, Mary S. Vaughan-Sarrazin, and Eric D. Peterson. 2006. “Contemporary Impact
of State Certificate-of-Need Regulations for Cardiac Surgery: An Analysis Using the
Society of Thoracic Surgeons’ National Cardiac Surgery Database.” Circulation,
114(20): 2122-2129.

Dixit, Avinash K. and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1977. “Monopolistic Competition and Optimal
Product Diversity.” American Economic Review, 67(3): 297-308.
Dranove, David, Daniel Kessler, Mark McClellan, and Mark Satterthwaite. (2003). “Is
More Information Better? The Effect of “Report Cards” on Health Care Providers.”
Journal of Political Economy, 111(3), 555-588.
Gaynor, Martin. 2006. “What Do We Know About Competition and Quality in Health
Care Markets?” NBER Working Paper 12301.
Gaynor, Martin, Harald Seider, and William B.Vogt. 2005. “The Volume-Outcome
Effect, Scale Economies and Learning-by-Doing.” American Economic Review, 95(2):
243-247.
Halm, Ethan A., Clara Lee, and Mark R. Chassin. 2002. “Is Volume Related to Outcome
in Health Care? A Systematic Review and Methodological Critique of the Literature.”
Annals of Internal Medicine, 137(6), 511-520.
Hannan, Edward L., Chuntao Wu, Thomas J. Ryan, Edward Bennett, Alfred T. Culliford,
Jeffrey P. Gold, Alan Hartman, O. Wayne Isom, Robert H. Jones, Barbara McNeil, Eric
A. Rose, and Valvanur A. Subramanian. 2003. “Do Hospitals and Surgeons with
Higher Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery Volumes Still Have Lower RiskAdjusted Mortality Rates?” Circulation, 108(5): 795-801.
Hart, Oliver and Jean Tirole. 1990. “Vertical Integration and Market Foreclosure.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Microeconomics). 1990, 205-208.
Ho, Vivian. 2006. “Does Certificate of Need Affect Cardiac Outcomes and Costs?”
International Journal of Healthcare Finance and Economics, 6(4): 300-324.
Huckman, Robert S. 2006 “Hospital Integration and Vertical Consolidation: An Analysis
of Acquisitions in New York State.” Journal of Health Economics, 25(1): 58-80.
Huckman, Robert S. and Gary P. Pisano. 2006. “The Firm Specificity of Individual
Performance: Evidence from Cardiac Surgery”. Management Science, 52(4): 473-488.
Jones, Robert H. 2006. “Does Government Regulation Enhance Quality of
Cardiovascular Procedures?” Circulation, 114(20): 2090-2091.
Mankiw, N. Gregory and Whinston, Michael D. 1986. “Free Entry and Social
Inefficiency.” RAND Journal of Economics, 77(3): 48-58.

Koenker, Roger W. and Martin K. Perry. 1981. “Product Differentiation, Monopolistic
Competition, and Public Policy.” Bell Journal of Economics, 12(1): 217-231.
Luft, Harold S., John P. Bunker, and Alain C. Enthoven, A. 1979. “Should Operations be
Regionalized? The Empirical Relation Between Surgical Volume and Mortality.” New England
Journal of Medicine. 301(25): 1364-1369.
Luft, Harold S., Deborah W. Garnick, David H. Mark, Deborah J. Peltzman, Ciaran S. Phibbs,
Erik Lichtenber, and Stephen J. McPhee.1990. “Does Quality Influence Choice of Hospital?”
Journal of the American Medical Association, 263 (21): 2899-906.
McClellan, Mark, Barbara J. McNeil, and Joseph P. Newhouse. 1994. “Does More Intensive
Treatment of Acute Myocardial Infarction in the Elderly Reduce Mortality? Analysis Using
Instrumental Variables.” Journal of the American Medical Association. 272(11), 859-866.
Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel. 2006. “The Value of Health and Longevity” Journal of
Political Economy. 114(5), 871-904.
National Center for Health Statistics. 2006. “Trends in Health and Aging,”
http://209.217.72.34/aging/ReportFolders/reportFolders.aspx, accessed August 15,
2006.
Newhouse, Joseph P. 1970 “Toward a Theory of Nonprofit Institutions: An Economic
Model of a Hospital.” American Economic Review, 60(1): 65-71.
Pauly, Mark V. 2004 “Competition in Medical Services and the Quality of Care:
Concepts and History.” International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics,
4(2): 113-130.
Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council. 1998. Coronary Artery Bypass
Graft Surgery—1994-95 Data: Research Methods and Results.
Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council. 2002. Coronary Artery Bypass
Graft Surgery—2000 Data: Research Methods and Results.
Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council. 2004. Coronary Artery Bypass
Graft Surgery—2002 Data: Technical Notes.
Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council. 2005. Coronary Artery Bypass
Graft Surgery—2003 Data: Technical Notes.

Peterson, Eric D., Laura P. Coombs, Elizabeth R. DeLong, Constance K. Haan, and T.
Bruce Ferguson. 2004. “Procedural Volume as a Marker of Quality for CABG
Surgery.” Journal of the American Medical Association, 291(2):195-201.
Rey, Patrick and Jean Tirole. 2007. In The Handbook of Industrial Organization Volume
3. Eds. Mark Armstrong and Robert H. Porter. Amsterdam: Elsivier
Robinson, James C. and Harold S. Luft. 1987. “Competition and Cost of Hospital Care
1972-1982.” Journal of the American Medical Association, 257(23):3241-3245.
Robinson, Jamie L, David B Nash, Elizabeth Moxey, and John P. OConnor. 2001.
“Certificate of Need and the Quality of Cardiac Surgery.” American Journal of Medical
Quality, 16(3):155-160.
Shahian, David M., and Sharon-Lise T. Normand, 2003. “The volume-outcome
relationship: from Luft to Leapfrog.” Annals of Thoracic Surgery, 75(3): 1048-1058.
Spence, A. Michael. 1980. “Product Selection, Fixed Costs, and Monopolistic
Competition.” Review of Economic Studies, 43(2): 217-235.
Sutton, John. Sunk Cost and Market Structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 1991.
Tengs, Tammy O., and Amy Wallace. 2000. “One Thousand Health-Related Quality-ofLife Estimates.” Medical Care, 38(4): 583-637.
Wennberg, John E., Megan M. Cooper, and Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care Working
Group. 1999. The Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care 1999. Chicago: American Hospital
Publishing.
Zeckhauser, Richard. 1970. “Medical Insurance: A Case Study of the Tradeoff Between
Risk Spreading and Appropriate Incentives,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2(1): 10-26.

Table 1: Description of Incumbent and Entrant CABG Programs in Pennsylvania

Total
Surgeons*

Average
Surgeons
per
Program

Average
Annual
CABGs per
Surgeon**

Average
Hospital
RAMR

451
349

203
201

4.72
5.03

95
96

3.10%
2.17%

160

115

4.79

87

2.04%

Number
of
Programs

Annual
CABGs

43
40
23

Incumbent Programs
1994-1995
2000, 2002-2003
Entrant Programs
2000, 2002-2003

*Figures include all individuals practicing at a given program type and, thus, may count a surgeon twice if
he or she splits time across incumbent and entrant programs.
** Average total number of procedures across all hospitals by surgeons practicing at incumbent and entrant
hospitals in each period.
Source: PHC4 CABG Database

Table 2: Impact of Entrant Share on the Share of CABG Procedures by Standardand High-Quality Surgeons
Dependent Variable: Surgeon Market Share
High-Quality
Surgeon=Top 10%

High-Quality
Surgeon=Top 20%

High-Quality
Surgeon=Top 30%

High-Quality
Surgeon=Top 40%

-0.009 (0.003) **
-0.012 (0.007) *
-0.014 (0.008) *

-0.008 (0.004) **
-0.009 (0.008)
-0.008 (0.008)

-0.008 (0.004) **
-0.011 (0.008)
-0.010 (0.008)

-0.005 (0.004)
-0.006 (0.007)
-0.004 (0.007)

0.014 (0.008) *
0.007 (0.009)
-0.005 (0.010)

0.013 (0.007) *
0.009 (0.010)
0.005 (0.010)

0.004 (0.007)
-0.002 (0.010)
-0.008 (0.010)

β 1 : Entrant Share Group
1-10%
11-20%
20%+

β 2 : Entrant Share Group * High-Quality Surgeon
1-10%
11-20%
20%+

0.026 (0.010) **
0.021 (0.010) **
0.020 (0.013)

β 3 : Entrant Share Group * New Surgeon
1-10%
11-20%
20%+

0.008 (0.005)
0.018 (0.011)
0.019 (0.012)

0.007 (0.006)
0.015 (0.012)
0.013 (0.013)

0.007 (0.006)
0.016 (0.012)
0.016 (0.013)

0.004 (0.006)
0.011 (0.011)
0.010 (0.012)

Year = 2002
Year = 2003

-0.002 (0.002)
0.000 (0.002)

-0.002 (0.002)
0.000 (0.002)

-0.002 (0.002)
0.000 (0.002)

-0.002 (0.002)
0.000 (0.002)

Observations
R-Squared

3,836
0.8961

3,836
0.8961

3,836
0.8958

3,836
0.8958

Note: *,**,*** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively. Includes
observations only for the years following the repeal of CON in Pennsylvania (i.e., 2000, 2002, and 2003).
All models include surgeon-market fixed effects. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by surgeon
and market.

Table 3: Impact of Entrant Share on the Share of CABG Procedures Standard- and
High-Quality Surgeons Differentiated by Entering Hospital Focus (PTCA vs.
CABG)
Dependent Variable: Surgeon Market Share
High-Quality
Surgeon=Top 10%

High-Quality
Surgeon=Top 20%

High-Quality
Surgeon=Top 30%

High-Quality
Surgeon=Top 40%

β 1 : CABG Focused Entrant Share Group
1-10%
11-20%
20%+

-0.009 (0.005) **
-0.011 (0.007)
-0.008 (0.006)

-0.008 (0.006)
-0.007 (0.008)
-0.004 (0.007)

-0.008 (0.006)
-0.007 (0.008)
-0.004 (0.007)

-0.002 (0.007)
0.000 (0.006)
0.003 (0.009)

0.013 (0.009)
0.007 (0.011)
0.009 (0.011)

0.012 (0.009)
0.007 (0.011)
0.008 (0.010)

0.003 (0.009)
-0.004 (0.011)
0.000 (0.010)

0.017 (0.008) **
0.018 (0.012)
0.018 (0.011) *

0.016 (0.008) **
0.018 (0.012)
0.018 (0.011)

β 2 : CABG Focused Entrant Share Group * High-Quality Surgeon
1-10%
11-20%
20%+

0.027 (0.011) **
0.020 (0.011) *
0.031 (0.015) **

β 3 : CABG Focused Entrant Share Group * New Surgeon
1-10%
11-20%
20%+

0.018 (0.007) **
0.022 (0.011) *
0.022 (0.010) **

0.013 (0.008)
0.013 (0.011)
0.014 (0.010)

β 4 : PTCA Focused Entrant Share Group
1-10%
11-20%
20%+

-0.001 (0.002)
-0.002 (0.011)
-0.011 (0.016)

-0.001 (0.002)
-0.002 (0.012)
-0.011 (0.016)

0.000 (0.002)
-0.001 (0.012)
-0.010 (0.016)

-0.001 (0.002)
-0.002 (0.013)
-0.016 (0.019)

0.001 (0.004)
0.003 (0.013)
0.015 (0.016)

-0.001 (0.004)
0.002 (0.013)
0.013 (0.016)

-0.001 (0.004)
0.003 (0.013)
0.021 (0.020)

β 5 : PTCA Focused Entrant Share Group * High-Quality Surgeon
1-10%
11-20%
20%+

0.001 (0.005)
0.006 (0.012)
0.015 (0.016)

β 6 : PTCA Focused Entrant Share Group * New Surgeon
1-10%
11-20%
20%+

-0.005 (0.004)
-0.009 (0.020)
0.022 (0.020)

-0.006 (0.004)
-0.009 (0.021)
0.021 (0.020)

-0.006 (0.004)
-0.009 (0.021)
0.021 (0.020)

-0.006 (0.004)
-0.008 (0.021)
0.027 (0.023)

Year = 2002
Year = 2003

-0.003 (0.002) *
-0.002 (0.002)

-0.003 (0.002) *
-0.002 (0.002)

-0.003 (0.002) *
-0.002 (0.002)

-0.003 (0.002) *
-0.002 (0.002)

Observations
R-Squared

3,836
0.8664

*,**, and *** denote statistical signficance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

3,836
0.8957

3,836
0.8957

3,836
0.8655

Table 4: Hospitals and Surgeon Operating Below Selected Volume Thresholds

Hospitals w/ Annual Volume <200
Total Hospitals
Share Below Threshold

1994
10
43
23%

1995
7
43
16%

2000
15
55
27%

2002
27
62
44%

2003
29
63
46%

Surgeons w/ Annual Volume <125
Total Surgeons
Share Below Threshold

120
184
65%

114
189
60%

109
182
60%

146
188
78%

147
182
81%

Source: PHC4 CABG database

Table 5: Impact of New Entrant Share on the Likelihood of Seeing an AboveThreshold Provider

Dependent Variable:

β 1 : Entrant Share
Marginal Effect

β 1 : Entrant Share
Marginal Effect

β 1 : Entrant Share
Marginal Effect

β 1 : Entrant Share
Marginal Effect

β 1 : Entrant Share
Marginal Effect
Observations

Surgeon Volume
Above Threshold?

Hospital Volume
Above Threshold?

Surgeon-Hospital
Volume Above
Threshold?

Threshold=200
-0.002 (0.068)
0.000 (0.002)

Threshold=300
-0.018 (0.022)
-0.004 (0.005)

Threshold=200
0.072 (0.082)
0.002 (0.002)

Threshold=150
0.013 (0.029)
0.002 (0.005)

Threshold=200
-0.049 (0.025) **
-0.005 (0.002) **

Threshold=150
0.026 (0.029)
0.004 (0.004)

Threshold=125
0.031 (0.024)
0.008 (0.006)

Threshold=150
-0.054 (0.023) **
-0.001 (0.001) **

Threshold=125
0.011 (0.025)
0.003 (0.006)

Threshold=100
0.050 (0.021) **
0.011 (0.005) **

Threshold=100
0.000 (0.043)
0.000 (0.000)

Threshold=100
0.016 (0.015)
0.004 (0.004)

Threshold=75
0.000 (0.020)
0.000 (0.002)

Threshold=75
-0.019 (0.060)
0.000 (0.000)

Threshold=75
0.004 (0.013)
0.001 (0.002)

37,708

37,708

37,708

Note: *,**,*** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively. Includes
observations only for the years following the repeal of CON in Pennsylvania (i.e., 2000, 2002, and 2003).
The following variables are included in the regression but are not shown in the table: age, age2, calendar
quarter fixed effects, market fixed effects, indicators for cardiogenic shock, concurrent angioplasty,
complicated hypertension, dialysis, female gender, heart failure, and prior CABG or valve surgery.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by market.

Figure 1: Number and Market Share of Entrant Programs

40%
35%

Number of New CABG Programs

30
25

30%

20

Market Share

25%
20%

15

15%

10

10%
5

5%
0%

0
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

New Entrant Share of Statewide CABG
Programs
New Entrant Share of Statewide CABG
Volume

Source: PHC4 Hospital Discharge Database

Figure 2: Total CABG Programs in Pennsylvania, New York and New Jersey
70

Total CABG Programs

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Year
Pennsylvania

New York

New Jersey

Source: PHC4, New York State Department of Health, New Jersey Department of Health and Senior
Services.

Figure 3: Map of Incumbent and Entrant CABG Hospitals in Pennsylvania

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1990

CABGs Per 100,000 Population

Figure 4: Per Capita CABG Utilization in Pennsylvania, New York and New Jersey

Year
NJ

NY

PA

Source: PHC4, New York State Department of Health, New Jersey Department of Health and Senior
Services, and U.S. Census Bureau

6%
4%
2%
0%
-2%
-4%
-6%
-8%
-10%
-12%
-14%

Year
Incumbent
Source: Medicare Cost Reports

Entrant

Never Entered

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

-16%
1993

Hospital Operating Margin By Entry
Status

Figure 5: Operating Margin by Entry Status for Pennsylvania Hospitals

