NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EFFECTS OF VENUE-SPECIFIC STATE CLEAN INDOOR AIR LAWS ON SMOKING-RELATED
OUTCOMES
Marianne P. Bitler
Christopher Carpenter
Madeline Zavodny
Working Paper 15229
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15229

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2009

We thank Gary Giovino and colleagues at the Roswell Park Cancer Institute for sharing the ImpacTeen
Tobacco Control Policy Data, and we thank Jaime Chriqui for detailed discussions about how the laws
were coded. For generous financial support, Carpenter thanks the UC Institute of Labor and Employment
and the Paul Merage School of Business at UC Irvine, and Bitler and Zavodny thank the National
Institutes of Health (CDC/NIOSH OH008244). Results do not imply their endorsement; all errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Marianne P. Bitler, Christopher Carpenter, and Madeline Zavodny. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Effects of Venue-Specific State Clean Indoor Air Laws on Smoking-Related Outcomes
Marianne P. Bitler, Christopher Carpenter, and Madeline Zavodny
NBER Working Paper No. 15229
August 2009
JEL No. I1
ABSTRACT
A large literature has documented relationships between state clean indoor air laws (SCIALs) and
smoking-related outcomes in the US. These laws vary within states over time and across venues such
as schools, government buildings, and bars. Few studies, however, have evaluated whether the effects
of SCIALs are plausibly concentrated among workers who should have been directly affected because
they worked at locations covered by the venue-specific restrictions. We fill this gap in the literature
using data on private sector workers, government employees, school employees, eating and drinking
place workers, and bartenders from the 1992–2007 Tobacco Use Supplements to the Current Population
Survey. Our quasi-experimental models indicate robust effects of SCIALs restricting smoking in bars:
these laws significantly increased the presence of workplace smoking restrictions as reported by bartenders
and reduced the fraction of bartenders who smoke. We do not, however, find that SCIALs in private
workplaces, government workplaces, schools, or restaurants increased the presence of workplace smoking
restrictions among groups of workers working in venues covered by these laws. This suggests that
the smoking reductions associated with SCIALs in previous research are unlikely to have been directly
caused by effects of workplace smoking restrictions on workers.

Marianne P. Bitler
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 96297
and NBER
mbitler@uci.edu
Christopher Carpenter
University of California, Irvine
The Paul Merage School of Business
428 SB
Irvine, CA 92697-3125
and NBER
kittc@uci.edu

Madeline Zavodny
Agnes Scott College
141 E. College Ave.
Decatur, GA 30030
mzavodny@agnesscott.edu

Effects of Venue-Specific State Clean Indoor Air Laws on Smoking-Related Outcomes
1. INTRODUCTION
A large literature in economics and public health has examined the ability of public policies to
influence smoking and smoking-related outcomes such as exposure to secondhand smoke (SHS).
In particular, researchers and policymakers have increasingly focused on effects of state clean
indoor air laws (henceforth SCIALs), policies that prohibit or restrict smoking in various venues
such as private workplaces, schools, and restaurants. Numerous studies have shown that
individuals who live in states with stronger clean indoor air policies covering more venues have
better smoking-related outcomes than otherwise similar individuals in states with clean indoor air
policies that are less strict or cover fewer venues (e.g., Emont et al., 1993; Wasserman et al.,
1991; and Chaloupka, 1992). A smaller body of more recent research—mainly by economists—
has shown that some of these relationships for smoking-related outcomes are robust to including
unrestricted state and year fixed effects in the models, thus identifying the effects of SCIALs
from within-state changes in the number or restrictiveness of clean indoor air laws (e.g., Tauras,
2006; Yurkeli and Zhang, 2000).
In this paper we provide new evidence on the effects of SCIALs using the 1992–2007
Tobacco Use Supplements to the Current Population Survey (CPS TUS). These data provide
large samples of individual-level responses to questions about employment, workplace smoking
restrictions, and own-smoking outcomes. To the CPS TUS data we match detailed policy
information on the presence and strength of SCIALs for 12 separate venues (such as schools,
government workplaces, and bars) using Robert Wood Johnson’s ImpacTeen database.
Together, the CPS TUS microdata and state policy data allow us to make two important
contributions to the existing literature. First, we are able to make explicit use of the venue-

1

specific nature of clean indoor air laws by identifying groups of workers (through combinations
of class of worker, occupation, and industry codes) who should have been directly affected by a
venue-specific restriction while at work. For example, laws restricting smoking in schools
should disproportionately affect smoking behaviors among teachers and other school employees,
while policies banning smoking in bars should have relatively strong effects for bartenders.
Second, we are able to test directly for “compliance effects” of venue-specific SCIALs: whether
the state laws changed actual worksite smoking policies as reported by workers in the CPS TUS
data. Most existing research relates clean indoor air laws to smoking outcomes, but the
compliance effect (whether the laws actually changed smoking restrictions in practice) is a key
necessary condition for interpreting observed reductions in smoking associated with clean indoor
air policy as being attributable to exposure to tougher restrictions at work (Carpenter 2009,
forthcoming).1
We combine these two features of the CPS TUS data below to test whether, say, SCIALs
restricting smoking in government workplaces affected the worksite smoking policies and
smoking-related behaviors reported by government workers. Together, these tests allow us to
provide important evidence on whether and how venue-specific SCIALs affect outcomes. We
estimate straightforward models of own reports of official worksite smoking restrictions and
smoking behavior. In addition to controls for individual and state characteristics, all of our
models also include fixed effects for the CPS TUS survey month and year as well as unrestricted
state dummies; thus, our estimates of the effects of the venue-specific SCIALs are identified
from the numerous changes in venue-specific restrictions within states over time.

1

Below, we discuss several reasons why changes in SCIALs might not directly lead to commensurate changes in
actual worksite smoking policies.
2

To preview, we find robust evidence that state laws restricting smoking in bars
significantly increased the prevalence of bartender-reported worksite smoking restrictions and
reduced the likelihood of smoking among bartenders. We do not, however, find robust effects of
SCIALs that cover private workplaces, government buildings, schools, or restaurants on
outcomes for workers who should have been most directly affected by those policies (private
sector workers, government workers, school employees, and workers in eating and drinking
places, respectively). This suggests that any effects of SCIALs on smoking-related outcomes in
previous research are unlikely to have been caused by workers’ direct exposure to tougher
worksite restrictions.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes the relevant
literature and provides a conceptual framework. Section 3 describes the CPS TUS microdata and
ImpacTeen policy data and outlines the empirical approach. Section 4 presents the main results,
and Section 5 concludes.

2. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
There are several mechanisms through which workplace SCIALs can be related to smoking
restrictions and smoking-related outcomes. First, there is a direct causal link: states adopt laws
stating that workplaces must restrict smoking, workplaces comply with the laws and implement
restrictions, and people working at those places either stop smoking or reduce their cigarette
consumption.2
SCIALs and workplace smoking restrictions can also affect smoking-related outcomes
indirectly. If peer effects are important to smoking behaviors (as suggested by Cutler and

2

Evans, Farelly, and Montgomery (2002) is among the first studies to look at the effect of employer-instituted work
bans on smoking behaviors but does not consider the laws evaluated here.
3

Glaeser, 2007 and others) workplace smoking restrictions may spill over to people other than
workers at venues that restrict smoking. For example, both spouses may quit smoking after one
spouse’s workplace restricts smoking. Another possibility is that workplace smoking restrictions
affect customers’ smoking. This mechanism is most plausible for restrictions on smoking in
public workplaces, such as bars and restaurants. If there are indirect peer and customer effects,
venue-specific workplace SCIALs may reduce smoking among individuals besides the workers
at the specific venues to which the SCIALs apply.
Changes in social norms and the acceptability of smoking may be a common determinant
of SCIAL adoption, workplace smoking restrictions, and reduced smoking. Models that do not
account for changes in social norms thus might mistakenly suggest a causal relationship between
SCIALs, workplace smoking restrictions, and smoking because of omitted variable bias.3
In addition, passage of SCIALs might not lead to commensurate changes in actual
worksite smoking policies. Some employers may purposely defy the law because of concerns
about negative effects on their businesses.4 Other employers may not be well-informed about
laws since state laws vary dramatically as to which venues are actually subject to SCIALs and
how stringent such laws are. Finally, some employers may have already implemented
restrictions without having been compelled to do so.
Previous research on effects of venue-specific restrictions is unable to shed light on the
mechanisms through which SCIALs affect smoking. Indeed, earlier studies reached mixed
conclusions as to whether venue-specific SCIALs affect smoking. Taurus (2006) finds that
restrictions on smoking at shopping malls have a larger negative effect on smoking among the
3

We address this concern by controlling for anti-smoking sentiment (DeCicca et al., 2008) in robustness tests. Our
results are not affected.
4
There are many newspaper accounts of bar and restaurant owners, for example, actively defying smoking bans.
We unfortunately do not have data on the penalties for noncompliance with SCIALs, which typically include fines
(on the order of hundreds to thousands of dollars) for each violation.
4

general population than restrictions at private workplaces or restaurants, while restrictions at
health facilities are positively associated with smoking intensity. Taurus (2004) reports a
positive relationship between smoking among the general population and restrictions at
government workplaces but a negative relationship for restrictions at hotels and restaurants.
Adda and Cornaglia (2009, forthcoming) find that cotinine levels among households with a
smoker are positively related to smoking restrictions at restaurants and bars, likely due to
displacement of smoking from those venues into homes.5 Previous studies did not directly test
for compliance with worksite SCIALs or focus on smoking among workers at specific affected
venues. Examining the relationship between venue-specific SCIALs, actual reported worksite
smoking policies, and smoking among workers at affected venues is therefore an important
exercise.

3. METHODS
3.1 Data
Our individual-level data are from the CPS TUS. These surveys have been carried out
periodically since 1992 and have been used in previous research to evaluate the effects of
SCIALs and other tobacco control policies (e.g., Tauras, 2006; Lovenheim, 2008).6 The data
contain detailed information about smoking, demographic characteristics, and employment.
Individuals who work indoors and are not self-employed report whether their workplace has any

5

We do not review here a small number of public health studies that have descriptively examined a variety of
outcomes for particular occupation groups relevant for our analysis. Shopland et al. (2004), for example, find that
food service workers are less likely to be covered by official worksite smoking restrictions than are other workers.
6
The CPS TUS was carried out 2 or 3 times in each of 7 waves: 1992–93, 1995–96, 1998–99, 2000, 2001–02,
2003, and 2006–07. Our study incorporates every survey that included information about workplace restrictions on
smoking; this was not included in the 2000 CPS TUS.
5

official restrictions on smoking in the workplace.7 We create an indicator variable equal to one
if an individual reports that her worksite has any official restriction on smoking.8 Although
workers’ self-reports of worksite smoking restrictions are unlikely to be perfectly accurate, they
are likely to be better than other measures of compliance with SCIALs. Employers, for example,
could be unwilling to report non-compliance with SCIALs due to fear of sanctions; this reporting
bias should be less salient for workers who do not face such liability. Moreover, if SCIALs
change employer implementation of workplace smoking policies but these are not actually
translated into changes in workers’ perceptions of those policies, SCIALs should not be expected
to affect worker outcomes. As such, worker reports provide a valuable perspective on whether,
how, and to what extent SCIALs affected smoking-related outcomes.
We also use the CPS TUS data to create two variables that measure smoking-related
outcomes. We classify an individual age 18 or older as a smoker if she reports that she currently
smokes every day or some days. We measure smoking intensity among smokers using
information on the number of days in the past 30 days a respondent reported smoking multiplied
by the average number of cigarettes she reported smoking on the days she smoked. We use the
natural log of this value as the dependent variable in smoking intensity models.

7

The questions about workplace smoking bans were only asked of self-respondents to the smoking supplement, so
we use the self-response weights to obtain population representative results. This yields a maximum of 1,133,546
observations for adults 18 and older with a valid non-zero self-response weight. We exclude observations for two
reasons. The first group of 615,113 observations were out of scope for the workplace smoking policy questions
(were not in the labor force or unemployed, self-employed or not working for pay, worked outdoors or in a home or
in a vehicle or at varied locations). The second group had an invalid response for smoking status (3,312
observations), didn’t know/refused/had no response to the questions about working indoors (7,682 observations), or
didn’t know/refused/had no response to the questions about workplace smoking bans (5,643 observations). This left
our final sample of 501,796 workers with responses to the workplace smoking policy questions.
8
Specifically, individuals are asked, “Does your place of work have an official policy that restricts smoking in any
way?”
6

Our data on SCIALs come from Robert Wood Johnson’s ImpacTeen database.9 These
data represent a comprehensive effort to track and consistently code each state’s clean indoor air
restrictions in 12 venues: private workplaces, government workplaces, restaurants, bars, health
care facilities, public schools, private schools, shopping malls, public transit, child care centers,
recreational facilities, and cultural facilities. These ratings have a couple of key advantages over
other sources of information on state clean indoor air policies. First, they cover our entire
sample period (1992–2007), so we can use the full CPS TUS series in our analysis. This allows
us to incorporate more recent policy changes than previous work.10 Second, the ImpacTeen
ratings include considerably more detail than any other tracking system of clean indoor air laws.
The ImpacTeen data cover more venues than other sources of such laws, and within each venue
it provides strength ratings that indicate the relative restrictiveness of each venue-specific policy
on a scale of 0–3 or 0–5. The exact coding varies across venues, but for most venues a rating of
zero indicates no restriction; a rating of one indicates a restriction that allows a separate
designated smoking area; a rating of two indicates a restriction that requires a separately
ventilated area; and a rating of three indicates a complete ban on smoking.11 These ratings allow
us to take advantage of variation in both the strength of each policy and the specific venues
covered.

9

These are the ImpacTeen Tobacco Control Policy Data. A version of these data for 1991–2008 is posted on the
ImpacTeen website (www.impacteen.org). We used the version as posted on their website on June 5, 2009.
10
Most other sources (e.g., the National Cancer Institute’s State Cancer Legislative Database (SCLD) and the
American Lung Association’s State Legislated Actions on Tobacco Institutions (SLATI)) stop tracking the state
policies well before the end of our sample. The ImpacTeen ratings are strongly correlated with SCLD and SLATI
data for the venues and time periods for which we have comparable series. The other commonly used coding is the
Americans for Nonsmoker’s Rights Foundation (ANRF), which passively tracks restrictions for a subset of our
venues. There is a mismatch in the geography for the CPS TUS and the ANRF which precludes matching the CPS
TUS to the ANRF data exactly.
11
For venues which range from 0–5, 5 represents a full ban. The exceptions to these general rules can be found in
Appendix B of the ImpacTeen tobacco policy codebook.
7

3.2 Regression model
Our main empirical approach for evaluating the effects of SCIALs on worksite smoking
restrictions and smoking behaviors is a straightforward state and year fixed effects model.
Changes in outcomes for individuals in states over time coincident with policy adoption are
compared with changes in outcomes for individuals in states that did not change policy. These
models take the general form
Yist = α + β1 Xist + β2 Zst + β3 (Venue-Specific SCIAL Ratings)st + Ss + Tt + εist,

(1)

where Yist are our various outcomes of interest for individual i in state s at time t. For
dichotomous outcomes (presence of any worksite smoking restriction and smoking) we estimate
linear probability models for ease of interpretation; for smoking intensity we estimate OLS
regressions with log cigarettes as the dependent variable.12 Xist is a vector of individual
demographic characteristics and includes sex, age and its square, marital status dummies,
education dummies, race/ethnicity dummies, a dummy variable indicating residence outside a
metropolitan statistical area, and dummy variables for family income.13 Zst is a vector of timevarying state characteristics and policies and includes the state unemployment rate, annual state
employment growth rate, percent of population below the poverty line, and the real value of the
state excise tax on a pack of cigarettes.14 Ss is a full set of state fixed effects and captures all
time-invariant state characteristics that may impact outcomes (e.g., religiosity). Tt is a full set of
survey year and month dummies and accounts for secular changes in outcomes common to

12

This follows the health economics literature which estimates two-part models of smoking participation and
intensity (Cragg, 1971; Manning et al., 1981; Duan et al., 1983; Mullahy, 1998; and others). Our main results for
the dichotomous outcomes are robust to using a probit model.
13
Full details on our control variables can be found in the Data Appendix on the corresponding author’s website.
14
State excise taxes come from Orzechowski and Walker (2004) and Campaign for Tobacco Free Kids (2009). We
deflate nominal variables with the personal consumption expenditures deflator from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis. State unemployment rates are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. State employment growth rates are
based on Bureau of Economic Analysis employment levels. State poverty statistics are from the U.S. Census
Bureau.
8

everyone in the sample in each year or month (e.g., season). Standard errors are clustered at the
state level (Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan, 2004).
Venue-Specific SCIAL Ratingsst is a vector of 12 venue-specific restrictions that vary at
the state/year level. For our baseline specification, these ImpacTeen ratings range from 0–3 for
all venues except public and private schools, child care centers, recreational facilities, cultural
facilities, and public transit (which range from 0–5).15

3.3 Venues
One of our key contributions is to evaluate the effects of venue-specific SCIALs among
groups of workers likely to have been directly affected by such laws. There are five venues for
which we can reasonably identify workers likely to have been affected by venue-specific
SCIALs: private sector workplaces, government workplaces, public and private schools,
restaurants, and bars. We identify workers in these venues based on occupation, industry, or
class of worker. Specifically, we define private and government sector workers based on the
CPS class of worker code. School employees are defined using the CPS industry codes for
elementary and secondary schools. We identify restaurant workers as those individuals
employed at eating and drinking place places. We use bartenders in eating and drinking places
(defined using CPS occupation and industry codes) as individuals who should be
disproportionately likely to be affected by SCIALs covering bars. We focus on bar SCIALs
when examining bartenders because a large share (37%) of bartenders work in stand-alone bars

15

We also estimated variations of this model including only strength-weighted measures of SCIALs for venues
specific to a group of workers, as well as regressions that use a simple strength-weighted index of all restrictions
instead of separate controls for each venue-specific restriction. In this model, the vector of Venue-Specific SCIAL
Ratings is replaced by a single Strength-Weighted SCIAL Index, where the index variable equals the simple sum of
the 12 venue-specific values. The index can range from 0 to 48; similar indices have been used in previous research.
9

rather than in restaurants.16 Bartenders are only a small fraction (5%) of employees at eating and
drinking places, however, so we focus on restaurant SCIALs when examining all workers at
eating and drinking places.
We are not able to create groups of workers who should have been relatively affected by
SCIALs that apply to the other venues included in the ImpacTeen data. These venues are:
recreational facilities, cultural facilities, public transit, health care facilities, and shopping malls.
This is primarily because there is no clear way of identifying employed individuals in these
worksites (e.g., it is impossible to distinguish people who work at a shopping mall from those
who work at a stand-alone store in the CPS data).

4. RESULTS
4.1 Descriptive Statistics
Since all of our models include state and time fixed effects, identification of the effects of venuespecific SCIALs requires within-state changes in venue-specific restrictions. Table I shows that
such variation exists, particularly in recent years. For each venue tracked in the ImpacTeen data
we present the annual average across all states for each venue-specific strength-weighted index
during 1992–2007, weighted using the sum of the CPS TUS populations for each state. The
possible values for the specific venues shown in the other columns can range from 0–3 (or 0–5
for public schools, private schools, child care centers, recreational facilities, cultural facilities,
and public transit).

16

Authors’ calculation from the 2003–07 CPS TUS. We can only separately identify bars (drinking places) from
restaurants (eating places) beginning with the 2003 CPS TUS (the first sample year with updated 2000 Census
industry codes). Throughout, we focus on bartenders in eating and drinking places. Thus, the bartenders we
consider are a perfect subset of the group of eating and drinking place workers we consider. Bartender is the most
common occupation among workers in bars (49% of the bar workforce).
10

Several patterns are apparent in Table I. First, clean indoor air restrictions were already
widespread at the beginning of our sample period: by 1992, each of the 12 venues was already
covered somewhere in the U.S. by at least some type of restriction. Second, there is substantial
variation in SCIALs across venues. In 1992, for example, bars and shopping malls had
considerably more limited coverage than health care facilities and public schools. Third, there
have been numerous changes in SCIALs over time and especially since 2000. The venuespecific indexes all increased substantially over time. Finally—and most importantly for our
identification strategy—the timing and magnitude of the changes in SCIALs varies across
venues. Although Table I shows that the late 1990s were a general period of stagnation with
respect to strengthened SCIAL restrictions, there are numerous instances where year to year
changes in one venue-specific index do not exactly track changes in other venues, particularly in
the latter part of our sample period. This differential timing of adoption of venue-specific
restrictions forms the basis for identification of our fixed effects models.
Table II presents key descriptive statistics on smoking outcomes, SCIAL coverage, and
workplace smoking restrictions for the 1992–2007 CPS TUS data. Each column reflects a
separate group of workers. Means for private sector workers, government sector workers, school
employees, eating and drinking place workers, and bartenders are reported in Columns 1–5,
respectively. There are large differences in smoking rates and official workplace smoking
restrictions for different groups of workers. While 34% of all workers in eating and drinking
places and 51% of bartenders in those places report being a current smoker, only 10% of school
employees and 15% of government workers smoke. Workplace smoking restrictions also vary
substantially across the different types of workers: while only 77% of all eating and drinking
place workers report the presence of any smoking restriction at work, over 96% of school

11

employees report a restriction. Notably, only about 43% of bartenders in eating and drinking
places report the presence of any workplace smoking restriction. The large difference between
the fractions of all eating and drinking place workers and of bartenders reporting workplace
smoking restrictions (along with the fact that many bartenders work in drinking places, but
bartenders are a small share of eating place workers) supports our focus on restaurant SCIALs
for the former group and bar SCIALs for the latter group.

4.2 Venue-Specific SCIAL Effects on Compliance
We first examine worksite compliance with SCIALs in order to determine whether laws affect
actual clean indoor air policies. We present these results in Table III. Each column presents the
coefficients on the 12 SCIALs from a separate estimation of equation (1) for each of the relevant
groups of workers: private sector workers, government sector workers, school employees, all
workers in eating/drinking places, and bartenders in eating/drinking places. The dependent
variable is an indicator equal to one for individuals who report that their worksite has an official
policy that restricts smoking. The sample is restricted to non self-employed individuals who
work indoors, the group asked about workplace smoking policy. The regressions include all the
control variables described above; those coefficients are not shown here but are available on
request.
The results in Table III provide very limited evidence of compliance effects. In the
sample of private sector workers in Column 1, we fail to find a significant relationship between
reports of official smoking restrictions at work and the venue-specific restriction that should
have mattered most to those workers—restrictions on smoking in private workplaces. Column 2
of Table III reports the results for government workers. Again, we find no effect of SCIALs for

12

government workplaces, which should be particularly salient for these workers if the SCIALs
truly affect official smoking policies. Column 3 of Table III reports results for individuals
employed at K-12 schools. Restrictions on smoking at schools should be particularly relevant
for these individuals if the laws truly change worksite policies. We find little evidence, however,
that individuals employed at schools are more likely to report the presence of an official worksite
restriction when tougher SCIALs covering either public or private schools are adopted. Both
coefficients are small and statistically indistinguishable from zero.17 Results for all workers in
eating and drinking places are in Column 4. SCIALs covering restaurants should have
particularly strong effects on reported worksite restrictions for these workers, but the relevant
coefficient is small and statistically insignificant.
The one venue where we do find evidence of compliance effects is bars. Results for
bartenders in eating and drinking places are in Column 5; as noted above, SCIALs covering bars
should be the most relevant for these workers. There is a significant positive association
between bar SCIALs and the probability a bartender reports her workplace has an official
smoking restriction.18 Specifically, a one unit increase in a state law restricting smoking in bars
significantly increases the likelihood that a bartender reports an official workplace restriction by
11.3 percentage points.19 Given that the average strength-weighted SCIAL variable for bars
increased by about 1.17 units over our sample period, we estimate that SCIALs covering bars

17

About 84% of the school employees in the CPS TUS work in public schools.
In results not reported here but available upon request, this compliance effect for bartenders is robust to using a
probit regression to model the dichotomous outcome reflecting the presence of any workplace policy. The
compliance effect for bartenders also is robust to controlling for state preemption of SCIALs covering bars as coded
in the ImpacTeen database. State preemption laws generally restrict the ability of localities to adopt clean indoor air
policies that are more stringent than the state law. Finally, the compliance effect for bartenders is robust to
controlling for anti-smoking sentiment (DeCicca et al., 2008) for the period through 2003 (when that variable is
available).
19
Over our sample period, 17 states passed or strengthened SCIALs covering bars, 14 during the period 2003–07.
18

13

increased official workplace smoking restrictions by about 13.2 percentage points (1.17*11.3),
which is approximately 31% relative to the sample mean (13.2/42.6).
We further examine the robustness of the compliance effect for bartenders in Table IV.
Column 1 of Table IV simply reproduces the baseline estimate on the bar SCIAL from Column 5
of Table III (the model also includes separate controls for each of the 11 other venue-specific
SCIALs). In Columns 2 and 3, we show that the compliance effect for bartenders is robust to
addressing concerns about policy collinearity (i.e., states sometimes include SCIALs covering
multiple venues within the same piece of legislation) among the venue-specific SCIALs.
Specifically, in Column 2 we simply exclude the controls for the 11 other venue-specific
SCIALs and assume that the bar SCIAL is the only one that should directly affect compliance
among bartenders. This model returns an estimate very close to that in the main specification of
Column 1. In Column 3 we control for the bar SCIAL but include a summary measure that
equals the sum of the strength-weighted SCIALs in the 11 other venues (instead of measuring
them separately, as in Column 1, or excluding them, as in Column 2). This is an alternative way
to control for the broader clean indoor air policy environment while at the same time alleviating
the challenge of estimating 12 distinct SCIAL coefficients. Importantly, we continue to find a
strong compliance effect of bar SCIALs on bartenders, and the coefficient on the summary index
variable for the 11 other SCIALs is small and statistically insignificant. In Column 4 of Table IV
we return to the baseline specification with each of the 12 SCIALs entered separately, but we
add controls for linear state-specific time trends. Again, we find that the compliance effect of
SCIALs covering bars is robust. Finally, in Columns 5 and 6 of Table IV we consider alternative
measures of compliance. In Column 5, the outcome is an indicator equal to one if the bartender
reports that there is a complete ban on smoking in work areas at the workplace. In Column 6, the

14

outcome is an indicator equal to one if the bartender reports that there is a complete ban on
smoking in public areas at the workplace (such as lobbies, restrooms, and lunch rooms).20 Both
models estimate the baseline specification as in Column 1 but with a different dependent
variable. These alternative measures of compliance show strong evidence that SCIALs covering
bars increased a variety of measures of workplace smoking restrictions among bartenders. These
additional results increase our confidence in the compliance effects for bartenders.
We also performed a similar set of robustness checks for the other groups of workers,
since multicollinearity in the venue-specific SCIALs is a more general concern. First, we
performed a factor analysis similar to DeCicca et al. (2008) to isolate the true policy variation in
the SCIALs. We found evidence that a single factor described the majority of the variation in the
SCIALs. When we controlled directly for this single factor along with the own-venue SCIAL
(i.e., excluding the controls for SCIALs in other venues), we continued to find no compliance
effects for any group of workers except bartenders (results not shown but available upon
request). Second, we estimated the same specifications as in Columns 2 and 3 of Table IV for
the other groups of workers (e.g., excluding all other SCIALs not applying directly to that group
and summarizing the other SCIALs into a single summary index measure). When we controlled
only for the own-venue SCIAL (as in Column 2 of Table IV), we continued to find no significant
compliance effects of own-venue SCIALs for government workers or school employees. We
did, however, find that private workplace SCIALs were estimated to significantly increase
workplace smoking restrictions among private sector workers and that restaurant SCIALs were
20

Specifically, individuals who report an official policy are asked about the workplace smoking policy pertaining to
public or common areas “such as lobbies, rest rooms, and lunch rooms.” Individuals are then asked about the
workplace smoking policy pertaining to “work areas.” The CPS TUS also contain questions about secondhand
smoke (SHS) exposure. We do not report those results here because, until the 2006 wave, these questions were only
asked of individuals who reported the presence of a workplace smoking restriction. As such, there may be
composition bias to the sample with valid responses, which makes interpreting any relationship between SCIALs
and SHS exposure difficult.
15

estimated to significantly increase workplace smoking restrictions among the sample of eating
and drinking place workers. When we controlled for the sum of strength-weighted SCIALs in
the 11 other venues, however, the own-venue compliance relationship was not robust for either
private sector workers or restaurant workers. This suggests that omitted variable bias
contaminates the observed positive association between private workplace SCIALs and reports
of official smoking restrictions among private sector workers and between restaurant SCIALs
and reports of official smoking restrictions among eating and drinking place workers when no
other SCIALs are included. Thus, we conclude that that there is no meaningful compliance
effect of SCIALs covering private workplaces or restaurants (in addition to the consistently null
findings for government workplace and school SCIALs).

4.3 Venue-Specific SCIAL Effects on Smoking
We now turn to the effects of venue-specific SCIALs on smoking participation and smoking
intensity, respectively, for the relevant groups of workers.21 If there is a direct causal
relationship between SCIALs and smoking behaviors, then we would expect that smoking should
fall most in the same venue and for the same group for which the compliance effect is most clear.
That is, we would expect bartenders to reduce smoking in response to SCIALs covering bars.
More generally, we would expect smoking reductions among workers directly affected by venuespecific worksite smoking restrictions. We therefore look at smoking participation in Table V
and smoking intensity conditional on smoking in Table VI. Both tables take the same format as
21

Further robustness tests are described in the Data Appendix posted at the corresponding author’s website. In
results not shown but available upon request, we also estimated models of smoking for the full sample of individuals
who gave valid responses to the question about official workplace smoking restrictions. In this sample, none of the
12 venue-specific SCIALs were significantly related to smoking participation. We did find a negative and
statistically significant relationship between state excise taxes on cigarettes and the probability an individual reports
being a current smoker. Specifically, we estimate that a one dollar increase in the state cigarette tax reduces
smoking probability by 1.08 percentage points (│t│=2.42). This basic result has also been found in earlier work
using the CPS TUS (e.g., Tauras, 2004).
16

Table III: each column represents a separate group of workers, and we show coefficient
estimates for each venue-specific SCIAL. The samples in Table V for smoking are the same as
those in Tables III: non self-employed individuals who work indoors and reported their
workplace smoking policies. The samples in Table VI further condition on being a smoker.
The results provide some limited evidence that venue-specific SCIALs directly reduced
smoking. Specifically, we find a significant negative relationship between SCIALs covering
bars and smoking among bartenders in Column 5 of Table V. A one unit increase in the bar
SCIAL variable is estimated to reduce smoking participation by 5.8 percentage points. This
suggests that SCIALs covering bars reduced the fraction of bartenders who smoke by about 6.7
percentage points (5.8*1.17), or by about 13 percent relative to the sample mean (6.7/51). These
findings for bartenders—whose worksites were directly affected by the relevant venue-specific
SCIALs—are consistent with a direct role for SCIAL-induced worksite smoking policies to
significantly reduce smoking.22
A broader evaluation of Tables V and VI provides little other evidence that venuespecific SCIALs affect smoking in a predictable way. When venue-specific SCIALs are
estimated to have statistically significant relationships with smoking, those relationships are
about as likely to indicate harmful effects of SCIALs as they are to indicate reductions in
smoking related to SCIALs. Overall, the results do not provide strong evidence that SCIALs
reduced smoking through the mechanism of direct exposure to stronger worksite restrictions.

22

This reduction in smoking also may arise from other sources, making it inappropriate to calculate a direct
elasticity of smoking with respect to smoking restrictions. We cannot, for example, definitively rule out that
SCIALs covering bars reduce bar employment (as suggested by Adams and Cotti, 2007) and do so
disproportionately among smokers.
17

5. CONCLUSION
Previous research examining the effects of state clean indoor air laws has generally examined the
effects of laws in an aggregated or “strength-weighted index” form despite the fact that there is a
great deal of variation with respect to the specific venues covered by SCIALs. Moreover, most
existing research focuses only on smoking outcomes, largely ignoring worksite compliance—a
key mechanism through which the laws would be expected (and usually are presumed) to affect
smoking. We used detailed labor market information from the CPS TUS to identify groups of
workers who should have been directly affected by venue-specific restrictions because they work
at locations covered by those laws and to directly test for compliance effects.
Our results uncover very limited evidence that venue-specific SCIALs adopted by US
states over 1992–2007 actually changed the worksite smoking policies of workers who should
have been directly affected because they worked in locations covered by the SCIALs. SCIALs
covering private workplaces, government workplaces, schools, and restaurants are not estimated
to have significantly increased reports of worksite smoking restrictions by private sector
workers, government sector workers, school employees, and eating/drinking place workers,
respectively. We similarly found no evidence that venue-specific SCIALs reduced smoking for
these groups of workers, which is not surprising given the lack of evidence that these SCIALs
changed actual worksite smoking policies.
The one exception to these results is the case of bartenders in eating and drinking places.
We consistently find that SCIALs covering bars are estimated to significantly increase reports of
official workplace smoking restrictions and reduce smoking among bartenders. These effects of
SCIALs covering bars are unique to bartenders and are robust to a variety of alternative

18

specifications, increasing our confidence that these effects are real. Our finding that bars differ
from other workplaces is perhaps not surprising. Bars are one of the last indoor workplaces to be
covered by clean indoor air laws in most states. In 1992, only 2 states had laws restricting
smoking in bars, compared with 19 states with laws restricting smoking in private workplaces.
Bar owners and managers are likely to have been much more reluctant than other workplaces to
voluntarily restrict smoking because of concerns about losing customers and profits, giving more
scope for SCIALS to affect actual practices. Indeed, at the start of our sample period in 1992–
93, only 38% of bartenders reported that their workplace had any official policy restricting
smoking; the comparable figure for private sector workers was 80%.
Overall, the patterns of null findings for all groups of workers except bartenders suggest
that any estimated smoking reductions in previous research associated with SCIALs were
unlikely to have been brought about by workers’ direct exposure to stronger worksite smoking
restrictions. Other mechanisms (e.g., unobserved heterogeneity, peer effects, customer effects,
or changes in social norms) are more likely to be responsible for the smoking reductions
associated with adoption of state clean indoor air laws reported in previous research. Regardless
of the exact mechanism, any interpretation that attributes observed smoking reductions to
SCIALs requires that the laws actually changed smoking restrictions in that state. Among the
venues for which we can identify groups of workers who should have been directly affected, our
results suggest this was the case only for SCIALs covering bars.

19

Data Appendix
Our analysis uses data from all available rounds of the CPS Tobacco Use Supplement
(CPS TUS) that report data on whether workplaces have a policy banning smoking. This
includes data from 6 cycles of the CPS TUS, 1992–1993 (September 1992, January 1993, and
May 1993); 1995–1996 (September 1995, January 1996, and May 1996); 1998–1999 (September
1998, January 1999, and May 1999): 2001–2002 (June 2001, November 2001, and February
2002); 2003 (February 2003, June 2003, and November 2003); and 2006–2007 (May 2006,
August 2006, and January 2007). While there was an abbreviated version of the CPS TUS done
in January 2000 and May 2000, no questions were asked about workplaces restricting smoking.
Our specifications restrict the sample to self-respondents (because the questions about
workplace bans and number of cigarettes were only asked of self-respondents, while the smoking
questions were asked of proxy respondents) and use the supplement self-response weights. We
also therefore use the self-response weights to obtain population representative results. This
yields a maximum of 1,133,546 observations for adults 18 and older with a valid non-zero selfresponse weight. All of our samples exclude individuals who have an invalid response for
smoking status (unknown or indeterminate), which reduces our sample by 3,312 observations.
We drop a further 417,536 observations for individuals not in the labor force or unemployed and
a further 85,911 for individuals who are self-employed or not working for pay (neither group was
asked about workplace smoking policies). A further 7,682 answered refused/don’t know or had
no response to the questions about working indoors. The workplace smoking policy questions
were only asked of those who work indoors (and not at home); we lose another 111,665
observations because the individuals work outdoors/in a vehicle/at a home/or at varied locations.
Finally, we lose 5,643 observations among people who answered refused/don’t know or had no

20

answer recorded for the workplace smoking bans, and we lose 1 observation who is neither
currently working nor has a job and is on layoff but has a valid workplace policy ban variable,
yielding a final sample of 501,796 workers (404,989 private sector workers + 96,807 government
workers) with responses to the workplace smoking policies.
Groups of workers were created as follows:
•

Private sector: class of worker equals 4 or 5.

•

Government (state/local/federal): class of worker equals 1, 2, or 3.

•

School employees (elementary or secondary school): detailed industry
classification 842 “elementary and secondary schools” for the 2002 and earlier
surveys, and 7860 “elementary and secondary schools” for the 2003 and later
surveys.

•

Eating or drinking place employees: detailed industry code 641 (“eating and
drinking places”) for the 2002 and earlier surveys, and detailed industry
classifications 8680 (“restaurants and other food services”) and 8690 (“drinking
places, alcoholic beverages”) for the 2003 and later surveys.

•

Bartenders in eating or drinking places: eating and drinking place workers
combined with detailed occupation code 434 (“bartenders”) for the 2002 and
earlier surveys, and 4040 (“bartenders”) for the 2003 and later surveys.

For some robustness specifications (the bulk of which are not reported in the paper), we
also looked separately at a work area ban variable and a public area ban variable. The work area
ban variable is set to be 1 for those who report their workplace had a policy completely banning
smoking in work areas; 0 for those who report their workplace had a policy allowing smoking in
some or all work areas; and 0 for those not asked about the smoking policy for work areas (those

21

whose workplace had no official policy restricting smoking). The public area ban variable is set
to be 1 for those who report their workplace had a policy completely banning smoking in public
or common areas such as lobbies, restrooms, and lunch rooms; 0 for those who report their
workplace had a policy allowing smoking in some or all work areas; and 0 for those not asked
about the smoking policy for work areas (those who have no official policy restricting smoking).
The smoking specifications are estimated on the set of workers who answered the any official
policy variable. We also restricted the sample to be at least 18 years old (in later years of the
CPS TUS only those 18 and older are asked about smoking behavior).
Controls in all specifications included state, year, and month of survey fixed effects.
Additional individual controls are age and age squared; dummies for male; marital status (never
married, or widowed/divorced/separated); race (black/Asian/other non white); ethnicity
(Hispanic); educational attainment (high school dropout, exactly a high school degree or GED,
some college but not a four year degree, a 4 year degree but no graduate work); dummies for
family income being in 1 of 15 categories (this includes a missing category; in the later years,
several high income categories are collapsed to maintain consistency with the earlier period); and
a dummy for not living in an MSA. In addition to the ban variables; other controls varying at the
state and year level include the following: the real state excise tax for cigarettes for the survey
month (from Orzechoswki and Walker’s 2004 edition of The Tax Burden on Tobacco: Historical
Compilation, and updated for the later period with Cigarette Tax Increases by State per Year
2000–2009 from the Campaign for Tobacco Free Kids, deflated by the personal consumption
expenditure deflator); the unemployment rate (statewide annual numbers from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics); the employment growth rate (constructed from statewide total employment
numbers from the Bureau of Economic Statistics; and the percent of the state population that is in

22

poverty by state (from the Census Bureau). Standard errors are clustered at the state level and
self-response weights are used throughout.
Further Robustness
We estimate a battery of additional specifications to test the robustness of our venuespecific models in equation (1). For example, we also estimate models where—for specific
venues of interest—we control for whether the venue has a ‘strong’ 100% smoke-free ban (as
opposed to weaker restrictions such as requiring separate ventilation systems or designated
smoking areas). One might expect these stronger bans to have relatively larger effects on
workplace restrictions and own smoking outcomes. It is also possible, however, that weak bans
will have a larger effect on workplace restrictions, as the outcome measure in the CPS covers
any policy restricting smoking. We consider models that include linear state trends. To do so
we construct a variable Trend which equals 1 in 1992, 2 in 1993, and so forth, and we interact
the trend variable with each of the state dummy variables. In models that include these smooth
state trends, the effects of SCIALs are identified from sharp changes in outcomes relative to
smooth underlying trends for each state coincident with adoption of the venue-specific policy.
We estimated specifications controlling for preemption laws (as coded by ImpacTeen), which
restrict local areas from enforcing laws that are stricter than the statewide law.
ImpacTeen codes policies in a few venues as 3* (generally not as strong as 3 but still
much stronger than 2). It usually means a ban in areas open to the public but allows for separate
ventilated areas. In our main results, we code polices denoted as 3* as 3s. We also tested the
robustness of our findings to coding policies denoted as 3* by ImpacTeen to 2 instead of 3, all
results reported in the tables are robust to this. (It affects from 1 state for public transit to 6 states
for malls.) Lastly, we explored one other robustness issue with the ImpacTeen coding. Their

23

own documentation indicates that public transit should range from 0–3, but there are two states
with public transit coded as a 5 or as a 3*, deviating from the ImpacTeen codebook description.
Ohio passed a balled measure in 2006 that banned smoking almost everywhere. In the
ImpacTeen public data base, they coded public transit as a 5 for that year. Oregon codes public
transit as a 3* for some years. We estimate our main models setting this public transit variable to
3 for Ohio and Oregon for the relevant years, and the results are unchanged.
To allay any concerns about policy multicollinearity, we estimated a series of models.
We estimated models controlling for the own ban and the statewide measure of smoking
sentiment described in DeCicca, Kenkel, Mathios, Sin, and Kim’s 2008 article in Economic
Inquiry for the period through the 2003 data. We estimated principal components for the 12
smoking bans, and controlled for both the own specific venue ban and the first principal
component (the only one with an eigenvalue above 1) for each of our venues. We estimated
models controlling only for the own venue ban or controlling for it and the sum of the other
venue bans.
We also tested the robustness of our results to not turning on the bar bans until they
actually were implemented (i.e., only for the months in a year after they went into effect instead
of for the full year in which they were implemented regardless of the month of actual
implementation, as in the ImpacTeen data). These results were nearly identical to the results
reported in the text. For example, for the specification reported in column 1 of Table IV, the
implementation date bar ban variable point estimate is .107 (SE of .044) compared to the
estimate of .113 (SE of .041) reported in column 1 of Table IV. Similarly, the column 2
specification, the implementation date bar ban variable point estimate is .134 (SE of .021)
compared to the estimate reported in column 2 of Table IV of .132 (SE of .019).

24

We use information on MSA of residence for individuals in the CPS TUS data matched
to coverage of local smoking ordinances from the American for Nonsmokers’ Rights Foundation
(ANRF). The ANRF data track local ordinances covering private workplaces, restaurants, and
bars.23 The CPS implemented the new 2000 Geographic concepts in May 2004. This means that
the ANRF robustness tests are only conducted through the 2003 data.
We performed two last robustness checks. First, we verified that the results are robust to
leaving out the dummy for not living in an MSA, to allay concerns that the changed geographic
concepts may introduce bias. Second, we estimated our main models leaving out the income
dummies.
Our main findings are robust to all of these alternative specifications.

23

The ANRF policy tracking system has some disadvantages, including the fact that it is passive as opposed to
active. We obtained a data extract from ANRF that included local coverage of smoking ordinances for private
workplaces, restaurants, and bars. We did not obtain information on local coverage of ordinances covering
government workplaces, although other research has used this information (see, for example, Shipan and Volden’s
2006 article in American Journal of Political Science).
25

References
Adams S, Cotti C. 2007. The effect of smoking bans on bars and restaurants: An analysis of
changes in employment. B. E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 7(1) Contributions,
Article 12.
Adda J, Cornaglia F. 2009. The effect of taxes and bans on passive smoking. American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, forthcoming.
Bertrand M, Duflo E, Mullainathan S. 2004. How much should we trust difference in differences
estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119: 249-275.
Campaign for Tobacco Free Kids. 2009. Cigarette tax increases by state per year 2000-2009.
http://www.tobaccofreekids.org/research/factsheets/pdf/0275.pdf [5 July 2009].
Carpenter C. 2009. The effects of local workplace smoking laws on exposure to smoke at work.
Journal of Human Resources, forthcoming.
Chaloupka F. 1992. Clean indoor air laws, addiction, and cigarette smoking. Applied Economics
24: 193-205.
Cragg J. 1971. Some statistical methods for limited dependent variables with application to the
demand for durable goods. Econometrica, 39: 829-844.
Cutler D, Glaeser E. 2007. Social interactions and smoking. NBER Working Paper No. 13477.
DeCicca P, Kenkel D, Mathios A, Shin Y, Lim J. 2008. Youth smoking, cigarette prices, and
anti-smoking sentiment, Health Economics, 17: 733-749.
Duan N, Manning W, Morris C, Newhouse J. 1983. A comparison of alternative models for the
demand for medical care. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 1: 115-126.
Emont S, Choi W, Novotny T, Giovino G. 1993. Clean indoor air legislation, taxation, and
smoking behaviour in the United States: An ecological analysis. Tobacco Control, 2: 13-17.
Evans W, Farrelly M, Montgomery E. 2002. Do workplace bans reduce smoking? American
Economic Review 89: 728-747.
ImpacTeen. 2009. Tobacco control policy and prevalence data: 1991-2008. Codebook and
definitions. http://www.impacteen.org/statetobaccodata/Codebook.pdf [5 July 2009].
Lovenheim M. 2008. How far to the border? The extent and impact of cross-border casual
cigarette smuggling. National Tax Journal, 61 7-33.

26

Manning W, Morris C, Newhouse J, et al. 1981. A two-part model of the demand for medical
care: Preliminary results from the Health Insurance Study. In: van der Gaag J, Perlman M, eds.
Health, Economics, and Health Economics. North Holland, Amsterdam, 102-123.
Mullahy J. 1998. Much ado about two: Reconsidering retransformation and two-part model in
health econometrics. Journal of Health Economics, 17: 247-281.
Orzechowski W, Walker RC. 2004. The Tax Burden on Tobacco: Historical Compilation,
Volume 39. Arlington VA.
Shopland D, Anderson C, Burns D, Gerlach K. 2004. Disparities in smoke-free workplace
policies among food service workers. Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine 46:
347-356.
Tauras J. 2006. Smoke-free air laws, cigarette prices, and adult cigarette demand. Economic
Inquiry 44: 333-342.
Tauras J. 2004. Public policy and some-day smoking among adults. Journal of Applied
Economics 7: 137-162.
Wasserman J, Manning W, Newhouse J, Winkler J. 1991. The effects of excise taxes and
regulations on cigarette smoking, Journal of Health Economics 10: 43-64.
Yurkeli A, Zhang P. 2000. The impact of clean indoor-air laws and cigarette smuggling on
demand for cigarettes: An empirical model. Health Economics 9: 159-170.

27

Table I. Average strength-weighted indices of venue-specific state clean indoor air laws
Private

Government

Public
schools

Private
schools

Restaurants

Bars

Health
care
facilities
.93

Recreational
facilities

Cultural
facilities

Public
transit

Shopping
malls

.03

Child
care
centers
.74

1992

.39

.62

1.08

.62

.49

.74

1.37

1.53

.06

1993

.39

.67

1.29

.62

.48

.03

.87

.95

.76

1.41

1.54

.06

1995

.67

.95

1.92

1.15

.86

.03

2.05

1.26

1.37

2.00

1.45

.50

1996

.66

.94

1.93

1.15

.86

.03

2.05

1.25

1.35

2.00

1.45

.48

1998

.66

.99

1.97

1.14

.86

.36

2.18

1.24

1.36

2.00

1.55

.49

1999

.66

1.01

2.06

1.20

.86

.37

2.17

1.25

1.36

2.00

1.55

.49

2001

.67

1.03

2.27

1.22

.88

.38

2.22

1.26

1.38

2.01

1.55

.51

2002

.71

1.05

2.30

1.25

.88

.39

2.24

1.29

1.41

2.04

1.59

.56

2003

.99

1.32

2.43

1.41

1.15

.58

2.38

1.57

1.62

2.26

1.64

.99

2006

1.51

1.75

2.77

2.01

1.64

1.11

2.83

2.01

2.46

2.94

1.94

1.59

2007
1.67
1.82
2.80
2.05
1.77
1.19
2.95
2.10
2.65
3.05
2.00
1.69
Notes: Authors’ tabulations of means of the venue-specific restrictions from the ImpacTeen database (www.impacteen.org) for the 51 states and D.C. for each
year, weighted using the population age 18 and older in the CPS TUS with valid responses to the question about workplace smoking restrictions (indoor workers
who answered the survey themselves). The values for restrictions in each venue range from 0 to 3 except for public schools, private schools, child care centers,
recreational facilities, cultural facilities, and public transit which range from 0 to 5.

28

Table II. Descriptive statistics

Workplace restricts smoking
Current smoker

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
(5)
Eating/drinking places
All workers
Bartenders

Private sector
workers
.851
(.356)

Government sector
workers
.955
(.207)

School workers
.965
(.185)

.766
(.423)

.426
(.495)

.228
(.419)

.146
(.353)

.104
(.305)

.341
(.474)

.507
(.500)

Number of cigarettes last 30 days
445
424
370
435
501
among current smokers
(307)
(307)
(287)
(299)
(339)
Notes: Shown are weighted sample means (standard deviations) among indoor workers from the 1992-2007 Tobacco Use Supplements to the Current Population
Survey with valid responses to the question about workplace smoking restrictions. Private sector workers and government workers are defined by respective
class of worker codes in the CPS. School employees and eating and drinking place workers are defined by industry codes in the CPS. Bartenders are identified
by occupation codes in the CPS; only bartenders in eating and drinking places are included here.

29

Table III. Estimated effects of venue-specific SCIALs on whether workplace restricts
smoking at all, various groups of workers
(1)

(2)

(3)

Private
workplaces

Private sector
workers
.003
(.007)

Government
workers
-.004
(.004)

School
employees
-.010
(.007)

Government
workplaces

.006
(.004)

.003
(.002)

Public schools

.002
(.002)

Private schools

(4)
(5)
Eating/drinking places
All workers
Bartenders
-.004
(.012)

.001
(.097)

.003
(.006)

.011
(.009)

-.028
(.054)

.003*
(.002)

.002
(.002)

-.001
(.005)

-.027
(.028)

-.002
(.003)

-.0004
(.0018)

.003
(.002)

.007
(.006)

.038
(.034)

Restaurants

-.008
(.004)

-.002
(.004)

.001
(.004)

-.023
(.014)

-.039
(.077)

Bars

-.003
(.002)

-.0005
(.0025)

-.005**
(.002)

.009
(.006)

.113**
(.041)

Child care
centers

.001
(.002)

-.002
(.002)

-.002
(.002)

-.003
(.005)

.027
(.019)

Health care
facilities

.003
(.006)

.003
(.005)

.005
(.005)

-.009
(.016)

-.005
(.085)

Recreational
facilities

.002
(.004)

-.002
(.003)

.002
(.003)

.002
(.010)

-.013
(.038)

Cultural
facilities

-.002
(.005)

.001
(.003)

-.002
(.003)

.016
(.010)

.003
(.049)

Public transit

.001
(.002)

.001
(.003)

-.002
(.002)

-.009
(.006)

-.030
(.036)

Shopping malls

.005
(.005)

.003
(.004)

.006
(.004)

.017
(.014)

.059
(.098)

N
404989
96807
43207
25085
1380
Notes: * Significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Shown are estimated coefficients from OLS regressions (each
column is a separate model). The dependent variable is an indicator variable equal to one if the individual reports
that her workplace has an official policy on workplace smoking. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level
are in parentheses. Observations are weighted with the CPS TUS self-response supplement weight. All samples
include only indoor workers. Private sector workers and government workers are defined by respective class of
worker codes in the CPS. School employees and eating and drinking place workers are defined by industry codes in
the CPS. Bartenders are identified by occupation codes in the CPS; only bartenders in eating and drinking places
are included here. Additional controls not reported (but available upon request) include: survey month, year, and
state fixed effects, the real excise tax on a pack of cigarettes, and the individual and state demographic
characteristics described in the text.

30

Table IV. Robustness of estimated effects of bar SCIALs on workplace smoking restrictions, as reported by bartenders

Outcome is:
Bar SCIAL
Sum of SCIALs in
other venues

(1)
Baseline
specification,
Column 5 of Table
III

(2)
(1), but drop all
SCIALs except
SCIALs covering
bars

Any smoking
restriction
.113**
(.041)

Any smoking
restriction
.132**
(.019)

---

---

(3)
(1), but instead of
controlling for all
other SCIALs
separately control
for the sum of the
other SCIALs
Any smoking
restriction
.118**
(.026)

(4)
(1) + state-specific
linear time trends

(5)
(1), outcome is ban
on smoking in work
areas at workplace

(6)
(1), outcome is ban
on smoking in
public areas at
workplace

Any smoking
restriction
.165**
(.060)

Work area smoking
ban at workplace
.170**
(.031)

Public area smoking
ban at workplace
.141**
(.028)

.003
(.003)

---

---

---

N
1380
1380
1380
1380
1380
1380
Notes: * Significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Shown are estimated coefficients from OLS regressions (each column is a separate model). The dependent
variable in Columns 1-4 is an indicator variable equal to one if the individual reports that her workplace has an official policy on workplace smoking; in Column
5, an indicator for a ban on smoking in work areas; in Column 6, an indicator for a ban on smoking in public areas at the workplace. Robust standard errors
clustered at the state level are in parentheses. Observations are weighted with the CPS TUS self-response supplement weight. All samples include only indoor
workers. Bartenders are identified by occupation codes in the CPS; only bartenders in eating and drinking places are included here. Additional controls not
reported (but available upon request) include: survey month, year, and state fixed effects, the real excise tax on a pack of cigarettes, and the individual and state
demographic characteristics described in the text.

31

Table V. Estimated effects of venue-specific SCIALs on smoking participation, various
groups of workers
(1)

(2)

(3)

Private
workplaces

Private sector
workers
.001
(.003)

Government
workers
-.004
(.006)

School
employees
-.008
(.008)

Government
workplaces

-.005*
(.002)

.011
(.009)

Public schools

.001
(.001)

Private schools

(4)
(5)
Eating/drinking places
All workers
Bartenders
.002
(.011)

.055
(.068)

.013
(.009)

.004
(.012)

.014
(.050)

.001
(.002)

-.001
(.003)

.006
(.005)

.037
(.022)

-.002
(.001)

-.001
(.002)

-.004
(.004)

-.004
(.008)

-.072**
(.020)

Restaurants

.002
(.003)

.002
(.005)

.005
(.007)

.013
(.014)

.111
(.060)

Bars

.0004
(.0013)

.001
(.002)

.003
(.003)

-.014
(.008)

-.058**
(.021)

Child care
centers

.001
(.002)

.002
(.002)

.005
(.003)

-.010
(.005)

.013
(.030)

Health care
facilities

.004
(.004)

-.011
(.007)

-.005
(.007)

.033
(.024)

-.035
(.068)

Recreational
facilities

.002
(.003)

-.002
(.004)

.002
(.005)

.023*
(.010)

-.082*
(.035)

Cultural
facilities

-.006
(.003)

.002
(.005)

-.006
(.005)

-.028*
(.013)

.060
(.038)

Public transit

.002
(.002)

-.003
(.003)

-.005
(.004)

.002
(.004)

.045
(.051)

-.00005
(.00248)

.002
(.007)

.002
(.006)

-.023
(.016)

-.046
(.057)

Shopping malls

N
404989
96807
43207
25085
1380
Notes: * Significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Shown are estimated coefficients from OLS regressions (each
column is a separate model). The dependent variable is an indicator variable equal to one if the individual is a
current smoker (i.e. she reports she smokes every day or some days). Robust standard errors clustered at the state
level are in parentheses. Observations are weighted with the CPS TUS self-response supplement weight. All
samples include only indoor workers. Private sector workers and government workers are defined by respective
class of worker codes in the CPS. School employees and eating and drinking place workers are defined by industry
codes in the CPS. Bartenders are identified by occupation codes in the CPS; only bartenders in eating and drinking
places are included here. Additional controls not reported (but available upon request) include: survey month, year,
and state fixed effects, the real excise tax on a pack of cigarettes, and the individual and state demographic
characteristics described in the text.

32

Table VI. Estimated effects of venue-specific SCIALs on smoking intensity, various groups
of workers
(1)

(2)

(3)

Private
workplaces

Private sector
workers
-.027
(.031)

Government
workers
.016
(.044)

School
employees
.046
(.102)

Government
workplaces

.041*
(.016)

.027
(.032)

Public schools

.003
(.007)

Private schools

(4)
(5)
Eating/drinking places
All workers
Bartenders
-.057
(.088)

-.484
(.291)

.012
(.095)

.060
(.034)

.080
(.149)

.010
(.010)

-.040
(.042)

.034
(.022)

.021
(.090)

-.001
(.009)

-.003
(.013)

-.089
(.048)

.005
(.030)

.156
(.095)

Restaurants

.032
(.025)

.042
(.049)

-.021
(.102)

-.077
(.054)

-.104
(.190)

Bars

-.026*
(.010)

-.092**
(.018)

-.127*
(.051)

-.010
(.024)

.038
(.097)

Child care
centers

.002
(.006)

.006
(.015)

.008
(.030)

.016
(.020)

-.007
(.061)

Health care
facilities

.014
(.026)

.023
(.048)

.216
(.108)

.097
(.069)

-.320
(.381)

Recreational
facilities

-.002
(.017)

.105**
(.029)

.195*
(.078)

.024
(.039)

-.057
(.144)

Cultural
facilities

-.016
(.021)

-.082*
(.034)

-.173*
(.085)

-.028
(.055)

.177
(.178)

Public transit

.015
(.013)

-.033
(.020)

-.053
(.056)

.026
(.021)

-.058
(.100)

Shopping malls

-.027
(.024)

-.080
(.040)

-.127
(.093)

-.039
(.077)

.437
(.312)

N
93375
14330
4507
8958
717
Notes: * Significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Shown are estimated coefficients from OLS regressions (each
column is a separate model). The dependent variable is the log of the number of cigarettes an individual reports she
smoked in the past 30 days, and the sample is restricted to current smokers. Robust standard errors clustered at the
state level are in parentheses. Observations are weighted with the CPS TUS self-response supplement weight. All
samples include only indoor workers. Private sector workers and government workers are defined by respective
class of worker codes in the CPS. School employees and eating and drinking place workers are defined by industry
codes in the CPS. Bartenders are identified by occupation codes in the CPS; only bartenders in eating and drinking
places are included here. Additional controls not reported (but available upon request) include: survey month, year,
and state fixed effects, the real excise tax on a pack of cigarettes, and the individual and state demographic
characteristics described in the text.

33

