NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ASSET RETURN DYNAMICS UNDER BAD ENVIRONMENT GOOD ENVIRONMENT
FUNDAMENTALS
Geert Bekaert
Eric Engstrom
Working Paper 15222
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15222

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2009

The authors thank Stephen Figlewski for providing data on the risk neutral distribution of stock returns.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Geert Bekaert and Eric Engstrom. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Asset Return Dynamics under Bad Environment Good Environment Fundamentals
Geert Bekaert and Eric Engstrom
NBER Working Paper No. 15222
August 2009
JEL No. G10,G12,G13,G14
ABSTRACT
We introduce a "bad environment-good environment" technology for consumption growth in a
consumption-based asset pricing model. Using the preference structure from Campbell and Cochrane
(1999), the model generates realistic time-varying volatility, skewness and kurtosis in fundamentals
while still permitting closed-form solutions for asset prices. The model not only fits standard salient
asset prices features including means and volatilities for equity returns and risk free rates, but also
generates a realistic variance premium and option prices.

Geert Bekaert
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, 411 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu
Eric Engstrom
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Washington DC 20551
eric.engstrom@frb.gov

1

Introduction

To date, the consumption based asset pricing literature has mostly focused on matching unconditional features of asset returns: the equity premium, the low risk free rate, and the variability of
equity returns and dividend yields. In terms of conditional dynamics, a great deal of attention has
been paid to time variation in the expected excess return on equities. A number of models have
emerged that can claim some empirical success along these dimensions. Campbell and Cochrane
(1999, CC henceforth) develop an external habit framework where time-varying risk aversion is the
essential driver of asset return dynamics.
growth deliberately simple and linear.

CC keep the exogenous technology for consumption

Bansal and Yaron (2004, BY henceforth), while working

with diﬀerent preferences due to Epstein and Zin (1989), generate realistic asset pricing dynamics
by introducing long-run risk and time-varying uncertainty in the consumption growth process. Another recent strand of the literature that also focuses on the technology rather than preferences has
rekindled the old Rietz (1990) idea that fear of a large catastrophic event may induce a large equity
premium (see Barro (2006)). It is important to realize that in such a framework, there is no time
variation in risk premiums unless the probability of the “crash” is assumed to vary through time
(see Gabaix (2009), and Wachter (2008)).
At the same time a voluminous literature has focused on explaining the volatility dynamics of
stock returns and the joint distribution of stock returns and option prices [see Chernov, Gallant,
Ghysels and Tauchen (2003)]. This literature is largely reduced-form in nature, assuming stochastic
processes for stock return dynamics, and then testing how well such dynamics fit the data on both
stock returns and option prices. Seminal articles in this vein include Chernov and Ghysels (2000)
and Pan (2002). The current state-of-the art models are very complex, featuring stochastic volatility
and jumps in both prices and volatility (see, for instance, Broadie, Chernov and Johannes (2007)).
From one perspective, the distinct development of these two literatures in dynamic asset pricing
is surprising.

Successfully modeling volatility and option price dynamics from a more structural

perspective would appear not only economically important, but also statistically very informative.
The empirical evidence on volatility dynamics is very strong, and many features of the data are
without controversy, which is very diﬀerent from the large uncertainty surrounding the evidence
on return predictability (see e.g. Ang and Bekaert (2007), Goyal and Welch (2008) and Campbell
and Thompson (2008)). From another perspective, however, this dichotomy is not surprising at all:
every single consumption-based model described above would surely fail to generate anything like the

1

volatility and option price dynamics observed in the data. A particularly powerful empirical feature
of the data is the so-called variance premium, which is the diﬀerence between the “risk neutral”
expected conditional variance of the stock market index and the actual expected variance under
the physical probability measure.

The CBOE’s VIX contract essentially provides direct readings

on the risk-neutral variance; see Bollerslev, Gibson and Zhou (2008) and Carr and Wu (2008) for
more details.

Not only does the VIX show considerable time variation, Bollerslev, Tauchen and

Zhou (2009) show that the variance premium is a good predictor of stock returns. Other stylized
facts about the risk neutral conditional distribution of returns include time-varying (but generally
negative) skewness, fat tails, and a strong negative correlation between return realizations and riskneutral volatility (see, for instance, Figlewski (2009)).
To generate these features of the risk-neutral distribution, structural models must endogenously
generate time-varying skewness in returns.

However, most existing models would fail to do so,

as the technology for fundamentals is too close to normality, and the models therefore generate
near-Gaussian asset return dynamics.
We set out to integrate the two literatures by proposing a simple, tractable consumption based
asset pricing model, where preferences are as in Campbell and Cochrane (1999), but the consumption
technology is non-linear, following what we call a “Bad Environment — Good Environment” framework, “BEGE” for short. We essentially assume that the consumption growth process receives two
types of shocks, both drawn from potentially fat-tailed, skewed distributions. While one shock has
positive skewness, the other shock generates negative skewness. Because the relative importance of
these shocks varies through time, there are “good times” where the good distribution dominates,
and “bad times” where the bad distribution dominates. An implication of the framework is that
even during bad times, large good shocks can occur persistently and vice versa.
has been very apparent in stock return dynamics during the 2007-2009 crisis.

Such behavior

Economically, the

BEGE model creates a riskier consumption growth environment, which, in equilibrium, leads to a
large equity premium and substantial precautionary savings demands, keeping risk free rates low.
Because the risks vary through time, the model generates intricate return dynamics, and recession
risks imply variance risk premiums that are increasing in risk aversion. We demonstrate that fundamentals indeed exhibit important non-linearities at medium frequencies, which have important
pricing implications.
The BEGE framework is reminiscent of regime —switching models, where a Markov variable
generates switches between two normally distributed regimes. In principle, such mixture models

2

can also generate time-varying skewness and kurtosis. The impact of such models in consumption
based asset pricing was explored by Whitelaw (2000), Kandel and Stambaugh (1990), Bonomo and
Garcia (1994), Epstein and Zin (2001) and Cecchetti, Lam and Mark (1990).

Regime switching

models have much of the same economic appeal as the model we propose, but unfortunately, they are
fairly intractable in an equilibrium pricing context. In contrast, we use the gamma distribution for
our shocks resulting in an aﬃne term structure and quasi-closed form expressions for equity prices
and the variance premium. This greatly increases the appeal of the framework as we can obtain
useful intuition on what drives asset prices, and can easily estimate the structural parameters. We
formally test the performance of a simple version of our modeling framework with respect to a large
number of empirical features of asset returns and fundamentals.
The remainder of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the model. We present
simple solutions for the risk free rate, price dividend ratios and the variance premium. Section 3
introduces the data we use and documents that there are indeed time-varying non-linearities in the
consumption growth process. Much of what we do here confirms results in the literature, with some
additions regarding the conditional skewness of consumption growth. We also set out the estimation
strategy. Section 4 discusses our parameter estimates and the fit of the model. Apart from most
salient asset price features, the model also fits the variance premium and other stylized facts about
option prices. Section 5 discusses some robustness checks and extensions of the BEGE framework.
The final section oﬀers some concluding remarks, and compares our findings to contemporaneous
articles by Bollerslev, Tauchen and Zhou (2009) and Drechsler and Yaron (2008), that have similar
goals but a very diﬀerent framework. We also provide further motivation for the BEGE fundamental
dynamics using survey-based measures of the conditional distribution of economic growth.

2

The Bad Environment-Good Environment (BEGE) Model

In this section, we formally introduce the representative agent model. We begin with a discussion
of the assumed data generating process for fundamentals, and then describe preferences.

2.1

Fundamentals

Our model for consumption is given by the following equation:

∆ct+1 = g + σ cp ω p,t+1 − σ cn ω n,t+1
3

(1)

where ∆ct = ln (Ct ) − ln (Ct−1 ) is the logarithmic change in consumption, g is the mean rate
of consumption growth, which we assume is constant, and the parameters σ cp and σ cn are both
positive. The shocks, ω p,t+1 are ω n,t+1 zero-mean innovations with the following distributions,

ω p,t+1

∼ get+1 − pt

ω n,t+1

∼ bet+1 − nt

(2)

Above, get+1 represents the “good environment” variable and bet+1 represents the “bad environment” variable. Both follow gamma distributions. Specifically, get+1 ∼ Γ (pt , 1) where Γ (pt , 1)
represents a gamma distribution with shape parameter, pt , and size parameter equal to 1. Analogously, bet+1 ∼ Γ (nt , 1). The shape parameters, pt and nt are modeled as time-varying (positive)
latent factors, the data generating process for which will be introduced shortly. These factors thus
govern the conditional higher-order moments of ∆ct . Specifically, pt governs the width of the positive tail, and nt governs the width of the negative tail. Because the mean of the gamma distribution
is equal to its shape parameter (when the size parameter is 1), the terms, −pt and −nt in Equation
(2) ensure that the shocks each have conditional mean 0.

To understand what this implies for

the conditional moments of ∆ct+1 , we next calculate the conditional moment generating function
(MGF) of ∆ct+1 . For a scalar, m,

M GFm (∆ct+1 ) ≡ Et [exp (m∆ct+1 )]
= exp (mg − pt (mσ cp + ln (1 − mσcp )) − nt (−mσ cn + ln (1 + mσ cn ))) (3)
This follows directly from the MGF of the gamma distribution and the fact that ω p,t+1 and ω n,t+1
are independent.3

Next, we solve for the first few conditional centered moments of ∆ct+1 by

evaluating subsequent derivatives of the MGF at m = 0, which provides uncentered moments, and
then translating to their centered counterparts in the usual way. This yields:
h
i
Et (∆ct+1 − g)2
= σ 2cp pt + σ 2cn nt ≡ vct
h
i
Et (∆ct+1 − g)3
= 2σ 3cp pt − 2σ 3cn nt ≡ sct
h
i
h
i2
4
2
Et (∆ct+1 − g) − 3Et (∆ct+1 − g)
= 6σ 4cp pt + 6σ 4cn nt ≡ kct

(4)

3 To see this, note that for x ∼ Γ (k, 1), E [exp (mx)] = exp (−k ln (1 − m)), and for independent random variables,
x1 and x2 , E [exp (m (x1 − x2 ))] = E [exp (mx1 )] E [exp (−mx2 )].

4

The top line of Equation (4) shows that both pt and nt contribute positively to the conditional variance of consumption, defined as vct . They diﬀer, however, in their implications for the conditional
skewness of consumption.

As can be seen in the expression for the centered third moment, sct ,
3/2

skewness, which is defined as sct /vct , will be positive when pt is relatively large, and negative when
nt is large. This is the essence of the BEGE model: the bad environment refers to an environment
in which the ω n,t shocks dominate; in the good environment the ω p,t shocks dominate. Of course,
in both environments shocks are zero on average, but there is a higher probability of large positive
shocks in a "good environment" and vice versa. Whether good or bad shocks dominate depends on
pt and nt . Finally, the third line of the equation is the excess centered fourth moment, kct . The
conditional excess kurtosis of consumption growth is given by kct /vc2t . Both pt and nt contribute
positively to this moment, though in diﬀerent proportions than they do for vct . Note that there is
a linear dependence among higher moments of ∆ct , all of which are linear in pt and nt .
While we have represented the BEGE distribution as a mixture of two independent shocks for
illustrative purposes, it can, of course, also be represented as a univariate distribution with a density
function that depends on four parameters: pt , nt , σ cp , and σ cn .

A closed-form (but very messy)

analytic solution for the BEGE density function is also available (upon request from the authors).
Figure 1 plots four examples of BEGE densities under various combinations for pt , nt σ cp , and σ cn .
For ease of comparison of the higher moments, the mean and variance of all the distributions are
the same and σ cp = σ cn . The black line plots the density under large, equal values for pt and nt .
This distribution very closely approximates the Gaussian distribution. The red line plots a BEGE
density with smaller, but still equal values for pt and nt . This density is more peaked and has fatter
tails than the Gaussian distribution. The blue line plots a BEGE density with large pt but small
nt and is duly right-skewed. Finally, the green line plots a density with large nt and small pt , and
is left-skewed. This demonstrates the flexibility of the BEGE distribution and makes tangible the
role of pt as the “good environment” variable and nt as “the bad environment” variable.
We now turn to the assumed dynamics for pt and nt . We model the latent factor pt as following
a simple, autoregressive process with square-root volatility dynamics,

pt = p + ρp (pt−1 − p) + σ pp ω p,t

(5)

where p is the unconditional mean of pt , ρp is its autocorrelation coeﬃcient, and σ pp governs the
√
conditional volatility of the process. Specifically, the conditional volatility of pt+1 is σpp pt since

5

the variance of ω p,t+1 is pt . With fine enough time increments, this ensures that 0 is a reflecting
boundary for the process. We model nt symmetrically,

nt = n + ρn (nt−1 − n) + σ nn ω n,t .

(6)

Note that the conditional covariances between ∆ct+1 and pt+1 and nt+1 are, respectively,

COVt [∆ct+1 , pt+1 ] = σ cp σ pp pt
COVt [∆ct+1 , nt+1 ] = −σ cn σ nn nt

(7)

so that we have hard-wired a positive conditional correlation between ∆ct+1 and pt+1 , and a negative
conditional covariance between ∆ct+1 and nt+1 . This assumes that positive shocks to consumption
tend to increase the variability of "good" shocks while negative consumption shocks are associated
with a greater negative tail. However, this assumption could be easily relaxed within our general
framework. Moreover, the conditional covariance of ∆ct+1 and its own conditional variance, vct , is:
COVt [∆ct+1 , vct+1 ] = σ 3cp σ pp pt − σ 3cn σ nn nt

(8)

which can take on either sign and, indeed, can vary through time.

2.2

Preferences

We now describe the preferences of the representative agent in our model.

Consider a complete

markets economy as in Lucas (1978), but modify the preferences of the representative agent to have
the form:
E0

"∞
X
t=0

β

t (Ct

#
− Ht )1−γ − 1
,
1−γ

(9)

where Ct is aggregate consumption and Ht is an exogenous “external habit stock” with Ct > Ht .
One motivation for an external habit stock is the “keeping up with the Joneses” framework
of Abel (1990, 1999).

There, individual investors evaluate their own consumption relative to a

benchmark representing past or current aggregate consumption, Ht .
(1999), Ht is an exogenously modelled subsistence or habit level.4

In Campbell and Cochrane
Hence, the local coeﬃcient of

4 For empirical analyses of habit formation models, where habit depends on past consumption, see Heaton (1995)
and Bekaert (1996).

6

t
relative risk aversion equals γ CtC−H
, where
t

³

Ct −Ht
Ct

´

is defined as the surplus ratio5 . As the surplus

ratio goes to zero, the consumer’s risk aversion goes to infinity. In our model, we define the inverse
of the surplus ratio, Qt , so that. γ · Qt (Qt > 1) represents stochastic risk aversion. As Qt changes
over time, the representative investor’s risk tolerance changes.
The marginal rate of substitution in this model determines the real pricing kernel, which we
denote by Mt . Taking the ratio of marginal utilities at time t + 1 and t, we obtain:

Mt+1

−γ

(Ct+1 /Ct )
(Qt+1 /Qt )−γ
= β exp [−γ∆ct+1 + γ (qt+1 − qt )] ,

= β

(10)

where qt = ln(Qt ).
This model may better explain the predictability evidence than the standard model with power
utility because it can generate counter-cyclical expected returns and prices of risk. We specify the
unobserved process for qt ≡ ln (Qt ) as follows:
qt+1 = μq + ρq qt + σ qp ω p,t+1 + σ qn ω n,t+1

(11)

where μq , ρq and σ q and φp and φn are parameters. As in CC, the risk aversion process is persistent,
governed by the parameter ρq , and heteroskedastic, governed by time-variation in pt and nt . We also
follow CC in having the innovation in qt entirely spanned by the consumption shocks, but there are
two such shocks in our framework and these shocks are heteroskedastic.6 The conditional covariance
between risk aversion and consumption is given by:

COVt [∆ct+1 , qt+1 ] = (σ cp σ qp ) pt − (σ cn σ qn ) nt .

(12)

The external habit interpretation of the model requires this covariance to be negative: positive
consumption shocks decrease risk aversion. In CC, this correlation is a non-linear process increasing
in qt . Our modeling here is diﬀerent and more flexible. We would expect σqp to be negative and
σ qn to be positive.

When that occurs, shocks that increase the relative importance of “good

5 Of course, this is not actual risk aversion defined over wealth, which depends on the value function. The Appendix
to Campbell and Cochrane (1995) examines the relation between “local” curvature and actual risk aversion, which
depends on the sensitivity of consumption to wealth. In their model, actual risk aversion is simply a scalar multiple
of local curvature. In the present article, we only refer to the local curvature concept, and slightly abuse terminology
in calling it “risk aversion.”
6 In this sense, our modeling diﬀers from Bekaert, Engtrom and Grenadier (2005) and Bekaert, Engstrom and Xing
(2009) who let qt depend on a shock not spanned by fundamental shocks.

7

environment” shocks (ω p,t ) decrease risk aversion, and shocks that increase the relative importance
of “bad environment” shocks” (ω n,t ) increase risk aversion. Moreover, the conditional covariance
between consumption growth and risk aversion is then always negative.

We will not, however,

impose this restriction in the estimation stage.

2.3

Asset prices

In this subsection, we present solutions for asset prices in the BEGE framework.
2.3.1

The risk free term structure

We first solve for the real risk free short rate, rrft , in our framework and then the price of a real
consol. The latter is useful for comparison with equity prices.
The real short rate To solve for the real risk free short rate, we use the usual no-arbitrage
condition,
−1

exp (rrft ) = Et [exp (mt+1 )]

.

(13)

To simplify this expectation, it will be convenient to define the quantities,

ap

= γ (σ qp − σcp )

an

= γ (σ qn + σ cn )

(14)

These quantities measure of the impact of the two sources of uncertainty on the pricing kernel, as
can be seen in the equation,

mt+1 − Et [mt+1 ] = ap ω p,t+1 + an ω n,t+1

(15)

For ease of interpretation, we focus on the case where ap < 0 and an > 0. This corresponds to a
situation where positive ω p,t+1 shocks decrease marginal utility (good news) while positive ω n,t+1
shocks increase marginal utility (bad news). Using Lemma 1 in the appendix, the real short rate
can be expressed as,

⎛

¡
¢
⎜ − ln β + γg + γ 1 − ρq (qt − q)
⎜
rrft = ⎜
+ (ap + ln (1 − ap )) pt
⎜
⎝
+ (an + ln (1 − an )) nt
8

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(16)

The first line in the solution for rrft has the usual consumption and utility smoothing eﬀects: to
the extent that marginal utility is expected to be lower in the future (that is, when g > 0 and/or,
qt > q), investors desire to borrow to smooth marginal utility, and so risk free rates must rise. The
bottom two lines capture precautionary savings eﬀects, that is, the desire of investors to save more
in uncertain times. Notice that because the function f (x) = x + ln (1 − x) is always negative, the
precautionary savings eﬀects are also always negative. A third-order Taylor expansion of the log
function helps with the interpretation of rrft :
⎛

⎜
⎜
rrft ≈ ⎜
⎜
⎝

¡
¢
− ln β + γg + γ 1 − ρq (qt − q)
¡
¢
+ − 12 a2p − 13 a3p pt
¡
¢
+ − 12 a2n − 13 a3n nt

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(17)

The first precautionary savings terms,− 12 a2p pt and − 12 a2n nt capture the usual precautionary savings
eﬀects: higher volatility generally leads to increased savings demand, depressing interest rates. The
cubic terms represent a novel feature of the BEGE model. Consider again the case where ap < 0 and
an > 0. Under this assumption the term, − 13 a3p pt > 0, mitigates the precautionary savings eﬀect
to the extent that the good-environment variable, pt , is large. This makes perfect economic sense.
When good environment shocks dominate, the probability of large positive shocks is relatively large,
and the probability of large negative shocks is small, decreasing precautionary demand. Conversely,
the − 13 a3n nt < 0 term indicates that precautionary savings demands are exacerbated with nt is large.
That is, when consumption growth is likely to be impacted by large, negative shocks, risk free rates
are depressed over and above the usual precautionary savings eﬀects. Through this mechanism, our
model may generate the kind of extremely low but also very volatile risk free rates witnessed in the
2007-2009 crisis period.
The price of a risk free real consol We now extend the characterization of the real term
structure to a risk-free real consol, that is an asset that pays a real coupon, normalized to 1, each
period. Under standard no-arbitrage arguments, the price of the consol, P Ct , must obey:
⎛
⎡
⎞⎤
∞
i
X
X
P Ct = Et ⎣
exp ⎝
mt+j ⎠⎦
i=1

(18)

j=1

This conditional expectation can also be solved in our framework as an exponential-aﬃne function
of the state vector, as is summarized in the following proposition.

9

Proposition 1 For the economy described by Equations (1) through (11), the price of a risk free
real consol paying one unit of the consumption good is given by
P Ct =

∞
X

exp (Ai + Bi pt + Ci nt + Di qt )

(19)

i=1

where the initial values of the parameter sequences are given by
¡
¢
A1 = ln β − γg + γ 1 − ρq q
B1 = −ap − ln (1 − ap )
C1 = −an − ln (1 − an )
¡
¢
D1 = −γ 1 − ρqq

and the functions providing the coeﬃcients for n ≥ 2 are represented by
Ai = Ai−1 + Bi−1 μp + Ci−1 μn + Di−1 μq
¡
¢
¢
¡
Bi ≡ −ap + Bi−1 ρp − σ pp − Di−1 σ qp − ln (1 − ap − Bi−1 σpp − Di−1 σ qp )

Ci ≡ (−an + Ci−1 (ρn − σ nn ) − Di−1 σ qn ) − ln (1 − an − Ci−1 σ nn − Di−1 σqn )
Di ≡ D1 + Di−1 ρqq
(Proof is available in separate appendix).
The most useful expressions above for gaining intuition about consol pricing are those for B1 and
C1 . First, note that B1 and C1 are always positive because the function f (x) = −x − ln (1 − x) is
always positive. Moreover, one can easily show that Bi and Ci are positive for all i as well. Hence,
increases in nt and pt always increase real consol prices, another implication of the precautionary
savings channel.

Finally, the Dn term captures the eﬀect of the risk aversion variable, qt , which

aﬀects bond prices through utility smoothing channels; therefore increases in qt tend to depress
consol prices.
2.3.2

Equity valuation

Following Campbell and Cochrane (1999), we assume that dividends equal consumption and solve
for equity prices as a claim to the consumption stream. In any present value model, under a nobubble transversality condition, the equity price-dividend ratio (the inverse of the dividend yield) is
represented by the conditional expectation,
⎡
⎛
⎞⎤
∞
i
X
X
Pt
= Et ⎣
exp ⎝
(mt+j + ∆dt+j )⎠⎦
Dt
i=1
j=1
where

Pt
Dt

(20)

is the equity price-dividend ratio and ∆dt represents logarithmic dividend growth. This

conditional expectation can also be solved in our framework as an exponential-aﬃne function of the
10

state vector, as is summarized in the following proposition.
Proposition 2 For the economy described by Equations (1) through (11), the price-dividend ratio
of equity is given by
∞
³
´
X
Pt
ei + B
ei pt + C
ei nt + D
e i qt
=
exp A
(21)
Dt
i=1

where the initial values of the parameter sequences are given by
¡
¢
e1 = ln β + (1 − γ) g + γ 1 − ρq q
A
e1 = −ap − σ cp − ln (1 − ap − σ cp )
B

e1 = −an + σcn − ln (1 − an + σ cn )
C
¡
¢
e 1 = −γ 1 − ρqq
D

where the functions providing the coeﬃcients for n ≥ 2 are represented by
ei = A
e1 + A
ei−1 + B
ei−1 μp + C
ei−1 μc + D
e i−1 μq
A
³
´
³
´
¡
¢
ei−1 ρp − σ pp − D
ei−1 σ pp − D
e i−1 σ qp
ei ≡ −ap − σcp + B
e i−1 σ qp − ln 1 − ap − σ cp − B
B
³
´
³
´
ei ≡ −an + σ cn + C
ei−1 (ρn − σ nn ) − D
e i−1 σqn − ln 1 − an + σ cp − C
ei−1 σ nn − D
e i−1 σ qn
C

fi ≡ D
e1 + D
e i−1 ρqq
D

(Proof is available in separate appendix).
First, note that there is no marginal pricing diﬀerence in the eﬀect of qt on riskless versus risky
e n is the same as Dn .
coupon streams: the expression for D

This is true by construction in this

model because the preference variable, qt , aﬀects neither the conditional mean nor volatility of cash
flow growth, nor the conditional covariance between the cash flow stream and the pricing kernel at
any horizon. We purposefully excluded such relationships because, economically, it does not seem
reasonable for investor preferences to aﬀect productivity.

The implication is that increases in qt

e1 and C
e1 terms do diﬀer from their consol counterparts.
always depress equity prices. Second, the B

However, the pricing functions are still such that these coeﬃcients are always positive.

In other

words, shocks to nt and pt that drive up the variability of cash flows, always increase the pricedividend ratio. There is a large literature examining the eﬀects of uncertainty on equity prices. The
folklore wisdom is that increased economic uncertainty ought to depress stock prices because it raises
the equity premium (see Poterba and Summers (1986) and Wu (2001)). However, such a conclusion
is by no means general. Pastor and Veronesi (2006) stress that uncertainty about cash flows should
increase stock values (as it makes the distribution of future cash flows positively skewed), whereas
Abel (1988) ‘s Lucas —tree model can generate either eﬀect, depending on the coeﬃcient of relative
risk aversion. In Barsky (1989) and Bekaert, Engstrom, and Xing (2009), similar to this paper,
11

the term structure eﬀects of increased uncertainty cause equity prices to (potentially) rise. Let us
maintain the assumption that ap < 0 and an > 0. Because −ap − σ cp is less positive than −ap , an
increase in pt raises equity prices less than it raises real consol prices because the equity cash flow
is risky. Similarly, because −an + σcn is less negative than −an , equity prices rise by less than real
consol prices when nt increases. Thus, the risky cash flow and pure term structure eﬀects oﬀset one
another. Again, this is only under our maintained assumption of the signs of ap and an , which are
in turn consistent with a counter-cyclical risk aversion process. That equity prices are so closely tied
to consol prices is an artifact of our desire to follow the model structure in CC, setting consumption
equal to dividends and excluding time-varying cash flow expectations eﬀects in equity pricing. We
consider a simple extension in the final section that relaxes these assumptions.
2.3.3

Approximations to the exact equity solution

While the above solution for the equity price-dividend ratio is exact, it is a non-linear function
of the state vector.

To simplify our subsequent calculations, it is useful to calculate a log-linear

approximation to the price-dividend ratio. It is shown in the appendix that the logarithmic dividendprice ratio, dpt , is approximately,
dpt ≈ d0 + d01 Yt

(22)

where Yt = [∆ct , pt , nt , qt ]0 is the state vector and the coeﬃcients d0 , d1 , etc. are functions of the deep
model parameters with explicit formulae provided in the appendix. Further, we can approximate
logarithmic equity returns as
rt+1 ≈ r0 + r10 Yt+1 + r20 Yt

(23)

with these results also described in detail in the appendix.
2.3.4

The distribution of equity returns

We now examine the implications of the BEGE model for the conditional distribution of equity
returns. We examine the physical and risk-neutral distributions separately.
Physical moments The appendix shows how to calculate the (physical) moment generating function for any aﬃne function of the state vector.

Armed with that, it is possible to calculate any

moment of interest. These calculations are straightforward and similar to those for computing the
conditional moments of consumption growth, as shown in Section 2.1. We begin by calculating the

12

physical measure of conditional equity return volatility, pvart . Using the approximation in Equation
(23) and Lemma 1 yields:
2

2

pvart = (σ pp rp + σcp rc + σ qp rq ) pt + (σ nn rn − σ cn rc + σ qn rq ) nt

(24)

where rp is the loading of returns onto on pt , in Equation (23), etc. Unsurprisingly, both pt and
nt contribute to return variance in a positive, linear fashion.

Similar calculations show that the

conditional (centered) third moment and excess fourth moment, denoted pskt and pkut respectively,
can be expressed as:
3

3

4

4

pskt

= 2 (σ pp rp + σ cp rc + σ qp rq ) pt − 2 (σnn rn + σ cn rc + σ qn rq ) nt

pkut

= 6 (σ pp rp + σ cp rc + σ qp rq ) pt + 6 (σnn rn + σ cn rc + σ qn rq ) nt

(25)

The BEGE model is therefore clearly able to generate time-varying skewness which can change sign
over time as well as time-varying kurtosis.

It is worth highlighting that because there are only

two state variables driving these (and all higher) moments, there is a linear dependence among the
moments’ dynamics, which may be counterfactual. Of course, we can always augment the BEGE
system with additional state variables to break this dependence.
Risk-neutral moments Many stylized facts about the risk-neutral distributions of returns have
emerged in the literature, see Figlewski (2009) for a good survey.

We focus our analysis of the

BEGE system on the following empirical regularities:
1. The risk-neutral conditional variance of returns usually exceeds the physical variance of returns;
the diﬀerence is called the variance premium.
2. The variance premium and physical return variance covary positively with the equity risk
premium. (See Bollerslev, Gibson and Zhou (2009), for instance.)
3. Returns are negatively correlated with changes in the risk-neutral variance.
4. The risk-neutral distribution of equity returns is negatively skewed and fat tailed.7 .
We now examine whether the BEGE framework is capable of matching these stylized facts. To
facilitate the calculation of the risk-neutral distribution of returns, let us first define the risk-neutral
7 This is consistent with the older options pricing literature that focused on implied volatility “smirks” and “smiles,”
using the Black-Scholes option pricing model to back out implied volatilities at various strike prices.

13

expectation of any variable, EtQ [exp (xt+1 )] ,as
EtQ [exp (xt+1 )] = Et [exp (mt+1 + xt+1 )] (Et [exp (mt+1 )])−1

(26)

Based on this definition, Lemma 2 of the appendix shows how to calculate the risk-neutral moment
generating function for the BEGE system, which renders the calculation of any risk-neutral moment
straightforward, if tedious. For instance, the risk-neutral variance measure, qvart , simplifies to:

qvart =

µ

σ pp rp + σ cp rc + σ qp rq
1 − ap

¶2

pt +

µ

σ nn rn − σcn rc + σqn rq
1 − an

¶2

nt

(27)

This expression is intuitive when compared with the solution for pvart , adding a simple denominator term to the parameters multiplying pt and nt in Equation (24).

Consider first the

denominator term multiplying pt . Maintaining our assumption that ap < 0 (that is, that positive
pt shocks lower marginal utility) the denominator is strictly greater than 1. This implies that pt ,
the good environment variable, serves to reduce risk neutral variance relative to its physical measure
counterpart. On the other hand, as long as an > 08 (which is consistent with positive nt shocks
raising marginal utility), nt will generally increases the risk-neutral variance relative to its physical
measure counterpart. This is intuitive and suggests that the BEGE system is potentially capable of
matching stylized fact 1: the so-called variance premium, qvart −pvart (henceforth denoted vpremt )
is positive. Moreover, if, as expected, increases in nt tend to increase the equity risk premium, then
the variance premium may covary positively with the equity risk premium, consistent with stylized fact 2. If nt is persistent, then negative return shocks may coincide with higher risk-neutral
variance that persists for several periods, consistent with stylized fact 3.

Finally, if the variance

premium is indeed increasing in nt , then the BEGE framework may exhibit the property that the
variance premium is higher when the physical return distribution is more leptokutotic and/or more
left-skewed, a feature emphasized by Bakshi and Madan (2006) as being consistent with a broad
range of preference specifications and also having strong empirical support.
We now turn to higher risk-neutral moments.

Simple calculations using Lemma 2 show that

the risk neutral conditional (centered) third moment and excess fourth moment, qskt and qkut
8 We

also need an < 2, a technical condition which is always met in our estimations.

14

respectively, can be expressed as:

qskt
qkut

µ

σ pp rp + σ cp rc + σ qp rq
1 − ap

¶3

µ

¶3
σ nn rn − σ cn rc + σ qn rq
nt
1 − an
µ
µ
¶4
¶4
σ pp rp + σ cp rc + σ qp rq
σ pp rp + σ cp rc + σ qp rq
= 6
pt + 6
nt
1 − ap
1 − an
= 2

pt − 2

(28)

Clearly, qskt will be negative when nt is large and qkut will be high to the extent that pt or nt are
large. These eﬀects make the BEGE system potentially consistent with stylized fact 4.

3

Empirical Implementation

In this section, we introduce the data used in the study and present reduced-form evidence for the
kind of variation in consumption growth implied by our model in Section 1. We then outline the
estimation strategy.

3.1

Data

The main data we use are monthly and span the period from January 1990 through March 2009. For
consumption growth, ∆ct , we use real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) on nondurables
and services from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). To calculate an inflation-adjusted
series, we first sum the two nominal consumption series, calculate the nominal growth rate, and
then deflate using the overall PCE deflator from the BEA. We estimate the real short rate, rrft , as
the 30-day nominal T-bill yield provided by the Federal Reserve less expected quarter-ahead inflation
(at a monthly rate) measured from the Blue Chip survey. In doing so, we implicitly assume that
the inflation risk premium is zero at the monthly horizon and that the term structure of expected
inflation is flat at horizons less than one quarter. For equity prices, we use the logarithmic dividend
yield, dpt , for the S&P 500, calculated as trailing 12-month dividends (divided by 12) divided by the
month-end price. The equity return, rett , is the logarithmic change in the month-end level of the
S&P 500 plus the monthly dividend yield defined above minus PCE inflation over the month. We use
the realized and risk-neutral expected variance data provided on Hao Zhou’s website, and updated
through March 2009.

We measure the risk-neutral equity conditional variance, qvart , following

Bollerslev, Tauchen and Zhou (2009) as the month-end value of the VIX, squared.

We calculate

the physical probability measure of equity return conditional variance, pvart , in two steps.

We

begin with the monthly realized variance, rvart , calculated as squared 5-minute capital appreciation
15

returns over the month. Then we project rvart onto one-month lags of the variables: rvart , rrft ,
dpt , and qvart .9 The fitted values from this regression are used to measure pvart . This procedure
is quite close to that used by Drechsler and Yaron (2009) and others.
Panel A of Table 1 reports some simple statistics for the monthly sample (with GMM-based
standard errors in parentheses).

Note that the average real return on equity for this sample is

only 0.0037 per month, or about 4.4 percent per year.

Given that the real short rate averaged

about 1.2 percent per year, the realized average excess return on equity for the sample is about
3.2 percent per year. The usual stylized facts are present: a low risk free rate with low volatility,
a volatile dividend yield and volatile equity returns.

In addition, we note the properties of the

variance premium, which has a significantly positive mean. Also note that unconditional higherorder moments of consumption suggest little departure from normality:

Sample skewness and

kurtosis are −0.1 and 3.7 respectively, with only the latter significantly diﬀerent from its value
under normality. Nevertheless, when we examine the data more carefully for nonlinearities in the
consumption process in the next subsection, significant time-varying departures from normality do
emerge.

3.2

Empirical evidence for non-linearities in fundamentals

While the evidence of time-variation in consumption growth volatility is abundant (see Bekaert,
Engstrom, Xing (2009) for a survey), there exists considerably less empirical work on higher-order
moments of consumption growth. The estimated regime switching models in Whitelaw (2000) and
Bekaert and Liu (2004) do, however, imply that US consumption exhibits time-varying skewness.
For our main monthly dataset, we measure conditional higher-order consumption moments in a
reduced-form fashion using asset prices as instruments.

Specifically, we estimate the following

system of equations:

∆ct+1

= g + u1t

(∆ct+1 − g)

2

= m2 + x0t β 2 + u2t

(∆ct+1 − g)

3

= m3 + x0t β 3 + u3t

(29)

9 This regression suggests that cvar loads heavily onto both lagged rvar and qvar . We cannot reject the joint
t
t
t
hypothesis that the loadings on lagged rrft and dpt are zero, but we very strongly reject the hypothesis that there is
no dependence on lagged qvart .

16

On the left-hand side of the bottom two equations are realized, demeaned consumption growth
raised to the second and third powers.
mean.

We maintain the assumption of a constant conditional

On the right-hand side are simple linear specifications using a vector of instruments, xt ,

which is comprised of the real short rate, rrft , the dividend yield, dpt , the physical and risk-neutral
equity return variance measures, pvart and qvart , and exponentially-weighted (with parameter 0.1)
moving averages of squared and cubed demeaned consumption growth. In the first column of Panel
B in Table 1, the top row reports the p-value for the joint significance of β 2 and the second row
reports the joint significance for β 3 .

We strongly reject the null hypothesis that the conditional

variance and centered third moment are constant, as p-values for the joint significance of β 2 and β 3
are substantially below 0.01.
2

3

Recall that we denote Et (∆ct+1 − g) by vct and Et3 (∆ct+1 − g) by sct . Columns 2 through
4 of Panel B report some univariate statistics for vct and sct , revealing significant variability and
autocorrelation in both. These conditional moments also correlate in the expected manner with
asset prices (not reported). The dividend yield, the physical conditional variance of returns, and
the risk-neutral conditional variance of returns all vary strongly and positively with the conditional
variance of consumption growth, and negatively with its conditional third moment. The signs of
correlations with the real short rate follow the opposite pattern. Hence, when consumption shocks
are negatively skewed, equity prices, the VIX and the conditional variance of equity returns are
relatively high and real short rates are low.
Of course, our short sample period is not well suited to detect strong, robust non-linearities in
consumption growth. For example, relaxing the restriction of a constant conditional mean weakens the evidence for time-varying skewness. We nevertheless believe that the overall evidence for
these non-linearities in fundamentals is strong. In Section 6, we consider a longer sample to estimate consumption moments, using data going back to the Great Depression, which yields stronger
nonlinearities.

In the conclusion, we show how such non-linearities are very apparent in survey

data reflecting expectations of economic conditions. If anything, the estimation conducted here will
underestimate the importance of consumption growth non-linearities.

3.3

Structural Model Estimation

We use classical minimum distance (CMD) for estimation, which relies on the matching of sample
statistics.10
1 0 See

We begin by calculating a vector of sample statistics, pb, with estimated covariance

Wooldridge (2002), pg. 445-446 for a good textbook exposition on CMD.

17

matrix Vb to be matched by the structural model. For pb, we use all the statistics reported in Table

1 (Panels A and B). In doing so, we ask the model to match the conditional means, volatilities
and autocorrelations of consumption growth, ∆ct , the real short rate, rrft , the dividend yield, dpt ,
real equity returns, rett , the conditional variance of returns under the physical and risk-neutral
measures, pvart and qvart respectively, and the conditional second and third centered moments
of consumption growth, vct and sct respectively.11

Further, we require that the model match

the unconditional sample skewness and kurtosis of consumption growth.

We also seek to fit the

unconditional correlation between changes in pvart and the variance premium, vpremt .

We find

that this statistic is useful in helping to identify the correlation between risk aversion, qt , and the pt
and nt processes more precisely. In all, we ask the model to match 26 reduced-form statistics. By
any measure, this represents an extremely challenging set of moments for a relatively parsimonious
structural model. We use a heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent (HAC) estimator for
Vb employing the Newey-West (1987) methodology with 20 lags. The sample statistics are related

to the population statistics, p0 , by

³
´
√
T (b
p − p0 ) ∼ N 0, Vb .

(30)

We denote the true structural parameters by the vector, θ0 . The parameters to be estimated
are,
£
¤0
θ = g, σcp , σ cn , p, ρp , σ pp , n, ρn , σ nn , q, ρq , σ qp , σ qn , ln (β) , γ

(31)

Under the null hypothesis that our model is true,

p0 = h (θ0 )

(32)

where h (θ) is a vector-valued function that maps the structural parameters into the reduced-form
statistics. This mapping is described in the appendix. To estimate the structural parameters, b
θ,

we minimize an objective function of the form,

c −1 {b
min {b
p − h (θ)}0 W
p − h (θ)}
θ∈Θ

c −1 is a symmetric, positive semi-definite, data-based weighting matrix.
where W
1 1 We

(33)

Eﬃcient CMD

do not attempt to match the consumption growth autocorrelation, which our model implicitly fixes at 0.

18

c =
suggests Vb −1 for the weighting matrix, but we instead use a diagonal weighting matrix , W
³ ´−1
diag Vb
. We do this because vct and sct are very nearly exact linear combinations of the

other variables,12 rendering Vb nearly singular. Standard CMD arguments lead to the asymptotic
distribution of b
θ and a test of the overidentifying restrictions (see the appendix for more details).

4

Results

In this section, we report on the estimation of the structural model parameters and then explore the
model’s implications for a variety of asset pricing phenomena.

4.1

Model estimation results

We only estimate 13 of the 15 parameters listed above in θ because we fix two parameters ex-ante.
First, because the scale of the latent factor qt is not well identified using our set of reduced-form
parameters, we fix q = 1. Note that this does not restrict the level of risk aversion in the economy
because γ is freely estimated. Second, we also fix ln (β) = −0.0003 to aid in identification. This
parameter is also only weakly identified using our estimation strategy, and fixing it does not seem to
materially impact our ability to fit the moments of interest. Table 2 reports on the remaining parameters’ estimates. Of the three state variable process, nt and qt are highly persistent, whereas pt ’s
autocorrelation coeﬃcient is only 0.6. Of particular interest are the parameters σ qp and σ qn which
govern the correlation between consumption shocks and risk aversion. As expected, positive “good
environment” consumption shocks reduce risk aversion, and positive “bad environment” shocks lead
to higher risk aversion. Both coeﬃcients are significantly diﬀerent from zero.
Note that the test of the over-identifying restrictions rejects at the 1 percent level, but the model
does have an overall satisfactory fit with the moments used in the estimation. To see this, let us
go back to Table 1, which reports the model-implied statistics in square brackets above the sample
statistics.

Let’s first focus on the fitted consumption growth statistics. The fit is nearly perfect.

Not only do we fit the mean and volatility exactly, we fit the near-zero skewness and mild kurtosis
of consumption growth. Of course, the autocorrelation of consumption growth in the model is by
definition zero, whereas the monthly data show slight negative autocorrelation. In Panel B, we
also look at the conditional variance and centered third moment of consumption growth, vct and
1 2 Because vc and sc are spanned in part by lagged (exponentially-weighted) moving averages of squared and cubed
t
t
consumption growth in addition to the other instruments, there is no exact dependence with the other variabels used
in estimation. However, in practice the regression places very low weights on these variables, so that vct and sct are
almost perfecetly linearly dependent on the other variables.

19

sct respectively, and the model fits the first three moments of vct near perfectly, but has trouble
matching the volatility of sct .
For the real short rate, the dividend yield and equity returns, we also match the first three
moments, producing moments comfortably within one standard error of the data moment. Hence,
the model fits the standard moments that are the focus of articles such as Bansal and Yaron (2004)
and Campbell and Cochrane (1999).

However, the model generates a correlation between equity

returns and consumption growth of 0.7, while that moment in the data is only 0.2, estimated with
a standard error of 0.1. While the model-implied correlation is thus too high, it is lower than the
correlation implied by some other popular consumption-based models (for instance, Campbell and
Cochrane (1999)). If we add this statistic to the set being matched during estimation, we find that
we can lower this correlation somewhat without dramatically worsening the fit elsewhere. Moreover,
the model extension we propose in Section 6 can easily break the strong correlation by introducing
a dividend process that is not perfectly correlated with consumption.
Finally, we report some characteristics of the conditional variance of equity returns and the
variance premium. While the model generates a good fit for the mean of the physical volatility of
returns and the variance premium, the volatility of the physical volatility of returns is somewhat
too low. In section 6, we show how this miss owes to the mild consumption data we have used in
the study. To preview those results: when we taker a longer view of consumption growth dynamics,
we indeed find stronger nonlinearities in consumption. If we then incorporate these consumption
dynamics into the estimation, the model matches all the moments of pvart and vpremt almost
perfectly.

4.2

The conditional distribution of consumption growth

We now examine the dynamics of the conditional distribution of consumption growth in more detail.
The mean of pt is estimated at around 26.
normally distributed.

At this value, shocks to ω pt are fairly close to being

In contrast, nt has a very low mean of about 0.066, suggesting a strongly

nonlinear distribution of ω n,t shocks on average.13 However, the mean contribution of the ω p,t shocks
to the consumption growth variance, σ2cp p, is an order of magnitude larger then the contribution
of ω n,t shocks, σ 2np n. The distribution of consumption growth that emerges is one that is close to
Gaussian over much of the range of ∆ct , but with a longer negative tail, suggesting occasional sharp
√
a Γ (26, 1) random variable, skewness is 2/ 26 ∼ .4 and excess kurtosis is 6/26 ∼ 0.2.
random variable, skewness is about 8 and excess kurtosis is about 90.
1 3 For

20

For a Γ (0.066, 1)

declines in consumption. To illustrate this, Figure 2 shows the density of demeaned consumption
growth under various configurations for pt and nt .

To facilitate the visibility of the tails of the

distribution, the logarithms of the densities are plotted.

The top left panel shows that when nt

and pt are at their median values, the distribution of consumption growth does indeed have fatter
tails than a corresponding Gaussian density with the same variance. Moreover, the left tail of the
distribution is much fatter than the right tail relative to normality. The top right panel shows the
density of consumption growth when pt is at its 95th percentile value. At this configuration, even
though the variance of consumption growth is high, its distribution is actually closer to the normal
distribution. This is because the gamma distribution approaches the normal distribution for large
values of the shape parameter (holding the variance constant). Nevertheless, it is clear that elevating
pt raises the right tail much more than the left tail, so that pt is indeed a "good environment" state
variable. The bottom left panel shows that when nt is at its 95th percentile value, the distribution
of consumption growth is still highly non-Gaussian, and the left tail is moderately thicker compared
to the upper right panel, justifying nt ’s role as a "bad environment" state variable. Finally, when
both nt and pt take on their 95th percentile values (which happens very infrequently since they are
independent), the distribution of consumption growth is again closer to normality due to the very
high level of pt and its large contribution to the overall variance of consumption growth. In summary,
at the point estimates presented in Table 2, pt basically serves to govern the overall variance of the
distribution of consumption growth and the thickness of the positive tail, while nt determines the
size of the negative tail with less of an impact on overall consumption growth variance.

4.3

The dynamics of asset prices

Table 3 reports the dependence of various key endogenous variables on the state vector. We first
focus on Panel A, which reports the factor loadings on the three state variables (pt , nt and qt ).
Not surprisingly, positive shocks to pt and nt lower real interest rates through precautionary savings
eﬀects, while a positive shock to qt increases the interest rate through a consumption smoothing
eﬀect. These eﬀects are also present with the same sign for the dividend yield. This parity arises
because our model lacks interesting equity cash flow dynamics–the main eﬀects of the state variables
for all long-lived assets work through the term structure. The conditional variance of equity returns
is increasing in all three state variables, but the variance premium only loads positively on nt .
Figure 3 plots impulse response functions of these variables to ω p,t and ω n,t .

Recall that qt

is spanned by the two fundamental consumption shocks. Hence, a positive ω p,t shock not only
21

increases pt but also decreases qt . Consequently, the eﬀect of ω p,t on interest rates is negative. For
ω n,t shocks, increases in risk aversion are so severe that the desire of investors to borrow to smooth
consumption dominates and short rates rise. Both shocks increase the conditional variance of equity
returns but the eﬀect of an ω n,t shock dies out much more slowly than that of an ω p,t shock. Finally,
the variance premium persistently increases with an ω n,t shock, and decreases slightly with an ω p,t
shock.

4.4

Endogenous predictability

Much of the asset pricing literature focuses on equity return predictability. Nevertheless, the return
predictability evidence is rather weak. In Table 4, Panel A, we present some univariate statistics for
regressions of excess equity returns on the short rate, the dividend yield and the variance premium.
None of the short rate, dividend yield, and the variance premium are significant predictors of future
stock returns. The short rate in fact is the strongest predictor. Bollerslev, Tauchen and Zhou (2009)
report that the variance premium is a highly significant predictor of equity returns. However, their
main measure of the variance premium simply uses rvart as the measure of conditional variance,
pvart .

In contrast, we use a projection of rvart onto several lagged several variables to identify

pvart .

The last column of Panel B shows that the variance premium measured as in Bollerslev,

Tauchen and Zhou (2009) indeed significantly predicts equity returns for our sample. Our structural
model generates a modest amount of return predictability. We report the model-implied projection
coeﬃcients in brackets above the sample coeﬃcients. All the signs match the signs in the data, but
the magnitudes are somewhat smaller than their counterparts in the data.
Panel B reports the expression for the equity premium in terms of the fundamental state variables
and the model implied R2 , which is very modest at 25 basis points. Given the lack of strong
predictability in the data, this would appear to be realistic.

Positive shocks to nt increase the

equity premium, eqpremt , with the eﬀect of the other variables being negligible.

This, in turn,

induces a positive correlation between the equity risk premium and the variance premium. Hence,
the model fits stylized fact 2 regarding the risk-neutral distribution of stock returns.
The conditional Sharpe ratio for equity, the ratio of the conditional expected excess return to
the conditional volatility, does vary substantially through time under the BEGE model.

Figure

4 plots the Sharpe ratio as a function of nt and pt . The Sharpe ratio is not very sensitive to pt ,
and mostly remains well below an annualized 28 percent. However, the conditional Sharpe ratio is
very sensitive to shocks to nt and can become as high as 45% when nt exceeds 0.13, about twice
22

its unconditional mean. Because this happens infrequently and in relatively bad times, the BEGE
model’s implications for the Sharpe ratio are potentially consistent with recent evidence on the
counter-cyclical nature and rare occurrence of return predictability (see Henkel, Martin and Nardari
(2009)).

4.5

Higher order risk-neutral return moments

We have already shown in Table 1 that our model generates a positive variance risk premium,
perhaps the most celebrated stylized fact about the risk-neutral distribution of equity returns. In
Table 4, Panel A, we report some descriptive statistics for the higher order moments as well. These
are the return distribution statistics under the model when the state vector is at its unconditional
mean. Note that none of these moments were fit as part of the estimation. The sample data to
which we compare our model’s implications are estimated by Figlewski (2009) from another data
source. Figlewski uses option price data to empirically identify the complete risk-neutral distribution
of returns for the S&P 500 over a time span similar to ours.14

The model’s implied risk-neutral

skewness and kurtosis both suggest unrealistically large departures from normality when the state
vector is at its unconditional mean.

It is conceivable that this poor fit arises because the model

tries to simultaneously explain quite benign consumption growth data and fairly dramatic asset
price movements. We revisit these statistics when we re-estimate the BEGE model using alternative
consumption statistics that are based on a longer consumption sample in Section 5.1.
In panel B, we report the correlation of changes in the risk neutral variance of returns with
realized equity returns.

The contemporaneous correlation in the data is significantly negative,

which is matched quite well by the model.

Further, because the change in risk-neutral variance

is persistent, returns do not significantly forecast any subsequent changes in risk-neutral volatility.
This feature of the data is also well-matched by the model. Finally, the last two columns report
the contemporaneous correlation between returns and changes in qvart conditional on returns being
positive and negative.

In the data, the correlation is much more sharply negative conditional

on returns being negative, although the correlation is negative conditional on positive returns as
well. Under our main estimation, we also generate this asymmetry, matching the deeply negative
correlation conditional on negative returns quite well, but we actually find a positive correlation
conditional on positive returns.
1 4 However, Figlewski uses 90-day options whereas we model 30-day options. We ignore the potential diﬀerence
implied by the maturity diﬀerence for risk-neutral skewness and kurtosis. However, because temporal aggregation
should induce distributions closer to normality, we therefore exaggerate the lack of fit.

23

Overall, Table 5 suggests a good fit between the BEGE model and the most salient stylized facts
about the risk-neutral distribution of returns from the options pricing literature.

5

Robustness checks and model extensions

In this section, we first consider the problem that while our sample only starts in 1990 because of the
availability of the VIX data, consumption nonlinearities, the heart of the BEGE model, are much
more evident in earlier time periods. Then, we describe a relatively straightforward extension to
the current model that may further improve the fit with the data along some dimensions that are
not the primary focus of this article.

5.1

A Longer-term perspective on consumption nonlinearities

Our main monthly data set, which extends from January 1990 through March 2009, covers a relatively mild period for consumption growth. Even the last twelve months of consumption growth,
in the thick of the financial crisis of 2008 and 2009, show consumption falling only by about 4 basis
points per month on average with volatility for the last 12 months of 33 basis points — just a bit
higher than the overall sample volatility.

Meanwhile, the upheaval in asset prices in 2008 and

2009 is more reminiscent of return dynamics during the Great Depression. Of course, it is possible
that asset prices are simply foretelling more dramatic consumption dynamics (yet to come). It is
reasonable, however, to ask whether our model results would diﬀer materially if we instead took a
longer view of consumption dynamics (it is not possible to examine asset price dynamics used in this
paper over a longer sample given the limited availability of the VIX). For example, investors may
have long placed some probability, albeit small, on the return of a regime like the Great Depression,
but that belief is surely not represented by the statistics about vct and sct reported in Table 1 since
they are based on very modest consumption dynamics exhibited in the 1990’s. It follows that the
preference parameters we estimate in Table 2 may also not be representative of investors’ true preferences. This might also explain why the model has some trouble generating suﬃcient volatility in
pvart under the physical measure (see Table 1) and why the model-implied skewness and kurtosis of
the risk-neutral return density are so extreme in Table 5. To explore this issue, we first characterize
consumption dynamics over a much longer time-span that encompasses the Great Depression. We
then inject these consumption dynamics into our framework, and ask whether our structural model

24

estimates diﬀer materially from our main estimation.15
The monthly consumption data used in this study extend back only to 1959. However, annual
consumption data is available back to 1929 from the BEA in the NIPA accounts.

To estimate

monthly consumption dynamics back to the Great Depression era, we must interpolate intra-year
consumption growth using another data source. The appendix shows how we use a bootstrapping
procedure to sample from monthly consumption dynamics back to 1926 using the monthly growth
rate of industrial production (which is available back to 1919) as an instrument. Based on these
draws, we calculate bootstrapped statistics for ∆ct , vct , and sct in the same manner as we did for
the short sample.
The median outcome for these statistics and standard errors over 10,000 draws are reported in
Panel A of Table 6. The unconditional sample statistics for consumption growth are not too diﬀerent
from those for the short sample reported in Table 1, except that, not surprisingly, the volatility of
consumption growth is higher in the longer sample.

However, the properties of vct and sct are

much more extreme. The column labeled pvals reports the median p-value for the significance of
the regressions estimating vct and sct . The mean and volatility of vct are about three times higher
for the long sample than for the short one.

For sct we find a much more negative unconditional

mean and nearly fives times as much volatility. Figure 5 plots the median draw of vct and sct for
the full sample. Not surprisingly, the more extreme consumption dynamics arise from the inclusion
of the Great Depression in the long sample. However, the recent values taken on by vct and sct are
more dramatic than any other economic downturn since the 1930’s.
In Panel B of Table 6, we report results for the structural parameter estimates once we have
replaced the sample statistics for ∆ct , vct and sct for those reported in Panel A of Table 6 using the
long sample. All the other sample statistics to be matched remain the same (as reported in Table
1). The structural model parameters are qualitatively similar to those in Table 3. In particular, the
qt dynamics are quite similar. Moreover, we find that pt still has a large mean, indicating that ω p,t
shocks are typically quite Gaussian. However, nt has significantly higher variance under the new
parameters so that it is a more important driver of asset prices, and its mean is larger, suggesting
it features less severe departures from normality than it did in the main estimation Surprisingly,
we no longer find σ qp < 0, suggesting that positive consumption shocks sometimes do not reduce
risk aversion, which is inconsistent with the notion of habit. However, σ qn is still quite large and
1 5 This is similar in spirit to the eﬀorts of Barro, Nakamura, Steinsson and Ursua (2009) to obtain better estimates
for the fundamentals of a rare disasters model using a large panel of cross-country data.

25

positive, as before. The model retains the ability to fit all the asset price data quite closely and
we do not report detailed statistics. Notably, with the more dramatic consumption dynamics, the
model is now able to match the volatility of pvart much more closely. One notable failure of this
estimation is that the model does not match the correlation between changes in pvart and vpremt .
This is occurring because nt is the overwhelming driver of both pvart and vpremt . In Panel A of
Table 6, we also report the model statistics for consumption dynamics. The model now fits the sct
statistics somewhat more closely, but it still cannot generate enough volatility in sct .

The other

characteristics of vct and sct are fit near-perfectly.
For brevity, we do not reproduce the full set of model-implied dynamics analysis as we did for the
main model in Tables 3 and 4. The results for the alternative estimation are similar. However, we do
report the model’s implications for the risk-neutral density of returns under the alternative estimation
in Table 5.

The model now generates more modest mean risk-neutral conditional skewness and

kurtosis of returns of −3.5 and 27.5 respectively.

These values are quite close those reported by

Figlewski (2009). However, the model does generate too much (negative) correlation between returns
and changes in qvart in the alternate estimation, and therefore also fails to produce meaningful
volatility asymmetry. We find that this implication of the model is sensitive to the σ qp parameter.
Simply making the parameter slightly positive, which constitutes a small change from the estimated
value, makes the correlation less negative and generates volatility asymmetry.
In summary, some of the few unrealistic features of the BEGE model reported for the main
estimation are ameliorated when taking a longer view of consumption dynamics. In particular, the
model matches option price data more closely.

Perhaps this is indirect evidence that the Great

Depression and other periods of severe economic stress leave a lasting imprint on asset prices.

5.2

Model Extension

In presenting the BEGE model, we tried to stay as close as possible to the set-up in Campbell
and Cochrane (1999), but introduced nonlinearities to allow the model to fit option price dynamics.
While the model is clearly successful in that dimension, it is too restrictive to match other salient
features of the equity and risk free rate data. Specifically, we did not allow for conditional mean
dynamics in the consumption growth process, and to model equity prices we priced a consumption
claim as opposed to modelling equity dividends. This makes it harder to generate “flight-to-safety”
eﬀects, where bad consumption shocks cause interest rates to drop through a precautionary savings
eﬀect, while simultaneously making equities riskier and decreasing equity prices. With the current
26

specification, we have essentially precluded the latter channel, as our equity claim is a claim to
consumption, and there are no intricate cash flow dynamics present in the model.
It is rather straightforward to incorporate a more realistic dividend process, as shown by the
following example. Instead of assuming that dividends equal consumption, assume that the logarithmic dividend-consumption ratio depends on pt and nt :

dt − ct = dc + κdp pt + κdn nt

(34)

where dt is the log level of dividends, and dc, κdp , and κdn are parameters. Clearly, the dividendconsumption ratio is stationary under this specification, but may vary over the business cycle. The
following lemma describes equity prices with this extension
For the economy described by Equations (1) through (11), and (34) the price-dividend ratio of
equity is given by
∞
³
´
X
Pt
bi + B
bi pt + C
bi nt + D
b i qt
=
exp A
(35)
Dt n=1
where the initial values of the parameter sequence are given by
¡
¢
b1 = [κdp p + κdn n] + ln β + (1 − γ) g + γ 1 − ρq q
A
£
¡
¢¤
b1 = κdp ρp − 1 − σ pp − ap − σ cp − ln (1 − [κdp σ pp ] − ap − σ cp )
B

b1 = [κdn (ρn − 1 − σ nn )] − an + σ cn − ln (1 − [κdn σ nn ] − an + σ cn )
C
¡
¢
b 1 = γ ρqq − 1
D

where the functions providing the coeﬃcients for n ≥ 2 are represented by

bi = A
bi−1 + B
bi−1 μp + C
bi−1 μc + D
b i−1 μq
A
³£
´
¡
¢¤
¡
¢
bi ≡ κdp ρp − 1 − σ pp − ap − σ cp + B
bi−1 ρp − σpp − D
b i−1 σ qp
B
³
´
bi−1 σ pp − D
b i−1 σ qp
− ln 1 − [κdp σpp ] − ap − σ cp − B
³
´
bi ≡ [κdn (ρn − 1 − σ nn )] − an + σ cn + C
bi−1 (ρn − σ nn ) − D
b i−1 σ qn
C
³
´
bi−1 σnn − D
b i−1 σ qn
− ln 1 − [κdn σ nn ] − an + σ cp − C

b1 + D
b i−1 ρqq
bi ≡ D
D

The terms that are new relative to the equity pricing result in Section 2 are highlighted in brackets.
They reflect pure cash-flow eﬀects, and to the extent that pt and nt aﬀect cash-flow expectations,
they will drive a wedge between equity prices and the price of the real consol. We defer estimating
such a model to future work.

27

6

Conclusion

We have presented a new framework to model economic shocks. In our BEGE framework, there
are two types of shocks: good environment shocks, which are positively skewed, and bad environment shocks, which are negatively skewed. Using this simple device and the convenience of gamma
distributions, we can generate non-linear dynamics in a very tractable fashion. In this paper, we
appended the BEGE technology to the well-known Campbell—Cochrane (1999) consumption-based
asset pricing model. We demonstrate that the model fits the data very well, and fits features of the
data that the Campbell-Cochrane model cannot fit, such as the conditional variance dynamics of
equity returns, the variance premium, and other features of the risk-neutral distribution of returns
which have received much recent attention.
Of course, many realistic features are missing from the particular model explored in this paper.
The recent crisis reinforces the potential importance of Knightian uncertainty (see Drechsler (2009)
and Epstein and Schneider (2007) for recent eﬀorts) and learning (see Veronesi (1999) for example)
for understanding the joint dynamics of asset returns and fundamentals. Nevertheless, we feel that
the technology introduced here can be very helpful to make headway in formulating models that
break the curse of Gaussianity in a tractable fashion.

In particular, a very useful extension of

our model would be to add a time —varying mean to the consumption growth process as in Bansal
and Yaron (2004). The main advantage of such a model is that it allows expectations about the
future state of the economy to be priced in financial market data. The current crisis again shows
that anticipation of future bad economic conditions has marked implications on asset prices, yet, in
our Campbell-Cochrane specification, fundamentals are only driven by ex-post shocks. That said,
recent work by Beeler and Campbell (2008) shows that a Campbell-Cochrane specification may be
more consistent with the joint dynamics of stock prices and consumption growth than a "long-run
risk" model as in Bansal and Yaron (2004).
Moreover, the sample used in this article only witnessed a few mild recessions, with the current
crisis likely not yet fully reflected in the data. A richer picture of the distribution of economic
conditions can be gleaned using longer consumption growth data as in the previous section, or
from contemporaneous survey data. From the Survey of Professional Forecasters we can estimate
the entire conditional distribution of real GDP growth. To do so, we combine information about
probabilities from the survey with long-term data on annual GDP growth to compute the first
three uncentered moments of real GDP growth (see the appendix for more details). Shaliastovich

28

(2009) uses similar data to model expected consumption growth in a long-run risk model. Figure 6
plots the centered conditional moments of fundamentals growth based on the survey data using the
methodology described in the appendix. While they refer to GDP, it is likely that the conditional
distribution of real consumption growth follows similar patterns.

The top panel plots the time

series for the conditional mean of GDP growth. While the conditional mean typically fluctuates in
a narrow band between 2 and 4 percent, low expected growth is evident around the recessions in
the early 1990s, early 2000s and in early 2008. Moreover, in an exercise similar to that conducted
for Table 1, we project these conditional moments on asset prices (the dividend yield, VIX, etc).
The regressions overwhelmingly reject the null that there is no dependence between the conditional
second and third moments of GDP growth and asset prices. The middle panels plot the time-series
of the conditional variance and volatility of growth. The decline in volatility previously referred to
as the Great Moderation from the early 1980’s through 2007 is clearly evident. However, the recent
spike in volatility is near the all-time high for the series. The bottom two panels plot the uncentered
third conditional moment of growth and conditional skewness. The conditional skewness plot shows
interesting variation, with long periods of both positive and negative skewness.

In particular,

positive skewness which emerged in the early 2000s has given way to deeply negative skewness in
2008 and 2009. Overall, we interpret these results as consistent with strong time-variation in the
higher-order moments of fundamentals growth over the business cycle. This is exactly the kind of
variation we hope to capture with the BEGE model developed in this article.
Our work is related to but quite diﬀerent from Drechsler and Yaron (2009), Bollerslev, Tauchen
and Zhou (2009), and Bollerslev, Sizova and Tauchen (2009).

These articles feature equilibrium

economies to attempt to explain the variance premium and its dynamics.

Drechsler and Yaron

essentially add jumps to the consumption growth technology in Bansal and Yaron (2004), whereas
the Bollerslev et. al. articles use stochastic volatility of volatility of consumption growth to generate
non-linearities. Both employ an Epstein-Zin (1989) preference framework. However, these articles
do not estimate structural parameters or come as close as the BEGE model to fitting such a wide
set of stylized facts.

In fact, the Bollerslev et. al. (2009) articles forgo matching fundamentals

data all together. Instead, we show that complementing a well-known model (that of Campbell and
Cochrane (1999)) with realistic consumption non-linearities suﬃces to match many salient features
of asset price data.

29

7
7.1

Appendix
The General Model

We can write our model is general terms as follows
Yt+1 = μ + AYt + ΣH εt+1 + ΣF ω t+1

(36)

Where Yt (n × 1) is the state vector, μ (n × 1) is the associated mean parameter vector, A (n × n) is a
transition parameter matrix, ΣH (n × q) is the conditional volatility matrix for normally-distributed
shocks, εt+1 (q × 1), and ΣF (n × p) is the conditional volatility matrix for the gamma-distributed
shocks, ω t+1 (p × 1). The specific distributional assumptions for the shocks are
εit+1
ω it+1

∼ N (0, 1) , i = 1, ..., q
¡
¢
∼ Γ kti , 1 − kti , kt = ΦYt , i = 1, ..., p

(37)

and all the shocks are independent. The additive term in the ω it+1 definition, −kti , sets the mean of
the shock to zero. The parameter matrix Φ(p × n) is comprised of only zeros and ones and selects
which elements of Yt determine the "shape" parameter of each ω it+1 shock.16 For our main model,
Yt = [pt , nt , ∆ct , qt ]0 , and the system matrices are:
£¡
¡
¢
¢ ¤0
1 − ρp p, (1 − ρn ) n, g, 1 − ρq q
¡£
¤¢
A = diag ρp , ρn , 0, ρq , ΣH = 0
⎤
⎡
σ pp 0
∙
¸
⎢ 0
1 0 0 0
σ nn ⎥
⎥
⎢
,Φ =
ΣF = ⎣
0 1 0 0
σ cp −σ cn ⎦
σ qp σ qn
μ =

(38)

The moment generating function of Yt+1 is given by Lemma 1.

Lemma 1 For the random variable Yt in Equation (36) the conditional expectation of an exponentialaﬃne function of the state vector, Et [exp (v0 Yt+1 )],where v is a vector of constants (that is, the
moment generating function under the physical probability measure), is given by
Et [exp (v0 Yt+1 )] = exp (v0 μ + v0 AYt ) Et [exp (v 0 ΣH εt+1 )] Et [exp (v 0 ΣF ω t+1 )]
µ
¶
1 0
0
0
0
0
0
= exp v μ + v AYt + v ΣH ΣH v − (v ΣF + ln (1 − v ΣF )) ΦYt
2
The physical measures of the expectation and variance of v0 Yt+1 are defined, respectively, as
d
[Et [exp (sv 0 Yt+1 )]]s=0
ds
d2
[Et [exp (sv 0 Yt+1 )]]s=0
ds2

(39)

They are given by:

Et [v 0 Yt+1 ] = v 0 μ + v 0 AYt
Vt [v 0 Yt+1 ] = v 0 ΣH Σ0H v + (v 0 ΣF )

•2

ΦYt

√
For a Γ (k, 1) distribution, the mean equals k, the variance equals k, the skewness is 2/ k, and the kurtosis
is 6/k.
The moment generating function is: MGFm = Et [exp (mΓ (k, 1))] = exp (−k ln (1 − m)). The MGF is
undefined for m > 1.
16

30

where a•2 denotes the element-by-element exponentiation. For the third and fourth centered moments, straightforward calculations yield,
h
i
3
3
•3
Et (v 0 Yt+1 ) − Et [(v0 Yt+1 )]
= 2 (v0 ΣF ) ΦYt
h
i
4
4
2
•4
Et (v0 Yt+1 ) − Et [(v 0 Yt+1 )] − 3Vt [v0 Yt+1 ] = 6 (v0 ΣF ) ΦYt

Lemma 2 For the random variable Yt in Equation (36), and a real pricing kernel, mt , that is aﬃne
in current and lagged values of Yt :
mt = m0 + m01 Yt + m02 Yt−1 ,

(40)

the conditional risk-neutral expectation of an exponential-aﬃne function of the state vector is defined
as
EtQ [exp (v0 Yt+1 )] ≡ Et [exp (mt+1 )]−1 Et [exp (mt+1 + v0 Yt+1 )]
(41)
and is given, using Lemma 1, by
EtQ [exp (v 0 Yt+1 )]
Ã 0
!
1 0
0
0
0
v μ+
v ΣH Σ0H v + m´´
1 ΣH ΣH v
³ v AYt + 2 ³
= exp
v0 ΣF
− v 0 ΣF + ln 1 − • 1−m
ΦYt
0Σ
F

(42)

1

where • ab denotes element-by-element division. Moreover, EtQ [exp (sv 0 Yt+1 )] is the risk-neutral
moment generating function for v0 Yt+1 . The risk neutral first and second moments of v 0 Yt+1 can
be found, respectively, by evaluating
i
d h Q
Et [exp (sv 0 Yt+1 )]
ds
s=0
i
d2 h Q
Et [exp (sv 0 Yt+1 )]
ds2
s=0

Upon evaluation, these reduce to:

(43)

µ
EtQ [v 0 Yt+1 ] = v0 μ + v0 AYt + m01 ΣH Σ0H v + −v0 ΣF + •
VtQ [v 0 Yt+1 ]

= v

0

ΣH Σ0H v

µ
+ •

v 0 ΣF
1 − m01 ΣF

¶•2

v 0 ΣF
1 − m01 ΣF

¶

ΦYt

ΦYt

For the third and fourth centered moments, straightforward calculations yield,
EtQ

h

0

3

(v Yt+1 ) −

3
EtQ [(v0 Yt+1 )]

i

h
i
4
4
2
EtQ (v 0 Yt+1 ) − EtQ [(v0 Yt+1 )] − 3VtQ [v 0 Yt+1 ]

7.2

¶•3
v 0 ΣF
= 2 •
ΦYt
1 − m01 ΣF
¶•4
µ
v 0 ΣF
= 6 •
ΦYt
1 − m01 ΣF
µ

Unconditional moments of the state vector and endogenous variables

To calculate the unconditional moments of Yt , we proceed using the law of iterated expectations,
£ n ¤
£ £
¤¤
n
E Yt+1
= E Et e0 Yt+1
(44)

31

where e is a vector selecting the appropriate element of Yt . The inner expectation can be solved by
recalling that Lemma 1 provides the moment-generating function for elements of Yt . That is, by
evaluating derivatives of Et [exp (mYt+1 )] :

Brute force algebra yields,

£ n ¤
∂n
Et [exp (me0 Yt+1 )] |m=0
=
Et Yt+1
∂mn

£
¤
1
Et e0 Yt+1
h
i
Et e0 (Yt+1 − Et Yt+1 )2
h
i
3
Et e0 (Yt+1 − Et Yt+1 )
h
i
4
Et e0 (Yt+1 − Et Yt+1 ) − 3V 2

(45)

= e0 μ + e0 AYt
•2

= e0 ΣH Σ0H e + (e0 ΣF )
•3

ΦYt

•4

ΦYt

= 2 (e0 ΣF )
= 6 (e0 ΣF )

ΦF Yt ≡ V

(46)

all of which are linear in the state vector. To calculate unconditional moments, we simple condition
down, replacing Yt with Y in the above equations. For any endogenous variable aﬃne in Yt , its
unconditional moments follow trivially from the above equation. This is true for the term structure
variables, but equity prices are a non-linear function of Yt .

7.3

Log Linear Approximation of Equity Prices

In the estimation, we use a linear approximation to the price-dividend ratio. From Equation (20),
we see that the price dividend ratio is given by
∞

X
Pt
0
=
qi,t
Dt
i=1
=

∞
X
i=1

¡
¢
exp b0i + b0i Yt

(47)

h
i
ei and bi = B
ei , C
ei , D
e i with the coeﬃcient sequences given in the text.
where Yt = [pt , nt , qt ] , b0i = A
We seek to approximate the log price-dividend ratio, pdt , using a first order Taylor approximation
of Yt about Y , the unconditional mean of Yt . Let
¡
¢
q 0i = exp b0i + b0i Y
(48)
and note that

∂
∂Yt
Approximating,
pdt ' ln

Ã∞
X

0
qi,t

i=1

Ã∞
X

q 0i

i=1

= d0 + d01 Yt

!

!

=

∞
∞
X
X
∂ 0
0
qi,t =
qi,t
· b0i
∂Y
t
i=1
i=1

1

+ P∞

0
i=1 q i

32

Ã∞
X
i=1

q 0i · b0i

!

¡
¢
Yt − Y

(49)

(50)

where d0 and d1 are implicitly defined. Similarly,
!
Ã∞
!
Ã
µ
¶
∞
X
X
¢
¡
Pt
1
0
0
0
P∞ 0
gpdt ≡ ln 1 +
qi +
q i · bi Yt − Y
' ln 1 +
Dt
1 + i=1 q i n=1
i=1
= h0 + h01 Yt

(51)

where h0 and h0 are implicitly defined. Using pdt and gpdt we can span log equity returns. Using
the definition of equity returns,
rett+1 = −pdt + ∆ct+1 + gpdt+1
∼ (h0 − d0 ) + (e0c + h01 ) Yt+1 − d01 Yt
= r0 + r10 Yt+1 + r20 Yt

(52)

where r0 , r1 and r2 are implicitly defined.

7.4

Estimation Asymptotics

First note that the first order condition for our CMD optimization, described in Equation (33), is
n
³ ´o
b 0W
c −1 pb − h b
H
θ
= 0.
(53)

³ ´
b = ∇θ h b
where H
θ is the Jacobian of h (θ) estimated at b
θ. Second, using a standard mean value
expansion,
³
´
³ ´
θ − θ0 .
(54)
h b
θ = h (θ0 ) + H0 b
where H0 = ∇θ h (θ0 ) is the gradient of h (θ) at the true parameter values. Combining Equations
(53) and (54), we have,
³
´ √
√
b 0W
b 0W
c −1 H0 b
c −1 (b
TH
p − h (θ0 ))
(55)
θ − θ0 = T H

so that under the usual arguments, the limiting distribution of the structural parameters is,
´
³
´
√ ³
cθ
T b
θ − θ0 ∼ N 0, V

(56)

³
´
cθ = M
c−1 H
c=H
b 0W
b 0W
c −1 Vb W
c −1 H
bM
c−1 , M
c −1 H,
b and Vb is the sample variance-covariance
where V
matrix of the statistics, pb.
7.4.1

Overidentification Test

Under eﬃcient CMD, a simple overidentification test is available,
n
³ ´o
n
³ ´o
T pb − h b
θ Vb −1 pb − h b
θ
∼ χ2ns−np

(57)

where ns and np are the size of pb and b
θ respectively. Under an alternative weighting matrix such as
ours, a similar test statistic is available, but its distribution is diﬀerent. To establish the distribution
of
n
³ ´o
n
³ ´o
c −1 pb − h b
T pb − h b
θ W
θ
= T · Obj
(58)

33

c −1 6= Vb −1 , we follow Jagannathan and Wang (1996, JW henceforth). From the previous
for W
subsection, we obtain:
³ ´o
³
´´
√ n
√
√ ³
T pb − h b
θ
=
T pb − T h (θ0 ) + H0 b
θ − θ0
(59)
µ
¶
³
´−1
√
c−1 H0
c −1 (b
=
T I − H0 H00 W
H00 W
(60)
p − h (θ0 ))
Substitution into the objective function and rearrangement yields,
µ
¶
³
´−1
√
√
c −1 H0
c −1
c−1 H0 H00 W
c −1 − W
T (b
p − h (θ0 ))0 W
H00 W
T (b
p − h (θ0 )) (61)
T · Obj =
µ
¶
³
´−1
c −1 H0 H00 W
c −1 − W
c −1 H0
c −1 Z
= Z0 W
H00 W
(62)

where Z is an ns dimensional random vector which is asymptotically normally distributed with zero
mean and covariance matrix Vb . Defining Z = Vb 1/2 z where Vb 1/2 is the lower triangular Cholesky
decomposition of Vb and z ∼ N (0, I), we obtain,
T · Obj = z 0 Az

(63)

µ
¶
³
´−1
c −1/20 H
c −1/20 Vb 1/20 .
c −1/2 I − W
b H
b 0W
c −1 H
b
b 0W
c −1/2 W
where A = Vb 1/2 W
H

JW show that A

has (ns − np) positive eigenvalues. Moreover, the quadratic form, z 0 Az, is easily simulated to derive
critical values for T · Obj.

7.5

Sampling monthly consumption data from 1926-1959

Using the full monthly sample of consumption data spanning 1959-2008, we first demean both
consumption and industrial production (IP henceforth) growth rates by their respective year-byyear average growth rates, denoted ∆cat and ∆ipat respectively. Then, we regress the demeaned
monthly consumption series on leads and lags of the demeaned monthly IP series. Specifically, we
use the following regression model:
(∆ct − ∆cat ) = b0 (∆ipt − ∆ipat ) +

lags
X
i=1

blag
i (∆ipt−i − ∆ipat−i ) +

leads
X
i=1

blead
(∆ipt+i − ∆ipat+i ) + εt
i

(64)
We examine lead and lag lengths up to 4 months, but the usual BIC and AIC criteria both select one
lag and no leads. Adopting this recommendation, estimation of this regression yields bb0 = 0.0556
and bblag
= −0.0380, with only the former statistically diﬀerent from zero. While the R2 from the
1
model is modest (1.5 percent), it is only used to model the intra-year consumption growth variation
from the IP data. Specifically, we create draws for the monthly consumption series from 1929-1958
as follows
draw
∆cdraw
= ∆cat + bb0 (∆ipt − ∆ipat ) + bblag
(65)
t
1 (∆ipt−1 − ∆ipat−1 ) + εt

where we draw εdraw
from a normal distribution with zero mean and variance equal to the sample
t
variance of the residual, εt . Given a draw ∆cdraw
, we splice it with the actual consumption data
t
from 1959-2008, and proceed to calculate vcdraw
and
scdraw
using the same methods as outlined in
t
t
17
Section 2 for the shorter consumption series.
Finally, for each draw, we calculate sample statistics
(and standard errors) for ∆cdraw
, vcdraw
and scdraw
exactly as in Section 2.
t
t
t

1 7 The available asset prices for the vc and sc projections are diﬀerent, however, for the longer sample. We use the
t
t
dividend yield, AAA and BAA corporate bond rates, and a measure of rvart that is based on squared daily returns.

34

7.6

Survey data

We utilize survey data available from the Survey of Professional Forecasters currently conducted by
the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Since 1981Q3, the SPF has asked respondents to fill in
probabilities for histograms over real GDP growth outcomes for the coming year.18 For instance,
respondents are asked to fill in the probability that real GDP growth over the next year will fall into
the "zero-to-one percent" bin. Unfortunately, the bins’ boundaries have not been stable over the
history of the SPF. To deal with this, we create "uber-bins" to which we can consistently assign
probability from all the surveys. For instance, if a particular survey asked for separate probabilities
for "zero-to-one" and "one-to-two" percent growth, we sum these probabilities for the "zero-to-two"
uber-bin. For each uber-bin, we calculate the first, second and third uncentered empirical moments
using historical US annual real GDP growth data from 1930-2008. For instance, conditional on
GDP growth being less than −0.02, the first, second and third uncentered moments of historical
GDP growth are −0.09 , 0.102 and −0.103 respectively. The below table summarizes these statistics
for all the uber-bins.
Et [gt+1 ]
£ 2 ¤1/2
Et £gt+1
¤ 1/3
3
|Et gt+1
|

(−∞, −0.02]
−0.09
0.10
0.10

(−0.02, 0.00)
−0.01
0.01
0.01

[0.00, 0.02)
0.01
0.01
0.01

[0.02, 0.04]
0.03
0.03
0.03

(0.04, 0.06)
0.05
0.05
0.05

[0.06, ∞)
0.10
0.10
0.11

We use these conditional expectations together with the cross-sectional mean probabilities attached
to each of the uber-bin to calculate the first three uncentered moments for the full distribution as:
6
¤
£ i ¤ X
£ i
Et gt+1
probt (bin = b) · Et gt+1
|bin = b
=

(66)

b=1

where the summation runs over the six uber-bins shown in the above table and probt (bin = b) is
the cross-sectional mean probability attached to bin b in the survey dated t.
1 8 In actuality, the SPF asks for separate histograms for the current and following calendar years.
To avoid
seasonality and to roughly maintain a 1-year-ahead forecast horizon, we use a weighted average of the probabilities in
the current and next calendar year. For first quarter surveys, we assign the full weight to the current year forecast.
For second quarter surveys, we assign three-quarters weight to the current calendar year and one-quarter to the next
calendar year, etc.

35

References
[1] Abel, A., 1988, Stock Prices under Time-Varying Dividend Risk: An Exact Solution in an
Infinite-Horizon General Equilibrium Model, Journal of Monetary Economics, 22, 375-393.
[2] Abel, A., 1990, Asset prices under habit formation and catching up with the Joneses, American
Economic Review, 80, 38-42.
[3] Abel, A., 1999, Risk premia and term premia in general equilibrium, Journal of Monetary
Economics, 43, 3-33.
[4] Ang, A., Bekaert, G., 2007, Stock Return Predictability: Is it There?, Review of Financial
Studies, 20(3), 651-707
[5] Bakshi, G. and D. Madan, 2006, A Theory of Volatility Spreads, Management Science, 52,
1945-1956.
[6] Bansal, R., Yaron, A., 2004, Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset Pricing
Puzzles, Journal of Finance, 59, 1481.
[7] Barro, R. J., E. Nakamura, J. Steinsson, J. Ursua, 2009, "Crises and Recoveries in an Empirical
Model of Consumption Disasters, working paper.
[8] Barro, R.J., 2006, Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 121, 823-866.
[9] Barsky, R., 1989, Why Don’t the Prices of Stocks and Bonds Move Together?, American Economic Review, 79, 1132-45.
[10] Beeler, J. and J. Y. Campbell, 2009, the Long-Run Risks Model: An Empirical Assessment.
[11] Bekaert, G., 1996, The time-variation of risk and return in foreign exchange markets: A general
equilibrium perspective, Review of Financial Studies 9, 427-470.
[12] Bekaert, G., Engstrom, E., Grenadier, S., 2005, Stock and Bond Returns with Moody Investors,
working paper.
[13] Bekaert, G., Engstrom, E., Xing, Y., 2009, Risk, uncertainty, and asset prices, Journal of
Financial Economics, 91, 59-82.
[14] Bekaert, G., Liu, J., 2004, Conditioning Information and Variance Bounds on Pricing Kernels,
Review of Financial Studies 17, 2, 2004, 339-378.
[15] Bollerslev, T., Tauchen, G. E., and Zhou, H., 2008, Expected Stock Returns and Variance Risk
Premia, Review of Financial Studies, Forthcoming.
[16] Bollerslev, Gibson, M., and H. Zhou, 2009, Estimation of Volatility Risk Premia and Investor
Risk Aversion from Option-Implied and Realized Volatilities, Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming.
[17] Bollerslev, T., Sizova, S., and G. Tauchen, 2009, Volatility in Equilibrium: Asymmetries and
Dynamic Dependencies, working paper.
[18] Bonomo, M., Garcia, R., 1994, Can a Well-Fitted Equilibrium Asset-Pricing Model Produce
Mean Reversion?, Journal of Applied Econometrics, 9, 19-29.
[19] Broadie, M., Chernov, M., Johannes, M., 2007, Model Specification and Risk Premia: Evidence
from Futures Options, Journal of Finance, 62, 1453-1490.

36

[20] Campbell, J. Y., Cochrane, J. H., 1995, By force of habit: A consumption based explanation
of aggregate stock market behavior, NBER working paper.
[21] Campbell, J. Y., Cochrane, J. H., 1999, By force of habit: A consumption based explanation
of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205-251.
[22] Campbell, J.Y., Thompson, S.B., 2008, Predicting Excess Stock Returns Out of Sample: Can
Anything Beat the Historical Average?, Review of Financial Studies, 21, 1509-1531.
[23] Carr, P., Wu, L., 2008, Variance Risk Premiums, Review of Financial Studies, 22, 1311-1341.
[24] Cecchetti, S. G., Lam, P., Mark, N. C., 1990, Mean Reversion in Equilibrium Asset Prices,
American Economic Review, 80, 398-418.
[25] Chernov, M., Gallant, A.R., Ghysels, E., Tauchen, G., 2003, Alternative Methods for stock
price dynamics, Journal of Econometrics, 116, 225-257.
[26] Chernov, M., Ghysels, E., 2000, A study towards a unified approach to the joint estimation of
objective and risk neutral measures for the purpose of options valuation, Journal of Financial
Economics, 56, 407-458.
[27] Drechsler, I. 2009, Uncertainty, Time-Varying Fear, and Asset Prices, working paper.
[28] Drechsler, I., and Yaron, A., 2008, What’s Vol Got to Do With It, The Wharton School.
[29] Epstein, L.G., Schneider, M., 2007, Ambiguity, Information Quality and Asset Pricing, Journal
of Finance, forthcoming.
[30] Epstein, L.G., Zin, S.E., 1989, Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of
Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework, Econometrica, 57(4), 937-969.
[31] Epstein, L. G., Zin, S. E., 2001,The independence axiom and asset returns, Journal of Empirical
Finance, 8, 537-572.
[32] Figlewski, S., 2008, Estimating the Implied Risk-Neutral Density of the U.S. Market Portfolio,
Volatility and Time Series Econometrics (eds. T. Bollerslev, J. Russell, and M. Watson), Oxford
University Press.
[33] Gabaix, X., 2008, Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten Puzzles in
Macro-Finance, NBER working paper.
[34] Goyal, A., and Welch, I., 2008, A Comprehensive Look at the Empirical Performance of Equity
Premium Prediction, Review of Financial Studies 21(4) 1455-1508.
[35] Jagannathan, R. and Z. Wang, 1996, The conditional CAPM and the Cross-Section of Expected
Returns, Journal of Finance, LI(1), 3-53.
[36] Henkel, S., J. Martin and F. Nardari, 2008, Time-Varying Short-Horizon Return Predictability,
working paper.
[37] Kandel, S., Stambaugh, R., 1990, Expectations and Volatility of Consumption and Asset Returns, Review of Financial Studies, 3, 207-232.
[38] Lucas, R. E. Jr., 1978, Asset prices in an exchange economy, Econometrica 46, 1426-1446.
[39] Newey, W., West, K., 1987, A Simple Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix, Econometrica, 55, 703-708.
[40] Pan, J., 2002, The jump-risk premia implicit in options: evidence from an integrated tie-series
study, Journal of Financial Economics, 63(1), 3-50.
37

[41] Pastor, L., Veronesi, P., 2006, Was There a NASDAQ Bubble in the Late 1990s?, Journal of
Financial Economics, 81,61-100.
[42] Poterba, M., Summers, L., 1986, The Persistence of Volatility and Stock Market Fluctuations,
American Economic Review, 76, 1142-1151.
[43] Rietz, T.A., 1988,The equity risk premium a solution, Journal of Monetary Economics, 22,
117-131.
[44] Shaliastovich, I, 2009, Learning, confidence and Option Prices, working paper.
[45] Veronesi, P., 1999, Stock Market Overreaction to Bad News in Good Times: A Rational Expectations Equilibrium Model, Review of Financial Studies, 12, 975-1007.
[46] Wachter, J., 2009, Can Time-varying Risk of Rare Disasters Explain Stock Market Volatility?
working Paper.
[47] Whitelaw, R., 2000, Stock Market Risk and Return: An Equilibrium Approach, Review of
Financial Studies, 13, 3, 521-547.
[48] Wooldridge, 2002, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, the MIT Press.
[49] Wu, G., 2001, The Determinants of Asymmetric Volatility, Review of Financial Studies, 14,
837-859.

38

Table 1: Sample Statistics and Model Fit
Panel A: Key sample statistics
∆ct
rrft
mean
[0.0026] [0.0009]
0.0025
0.0010
(0.0002) (0.0003)

dpt
[−6.4227]
−6.3948
(0.0941)

rett
[0.0042]
0.0037
(0.0042)

pvart
[0.0016]
0.0021
(0.0005)

vpremt
[0.0017]
0.0017
(0.0002)

std

[0.0028]
0.0028
(0.0002)

[0.0013]
0.0012
(0.0001)

[0.3594]
0.3375
(0.0410)

[0.0398]
0.0433
(0.0045)

[0.0010]
0.0028
(0.0008)

[0.0013]
0.0013
(0.0001)

ac(1)

[0.0000]
−0.1947
(0.0941)

[0.9726]
0.9839
(0.1666)

[0.9944]
0.9830
(0.2214)

[−0.0029]
0.0612
(0.0976)

[0.9954]
0.7584
(0.0869)

[0.6508]
0.6986
(0.1644)

skew(∆ct )

[0.1254]
−0.1101
(0.1924)

kurt(∆ct )

[3.9318]
3.7293
(0.2964)

corr (∆pvart , ∆vpremt )

[0.5180]
0.1529
(0.1922)

Panel B: Sample statistics for higher ∆ct moments
mean
std
ac(1)
¡
¢ pvals
vct ×104
(0.0002) [0.0774]
[0.0408] [0.6508]
0.0784
0.0330
0.7791
(0.0062)
(0.0063)
(0.0971)
¡
¢
sct ×108
(0.0002) [0.2704]
[0.5476] [0.7922]
−0.1851
3.1936
0.7599
(0.5420) (0.6286) (0.0537)

This table reports on the ability of the structural model and parameter estimates shown in Table 2 to
match the reduced-form statistics used in the CMD estimation. The model-implied statistics are shown in
square brackets. The sample statistics are reported below with GMM standard errors using 20 Newey-West
(1987) lags in parentheses. Data are monthly from January 1990 through March 2009. All variables are
expressed at a monthly rate. The variables include real nondurables and services consumption growth,
∆ct , the real short rate, rrft , the logarithmic dividend yield, dpt , equity returns, rett , the conditional
variance of returns under the physical and risk-neutral measures, pvart and qvart respectively, and the
variance premium, qvart − pvart . Panel B reports on the model-implied versus sample statistics for the
conditional variance and centered third moment of consumption growth, vct and sct , respectively.Table

39

2: Structural Model Estimates

pt

p

nt

n

∆ct

g

qt

q

mt

ln (β)

Jstat
pval

45.91
(0.0044)

26.4742
(15.6575)
0.0659
(0.0132)
0.0026
(0.0002)
1.0000
(f ixed)
−0.0003
(f ixed)

ρp
ρn
σ cp
ρq
γ

0.6445
(0.1138)
0.9955
(0.0055)
0.0005
(0.0001)
0.9948
(0.0017)
2.3241
(0.7056)

σ pp
σ nn
σ cn
σ qp

2.2556
(1.1517)
0.0190
(0.0141)
0.0033
(0.0003)
−0.0018
(0.0006)

σ qn

0.1438
(0.0288)

The model being estimated is summarized by the equations

∆ct+1
pt
nt
qt
mt+1

=
=
=
=
=

g + σ cp ω p,t+1 − σcn ω n,t+1
p + ρp (pt − p) + σ pp ω p,t
n + ρn (nt − n) + σ nn ω n,t
q + ρq (qt−1 − q) + σ qp ω p,t + σqn ω n,t
ln (β) − γ∆ct+1 + γ∆qt+1

Estimation uses the Classical Minimum Distance method using our monthly sample from Jan 1990 through
March 2009. Standard errors are in parentheses. The parameters matched by CMD are shown in Table
1. The Jstat statistic is the test of over-identifying restrictions, the distribution of which is described in the
Appendix.

40

Table 3: Factor Loadings

pt
nt
qt

rrft
−0.0001
−0.0765
0.0120

dpt
−0.00004
−5.1607
1.6244

eqpremt
0.0001
0.0448
−0.0010

pvart
0.0001
0.0192
0

qvart − pvart
−0.00003
0.0252
0

0

This table reports the loadings of various endogenous variables on the state vector, Yt = [pt , nt , qt ] for
the model and point estimates reported in Table 2.

41

Table 4: Equity Return Predictability
Panel A: Return predictability in the model and data sample
rrft
dpt qvart − cvart qvart − rvart
[0.4052] [0.0047]
[1.5018]
—
3.8341
0.0077
2.4373
3.3484
(2.4051) (0.0085)
(2.2651)
(1.3376)
sample R2
0.0110
0.0036
0.0051
0.0267
Panel B: Equity risk premium dynamics under the model
analytic
Yt = Y

Et (rett+1 − rrft )
0.0011 + 0.0001pt + 0.0448nt − 0.0010qt
0.0033

V ARt (rett+1 − rrft )
0.12e−4 pt + 0.19e−1 nt
0.0016

V AR(Et (rett+1 −rrft ))
V AR(rett+1 −rrft )

0.0024

Panel A reports the univariate predictability of one month ahead excess equity returns with respect
to instruments listed in columns. The coeﬃcient implied by the model is listed first in square brackets;
the corresponding coeﬃcient in the data sample, along with its OLS standard error (in parentheses) and
the associated R2 statistic are listed below. Panel B reports the dependence of the conditional mean and
variance of excess equity returns implied by the structural model at the parameters estimated in Table 2,
and evaluates them at the unconditional mean of the state vector.

42

Table 5: The Conditional Distribution of Equity Returns
Panel A: Univariate statistics for risk-neutral return moments
1/2

BEGE main estimation
Data
BEGE long cons estimation

qvart
[0.20]
0.20
{0.20}

qskt
[−6.6]
−2.4
{−3.5}

qktt
[78.1]
20.5
{27.5}

Panel B: Correlations: ∆qvart
BEGE main estimation
Data
BEGE long cons estimation

rett
[−0.5141]
−0.6291
(0.0759)
{−0.9991}

rett−1
[0.0027]
0.0748
(0.1000)
{0.0024}

rett |rett > 0
[0.3655]
−0.2810
(0.0760)
{−0.9955}

rett |rett < 0
[−0.8590]
−0.7298
(0.0501)
{−0.9996}

Panel A reports on the univariate properties of the higher order moments of returns under the riskneutral measure when the state vector is at its unconditional mean. The row labeled "Data" in Panel A
(only) reproduces results from Table 3 of Figlewski (2009). The bottom row reports BEGE model-implied
moments estimated using long-term consumption growth data as described in Section 6. Panel B reports
the correlations between changes in the risk neutral variance and realized returns. In both panels, modelimplied moments are in brackets. Sample data are reported with GMM standard errors, when available,
(20 Newey-West (1987) lags) below in parentheses.

43

Table 6: Long-Term Perspective of Consumption Growth Dynamics
Panel A: Sample statistics for consumption growth
pvals
∆ct

vct

sct

¡
¢
×104

¡
¢
×108

(< 0.0001)

(< 0.0001)

mean
[0.0027]
0.0027
(0.0003)
[0.2200]
0.2155
(0.0168)
[−1.3771]
−1.2999
(1.8820)

std
[0.0047]
0.0046
(0.0002)
[0.1205]
0.1183
(0.0202)
[4.7607]
14.0113
(3.2215)

ac(1)
[0.0000]
0.0153
(0.0714)
[0.9847]
0.9865
(0.0212)
[0.9859]
0.9757
(0.0191)

skew
[−0.1334]
−0.1305
(0.1569)

kurt
[4.2188]
4.0214
(0.2847)

Panel B: Parameter Estimates
pt
nt
∆ct
qt
mt

p
n
g
q
ln (β)

30.2652
0.2374
0.0027
1.0000
−0.0003

ρp
ρn
σcp
ρq
γ

0.9884
0.9859
0.0008
0.9898
2.6114

σ pp
σ nn
σ cn
σ qp

0.6069
0.0903
0.0044
0.0003

σ qn

0.0783

Panel A reports the properties of monthly consumption growth based on a sample extending back to
1929. The text describes our methodology for constructing consumption statistics for this sample. The
variables vct and sct refer to the conditional second and third centered moments respectively. The statistics
in square brackets are the model-implied moments, computed using the structural parameters reported in
Panel B. The model estimated is the same as reported in Table 2.

44

Figure 1: Examples of the BEGE distribution

180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
−0.01 −0.008 −0.006 −0.004 −0.002

0

0.002

0.004

0.006

0.008

0.01

This figure plots BEGE densities under various configurations for pt , nt , σ cp and σ cn . All the distributions have zero mean and standard deviation 0.0029. The parameter configurations for the lines are as
follows.

black
red
green
blue

pt
40
2
.4
3

nt
40
2
3
.4

σcp
0.0003
0.0014
0.0016
0.0016

45

σ cn
0.0003
0.0014
0.0016
0.0016

Figure 2: Estimated Log Density of ∆ct
median p , median n
t

95th pct p , median n

t

t

10

10

5

5

0

0

−5

−5

−10

−10

−15

−15

−20

−20
Gaussian
BEGE

−25
−30
−0.02

−0.01

−25

0

−30
−0.02

0.01

median p , 95th pct n
t

5

5

0

0

−5

−5

−10

−10

−15

−15

−20

−20

−25

−25
0

0

t

10

−0.01

−0.01

0.01

95th pct p , 95th pct n

t

10

−30
−0.02

t

−30
−0.02

0.01

−0.01

t

0

0.01

This figure plots the log density of (demeaned) monthly consumption growth under the BEGE model
estimates presented in Table 2. Each panel presents the log density at a diﬀerent configuration of pt and
nt with each either at its model-implied median value, or its 95th percentile value. The quantiles of pt and
nt are determined by simulation. Also plotted are normal log densities with the same mean and variance
as the BEGE density at each configuration of pt and nt .

46

Figure 3: Impulse Responses under the Structural Model

0

0

−0.5

p shock

−0.5

n shock

t

10

t

20

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

n shock

t

t

10

20

30

10

20

30

10

20

30

10

20

30

0.2

0

0

−0.2

10

20

−0.2

30

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

pvar

pvar

p shock

30

dp

dp

large positive shocks
0.5

rrf

rrf

moderate positive shocks
0.5

0.2
0.1

0.2
0.1

0

10

20

0

30

−3

10

x 10

qvar−pvar

qvar−pvar

0.4
5
0

0.2
0

−5

0

10

20

30

40

This figure shows the impulse response of rrft , dpt , pvart , and qvart − pvart to shocks to pt and
nt . For all variables, the units on the vertical axis are unconditional standard deviations. In all panels,
the shocks occur at month 1 and the horizontal axis runs from 0 months (prior to the shock) through 36
months. In the left column, impulse responses to 90th percentile shocks to pt and nt are reported. In the
right column, response to 99th percentile shocks are reported. For pt , the 90th and 99th percentile shock
values are 3.16 and 6.88 respectively. For nt the 90th and 99th percentile shock values are 0.025 and 1.074
respectively. Note that the scale in the bottom left panel has been expanded for visibility. The response of
each endogenous variable in j periods, izt+j , is given by

izt+j

⎡

ρp
= hz ⎣ 0
0

0
ρn
0

⎤j−1 ⎡
0
σ pp
⎣ 0
0 ⎦
ρq
σ qp

where hz is the loading of the variable on Yt = [pt , nt , qt ] .

47

⎤
∙
¸
0
ω p,t+1
σ nn ⎦
ω n,t+1
σ qn

Figure 4: Dependence of the Equity Conditional Sharpe Ratio

0.16
0.14

Sharpe ratio

0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.25
0.2

80
0.15

60
0.1

40
0.05

20
0

nt

0

pt

This figure reports the monthly Sharpe ratio for one-month ahead equity returns under the structural
model and point estimates in Table 2 calculated as

Sharpe ratio =

Et [rett+1 − rrft ]
1/2

V ARt [rett+1 ]

48

Figure 5: Long-term perspective on Conditional Consumption Moments

0.8

vctx1e4

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

40

t

sc x1e8

20
0
−20
−40
−60
−80
1930

This figure presents the median draws of vct and sct as described in Section 6. The numbers are scaled
up for visibility.

49

Figure 6: Conditional Moments of real GDP Growth from Survey Data

Conditional mean
0.1

0.05

0

−0.05
1980

1985
−3

2.5

x 10

1990

1995

2000

Conditional variance

Conditional volatility

0.04

1.5

0.03

1

0.02

0.5

0.01

2

−4
x 10 Conditional centered third monent

1

2010

0.05

2

0
1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

2005

0
1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
Conditional skewness
4
2

0
0
−1
−2
−3
1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

−2
−4
1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

This figure presents the conditional expectation of four-quarter GDP growth from survey data in the
SPF. Data are quarterly from 1981Q1 through 2009Q1. The appendix describes the construction of these
series.

50

