                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             COSTLY PORTFOLIO ADJUSTMENT

                                          Yosef Bonaparte
                                          Russell Cooper

                                       Working Paper 15227
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15227


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2009




We are grateful to the National Science Foundation for supporting this research. We thank seminar
participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, the CCER
at Peking University, Melbourne University, Cambridge University, the EIEF in Rome, Oxford University,
the Toulouse School of Economics, the Finance Division at the UBC Sauder School of Business and
at the Pennsylvania State University for comments. Guozhong Zhu provided outstanding research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Yosef Bonaparte and Russell Cooper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Costly Portfolio Adjustment
Yosef Bonaparte and Russell Cooper
NBER Working Paper No. 15227
August 2009, Revised October 2010
JEL No. E21,E44,G11

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper studies the dynamic optimization problem of a household when portfolio adjustment is
costly. The analysis is motivated by the observation that on an annual basis, less than 71% of stockholders
typically adjust their portfolio of common stocks. We use this, and related observations, to estimate
the parameters of household preferences and portfolio adjustment costs. We find significant adjustment
costs, beyond the direct costs of buying and selling assets. These adjustment costs and the consequent
inactivity in portfolio adjustment imply that inferences drawn about household risk aversion and the
elasticity of intertemporal substitution are biased: household risk aversion is lower compared to other
estimates and it is not equal to the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution.


Yosef Bonaparte
Robert Day School of Economics and Finance
Claremont McKenna College
500 East Ninth Street
Claremont, CA 91711-6400
yosef.bonaparte@claremontmckenna.edu

Russell Cooper
Department of Economics
European University Institute
via della Piazzola, 43
Firenze, Italy 50133
and University of Texas
and also NBER
russellcoop@gmail.com
                                                                                            1 MOTIVATION


1         Motivation
Since the contribution of Hansen and Singleton (1982), most studies of household intertem-
poral consumption choice base inferences upon an Euler equation of the form

                                           u0 (cit ) = βEt [Rt+1
                                                             i
                                                                 u0 (cit+1 )]                                  (1)

where i = 1, 2, ...I is an index for the household, cit is period t consumption, Rt+1
                                                                                  i
                                                                                      is the
return in period t + 1 for household i, where t = 1, 2, ... is an index of time.
        Estimation of preference parameters proceeds along two lines. One approach, following
Hansen and Singleton (1982), imposes (1) on the representative household, using observa-
tions of consumption and asset returns on a monthly basis. Other studies have allowed
some heterogeneity in the consumption paths across households and more recently in asset
returns as well.1 These studies focus on estimation of the curvature of the household’s utility
function.
        A second approach, following Hansen and Singleton (1983) and used in Hall (1988), rests
upon an approximation of (1). With this approach, the researcher estimates the relationship
between consumption growth and the (log of the) real interest rate. The coefficient on the
interest rate is often interpreted as the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS). With
some additional structure, the inverse of the EIS is the degree of risk aversion.2
        Hall (1988) summarizes his findings as “ ... supporting the strong conclusion that the
elasticity is unlikely to be much above 0.1, and may well be zero.” This result of a near-
zero EIS is consistent with many other studies of this important link between consumption
growth and interest rates. Under some specifications of the utility function this low estimate
of the EIS implies a high level of household risk aversion.
        This paper challenges the interpretation of these findings. Equation (1) is a necessary
condition for optimality if the household reoptimizes by adjusting its portfolio each period.
Yet, on a monthly basis, only 8.6% of households owning stocks adjust their portfolio of
common stocks. The fraction rises to 71.0% on an annual basis.3
    1
        See Bonaparte (2008) and the discussion therein.
    2
        As noted in Hall (1988), papers in the literature differs in terms of describing the estimation in terms of
the EIS or household risk aversion.
   3
     This annual measure comes from the response to question X3928 in the Survey of Consumer Finances.
The monthly inaction comes from question X7193. Here action means the purchase or sale of stocks or



                                                           2
                                                                                      1 MOTIVATION


    The inaction in portfolio adjustment has two implications. First, it is not appropriate
to use (1) as a basis for estimation at the individual level since this condition assumes
continuous adjustment. Second, the inaction at the household level will not necessarily
disappear when looking at aggregated data. The inaction in household adjustment may well
effect the estimation based upon aggregated data.
    The nature and extent of the bias to estimates of the intertemporal elasticity of substi-
tution is not clear a priori. Though the inaction seems to naturally pull the estimated EIS
lower, when adjustment occurs it can be more sensitive to interest rate movements. We re-
estimate household risk aversion using a model which explicitly recognizes costs of portfolio
adjustment. We find that degree of risk aversion is considerably lower than one would infer
from previous studies.
    These findings come from the analysis of the dynamic optimization of a household with
costly portfolio adjustment. These costs come from the buying and selling of assets as well
as the time cost of portfolio adjustment.
    The model is related to but, in important ways, is distinct from the literature on asset
market participation. The literature, stemming from the insights of Mankiw and Zeldes
(1991), recognizes that only a subset of households are directly involved in asset markets.
Thus conditions such as (1) hold for only the households actively involved in assets markets.
As argued in Vissing-Jorgensen (2002), the neglecting the asset market participation deci-
sion may bias estimates of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution downward. For some
specifications of utility, this leads to an upward bias in the estimated degree of risk aversion.
    Our observations go beyond the participation decision to recognize that even the subset
of households directly owning assets and hence involved in asset markets do not adjust
their portfolio’s each month let alone each year. This is a distinct reason why (1) may not
hold. Moreover, ignoring the underlying adjustment costs which rationalize the inaction
in portfolio composition may also lead to a miscalculation in the value of asset market
participation itself.4
    Luttmer (1999) also studies the implications of trading costs in the intertemporal opti-
mization problem of a household. His result is a lower bound on these costs for given values
other securities through a broker. This adjustment rate is an average of the 1995, 1998, 2001 and 2005
cross-sections.
   4
     The literature on asset market participation, such as Heaton and Lucas (1996), looks at the role of
transactions costs for the participation decision, without focusing on portfolio adjustment.


                                                     3
                                                                                             1 MOTIVATION


of the curvature of the period utility function and a parameter for an external habit. Our
approach and results are different. We obtain some trading costs directly from the data and
provide estimates of both a preference parameter and a direct opportunity cost of trading.5
       Given inaction in portfolio adjustment, the model is estimated using a simulated method
of moments procedure, rather than the standard approach of estimating parameters from ex
post errors associated with (1).6 To implement this approach, we take some key moments
from the data and find parameter values for the household’s problem which reproduce these
moments in simulated data. From this exercise, we obtain estimates of household utility
functions as well as the time cost of trading. Additional trading costs are estimated directly
from the data.
       Following Hansen and Singleton (1983), Hall (1988) and numerous other researchers, we
too regress consumption growth on the interest rate. But in our model, the coefficient on
the interest rate is not an estimate of the household EIS. Instead, we use that coefficient and
others as moments to infer the household degree of risk aversion.
       For our baseline results and in a number of extensions, we estimate the curvature of
the household utility at a little over 3.5.7 In addition, we find the presence of non-convex
adjustment costs, due to both fixed trading costs and time costs at the household level.
Finally, for our baseline we estimate a household discount factor of about 0.88, reflecting a
high average portfolio return.
       Throughout these extensions, the response of consumption growth to variations in the
interest rate, one of our key moments, varies considerably. But, the estimated curvature of
the utility function is remarkably robust to the use of different interest rate series and to the
inclusion in the estimation of households not participating in asset markets.
   5
       Brunnermeier and Nagel (2008) find that the household asset market participation decision is sensitive
to wealth levels.
   6
     The approach of Cooper, Haltiwanger, and Willis (2010) which estimates parameters from Euler equa-
tions at the level of an individual in the presence of non-convex adjustment costs could be used here as
well.
   7                                                                            1    1−γ
     This the estimate of γ where household utility is represented by u(c) =   1−γ c     .




                                                       4
                                                                            2 HOUSEHOLD BEHAVIOR


2         Household Behavior
We model the household through the specification of a dynamic discrete choice problem.
The household can either choose to adjust its portfolio or not. If it chooses to adjust, then
it incurs transactions costs but is able to change its portfolio. These costs take two forms:
direct financial trading costs and the opportunity cost associated with the time involved in
trading. An explicit model of these time costs, through search, is provided in Bonaparte
and Fabozzi (2010). For our analysis, these costs are interpreted as costs of trading rather
                                                 8
than costs of thinking about trading.                If the household chooses not to adjustment, then its
consumption is equal to labor income. All capital income, such as unrealized capital gains
and dividends, are assumed to be reinvested without cost.
        Our focus is on the consumption savings choice rather than portfolio rebalancing per se.
Accordingly, we restrict attention to an optimization problem in which the household must
adjust all the elements of its portfolio simultaneously. If there are fixed costs of adjustment
which apply across all assets, such as information gathering costs, then it will be optimal for
households to adjust an entire portfolio. In what follows we refer to the household as having
a single asset.


2.1         Dynamic Optimization Problem
Formally, v(y, s−1 , R−1 ) is the value of the household’s problem when it has current income
y, an existing asset of s−1 and the return from the previous period was R−1 . Total financial
wealth equals R−1 s−1 at the start of a period.
        The value of the household’s problem is given by the maximum over the options of
adjusting or not:

                          v(y, s−1 , R−1 ) = max{v a (y, s−1 , R−1 ), v n (y, s−1 , R−1 )}                   (2)

for all (y, s−1 , R−1 ). If the household chooses to adjust its portfolio, then the value of the
problem is:
                            v a (y, s−1 , R−1 ) = max u(c) + βER,y0 |R−1 ,y v(y 0 , s, R).                   (3)
                                                  s≥s

The consumption level is given by
    8
        Models of rational inattention are discussed, inter alia, in Brunnermeier and Nagel (2008), Abel, Eberly,
and Panageas (2009) and Alvarez, Guiso, and Lippi (2010) .


                                                          5
2.1 Dynamic Optimization Problem                                             2 HOUSEHOLD BEHAVIOR




                                    c = R−1 s−1 + y × ψ − s − C(s−1 , s).                                     (4)

Here s is the current purchase of the asset. We allow the household to be in debt but there
is a limit, as indicated in (3), on indebtedness imposed in the estimation. In this expression,
the function C(·) captures the cost of portfolio adjustment. It is a key part of the model in
order to match observations of inaction in the adjustment of portfolios by households.
       The other cost of adjustment is parameterized by ψ. It effects consumption and thus
current utility through a reduction in labor income, assuming ψ < 1 . We call this a time
cost of trade to distinguish it from the trading costs paid to a broker. One interpretation of
this cost is lost income due to time spent on portfolio adjustment. In this case, this cost is
distributed across the population reflecting heterogeneity in household labor income.
       If there is no adjustment, the value of the problem is:

                              v n (y, s−1 , R−1 ) = u(y) + βER,y0 |R−1 ,y v(y 0 , s, R).                      (5)

When there is no adjustment in the portfolio, the household consumes only its labor income
and the cost of adjustment is absent. The proceeds from its existing portfolio are assumed
to be costlessly reinvested.9 Hence
                                                   s = R−1 s−1 .                                              (6)

This is in the argument for the transition of shares in (5).
       The specification of this discrete choice model is consistent with the measure of inaction in
the data. That is, the statistics reported above about the fraction of inaction in household
portfolio adjustment were measures of household trades. Inaction meant there were no
purchases and no sales of assets by a household. Nonetheless portfolio values do change
along with asset prices even when there is no direct adjustment by the household. Income
variations, though, are met by variations in consumption, not in the holdings of assets if the
household chooses “no adjustment”.
   9
       This means that any capital gains are converted into new shares since the price of a share is kept fixed at
unity. An alternative formulation, explored below, would have the actual shares remain constant and allow
consumption to absorb the return on the existing portfolio.




                                                          6
                                                                             3 QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


3        Quantitative Analysis
As noted earlier, (1) will generally not hold for this optimization problem since adjustment
is intermittent. Thus we do not try to estimate parameters directly from an Euler equation
or its log-linear approximation.
       Our approach is to calculate pertinent moments from data and to estimate parameters
of the utility function from a simulated method of moments approach. The trading costs
of portfolio adjustment are estimated directly from observations outside of the dynamic
programming model. This allows us to identify the time opportunity costs of trade separately
from actual trading costs. Our data are described in detail in the Appendix.


3.1        Parameterization
Here we present our specification of functional forms. Some of the parameters are estimated
outside of the dynamic programming problem and those estimates are provided here as well.

                                                                                                 1 1−γ
Utility Function We assume a utility function of the CRRA form: u(c) =                          1−γ
                                                                                                    c .     For
this specification, our estimate of risk aversion is the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution. We estimate the preference parameters γ, along with the trading cost ψ and
the discount factor β using simulated method of moments, described below.
       We could also add a direct utility cost of trading.10 We have instead chosen to model the
cost of adjustment as a time cost, through the inclusion of ψ in (4).


Cost of Adjustment A novel part of the analysis is the parameterization of the adjust-
ment cost function. We assume that the cost function, C(s−1 , s) is separable across assets
so that C(s−1 , s) = i C j (si−1 , si ) where j = b if some asset i is bought and j = s if it is
                    P

sold. We assume:
                             C b (si−1 , si )) = ν0b + ν1b (si − si−1 ) + ν2b (si − si−1 )2                 (7)

if the household buys asset i so that si > si−1 . If instead the household sells asset i, then

                             C s (si−1 , si )) = ν0s + ν1s (si−1 − si ) + ν2s (si − si−1 )2 .               (8)
  10
       As in much of the discrete choice literature, such as Rust (1987), we could make this additional additive
and stochastic so that each household faces a choice specific shock.



                                                            7
3.1 Parameterization                                                      3 QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


       We use the monthly household account data to directly estimate these transactions costs
for the buying and selling of common stocks. These estimates come from the data set used
by Barber and Odean (2000). It contains information on common stock trades of about
78,000 households through a discount brokerage firm from January 1991 to December 1996.
       In our sample, we have over three million observations where in each observation a stock-
holder (trader) reports: trade date, buy or sell, quantity of shares transacted, commission
(in dollars value), cusip identifier and the price.11 We estimate these trading costs from a
regression where the dependent variable is the commission and the independent variables are
trade value (the price of the share times the quantity of share) and trade value squared. If a
stockholder bought different stocks in a given month, the stockholder reports the commission,
quantity and price on each one of these stocks separately.

                                   Parameter                Buying          Selling
                                   Constant ν0i               56.10          61.44
                                                               (0.05)         (0.061)


                                    Linear ν1i               0.0012         0.0014
                                                             (1.63e-06)      (1.93e-06)


                                  Quadratic ν2i             −1.01e−10      −1.28e−10
                                                             (2.88e-13)      (9.26e-13)


                                     Adj. R2                  0.251          0.359
                           Number of Observations           1,746,403      1,329,394


                                    Table 1: Estimated Trading Costs

       The estimates, along with standard errors in parentheses, are given in Table 1. Note
there is a fixed cost of trading of around $60.00.12 Because of this fixed cost, even if ψ ≥ 1,
the model will still produce inaction.
       To get a sense of magnitudes, the average purchase in our sample has a value of about
$11,000. The cost of this trade is about $70.00. For trades of this size, the quadratic term
is negligible.
  11
       This includes trades which entail a negative commission using our estimates. For these calculations, the
(s − si−1 ) terms in C s (si−1 , si )) are values not quantities.
 i
  12
     For comparison, Heaton and Lucas (1996) only allow a quadratic cost of adjustment.



                                                        8
3.2 Simulated Method of Moments Estimation: Results 3 QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


       These estimates were obtained for the trade of a given asset i. Since agents who choose
to trade may trade more than a single asset in a given year, the fixed cost per trade may
understate the actual fixed cost incurred. We consider below the effects of larger fixed costs.
       To be clear, the estimates of these transactions costs is one piece of the adjustment cost
function. The other component is the cost of trade, ψ in (4).


Income and Returns The dynamic optimization problem of the household includes con-
ditional expectations over its income and the return on assets. The income variable itself
is the product of a common shock and a household specific shocks. These income processes
along with the return process are represented as AR(1) processes.
       The return process measures the return on stock holdings and includes both dividends
and capital gains and has an average annual real return of 5.5% and a serial correlation of
0. We term this the “stock” return process in the discussion that follows. The data used to
construct these processes are described in detail in the Appendix.13


3.2        Simulated Method of Moments Estimation: Results
Given these estimates of transactions costs, we use a simulated method of moments technique
to estimate the remaining parameters, (γ, ψ, β).14 There are three moments used to identify
the parameters. The appendix provides details on the data used to calculate these moments.
We talk about other implications of our just identified model below.
       The model is estimated at the annual frequency. The first moment comes from the
SCF data set where in an average year 71% of households adjustment their portfolio. This
moment is very informative about the cost of trade, ψ.
       The second moment comes from the sensitivity of consumption growth to returns esti-
mated from the log-linear approximation of a consumption Euler equation, drawing upon
Hansen and Singleton (1983).15 To create this moment, we regress the log of consumption
  13
       As discussed, for example, in Guvenen (2007) and Browning, Ejrnaes, and Alvarez (2009), the estimation
of the income process is by itself an open issue. Given our focus on portfolio adjustment costs, we have chosen
a rather parsimonious model of the income process. The serial correlation of the annual real return is not
statistically different from zero for the post-WWII and more recent samples.
  14
     In contrast, Luttmer (1999) estimates parameters by looking at deviations from observed outcomes using
trading rules.
  15
     Despite the warnings contained in Carroll (2001), this is nonetheless a useful moment for inferring the


                                                       9
3.2 Simulated Method of Moments Estimation: Results 3 QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


growth on the log of the return:

                                       ct+1
                                log(        ) = α0 + α1 × log(Rt+1 ) + ζt+1 .                                (9)
                                        ct
At this stage, we offer no structural interpretation of the moment, α1 . We call this coefficient
the aggregate EIS to distinguish it from the EIS at the household level.
    We estimate α1 from data on real consumption growth of non-durables and services and
stock returns for the 1967-92 period. To be precise, this is the growth rate of aggregated
consumption not the average growth rate across households. The consumption series pertains
to households who are direct participants in asset markets.
    The estimate is α1 = 0.0878 with a standard error of 0.0021. This estimate is larger than
the estimates reported elsewhere in the literature since our sample consists of asset market
participants only.
    The third moment is the median financial wealth to income ratio. The value of this ratio
is 1.03 in our data. This moment is quite sensitive to the average return on the portfolio
and is informative about β.
    The parameter vector (γ, ψ, β) is estimated using Simulated Method of Moments. To do
so, we solve the dynamic programming problem of an individual household. We then create
a panel data set with 500 households and 500 time periods.16 Households differ because of
idiosyncratic income shocks. We compute moments from the simulated data set in exactly
the same manner that the moments were calculated in the actual data. The estimation finds
the parameters (γ, ψ, β) which brings the simulated and actual moments as close as possible.
    Table 2 summarizes our results for four different specifications of the return process.
Since our model assumes there is a single asset, it leaves open exactly which return process
is appropriate. We look at four return processes. These represent the last four columns of
the table. The first set of rows are the moments and the second set report our parameter
underlying curvature of the utility function. In simulation, we see that this regression coefficient is sensitive
to variations in γ. In contrast to Carroll (2001) and Attanasio and Low (2004) we do not infer the degree of
risk aversion directly from this parameter but rather infer it indirectly through the SMM estimation of the
structural parameters.
  16
     For estimation, the state space included 5 values of return, 3 idiosyncratic income shocks, 3 aggregate
income shocks and 500 elements in the asset space. We imposed a lower bound on assets of equal to 20% of
the natural borrowing constraint, about $5,000 of unsecured debt. This constraint is binding in about 1.5%
of our observations.


                                                       10
3.2 Simulated Method of Moments Estimation: Results 3 QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


estimates. For the moments, one row reports the estimate of α1 from the data and the
following row reports the estimates from the simulated model. As we use different return
processes, the estimate of α1 is different for each column.
   The first is the stock market return process that includes both dividends and capital
gains. This is the appropriate return process if we interpret our single asset as a composite
of stocks. We term this our baseline model.
   The column labeled “Baseline” reports results for the estimation of γ, β and ψ. The
curvature of the utility function is 3.51, the discount factor is 0.88 and the trading cost is
about 2.6% of annual income. As we shall see, these parameter estimates are remarkably
robust across alternative models.
   At these parameter values, the sensitivity of consumption growth to the interest rate is
0.110, slightly above the estimate of α1 in the data. The adjustment rate is about 72% and
the wealth income ratio matches its data counterpart.
   At ψ = 0.974 the cost of adjustment at the average income level is about $1,870. But,
this overstates the adjustment costs actually paid since the choice of whether to adjust or
not is endogenous and this calculation ignores this selection.
   The estimate of β of 0.880 may seem relatively low. This is driven largely by the high
mean return on the interest process of nearly 5.5%.

           Moments              Data    Baseline    Stocks and Bonds        S&P      CD
   Portfolio adjustment rate     0.71      0.72                0.68         0.702    0.75
            α1 data                       0.088               0.149         0.083    0.571
             α1 sim.                      0.110               0.068         0.0756   0.03
      wealth income ratio        1.03      1.03                0.99          1.03    1.07
   Estimated Parameters
                γ                          3.51                3.81          3.79    3.42
                ψ                         0.974               0.964         0.967    0.976
                β                         0.880               0.895         0.916    0.924
               fit                        0.0006              0.0085        0.0001   0.298


                             Table 2: Moments and Parameters




                                              11
3.2 Simulated Method of Moments Estimation: Results 3 QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


       The fit is close to zero for the just identified model.17 The model though slightly overstates
the sensitivity of consumption growth to interest rate movements. This motivates our study
of other measures of asset returns. As we shall see, the estimates in the other specifications
are generally very close to the baseline parameter values.
       For each of these alternative processes, we estimate an AR(1) representation of the return.
This is used to form the conditional expectation of the agent’s optimization problem. This
return is also used to estimate α1 in (9). Consequently, Table 2 presents return specific
estimates of α1 both for the actual data and for the simulated data.
       The second set of results, labeled “Stocks and Bonds” computes an annual return based
on a portfolio composed of stocks (60%) and bonds (40%). This return had a mean of 3.44%
and the serial correlation of 0.086. This same process was used to estimate α1 = 0.149.
Evidently consumption growth is more responsive to the return on this composite portfolio
than the baseline.
       The parameter estimates for this process are quite similar to the baseline. The estimate
of γ is just above 3.8 and the adjustment cost is slightly larger. The low value for β again
reflects the high portfolio return.
       A third alternative is to calculate real returns based upon the S&P index. This measure
of return was used by Vissing-Jorgensen (2002). The mean return was 1.016%, the serial
correlation was zero and the standard deviation of the return is 0.16 over the sample period.
One main difference between this and the process including dividends is in the average return,
which is considerably lower for the S&P.
       For this return process, the estimate of α1 = 0.083. With this moment along with inaction
and the wealth to income ratio, the estimated values are γ = 3.79, ψ = 0.967 and β = 0.916.
The estimates of (γ, ψ) are both close to the baseline. Given the lower mean return, the
estimate of β is higher.
       The fit for this return process is better than the baseline. This model is able to capture
the muted response of consumption growth to the interest rate. But the estimated model
does not match the adjustment rate as well as the baseline.
       The final process studied was the return on a CD. The mean return for this process is
  17
       We use an identify matrix and thus the fit is the sum, over the three moments, of the squared difference
between the simulated and data moments. Table 3 provides information on the elasticities of the moments
with respect to the parameters.



                                                       12
3.3 Sensitivity of Moments to Parameters                                  4 ROBUSTNESS


2.15%. In contrast to the other processes, the CD return had a very high serial correlation
of 0.879. This model fits the moments very poorly. For this asset, it might be that the
direct trading costs are negligible. The estimates without the financial trading costs were
essentially identical. This indicates that the CD return is a not a good proxy for the joint
return on the portfolio.
    In all cases, the estimated degree of risk aversion is quite modest with γ ranging between
3.4 and 3.8. Importantly, one cannot infer the EIS nor the degree of risk aversion directly
from the inverse of α1 . Put differently, given our estimate of γ, the estimate of α1 close to
zero does not reflect a high degree of risk aversion.


3.3    Sensitivity of Moments to Parameters
Table 3 shows how the moments respond to variations in parameters. These numerical
derivatives are computed in the neighborhood of the Baseline parameter estimates. The
three parameters are listed as rows and the three moments are the columns. An entry is
an elasticity: the percentage change of a moment with respect to the percentage change in
a parameter. So, for example, variations in β have large effects on both the wealth income
ratio and the adjustment rate. The α1 parameter is influenced most by variations in the
adjustment cost, ψ.

                 Table 3: Matrix of Elasticities of Moments to Parameters

                parameter adjustment rate          α1    wealth income ratio
                      γ           2.7108        0.5193          4.5495
                      ψ           6.8047        6.9963          1.5632
                      β           37.2208       3.1711         45.5894




4     Robustness
Here we study the robustness of our results. In particular, we consider an alternative model
of inaction, an estimation with shareholders and non-shareholders and a specification with



                                              13
4.1 An alternative model of Inaction                                       4 ROBUSTNESS


much larger trading costs. A key result is that the estimates of the three parameters are
very robust across these alternative models.


4.1    An alternative model of Inaction
Thus far inaction implied no assets trades so that any adjustment in the value of a portfolio
arose through changes in asset valuations not direct trades. There is, however, another model
of inaction one might consider. In the alternative model, inaction is interpreted as no change
in asset holdings. Thus unrealized capital gains and paid dividends are treated as current
income and hence consumption.
   Specifically, this alternative model defines inaction as no changes in shares s = s−1 . In
this case, c = (R−1 − 1)s−1 + y.
   The column labeled “Alt. ” in Table 4 shows our results for this specification. The fit of
this model is not nearly as good as in the baseline. The adjustment rate and aggregate EIS
are both larger than the data and wealth income ratio is slightly low.
   However, the estimates of (γ, ψ, β) are close to the baseline estimates. Evidently, this
model of inaction implies that non-adjustment is less costly so that the cost of adjustment,
ψ is slightly lower to get closer to the portfolio adjustment rate.

          Moments               Data    Baseline     Alt.     Part.   Big Costs      SC
  Portfolio adjustment rate     0.71       0.72      0.74     0.70        0.69       0.71
            α1 data                       0.088      0.088   0.0138      0.088      0.088
            α1 sim                        0.110      0.153    0.041      0.120      0.084
      wealth income ratio       1.03       1.03      1.01     1.04        1.03       1.03
  Estimated Parameters
               γ                           3.51      3.45     3.40        3.26       3.15
               ψ                          0.974      0.970    0.970      0.986      0.974
               β                          0.880      0.886    0.884      0.886      0.889
               fit                       0.0006     0.0052   0.0009      0.0012    0.00005


                      Table 4: Moments and Parameters: Robustness




                                               14
4.2 Market Participation                                                              4 ROBUSTNESS


4.2        Market Participation
Thus far we have focused on the behavior of stock market participants. But many studies
of the response of consumption growth to the interest rate measure the consumption of all
households not just stock market participants.18 We extend our analysis to that situation
by adding in households who do not participate in stock markets.
       To do so, we first reestimate (9) using aggregate consumption growth. The estimated
value of α1 was 0.0138. This is very small and not significantly different from zero, as is the
case in many papers in this literature.
       Since (9) is estimated from aggregated data, it averages over stock market participants
as well as non-participants. Further, it averages over portfolio adjusters and non-adjusters.
Accordingly, the sensitivity of consumption growth to the return reflects both the partici-
pation decision as well as the adjustment decision. A low value of α1 is indicative of both
non-participation and inaction in portfolio adjustment. Accordingly, this estimate of α1 is
lower than the estimate obtained for stock market participants only.
       As this aggregated data include both stock market participants as well as non-participants,
we add to our model a group of households who are not active in financial markets. The
consumption of these households is set equal to their income.19
       Following the calculations in Vissing-Jorgensen (2002), we assume that 50% of the house-
holds participate in financial markets.20 The estimate of α1 from the simulated data comes
from aggregating consumption across the households who participate in asset markets and
those who do not and then calculating consumption growth rates.
       Our finding are reports in the column labeled “Part.” in Table 4. The parameter estimates
are again very close to those reported for the baseline.21 The fit is not as good as the baseline.
Still, the model seems capable of matching the evidence of both participants alone and more
aggregated data that includes non-participants.
  18
       This issue of stock market participation is the focus, for example, of Alan (2006).
  19
       The model could in principle be extended to allow these households some smoothing outside of direct
stock ownership. The addition of an additional asset though requires an additional state variable and is thus
computationally quite demanding.
  20
     This is consistent with the more recent findings of Bucks, Kennickell, Mach, and Moore (2009) that
about 50% of households own stock directly or indirectly.
  21
     Compared to Alan (2006) study of endogenous asset market participation, our discount factor is about
the same and we find more curvature in the utility function.



                                                     15
4.3 Larger Fixed Trading Costs                                               4 ROBUSTNESS


4.3    Larger Fixed Trading Costs
As noted earlier, our measure of transactions costs is for a given asset while our model
assumes adjustment of a portfolio of assets. From the SCF, the average number of trades
by an agent is about 6 per year. Thus the fixed cost of trade reported in Table 1 may be
too small. The row labeled “Big Costs” in Table 4 reports results when the fixed costs of
trading is $1,000 rather than the value of around $60 reported in Table 1. This is enough of
a payment to cover 16 trades, well above the average. In this way, the results bracket two
extremes.
   The next to last column of Table 4 shows that the estimate of γ for this model is a bit
lower than the baseline. Since the estimation uses the baseline return process, the estimate
of β is also close to the baseline. But, with the fixed financial costs of trade about 20 times
higher than the baseline, the estimated value of ψ is larger to bring the adjustment frequency
close to the data moment. The fit of this model is not as good as the baseline.


4.4    Serial Correlation in Interest Rates
As noted earlier, we impose an iid process for interest rates. Both Carroll (2001) and
Attanasio and Low (2004) discuss in the context of their simulation results the importance
of serially correlated interest rate shocks for the identification of household risk aversion from
the coefficients of (9). Though our identification is indirect, rather than direct, it is still of
interest to study the effects of serial correlation on our estimates.
   To do so, we use the parameterization of Attanasio and Low (2004) which assumes a serial
correlation of 0.21 for an annual process. The column labeled “SC” in Table 4 summarizes
our results. First, note that the fit is an order of magnitude better for this model, compared
to the baseline case of iid interest rates. Second, the parameters are not far from the baseline
though the curvature of the utility function is lower than the baseline estimate.
   While this specification of the return process leads to a better fit of the model, it does so
at a cost. For this specification, the beliefs of agents are not consistent with the underlying
return process. We use this insight in Bonaparte and Cooper (2010) to look at the effects of
overconfidence on household portfolio turnover.




                                               16
                                                          5 INSPECTING THE RESULTS


5     Inspecting the Results
In this section, we highlight the forces underlying our results. We first look at the role of
aggregation across households. We then study the contribution of the adjustment costs.


5.1    Role of Aggregation
The model was estimated using the growth rate of average consumption. There might be
interesting differences between the behavior at an individual level and in the aggregate. At
the individual level, there are non-convexities leading to a discrete choice in adjustment that
are smoothed over through the aggregation exercise. So the Euler equation that underlies
(9) might be a better approximation to smoothed aggregate behavior than a version of this
equation estimated using data at the individual household level. Further, heterogeneity in
income at the individual level is smoothed when one studies aggregate consumption growth.

           Moment       Single Agent      Panel    Average Growth        Baseline
               α1            0.037        0.043           0.044            0.110


                    Table 5: Effects of Aggregation and Adjustment Costs

    We study the role of aggregation by looking at four simulation results, summarized in
Table 5. These simulations are all using the baseline parameters: γ = 3.51, ψ = 0.974
and β = 0.880. Table 5 reports the estimates of α1 from various simulations using these
parameter values.
    The column labeled “Single Agent” looks at the time series (400 periods) of a single
household. The estimate of α1 comes from the consumption and adjustment choices of a
single household, there is no aggregation whatsoever. The estimate of α1 is slightly lower
than the baseline and not significantly different from zero.
    The column labeled “Panel” shows the portfolio adjustment rate and α1 estimated from
a simulated panel data. Instead of aggregating across households to produce measures of
aggregate consumption growth, here the simulated data and hence the moments come from
the time series of individual households. For this analysis, 100 households were randomly
selected from our simulated data. For this experiment, like the single agent case, the estimate
of α1 is lower than the baseline model.

                                              17
5.2 Role of Adjustment Costs                                        5 INSPECTING THE RESULTS


       The column labeled “Average Growth” calculates aggregate consumption growth by av-
eraging across consumption growth at the household level. This is not the same aggregate
used to create the baseline. The estimate of α1 in this case is essentially the same as that
obtained from the estimates at the level of the individual household and in the panel data.
       The final column reproduces the baseline results. Here the response of consumption
growth to interest rates is larger than the other treatments.
       Clearly aggregation matters for matching the aggregate EIS in the data. As shown here,
the differences are due to the manner in which aggregate consumption growth is calculated:
as growth of average consumption (as in the baseline) or as average consumption growth.22
The difference in these measures is from weighting. Yet the differences are not large: ag-
gregation is apparently not a key issue in understanding the mapping from the moments to
structural parameters.


5.2        Role of Adjustment Costs
Table 6 highlights the effects of adjustment costs on our results. To do so, we report the
simulated moments with and without the various adjustment costs of the model. These are
simulations using the baseline parameters, there is no further estimation involved.

                 Moments                 Baseline     No Costs     Only C(·)     Only ψ     ψ = 0.95
         Portfolio Adjustment rate          0.72         0.97         0.93         0.72        0.62
                      α1                   0.110        0.112         0.115       0.110       0.096
            wealth income ratio             1.03         1.09         1.09         1.03       0.993
                      fit                 0.0006        0.072         0.052       0.0006      0.0098


                                   Table 6: Moments and Parameters

       The first column is the baseline as a basis for comparison purposes. The column, labeled
“No Costs” presents moments for the model without any trading costs. That is, the trading
costs summarized in Table 2 are set to zero and ψ = 1. The portfolio adjustment is of course
  22
       Attanasio and Weber (1995) discuss the effects of these two forms of aggregation and report that their
point estimate of the EIS is 0.214 using average consumption growth and increases to 0.452 using the growth
of average consumption.




                                                      18
5.2 Role of Adjustment Costs                                              5 INSPECTING THE RESULTS


much higher than the baseline.23
       Note that the inverse of α1 remains far from γ, the curvature of the utility function.
This is consistent with the findings of Carroll (2001), though we are using an infinite horizon
model and looking at time series variation.
       The column, labeled “Only C(·)”, reports moments using the transactions costs reported
in Table 2. The adjustment rate is a bit lower due to these costs. But the costs coming
through the estimated trading costs are not large enough to explain the observed inaction
and this motivates an additional cost of adjustment through ψ < 1.
       The column, labeled “Only ψ”, reports moments for a model where the direct trading
cost is ignored so that C(·) ≡ 0. The moments are essentially identical to the baseline.
       One feature of these simulations worth noting is that the aggregate EIS (α1 ) is not
that sensitive to variations in trading costs. However, from Table 3, the elasticity of α1 with
respect of ψ is about 7.0. This same elasticity is about 4.2 when the derivatives are evaluated
at ψ = 1. So it is not the case that variations in ψ have no effect on this moment.
       To further illustrate this, a simulation with ψ = 0.95 is shown in the last column of the
table. In this case α1 falls to 0.096. If we set ψ = 0.90, then α1 falls further, to 0.07. Thus
the response of consumption to the interest rate does depend upon portfolio adjustment
costs.
       The parameter estimate of α1 = 0.110 in the baseline model reflects the effects of interest
rate movements on two margins: the extensive margin of adjust/no adjust and the intensive
margin of how much to adjust. These two effects move in opposite directions. Because
of the adjustment costs, households do not always adjust their portfolios which dampens
the response of consumption growth to the interest rate. But, conditional on adjustment,
households may react more to interest rate movements than they would otherwise.
       Looking at the simulated data, the fraction of household’s adjusting their portfolio de-
pends upon the realized interest rate. The adjustment rate is 69% in the lowest interest rate
state and rises monotonically to 75% in the highest interest rate state.
       On the intensive margin, at the level of an individual household, we estimated α1 condi-
tional on portfolio adjustment. That is, (9) was estimated using observations of consumption
growth and interest rates conditional on adjustment in period t + 1. The resulting estimate
was α1 = 0.131, considerably higher than the estimate of α1 = 0.037 reported in Table 5. The
  23
       The fact it is not literally 1 reflects the discreteness of the state space.


                                                          19
                                                                               7 APPENDIX


latter estimate comes from pooled data over periods of adjustment and non-adjustment while
the estimate of α1 = 0.131 captures the intensive margin by conditioning on adjustment.



6     Conclusion
Our goal in this paper was to understand the implications of infrequent portfolio adjustment
for estimates of household risk aversion and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution. To do
so, we formulated and estimated a model incorporating fixed and quadratic costs of portfolio
adjustment. The estimation was through a simulated method of moments approach to match
a parameters linking interest rates to consumption growth from aggregated household data
and inaction of portfolio adjustment.
    We found support for costs of portfolio adjustment directly from trading data. Our
estimates find a utility loss associated with trading and a risk aversion estimate that is much
lower than the one inferred from estimation based upon the representative agent model with
continuous adjustment.
    Our focus here has been on the consumption/saving margin. To study portfolio rebalanc-
ing requires a more complex model. An alternative formulation would include asset specific
trading cost to distinguish between assets which are easily adjusted, such as a savings ac-
count, and those which require more decision time, such as complex options trades. If, for
some of the assets, there are no costs of adjustment at all, including both direct and time
costs, then the agent could use that asset for the purpose of consumption smoothing in each
period. Adding these additional assets, as well as durable goods which entail their own
adjustment costs, such as housing, remains for future work.



7     Appendix

7.1    Data Sources for the Driving Processes
We need both interest rate and income processes to solve the household optimization prob-
lem. These are computed directly from data on interest rates and income.


Interest Rate Processes The stock return process came from an AR(1) representation of
the S&P data on real returns deflated by the CPI, including dividends, from Robert Shiller,

                                              20
7.2 Definition of the moments                                                              7 APPENDIX


available at http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm. The inclusion of dividends
in this return measure is consistent with our model of inaction where dividends are costlessly
reinvested. For that process, the mean return is 5.49% over the 1967-1992 period. The serial
correlation of the return is near zero (though not very precisely estimated) and the standard
deviation is 0.159.24


Household Income We use data from the PSID to estimate a household income process.
Our sample period is from 1967-1993. Households labor incomes are deflated using the CPI
obtained from BLS. The sample selection includes the following: (i) male,(ii) between 20 and
64 years old, (iii) not from the SEO sample, (iv) real hourly labor earnings between $2 and
$400, (v) work between 520 hours (10 hours per week) and less than 5110 hours (14 hours a
day, everyday) and (vi) The households have more than 19 years of observations (out of 25
years of the sample).
       We decompose income into a common and a household specific shock. The serial corre-
lation of the common component was estimated to be 0.58 and the standard deviation of
the innovation to aggregate income was estimated to be 0.028. For the idiosyncratic compo-
nent, the serial correlation was 0.90 and the standard deviation of the innovation was 0.238.
The idiosyncratic shock is both more persistent and more volatile. The average level of real
income is set at $72,000 annually to mimic the income levels in the household account data.


7.2        Definition of the moments
Adjustment The annual measure comes from the response to question X3928 in the Sur-
vey of Consumer Finances where responders who own stocks through a broker asked ”Over
the past year, about how many times did you or anyone in your family living here buy or sell
stocks or other securities through a broker?” We assign a value of 1 if the household report
at least one action of buy or sell and zero otherwise.


Consumption Growth Response to Interest Rates For this moment, we follow the
literature on intertemporal consumption and study the response of consumption growth to
interest rate movements. Households are classified as stock market participants if they report
  24
       The moments of the return process are sensitive to the choice of sample period. We chose this period to
be close to the sample period for the other processes and moments.


                                                       21
7.3 Estimating the transaction costs parameters                              REFERENCES


ownership of stocks. As in Vissing-Jorgensen (2002), the consumption data for shareholders is
from the CEX. We convert the data there to create annual rather than semi-annual measures
of consumption growth. In our robustness, we study the response of average consumption
growth to interest rates. For that analysis, we use data on aggregate real consumption
expenditures from Robert Shiller available at http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.
htm. The interest rates process was described above.


Wealth Income ratio The SCF also report the total financial wealth (in a variable named
FIN), which is the sum of all liquid assets such as stocks, bonds, mutual funds, and other
quasi-liquid retirement accounts. Housing is not included. The SCF also reports the labor
earnings for each household. For example, for the 1998 SCF wave, Variable X5702 reports
information about: ”In total, how much income from wages and salaries did you receive in
1997, before deductions for taxes and anything else?” Given this information, we generate a
variable that measures the median ratio of wealth to income.


7.3    Estimating the transaction costs parameters
We utilize household account data set of more than 3 million observations used by Barber and
Odean (2000) to calibrate the transaction costs parameters. The trading costs are estimated
in a quadratic linear regression in which the dependent variable is the commission and the
independent variables are trade value (the price of the share times the quantity of share)
and trade value squared per stock. Table 2 reports the estimated parameters.



References
Abel, A., J. Eberly, and S. Panageas (2009): “Optimal Inattention to the Stock
  Market with Information Costs and Transactions Costs,” NBER Working Paper #15010.

Alan, S. (2006): “Entry Costs and Stock Market Participation over the life cycle,” Review
  of Economic Dynamics, 9, 588–611.

Alvarez, F., L. Guiso, and F. Lippi (2010): “Durable Consumption and Asset Manage-
  ment with Transaction and Observation Costs,” NBER Working Paper #15835.



                                             22
REFERENCES                                                             REFERENCES


Attanasio, O., and H. Low (2004): “Estimating Euler Equations,” Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 7(2), 406–435.

Attanasio, O., and G. Weber (1995): “Is consumption growth consistent with intertem-
  poral optimization? Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey,” Journal of Polit-
  ical Economy, 103(6), 1121–1157.

Barber, B., and T. Odean (2000): “Trading Is Hazardous to Your Wealth: The Common
  Stock Investment Performance of Individual Investors,” The Journal of Finance, 55(2),
  773–806.

Bonaparte, Y. (2008): “Estimating the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution with
  Household-Specific Portfolios,” mimeo.

Bonaparte, Y., and R. Cooper (2010): “Rationalizing Trading Frequency and Returns,”
  NBER Working Paper #16022.

Bonaparte, Y., and F. Fabozzi (2010): “Household Search Choice: Theory and Evi-
  dence,” forthcoming Applied Economics.

Browning, M., M. Ejrnaes, and J. Alvarez (2009): “Modeling Income Processes with
  lots of Heterogeneity,” Review of Economic Studies, 33(1), 1–33.

Brunnermeier, M. K., and S. Nagel (2008): “Do Wealth Fluctuations Generate Time-
  Varying Risk Aversion? Micro-evidence on Individuals,” American Economic Review,
  98(3), 713–36.

Bucks, B., A. Kennickell, T. Mach, and K. Moore (2009): “Changes in U.S. Family
  Finances 2004 to 3007: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finance,” mimeo, Board
  of Governments, Division of Research and Statistics.

Carroll, C. (2001): “Death to the Log-Linearized Consumption Euler Equation! (And
  Very Poor Health to the Second-Order Approximation),” Advances in Macroeconomics,
  1(1), 1–38.

Cooper, R., J. Haltiwanger, and J. Willis (2010): “Euler-Equation Estimation for
  Discrete Choice Models: A Capital Accumulation Application,” NBER Working Paper
  #15675.

                                           23
REFERENCES                                                                  REFERENCES


Guvenen, F. (2007): “Learning Your Earning: Are Labor Income Shocks Really Very
  Persistent?,” American Economic Review, 97(3), 687–712.

Hall, R. (1988): “Intertemporal substitution in consumption,” The Journal of Political
  Economy, pp. 339–357.

Hansen, L., and K. Singleton (1982): “Generalized Instrumental Variables Estimation
  of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models,” Econometrica, 91, 1269–1286.

Hansen, L., and K. Singleton (1983): “Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion and the
  Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns,” Journal of Political Economy, 91(2), 249–265.

Heaton, J., and D. Lucas (1996): “Evaluating the Effects of Incomplete Markets on Risk
  Sharing and Asset Pricing,” Journal of Political Economy, 104, 443–487.

Luttmer, E. (1999): “What Level of Fixed Costs can Reconcile Asset Returns and Con-
  sumption Choices?,” Journal of Political Economy, 107, 969–997.

Mankiw, N., and S. Zeldes (1991): “The Consumption of Stockholders and Nonstock-
  holders,” Journal of Financial Economics, 29, 97–112.

Rust, J. (1987): “Optimal Replacement of GMC Bus Engines: An Empirical Analysis of
  Harold Zurcher,” Econometrica, 55(5), 999–1033.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2002): “Limited Asset Market Participation and the Elasticity
  of Intertemporal Substitution,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(4), 825–853.




                                           24
