                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                       INFORMAL TAXATION

                                           Benjamin A. Olken
                                            Monica Singhal

                                          Working Paper 15221
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w15221


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2009




We thank Tim Besley, Ryan Bubb, Steve Coate, Amy Finkelstein, Ed Glaeser, Roger Gordon, Seema
Jayachandran, Henrik Kleven, Wojciech Kopczuk, Stephan Litschig, Erzo Luttmer, Rohini Pande,
Jim Poterba, and numerous seminar participants for comments. We thank Angelin Baskaran, Octavia
Foarta, Angela Kilby, Arash Nekoei, and Yusuf Neggers for excellent research assistance. We gratefully
acknowledge funding from the Harvard University Asia Center (Olken and Singhal), NICHD grant
R03HD051957 (Olken), and the Weatherhead Center for International Affairs and the Taubman Center
for State and Local Government (Singhal). We thank Rob Chase and Diane Steele at the World Bank
for providing us with data. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the World Bank, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or any other institution.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Benjamin A. Olken and Monica Singhal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Informal Taxation
Benjamin A. Olken and Monica Singhal
NBER Working Paper No. 15221
August 2009
JEL No. H27,H41,O17

                                             ABSTRACT

Informal payments are a frequently overlooked source of local public finance in developing countries.
We use microdata from ten countries to establish stylized facts on the magnitude, form, and distributional
implications of this "informal taxation." Informal taxation is widespread, particularly in rural areas,
with substantial in-kind labor payments. The wealthy pay more, but pay less in percentage terms, and
informal taxes are more regressive than formal taxes. Failing to include informal taxation underestimates
household tax burdens and revenue decentralization in developing countries. We propose a simple
model of information and enforcement constraints that parsimoniously explains the patterns in the
data.


Benjamin A. Olken
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
bolken@mit.edu

Monica Singhal
Harvard University
JFK School of Government
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
monica_singhal@harvard.edu
1        Introduction

A key function of government is the …nance and provision of local public goods. Taxation allows

communities to overcome the free rider problem that would otherwise lead to underprovision of these

goods. In many developing countries, formal direct taxation of households is limited, comprising

only 18% of total tax revenues on average compared with 45% in developed countries (Gordon

and Li 2005).1       Agricultural sectors are often entirely exempt from taxation, and local taxation

is generally quite constrained (Burgess and Stern 1993, Bird 1990). These facts would suggest

that local public goods are primarily …nanced outside the local community, either through direct

provision or intergovernmental grants.

        Substantial anecdotal evidence, however, suggests that local residents in many communities

throughout the developing world do contribute substantially –outside the formal tax system – to

the construction and maintenance of local public goods (e.g., Ostrom 1991). People pay in both

money and labor to these projects, with often complex arrangements determining how much each

household should pay and what penalties apply for those who free ride. Many countries even have

speci…c vocabulary to describe these systems, such as gotong royong in Indonesia and harambee in

Kenya.

        We refer to these mechanisms of …nancing of local public goods as “informal taxation.” We

de…ne informal taxation as a system of local public goods …nance coordinated by public o¢ cials but

enforced socially rather than through the formal legal system.2 Our distinction between formal and

informal (legal versus social enforcement) parallels the use of these terms in the informal insurance

literature (e.g. Townsend 1994). The involvement of public o¢ cials, discussed in more detail below,

distinguishes informal taxation from, for example, provision of local public goods by charities or

other non-governmental organizations.

        In this paper, we develop some of the …rst systematic micro-evidence on the magnitude, distrib-

utional implications, and forms of informal taxation, using a micro dataset we assembled consisting
    1
    These …gures refer to personal income taxation and are calculated from Table 1 of Gordon and Li 2005.
    2
    This is not to be confused with bribe payments, which are occasionally also referred to as informal taxation.
To the best of our knowledge, the system of …nancing local public goods through these types of payments was …rst
described as informal taxation by Prud’homme 1992, who, in his study of local public goods provision in Zaire, de…ned
informal taxation to include any "nonformal means utilized to …nance the provision of public goods and services."



                                                         1
of survey data from ten developing countries throughout the world. We then develop a simple

framework for thinking about informal taxation that, with very few assumptions, matches the styl-

ized facts we observe in the data. In the concluding section of the paper, we discuss the broader

implications of our …ndings for public …nance and policy in developing countries.

   The …rst stylized fact we document is that informal taxation is a widespread phenomenon,

and it can form a substantial share of local revenue. The share of households making informal

tax payments is 20% or higher in all but one country in our sample and exceeds 50% in several

countries. Participation rates are always higher in rural areas than in urban areas.     Across our

sampled countries, informal taxes generally comprise a small share of household expenditure (0.85%

in the modal country) and a modest share of total taxes paid by households (15.7% in the modal

country).   However, informal taxes can still be an important source of local public …nance.      In

our Indonesia sample, for example, including informal taxation almost triples the estimates of the

amount of revenue under local control.

   The second stylized fact we document is that, within individual communities, informal taxation

is redistributive but regressive. Wealthier households in a community are generally more likely to

participate in informal taxation schemes than poorer households. The elasticity of total payment

with respect to household expenditure is positive but less than one in all countries, indicating

that informal taxes rise with expenditure, but the average informal tax rate (i.e., informal taxes

divided by total expenditure) falls with expenditure. Informal taxation is therefore regressive, but

still provides redistribution if the local public good it …nances is valued equally across the income

distribution. Informal taxes are more regressive than formal taxes, both within communities and

when examined in aggregate at the national level.

   The third stylized fact we document is that the form of payment di¤ers from a traditional tax;

in particular, in-kind labor payments play a substantial role in informal taxation. Moreover, both

the participation gradient and the elasticity of payment with respect to household expenditure are

smaller for labor payments than for money payments, so that labor payments are relatively more

important for poorer households. All three stylized facts we observe are remarkably consistent

across countries.



                                                 2
   Given these facts, we propose a simple model of informal taxation. Although informal taxation

may appear suboptimal, we argue that it can in fact arise as the solution to a constrained optimal

tax problem. In our model, communities in developing countries wish to …nance a public good in

a social welfare maximizing way. Communities face an enforcement constraint (punishments for

non-compliance may be limited) and two information constraints: a hidden income constraint (high

ability types can pretend to be low ability types) and a shirking constraint (those supposed to be

working on public projects can shirk).

   We model formal and informal taxation as having di¤erent constraint parameters, arising from

di¤erences in their tax technologies. In the informal system, enforcement happens through social

sanctions rather than through courts. This means that the informal tax system can use information

that is observable but not legally veri…able, so informal taxation mechanisms e¤ectively have better

information than the formal tax system. On the other hand, by foregoing formal legal proceedings,

the informal system must use less severe punishments – i.e., social sanctions instead of jail time

– which limits the progressivity of the informal taxation system. The choice between formal and

informal taxes therefore represents a trade-o¤ between enforcement and information.

   The model requires few assumptions and parsimoniously explains the observed stylized facts.

Informal taxes are likely to be preferred to formal taxes if evasion costs are low or if the community

can e¤ectively levy social sanctions. We should therefore expect to see informal taxation in poorer

countries and in rural areas.   Informal taxation should have a positive income gradient but will

not necessarily be progressive. Finally, labor payments can be used as a screening device, since

unobservably high ability types face a higher cost of in-kind labor payments relative to monetary

payments. This rationalizes the high observed prevalence of labor payments in the data and the

fact that labor payments have a lower income elasticity than monetary payments.

   We argue that the empirical evidence is more consistent with this model than with alternative

models of public goods provision, such as altruism and user fees. Payment decisions do not appear

to be made by households unilaterally: in our Indonesia sample, only 8% of households report that

they decide for themselves whether to pay; 84% report that a local leader decides. A substantial

share of households also report negative consequences for refusal to participate, consistent with the



                                                  3
anecdotal evidence on informal taxation. While it does appear in some cases that households are

more likely to pay for goods from which they bene…t, a pure user fee model would not predict the

income gradients observed in the data.

        While our framework predicts that informal taxation is more likely to be prevalent in developing

countries, these types of systems may arise whenever there are limits to formal taxation and such

mechanisms are feasible. When Vermont’s school …nance redistribution law made …nancing schools

through higher local taxes more expensive, some communities responded by explicitly pressuring

households and businesses to make "voluntary" contributions to schools (Winerip 2003). School

fund leaders in Manchester, for example, published lists of compliers and encouraged residents to call

or visit non-contributer neighbors (Tomsho 2001). Residents described a variety of sanctions levied

on non-contributers, ranging from speci…c punishments ("if there is a restaurant that didn’t pay, I

know that I’m not going to eat there") to more intangible social sanctions ("it’s hard to look at those

people in the same way").3 Although our empirical analysis focuses on developing countries, the

model developed here is conceptually applicable to socially enforced extra-governmental provision

of public goods more generally.

        The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of the existing literature and

Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 presents the stylized facts. Section 5 develops our model of

informal taxation, and Section 6 considers speci…c empirical evidence that distinguishes our model

from other potential theories. Section 7 discusses the implications of our …ndings and concludes.



2        Existing Evidence on Informal Taxation

Qualitative evidence from a variety of settings suggests that informal taxation is a common form of

local …nance for the construction and maintenance of public goods such as roads, schools, and water

systems throughout the developing world (e.g., Ostrom 1991), although formal empirical evidence

on informal taxation remains fairly limited. A range of studies have documented the presence of
    3
    Similar extragovernmental mechanisms were observed in California when Proposition 13 limited local property
taxes (Brunner and Sonstelie 2003). Labor and money contributions to …re departments, libraries, and recreational
services have also been shown to increase in response to …scal limitations (e.g., Ferris 1984, Bice and Hoyt 2000).




                                                        4
informal taxation in various countries in Latin America, Africa, and Asia.4

       In many of these countries, informal tax systems appear to form a very important component

of community development.           In Indonesia, for example, the concepts of gotong royong (mutual

assistance) and swadaya (self-help) have become deeply institutionalized within local communities:

residents are expected to make labor and monetary payments toward development projects. 37%

of the cost of village public goods examined by Rao (2004) in Indonesia are contributed by the

community. In Kenya, harambee (pull together) projects accounted for 11.4% of national develop-

ment expenditure between 1967 and 1973, and harambee-…nanced spending on particular sectors,

such as education, matched or exceeded government expenditure (Mbithi and Rasmusson 1977).

       Several patterns emerge from the range of anecdotes and studies of informal taxation. First,

payments do not appear to be chosen by households individually.                     Rather, expected payments

are generally coordinated by community leaders or a project committee.                        Households may be

expected to provide a given monetary payment, as in the case of school fees in Kenya (Miguel and

Gugerty 2005), or provide a certain number of days of labor (Roseman 1996, Ostrom 1991). In

some cases, there may be a choice between paying in labor or in money (Njoh 2003).

       Second, many of these studies document the existence of non-contributers and describe a range

of punishments that may be imposed on such individuals.                   Miguel and Gugerty (2005) provide

several anecdotal examples of social sanctions in the context of school …nancing in western Kenya.5

A common sanction is the public announcement of the names of parents who are late with fees;

other forms of sanctions include "sending letters to the homes of parents late with fees, asking local

church leaders to encourage payment during sermons, and making personal visits to the individual

homes of debtors accompanied by the local Chief" (Miguel and Gugerty 2005). Other examples of

punishments include …nes (Ostrom 1991) and the denial of access to communal resources, such as

the use of a cattledip (Thomas 1987). It is possible that punishments could also include exclusion

from community credit or risk-sharing arrangements or other types of social enforcement, as in the
   4
     A non-exhaustive list of countries includes Cameroon (Njoh 2003), China (Eckaus 2003), India (Rao 2004),
Indonesia (Rao 2004, Beard 2007), Kenya (Mbithi and Rasmusson 1977, Thomas 1987, Barkan and Holmquist 1989,
Miguel and Gugerty 2005, Ngau 1987), Nigeria (Barkan, McNulty and Ayeni 1991), Pakistan (Khwaja 2007), Peru
(Larrabure 1966), and Zaire (Prud’homme 1992).
   5
     The paper argues that limited ability to impose social sanctions in ethnically diverse communities leads to lower
…nancing of local public goods.



                                                          5
informal insurance and micro…nance literatures.

   Our own direct experience with informal taxation in a village in Central Java, Indonesia, echoes

many of these themes. In 2002, a village where one of the authors was staying received 29 drums

of raw asphalt from the district government. In order to make use of the raw asphalt to resurface

a road, the village needed to raise funds for additional materials (e.g., …nely crushed gravel, coarse

gravel, sand) as well as labor. To solve this problem, the village head called a meeting in the

neighborhood where the road would be built. At that meeting, the village head, neighborhood

head and an informal community leader (a local school teacher), went around the room "assigning"

payments to each household. These payments increased with income: poorer households would

be asked to pay a small amount (usually a few days of labor), whereas wealthier households were

asked to pay in money, with the wealthiest households asked to pay the most. The meeting did

not specify what sanctions would be for non-payment; however, given that payments were assigned

in a public meeting, one can presume that there would have been social pressure applied to those

who failed to meet their assigned payment level.

   To the best of our knowledge, quantitative work on the distribution of informal tax burdens has

focused on two countries: Indonesia and Kenya. Beard (2007) …nds that Indonesian households

with more assets or more education pay more in labor and money toward informal taxation; those

with high household expenditure pay less. Note that these e¤ects are not unconditional: regressions

include all of these factors as independent variables. In surveys of particular communities in Kenya,

Thomas (1987) …nds that labor payments are widespread and that the rich are more likely to make

cash payments than the poor, and Barkan and Holmquist (1989) …nd that participation and labor

payments tend to follow an inverse U-shape with respect to landholding while payments in cash

are increasing in landholding.

   An open question is whether or not informal tax mechanisms appear similar across the broad

range of countries in which they are observed.         In the next sections of the paper, we provide

systematic cross-country evidence to document several stylized facts about informal taxation.




                                                   6
3        Data

We compiled microdata from around the world to create a dataset that covers the phenomenon

of informal taxation in as many countries as possible. We examined over 100 household surveys,

including (but not limited to) every publicly available World Bank Living Standards Measurement

Study (LSMS) survey.6 To be included in our sample, a survey needed to elicit information specif-

ically about payment towards the provision of local public goods.                A typical example of such a

question is: "In the last 12 months did you personally or any other member of the household par-

ticipate in any of the following ... participate in the collective construction of community works

(roads, schools etc.)."7 Our sample includes every household survey that met this criterion. We

did not include surveys that asked only about labor sharing agreements among neighbors or con-

tributions to local social organizations or cases in which the labor was clearly compensated, such

as paid public works days.8

        In addition to these pre-existing datasets, we designed a special survey module on informal tax-

ation for the Health and Education Service Survey in Indonesia. This survey module included de-

tailed questions on labor and monetary payments as well as questions on the decision-making process

and enforcement of informal taxation not available on the other surveys in the sample. The Indone-

sia survey was conducted by Gadjah Mada University and The World Bank as a baseline survey for

a poverty-alleviation program. The survey took place in 5 provinces from June-September 2007,

and covered a total of 12,000 households in over 2,300 villages. More details about the survey can be

found in Olken, Onishi, and Wong (2008).

        The types of community works mentioned on these surveys include roads, water and sanitation

systems, schools, health centers, dams and irrigation systems, electricity systems, and cleaning

of public roads and areas.9        While we refer to these goods as local public goods, they may be

excludable in some cases. We return to this issue in Section 6.
    6
     The review of surveys was conducted in the summer of 2006.
    7
     Guatemala, National Survey of Living Conditions, 2000.
   8
     It is still possible that in some cases those paying labor are partially compensated by being provided food or
other bene…ts not observed in our data.
   9
     The Indonesia and Philippines surveys also includes payments towards religious places. All results remain very
similar if we exclude those who only made these types of payments.




                                                        7
       The resulting sample consists of household surveys from 10 countries: Albania, Ethiopia,

Guatemala, Indonesia, Nigeria, Nicaragua, Panama, the Philippines, Vietnam and Zambia.10 The

sample is geographically diverse, including countries from Europe, Latin America, Africa and Asia.

Table 1 provides an overview of our sample of household surveys. The surveys were conducted

between 1997 and 2007, and sample sizes range from approximately 1,500 to 30,000. The surveys

are nationally representative with the exceptions of Ethiopia, Indonesia, and the Philippines, which

were conducted in rural areas only. Indonesia and the Philippines focus on a poorer-than-average

selection of rural areas, since both surveys were conducted as baseline surveys for poverty allevia-

tion programs. As shown in the table, all surveys contain information on in-kind labor payments

toward public goods; monetary payments and quantity data are available for subsets of countries.

Note that the recall period varies across surveys: while most surveys ask about payments over

the past year, one survey (Philippines) asks only about the previous six months and two surveys

(Nicaragua and Zambia) ask about the previous 5 years (see Appendix A for more details).

       Summary statistics for each survey are given in Table 2. The summary statistics (as well as

per-capita GDP from the World Development Indicators) indicate the breadth of countries covered

by our data. For example, per-capita GDP in the surveyed countries ranges from a low of PP$774

in Zambia to a high of PP$6129 in Panama, and mean years of education for the household head

ranges from a low of 2.5 in Ethiopia to a high of 9.6 in Albania.

       We include survey data from all available countries in our empirical analysis in order to paint as

complete a picture as possible of the informal taxation phenomenon. One caveat, however, is worth

noting explicitly. To the best of our knowledge, public labor contributions are legally mandated

in Vietnam. If an individual cannot ful…ll his required contribution, he must …nd a replacement

worker or make a monetary payment equivalent to hiring a replacement at local labor costs.11 The
  10
      Two countries had multiple surveys: Vietnam and Indonesia. In Vietnam, surveys were conducted in 1998 and
2002; we use the 2002 data which has …ve times the sample size of the 1998 data. The 2000 Indonesia Family
Life Survey (IFLS) asks about informal taxation, but only measures routine cleaning activities. We therefore use
our survey module for Indonesia which has more comprehensive questions about informal tax payments. A potential
concern with our sample of countries is that relevant survey questions are more likely to be included in countries
where the phenomenon is prevalent. As discussed in Section 2, anecdotal evidence indicates that informal taxation
is common in many other countries that are similar to our sampled countries.
   11
      Speci…cally, as of the year 2000, each citizen (men 18-45 yrs old, women 18-35) is required to participate in public
service work, for 10 days per year. If one cannot participate, the individual needs to …nd some replacement worker
or submit a …nancial contribution either to the commune/ward people’s committee or to the individual’s employing



                                                            8
payments observed in Vietnam may therefore be a formal tax rather than an informal tax; we

discuss this in more detail below.



4     Stylized Facts and Implications

This section presents several stylized facts about informal taxation. We focus on the following

questions that are relevant when thinking about any tax: where is it most prevalent? how large

is it? who pays it? and how is it collected? The …rst subsection summarizes the prevalence and

magnitude of informal taxation and compares the magnitude of informal taxation to formal tax

payments made by households and to formal government expenditure. In the second subsection,

we examine the distributional implications of informal tax payments and discuss the progressivity

of informal taxation relative to formal taxation. The third subsection discusses how these taxes are

collected and explores a feature of informal taxation that sharply distinguishes it from conventional

taxation: payments are often in labor rather than money.                The …nal subsection provides a brief

discussion of the implications of these …ndings for public …nance in developing countries.


4.1     Prevalence and Magnitude of Informal Taxation

4.1.1    Descriptive statistics on prevalence and magnitude

We begin by presenting descriptive statistics to examine the most basic question about informal

taxation: prevalence. Table 3 presents three sets of descriptive statistics: the share of households

making informal taxation payments over the recall period (Panel A), the share of households making

in-kind labor payments vs. payments in money and materials (Panel B), and the average amounts

of those payments (Panel C) for each country in our sample.12
institution/enterprise. This payment is once per year (per individual), and the required amount is set equivalent to
the hiring of replacements at local labor costs. The law speci…es di¤erent degrees of formal punishments depending
the type of violations: for example, avoidance for the …rst time gets a warning and …ne. We thank Trang Nguyen for
providing this information.
  12
     As noted above, the recall period di¤ers across surveys. We report annualized amounts for quantities but do not
adjust the participation data. To facilitate interpretation, the surveys in this and subsequent tables are sorted by
survey recall period. For surveys in which respondents were asked only about labor payments, the listed participation
rates for "overall participation" can be thought of as lower bounds on true participation rates.




                                                         9
      Informal taxation is prevalent in all surveyed countries (Panel A). With the exception of Alba-

nia, participation rates are 20% or higher in all countries and exceed 50% in Ethiopia, Indonesia,

and Vietnam. Informal taxation is more prevalent in rural areas in every country in our sample for

which we have data on both. Across the sample, participation rates are between 27% (Vietnam)

and 183% (Guatemala) higher in rural areas than in urban areas.

      In-kind payments in the form of labor are common in all countries (Panel B). The share of

households paying in labor is higher than the share of households paying in money in 3 of the 5

countries for which we have data on both labor and monetary payments (Indonesia, Nicaragua,

and Zambia). In the other two countries (Panama and Vietnam), labor payments are still quite

common, with 19 and 24 percent of households making payments in labor, respectively. The gap

between urban and rural is smaller for monetary payments than for labor payments in all cases.

      Panel C shows the magnitude of informal tax payments for all countries for which quantity data

are available.     The …gures shown represent annualized labor payments (in days) and annualized

monetary payments (in 2000 PPP US dollars). Average labor payments vary from 0.2 days per

year in Albania to 14.1 days per year in Ethiopia.


4.1.2      Informal taxes and formal taxes paid by households

To better gauge the magnitude of informal taxation, we compare it to two types of benchmarks.

In this subsection, we examine the burden it imposes on households by comparing informal tax

payments to household expenditure and to total taxes paid by households. These benchmarks

are available for the same households for whom we have data on informal taxation payments,

ensuring consistent samples for comparison. In the next subsection, we compare informal taxation

to government budgets.

      In order to make these comparisons, we monetize the labor payments made by households

to construct a measure of total informal tax payments. To do so, we predict the wage for all

working household members based on their education, age, gender, and urban/rural status, and

value the labor contributions at the average predicted wage for all working household members.13
 13
      To predict wages, we …rst we approximate monthly household income per worker as annual household expenditure




                                                        10
This method values the marginal and average wage of the household equally.                         This assumption

is consistent with Benjamin (1992) who shows that household composition does not a¤ect own-

farm labor supply for agricultural households in Indonesia, suggesting that labor markets for these

households are competitive and complete.                Since predicted wages vary across households, the

magnitude of informal taxation is measured as the social cost of production.14 We use equivalence

scale adjusted household expenditure as our measure of household income.15

    Data on total tax payments comes from two sources. Direct formal taxes paid by households

are calculated as the sum of all direct tax payments observed in the data, and include items such as

land and buildings taxes and personal income taxes. Indirect formal taxes (VAT) are imputed from

consumption data and VAT and excise rates for each country.                     We do not include expenditures

on food in our VAT estimates, since most households in developing countries are unlikely to pay

VAT on most food consumption in practice. Total formal taxes are the sum of direct and imputed

indirect taxes. Further details on the calculation of direct and indirect taxes are given in Appendix
divided by 12 and the number of workers in the household. We then regress the household monthly wage rate on
each individual’s education, age, and age squared interacted with a female dummy, an urban dummy, and a female x
urban dummy. We then divide by the number of working days in a month, which we de…ne as 21.7, to get a measure
of the household daily wage rate. 21.7 ' (365.25/12)*( 5/7), where 5/7 adjusts the wage rate for working days per
week. We repeat this prediction separately for each country. We use the predicted daily wage rate, rather than the
household daily wage rate, so that when we regress payments on household expenditures below, we will not be using
expenditures on both the left hand and right hand sides of the same regression.
   14
      Note that this is not necessarily the same as the value of the output produced, particularly if labor payments are
made by individuals whose wage rates exceed the unskilled wage rate. Note also that this measure may be biased if
labor contributions are made by those with the lowest opportunity cost of time, making the average household wage
an overestimate. On the hand, it is possible that some people who are listed as "working" do not work a full 260
work days per year, which would lead us to underestimate their true wage rate, or that those who contribute are
prime-age males with a higher marginal product than the average in the household. We discuss speci…cations using
labor measured in days rather than monetized days below.
   15
      Income data from developing country household surveys is often unreliable, so we follow the standard convention
of using household expenditures as a proxy for household income throughout the paper. Since household expenditure
includes direct and indirect taxes, it is conceptually a "pre-tax" measure. To be consistent, one might also want to
add back income lost as a result of informal tax payments. Since our measure of the household wage rate is likely to
be noisy, we do not make this adjustment.
   Following Deaton 1997, we de…ne equivalent expenditure as
                                               household expenditure
                                         (adults + 1 children + 2 inf ants)
Infants are de…ned as those aged 0-4; children are de…ned as those aged 5 to 14. Combining Deaton 1997’s estimates
of total child costs and Olken 2005’s estimates of household economies of scale, we set 1 = 0:6 and 2 = 0:5 and
  = 0:85.
   As an alternative, we have veri…ed that all empirical results are qualitatively similar if we use log total household
expenditure and a set of household size dummies instead of log equivalent expenditure.




                                                          11
A.

       Using this data, we calculate informal taxes as a share of total household expenditure and

informal taxes as a share of total household taxes (informal + direct formal + indirect formal).

Table 4 presents the mean of these variables for each country in the dataset. Since some households

may live in areas where informal taxation does not occur, we present both results for all households

(rows 1 and 3) and for all households that have non-zero informal tax payments (rows 2 and 4).

       Overall, informal taxation appears to comprise a small share of household expenditure, although

there is substantial heterogeneity across countries. Mean informal taxation payments range from

a low of 0.04% of household expenditure in Albania to a high of 3.8% in Ethiopia. Conditional on

making any informal tax payments, shares range from 0.37% (Albania) to 6.8% (Ethiopia).

       Informal taxes are a moderate share of total taxes paid by households: mean shares are 0.5%

in Albania, 7% in the Philippines, 16% in Vietnam, 17% in Indonesia, and 27% in Ethiopia. As a

share of total tax payments, informal taxes are therefore broadly comparable in magnitude to local

or state taxes in the United States.


4.1.3      Informal taxes and formal government expenditure

To understand how important informal taxation is to local public …nance, we compare informal

taxation to government budgets.             We focus on Indonesia, where for the 2001 budget year we

have data on both district expenditures and village expenditures for the districts and villages in

our survey area.16 We convert all amounts to 2000 PPP dollars. We calculate the mean per-

household level of informal taxes and formal taxes from the household survey, as well as the mean

per-household level of village and district revenues and village and district expenditures for our

sample area; results are given in Table 5.17

       We …nd that informal taxes are large relative to village budgets. Average annual per household
  16
      District budget data in Indonesia is available annually through 2005. Village budgets, however, are only collected
once every decade in the census of villages (PODES); the most recent data comes from the 2002-2003 census of
villages, which asked about village budgets during 2001. We therefore use 2001 district budget data as well to ensure
comparability with the village data.
   17
      Note that the village budgets were available for 19 of the 20 districts in our household survey area. We have
therefore calculated all statistics in Table 5 on the same set of 19 districts to ensure maximum comparability. Note
also that the household survey sample only includes subdistricts that are no more than 70% urban, so it potentially
excludes the very urban central areas of a few districts.



                                                          12
village budgets are 43.67 dollars per year, whereas our household survey suggests that per household

informal taxes are 49.86 dollars per year. Moreover, the o¢ cial village budget actually already

includes 13.09 dollars per year in "on-the-books" informal tax payments. If we subtract the 13.09

dollars per year in informal tax payments from the village budget to avoid double-counting, then

informal taxes –at 49.86 per year –are 1.6 times as large as all other sources of revenue in the village

budget (30.59 dollars per year). The inclusion of informal taxation in the village budget indicates

that local governments view informal taxation explicitly as a source of government revenue, and

the magnitudes demonstrate that informal taxation is one of the primary ways through which local

public goods are …nanced by these villages.

    We next compare informal taxation to district budgets. Since Indonesia’s decentralization be-

gan in 2001, Indonesian districts have primary responsibility for virtually all local public goods,

including local infrastructure, water, health, and education.18 The budget is divided into routine

expenditures (mostly civil servant salaries) and development expenditures (mostly capital expen-

ditures).19 These district budgets also include the intergovernmental transfers to villages, so these

budgets should be viewed as a superset of the village budgets. Informal taxation payments are 7%

as large as total district budgets, and 22% as large as district spending on development expendi-

tures. This implies that a non-trivial share of all spending on local public goods occurs through

the informal taxation mechanism.

    Third, we compare informal taxes with the other taxes that are under the control of local

government: formal taxes and fees collected by the village and district governments. Table 5 shows

that, other than informal taxation, sources of formal tax revenue under direct control of local

governments are extremely limited, as most revenue comes from intergovernmental grants from the

national government (which administers the VAT and other taxes). Informal taxes are 12 times

larger than total village formal taxes and almost triple total district level formal taxes and fees.

Informal taxes are therefore –by far –the largest source of …nance that is under local control.

    The above …gures present estimates of informal taxes in which labor payments are monetized
  18
     Note that since 2001 was the …rst year of decentralization, districts may have unsure as to the total amount of
central transfers they would receive and budgeted conservatively, resulting in a surplus.
  19
     Note that informal taxation payments are not reported in district budgets, so double-counting is not an issue in
this comparison.



                                                         13
as described in the previous section. We have also constructed estimates of informal taxes in which

labor payments are monetized using the local unskilled wage rate.20 The resulting estimates of per

household informal taxes decline only slightly, from 49.86 to 44.30 dollars per year. This adjustment

does not substantively a¤ect any of our conclusions about the importance of informal taxes as a

local revenue source.


4.2     Distributional Implications of Informal Taxation

This section examines the distributional implications of informal taxation by looking at the rela-

tionship between informal taxation payments and household expenditure. We begin by examining

the distribution of informal taxation payments within communities, which tells us how the bur-

den for …nancing a given level of public goods is borne across high and low income individuals

in those communities. Since informal taxation payments are determined at the community level,

this within-community analysis is the level of analysis one needs for developing models of informal

taxation. We then compare the aggregate burden of informal and formal taxation across the in-

come distribution. We do not compare informal taxes directly across communities within country,

since the level, type, and quality of public goods provided are likely to vary unobservably across

communities.


4.2.1    Informal taxation within communities

We …rst examine the participation margin – i.e., which households make informal taxation pay-

ments. We estimate the following conditional logit speci…cation via maximum likelihood:

                                            !           hP                                       i
                        Hc                                    Hc
                        X                         exp         h=1 P AYhc (   LN (EQU IV EXP )hc )
         P PAYc j             P AYhc = Tc       =P               hP                                i              (1)
                                                                   Hc
                        h=1                         dc 2Sc exp     h=1 dhc (   LN (EQU IV EXP )hc )
  20
    The local unskilled wage rate is calculated using survey information provided by the village head. We sum the
daily wage of a male laborer in the month of the interview in the village/ward with the average value per day of
goods provided for consumption while working (if applicable). We then divided by the number of hours worked by
laborers on an average day and multiplied by 6 to get the value of labor for a "normal" work day at the village level.




                                                         14
where h represents a household, c represents a community, P AYhc is a dummy for whether house-

hold c made any payments, P AYc is the vector of P AYhc for all households h in community c,

LN (EQU IV EXP ) is a measure of log household expenditure per equivalent adult, Tc is the num-

ber of respondents in community c who reported any payments, and Sc is the set of all possible
                                          P c
vectors dc = fd1c ; :::; dHc c g such that H
                                           h=1 dhc = Tc .
                                                         21 The key coe¢ cient of interest is , which is


the elasticity of the probability of making payments with respect to equivalent household expendi-

ture. Robust standard errors in this and subsequent regressions are adjusted for clustering at the

community level.

    The results are presented in Panel A of Table 6. Each cell in the table reports the coe¢ cient

on log equivalent household expenditure ( ) from a separate regression of the form in equation

(1).22 The estimated overall participation-expenditure gradient is statistically signi…cantly positive

in 6 of the 10 countries in our sample and is never negative and statistically signi…cant. The

modal elasticity among all 10 countries in the sample is about 0.2. This demonstrates that the

probability of payment is increasing with household expenditure within communities, and this

pattern is generally consistent throughout the the countries in our sample.

    We next examine the relationship between the quantity of payments and expenditure for coun-

tries for which data on the quantity of payments are available. Given the large number of ob-

servations with no payments, we estimate this relationship as a …xed-e¤ects Poisson quasi-MLE

regression with robust standard errors (Hausman, Hall and Griliches 1984, Wooldridge 1999; see

also Wooldridge 2002). This estimates, by MLE, equations such that


                   E (P AY M EN T AM OU N Thc ) =             c exp (   LN (EQU IV EXP )hc )                      (2)


where    c   is a community …xed-e¤ect, and P AY M EN T M OU N T is the quantity of total payments

(in local currency). Given the Poisson QMLE speci…cation, the resulting coe¢ cients                          can be

interpreted as elasticities.
  21
     Note that for the Philippines, Albania, Ethopia, Guatemala, and Nigeria, the P AY variable refers to in-kind
labor payments only. For all other countries, the P AY variable captures both monetary and in-kind payments.
  22
     As discussed above, we obtain similar results in this and subsequent speci…cations if we regress contributions on
log household expenditure and add as controls dummies for household size (not shown).



                                                         15
       To calculate P AY M EN T AM OU N T , we monetize labor payments using the imputed average

household wage as described above.23           By allowing the wage to vary with household income, we

incorporate the fact that providing a day of labor is more costly for those with high opportunity

cost.

       The results (Table 6, Panel B) show that total payments are increasing in expenditure in all

countries for which we have quantity data, and the coe¢ cients are statistically signi…cant in all cases.

The estimated elasticities of informal taxation payments with respect to equivalent expenditure are

0.40 in the Philippines, 0.33 in Albania, 0.13 in Ethiopia, 0.39 in Indonesia, and 0.08 in Vietnam.

These elasticities are also strictly and statistically signi…cantly less than 1, indicating that while

payments increase with expenditure, the share of household expenditures devoted to informal tax

payments (i.e., the average tax rate) is declining with expenditure.24 Payments are also increasing

in expenditure even conditional on making a positive informal tax payment (Table 6, Panel C), so

the overall e¤ects are driven by the intensive margin as well as the extensive margin.

       Together, the results tell a consistent story: within communities, the wealthy pay more in

informal taxes than the poor on an absolute level, though they pay less as a share of their total

resources.


4.2.2      Comparing formal and informal taxation

We next compare informal taxes to formal direct and indirect tax payments by households. The

results are presented in Table 7. For comparison purposes, Panel A shows the relationship between

informal taxes and equivalent household expenditures with community …xed e¤ects. Panel B repeats

the same regressions for direct formal taxes, and Panel C repeats the regressions for total direct
  23
     As an alternative, we have considered a speci…cation in which we examine days, rather than monetizing by the
wage rate (results not reported). As one would expect, the coe¢ cients examining just days are generally smaller than
in the monetized days speci…cation, although the gradient remains positive and signi…cant in Albania and Indonesia
and positive and insigni…cant in the Philippines and Ethiopia. The coe¢ cient for Vietnam is negative and signi…cant,
which may re‡ect features of the mandatory labor payment system.
  24
     Note that monetizing labor payments at a common rate, rather than at the predicted household wage rate as
we do, would make informal taxation appear even more regressive. One might be concerned that measurement
error in household expenditure data could cause the estimates to be less than one even if informal taxation is truly
progressive. However, applying the classical measurement error attenuation bias formula to our estimates shows that
measurement error would have to account for more than 60% of the total variation in observed household expenditures
in all countries in order for this to be the case.




                                                         16
and indirect formal taxes.25

    The results in Table 7 show that in all countries we examine, the estimated elasticities of formal

taxes with respect to household expenditure are greater than the estimated elasticities for informal

taxes. For example, the elasticity of formal direct taxes with respect to household consumption

Table 8 is 1.526 in the Philippines, 1.433 in Albania, and 1.372 in Indonesia, so that formal direct

taxes are progressive in these countries. By comparison, the analogous elasticity for informal taxes

is 0.395 in the Philippines, 0.334 in Albania, and 0.387 in Indonesia, so informal taxes are on

average regressive. Informal taxes are levied by local governments, whereas VAT and formal direct

taxes tend to be levied by state or national governments, so these are not necessarily taxes levied

by the same level of government; nevertheless, these regressions are all within community, and the

di¤erence in progressivity is substantial. Analogous regressions without community …xed e¤ects

produce similar results.

    Figure 1 illustrates these di¤erences graphically, plotting informal taxes, direct formal taxes

and total formal taxes (i.e., direct + indirect), all expressed as percentages of total household

expenditure. For each country, we plot the results of a non-parametric Fan regression (Fan 1992)

of each variable against log equivalent household expenditure. These regressions do not include

community …xed e¤ects, so they represent average progressivity or regressivity across our entire

sample in each country. The solid lines in Figure 1 show informal taxes, the dashed lines shows

direct formal taxes, and the dotted line shows total formal taxes. For comparison, we also plot a

histogram of log equivalent household expenditure. To keep the graphs readable, we have excluded

the bottom 0.5% and top 0.5% of the household expenditure distribution. The most striking fact

about these graphs is that the formal tax system is progressive in most countries whereas the

informal tax system is regressive. Including informal taxation therefore makes the total tax burden

look more regressive than previously thought.
  25
     Note that since formal indirect taxes are imputed by applying VAT rates to di¤erent categories of consumption
(see Appendix A), measurement error will bias the coe¢ cients on formal indirect taxes towards 1. In that sense
the most meaningful comparisons are between informal taxes and formal direct taxes, both of which are estimated
completely independently of household consumption.




                                                       17
4.3   Monetary vs. In-Kind Payments

A notable feature of informal taxation is that payments are often made in labor rather than money

(Table 3). To better understand this phenomenon, it is useful to understand in more detail which

types of households pay in labor versus money.

   To do so, we re-estimate equations (1) and (2) separately for each type of payment, focusing

on the countries for where we have data on both monetary and in-kind labor payments. In the

quantity analysis, to be consistent with the previous tables, we continue to value labor payments

at the household’s predicted average wage rate. Using days instead of monetized labor payments

generally makes the reported estimates for labor smaller and accentuates the di¤erence between

labor and money more than shown in the tables here.

   The results for the participation margin – does the household pay any labor or any money –

are presented in Panel A of Table 8, and the results on the quantity paid are presented in Panel

B of Table 8. The results in both panels show a very clear pattern: for almost all countries in the

sample, monetary payments increase more quickly with overall household expenditure than in-kind

labor payments. This is true both on the participation margin and, for the two countries where

we have quantity data, on the quantity margin as well. For example, looking within communities

in Indonesia, the elasticity of labor payments with respect to household expenditure is 0.26, but

the elasticity of monetary payments with respect to household expenditure is 1.45 (see Panel B of

Table 8). This implies that monetary contributions are particularly concentrated at higher income

levels, a fact we return to in the theoretical framework below.


4.4   Implications

These stylized facts have several implications for public …nance in developing countries. First,

a substantial share of households in many developing countries participate in these mechanisms.

Informal taxation can be the dominant source of revenue for local communities and may be a non-

trivial component of national spending on public capital improvements in developing countries.

Failing to take informal taxation into account will lead to underestimates of the tax burden faced

by households, the size of the public sector, and the level of decentralization. Second, informal


                                                 18
taxation is redistributive but regressive, and this pattern is observed in almost all of our sample

countries. Formal taxes appear to be more progressive than informal taxes, so estimates of formal

taxes alone may result in overestimates of the overall progressivity of the tax system. Finally,

a notable feature of informal taxation is that in-kind labor payments are an important source

of …nance and are made even by households with relatively high household expenditure. While

measuring a household’s true opportunity cost of time is di¢ cult, the …ndings certainly suggest

that at least some households are making ine¢ cient payments in labor.

    These …ndings also raise a number of questions. Why would communities choose such mecha-

nisms of …nance, and why do they tend to be concentrated in developing countries and poor and

rural areas? What determines the distribution of payments across individuals within a community,

and why do wealthier households pay more than poorer households? Why are in-kind payments so

prevalent in informal tax systems when they are rarely seen as part of modern formal tax systems,

and why might ine¢ cient labor payments arise in equilibrium?

    In the next section of the paper, we provide a framework for thinking about informal taxation.

The goal of the model is two-fold: to formalize the trade-o¤s between informal taxation and formal

taxation, and to show that the observed prevalence, distribution, and form of informal taxation

can be explained by thinking of informal taxation as a solution to a constrained optimal taxation

problem.



5    A Model of Informal Taxation

The stylized facts we observe are remarkably consistent across countries. This section develops a

simple framework for thinking about informal taxation that does not require non-standard pref-

erences, government corruption, or market failures in labor or credit markets, but instead treats

informal taxation as one possible solution to an optimal tax problem, with asymmetric information

and screening. We discuss alternative models in Section 6.

    In our model, local governments face a standard problem: …nancing local public goods in a

social welfare maximizing way.   We consider three sources of departure from the …rst best.     As




                                                19
in standard taxation models, governments face information constraints about true earnings ability.

Our model adds two additional constraints: governments may face constraints on their ability to

enforce the desired tax schedule, and they may also face constraints on labor taxes, since individuals

can shirk on required labor payments. These information and enforcement constraints limit the

degree to which the government can achieve redistribution in …nancing the public good.

       We model formal and informal taxes as having di¤erent constraint parameters arising from

di¤erences in their tax technologies. In the informal system, enforcement happens through social

sanctions rather than through courts. This means that the informal system must use less severe

punishments than the formal system, i.e., social sanctions instead of jail time.                      However, the

informal tax system can use information that does not meet the burden of proof required in court

(i.e., information that is observable but not veri…able), so it e¤ectively has better information than

the formal tax system.      26


       We demonstrate that informal taxation may be the optimal solution to the government’s con-

strained maximization problem and show that the model’s predictions are consistent with the

observed patterns of informal tax prevalence.              We also show that the predictions of the model

match the stylized facts on the distribution and form of informal tax payments.

       Modeling these payments as the equilibrium of a screening mechanism di¤ers from the literature

on voluntary contributions to public goods, which often models contributions driven by a personal

desire to a¤ect the level of the public good (e.g., Olson 1965), a warm-glow from donations (e.g.,

Andreoni 1990), or to signal wealth to others (e.g., Glazer and Konrad 1996). others have modeled

private provision of public goods in a collective action framework (e.g., Bagnoli and Lipman 1989,

Bergstrom, Blume and Varian 1986). Masclet, et al. (2003) and Falk et al. (2005) have emphasized

the role of social sanctions as a mechanism through which the free rider problem can be overcome,

and Fehr and Gachter (2000) show experimentally that cooperators are willing to punish free-riders

even if this is costly for them and even if they cannot expect future bene…ts from their punishment
  26
     Another possible constraint on redistribution is exit from the local community. Exit would a¤ect both formal
and informal taxes in the same way, so for simplicity, we do not consider the issue of exit here. In practice, mobility
is often low in developing countries (Bardhan 2002). Abramitzky (2008) explores the issue of exit as a constraint on
redistribution in a di¤erent context, that of Israeli kibbutzim.




                                                          20
activities.27 To the best of our knowledge, little work has focused on formally modeling informal

tax mechanisms speci…cally.          An exception is Wilson (1992), who argues that cooperation in a

repeated prisoner’s dilemma game may be sustainable in the context of harambee programs in

Kenya.

    This section proceeds as follows. We begin in section 5.1 by setting up the general social

planner’s maximization problem as a two-type screening model with enforcement and information

constraints and discuss characteristics of the general solution.              We then introduce informal and

formal taxation in the context of this model by varying the enforcement and information constraints.

Section 5.2 discusses the implications of the model for the empirics of informal taxation.


5.1      Model

5.1.1     Setup

Suppose that there are N individuals. A fraction                of the individuals have wage wH and a frac-

tion 1       have wage wL where wL < wH . We assume that w is private information and that

each individual has an endowment of time 1 which they spend working. Since we are primarily

interested in the tradeo¤ between enforcement and information, we model all behavioral responses

coming through an evasion decision rather than through a labor supply decision. This assumption

seems plausible in the contexts we are studying, and also allows us to capture the idea that local

communities may have information on earnings ability rather than just earnings. Each individual’s

wealth is therefore equal to his wage rate.            There are no savings, so individuals consume their

entire wealth after paying any taxes.

    Each individual i can potentially consume two goods, the private good (wi ) and the public good

(g). If the public good is provided, all individuals consume it and g = 1; if it is not provided, then

g = 0. We assume that utility over the private good is concave and that the utility from the private
  27
     On the empirical side, the lower public good provision in ethnically diverse communities has been explained using
the theory of social sanctions: Miguel and Gugerty (2005) argue that social sanctions are harder to enforce between
di¤erent ethnic groups, which explains the lower contributions to public goods in diverse communities. Alesina et al.
(1999) also show empirically that more diverse communities have lower public good provision.




                                                         21
and public good are separable, i.e.

                                                    U = u (wi ) + g

where u is concave and                indicates the value from consuming the public good. We assume that u
                                                                                                      wu00 (w)
has the property that the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion is greater than 1 (i.e.,               u0 (w)     > 1).28

       The public good costs G to produce, and once produced is both non-rival and non-excludable.

G is determined exogenously.29 For the public good to be provided, total government revenue R

must be greater than or equal to G. We assume that providing the public good is e¢ cient, so that

the …rst-best involves providing the public good.

       We assume that the goal of the government is to …nance the public good in a way that maximizes

social welfare.      Taxes cannot be negative; in other words, redistribution occurs only through

progressive payments toward the public good.30

       Taxes can potentially be levied in two forms: money and labor. De…ne                       H   and    L   as the

monetary payments from the high and low type. De…ne                     H    and   L   as the labor payments from

the high and low type, de…ned as a share of each type’s total time budget. After-tax income for

type i is then wi (1             i)     i.

       We assume that        i   is publicly valued at the low type wage rate wL , i.e.,          is always used for

low-skill tasks.     This implies that labor by the high type is ine¢ cient, since it is valued at the

opportunity cost wH by the high type but valued at wL in the government budget constraint. As

we show below, this asymmetry in the value of labor means that the government can use labor as
  28
    This assumption guarantees a single-crossing property which is necessary to allow screening using labor taxes
( ), discussed in more detail below. To see this, note that

                                                 @2U
                                                     =   wu00 (w)   u0 (w)
                                                @ @w
         00              2
If wu     (w)
     u0 (w)
              > 1, then @@ @w
                           U
                              > 0, so that the marginal utility cost of an extra hour worked is strictly increasing in
wealth.
  29
     We focus here on the decisions made by local government trying to raised a …xed amount of revenue to …nance
a public good, abstracting from intergovernmental transfers and endogenous public good size.
  30
     In a system where a large share of payments take the form of in-kind unskilled labor, positive net transfers (i.e.,
net receipt of unskilled labor) could be di¢ cult to implement. In addition, we can observe only payments (either
zero or positive) to the public good in the data. General transfer payments, if any, may occur through a di¤erent
mechanism. In this respect, we can think of informal taxation as somewhat analagous to a property tax system (a
tax levied to …nance a set of goods) that may exist in addition to a traditional income tax and transfer system.




                                                          22
a screening device.31

       We assume that the social planner faces three types of constraints in designing the optimal

allocation. First, there is the enforcement constraint: if a given type fails to pay his required taxes,

the planner can impose a utility punishment up to a maximum of P . This punishment P enters the

planner’s problem as an IR constraint. Second, there is the hidden income constraint: by paying a

utility cost D, a high type can hide his income and pretend to be a low type. Third, there is the

shirking constraint: by paying a utility cost S, the type who is supposed to do the higher amount

of work in labor can shirk and do only the lowest amount of labor required of any type (denoted

 ).32 The hidden income and shirking constraints enter the planner’s problem as IC constraints.

Together, the triplet of costs, (P; D; S), is what we refer to as the technology of the tax system.

We will model informal vs. formal taxation as having di¤erent tax system technologies.


5.1.2      Planner’s problem and characteristics of the solution

Faced with a given tax technology (P; D; S), the social planner’s problem is to maximize social

welfare subject to the enforcement (IR), hidden income (IC), and shirking (IC) constraints, i.e., he

solves:



                  max         (u (wH (1    H)       H ))   + (1       ) (u (wL (1        L)   L ))   +           (3)
                  ( i;   i)


subject to the enforcement constraints (IR):


                                    u (wH )     P          u (wH (1       H)        H)                       (ECH )

                                    u (wL )     P          u (wL (1      L)     L)                           (ECL )
  31
     While use of labor as a screening device has been considered in the design of income maintenance programs (e.g.,
Besley and Coate 1992), it has not, to the best of our knowledge, been considered in the context of raising revenue.
  32
     Note that hiding income allows the high type to pretend to be the low type and pay the labor and money taxes
required by the low type, whereas shirking allows each type to do the minimum amount of required labor without
a¤ecting the monetary taxes.




                                                            23
hidden income constraints (IC):


                       u (wH (1        L)     L)     D             u (wH (1        H)        H)    (HIH )

                      u (wL (1        H)     H)      D             u (wL (1        L)       L)      (HIL )


shirking constraints (IC):




                       u (wH (1        )     H)     S          u (wH (1            H)       H)     (SCH )

                        u (wL (1       )     L)     S          u (wL (1        L)           L)     (SCL )


the government budget constraint:

                                                                                        G
                             (    H   + wL   H)   + (1        )(   L   + wL   L)   =
                                                                                        N

and non-negativity constraints:

                                              i     0,    i    0 8i

   Note that in the …rst best (when no constraints bind), the planner will set taxes so that the

after-tax marginal utilities are equal for the two types; if the non-negativity constraint binds, the
                                                                        G
optimum in the …rst-best will be to set      L    = 0 and      H    =   N.

   Several comments are worth making about the general solution to this problem.                  We …rst

examine the form of tax payments of each type and then discuss the distributional implications.


Remark 1 The high type will always pay in money, not in labor.


   Proof. All proofs are given in Appendix B.

   The fact that the high type always pays in money, not labor, is the equivalent of the "no

distortion at the top" result from the optimal tax literature (Mirrlees 1971). Note that this is not

simply a productive e¢ ciency result; as we discuss below in Section 5.3, it can be optimal to have



                                                         24
low types make ine¢ cient payments in labor, but it will never be optimal to have the highest type

do so.

     The shirking constraint determines the degree to which labor can be used as a screening device

and therefore the form of payment of the low type:


Remark 2 As the utility cost of shirking (S) increases, the low type’s taxes will weakly shift towards
                               wL L
                          @   WL L + L
taxes in labor, i.e.,           @S       0, with the inequality strict whenever ECH does not bind and

 L   > 0.


     Since an hour of the low type’s labor is publicly valued at the low type’s outside wage rate,

having the low type pay in labor does not a¤ect the government budget constraint. It does, however,

allow for screening by a¤ecting the high type’s hidden income constraint: it would now cost the

high type more in foregone income if he were to deviate to the low type’s tax package and pay labor

instead of money. As long as ECH is slack (in other words, as long as it is possible to increase

the tax payment of the high type without violating his IR constraint), then shifting the low type

toward labor will allow the planner to improve social welfare.

     If the shirking constraint for the low type does bind (from Remark 1, we know that                 = 0 at

the optimum), then there are limits to the degree to which labor can be used as a screening device.

In this case,   L   could be positive, and the inability to screen using labor could reduce the overall

progressivity of the tax system or make it no longer optimal to provide the public good. Note that

if instead the required labor was high skilled (could only be provided by the high type), there would

be no screening bene…t from labor taxes. One implication is that such projects are less likely to

take place.

     We next examine the distribution of payments:


Remark 3 As long as the planner has some information (either D > 0 or S > 0) and P >
                      G
u(wH )      u wH      N   , then if the public good is provided, total payments will be strictly increasing

in household expenditure, i.e., it will always be the case that      H   + wH   H   >   L   + wL   L:



     Thus as long as the government has any information and su¢ cient ability to enforce, the tax


                                                      25
system will be redistributive –i.e., the high type will pay more in taxes than the low type.33 This

result comes directly from the fact that the planner is maximizing social welfare and the marginal

utility of income is higher for the low type. The di¤erence in tax payments between the two types

is weakly increasing in the wage gap between the two types.

       The fact that the high type pays more does not necessarily imply that the tax system will be

progressive –i.e., it does not imply that the high type will pay more in taxes as a share of income

than the low type. In fact, whether the tax system is progressive or regressive is theoretically

ambiguous and depends on the parameters of the model.

       It is also important to note that while the utility costs (P; D; S) represent a social loss, none

of these costs should be borne in equilibrium.            E¢ ciency costs relative to the …rst best instead

take two forms. First, the public good may not be provided whereas it will always be provided in

the …rst best. This may occur if the government cannot satisfy the enforcement and information

constraints and still meet its budget constraint or if redistribution is limited enough that providing

the public good actually reduces social welfare. Second, in a multiple type case, it may be optimal

for the government to require ine¢ cient labor payments from individuals whose wage rate exceeds

the unskilled wage rate, since those labor payments serve as a screening device for higher wage

types. We discuss extensions to the multiple type case in more detail below.


5.1.3      Formal vs. informal taxes

We model formal and informal taxation as having di¤erent technology triplets. Formal taxes

are thus represented by the triplet (PF ; DF ; SF ) whereas informal taxes are represented by the

triplet (PI ; DI ; SI ). We assume that PF         PI – i.e., the punishments that can be imposed by the

courts, conditional on detecting non-compliance, are at least as great as the punishments that can

be imposed informally through social sanctions.34              By using the formal legal system, the social
  33
     We monetize labor payments by the high type using the high type’s wage rate, since this measure is most relevant
for considering the distribution of tax burdens.
  34
     Note that social sanctions must be levied by individual community members, not by the social planner directly.
However, we can think of the social planner as coordinating the community on a particular equilibrium by choosing
the schedule of social sanctions to be implemented by the community. If each individual in the community’s cost of
enforcing a social sanction on someone else is less than the cost of receiving a social sanction themselves, there is
an equilibrium where everyone in the community enforces the social sanction on non tax payers, as well as enforces




                                                         26
planner can in theory levy an unlimited punishment if the individual does not meet his required

payments (for example, through imprisonment); in the informal tax system, there are likely to be

limits on the sanctions that can be imposed for non-payment. We can think of the costs of evading

income (D) or evading labor taxes (S) as inversely related to the information the community needs

to impose punishment. A conviction in the formal legal system is likely to require a higher level

of proof than a community needs to impose informal punishments, which implies that DF                           DI

and SF      SI . The choice between formal and informal taxation thus entails a trade-o¤ between

enforcement (P ) and information (D and S).

    Considering a limiting case may be useful for intuition. As PF ! 1 and DI ! 1, formal taxes

are limited by the IC constraints (hidden income and shirking) whereas informal taxes are limited by

IR constraints (punishments). Note that there are two potential sources of informational advantage

in the informal system: communities e¤ectively have more information about true earnings ability

and they are better able to monitor labor payments.               Either of these advantages is su¢ cient to

generate the result that informal taxation may be preferable to formal taxation; we believe both

are relevant in explaining the observed stylized facts, as we discuss below.


5.2     The informal tax framework and the stylized facts

5.2.1    The choice between formal and informal taxes

It is straightforward to see that loosening any of the constraints faced by the local government will

weakly allow it to achieve higher social welfare. This framework therefore suggests that informal

taxation is likely to result in a social welfare improvement relative to formal taxation when: (1) the

ability of the community to levy social sanctions (PI ) is high; (2) there is more available information

about incomes informally than formally (DF < DI ); and (3) the ability to monitor labor payments

informally is greater than the ability to monitor formally (SF < SI ).

    The prevalence of informal taxation throughout our sample of developing countries, particularly
the social sanction on anyone who deviates and does not enforce a social sanction when they are supposed to do so.
Perroni and Scharf (2007) note that any tax schedule must ultimately be sustained by the collective willingness of
the group to enforce the schedule, and Fehr and Gachter (2000) discuss the willingness of individuals to punish free
riders even if such punishments are costly.




                                                        27
in rural areas, is consistent with the existing evidence that informal insurance and credit markets

may function more e¤ectively in rural areas, where information is better and villagers are better

able to levy informal sanctions for default (Townsend 1995, Besley and Coate 1995, Banerjee and

Newman 1998, Ghatak 1999). The ability to verify income legally may also be more di¢ cult in

developing countries, since many individuals work in or can easily shift into the informal sector.35

Unsurprisingly, informal taxation mechanisms are not generally observed in developed countries,

where it is harder to hide income and where social sanctions may be less e¤ective.36

       Our model has considered the choice between formal and informal taxation made by a given

local government. Even within developing countries, information and social enforcement are likely

to be e¤ective within small communities.              This is consistent with the observation that informal

taxes tend to be levied at local levels, rather than by higher levels of government.

       The framework also clari…es why labor payments are more commonly observed in informal

taxation systems rather than in formal tax systems. Although labor payments are always desirable

as a screening device, they are also likely to be hard to verify legally. Therefore, the community

can more easily make use of labor payments as a screening device through the informal system.

Note that labor taxes are sometimes implemented through the formal tax schedule.                           Systems of

corvee labor, for example, were common at one time in Europe and elsewhere, and mandatory

labor taxes still exist in some countries, such as Vietnam. It may be that in at least some of these

contexts, local landlords or o¢ cials did not have to meet the burden of proof required by a court

in order to punish non-compliers, resulting in a high SF .37


5.2.2      The distribution and form of informal taxes

The informal tax model makes a number of predictions about the distribution and form of informal

tax payments. As discussed above, the framework suggests that informal tax payments should be
  35
     Similarly, while landholding may be legally veri…able in theory, land taxes in developing countries have also
proven di¢ cult to implement in practice (Burgess and Stern 1993).
  36
     As noted in the introduction, however, such systems can arise even in countries like the United States in situations
in which formal taxation is limited.
  37
     A number of studies have documented substantial absenteeism in sectors such as health and education in devel-
oping countries (e.g., Banerjee and Du‡o 2006), which suggests that the e¤ectiveness of formal public works projects
may be constrained by shirking as well.




                                                           28
increasing with household expenditures. We …nd that the elasticity of total payment with respect to

household expenditure is positive in all countries (shown in Table 6), consistent with the prediction

of the model. Moreover, in the simple two-type case, it will be optimal for the public good to be

…nanced solely by the high types if income inequality is su¢ ciently high and the planner has the

ability to satisfy the high type’s IR and hidden income IC constraints. The data is also consistent

with this prediction: we observe signi…cantly positive participation gradients in the majority of

sample countries (Table 6).

       In our simple framework, we have focused on the local government making a choice between

formal and informal taxes. In practice, the optimal solution may involve the government levying

both types of taxes. The observation that formal direct taxes are generally more progressive than

informal taxes could result from local governments levying formal taxes until D binds. While such

a formal tax system could be progressive, once D binds, a marginal expansion of the formal tax

system could then only be achieved by a (very regressive) poll tax. The local government might

instead choose to expand …nancing through informal taxes, where some degree of redistribution

can be achieved by making use of the higher information (D and S) available informally. The fact

that formal direct taxes tend to be very small (Figure 1) is consistent with the idea that local

governments are constrained in their ability to levy formal taxes, i.e., D may be binding.38

       Our framework also rationalizes the prevalence of labor payments observed in the data. In the

…rst best case, the government will be indi¤erent between having the low type pay in labor versus

money.      In our framework, the government will always prefer to have the low type pay in labor

if the shirking constraint does not bind, since doing so allows the government to extract greater

payments from those with (unobservably) higher income. If the shirking constraint does bind, the

low type may make payments in both money and labor, consistent with what we observe in the

data (Table 3, Panel B). Conversely, high types should pay in money rather than in labor, which

is what we observe in almost all countries (Table 8).
  38
    By contrast, indirect formal taxes (VAT) are large, but these tend to be levied by state and national governments
and could be administratively di¢ cult to administer at the local level.




                                                         29
5.3     Extensions to multiple types

This section discusses two extensions of the model. First, we consider the case where the low

type’s wage is above the unskilled wage rate, so that having the low type pay in labor imposes

social costs. Second, we consider what happens when we introduce more than two types into the

model. Together, these two extensions allow the model to closely match all of the stylized facts

demonstrated above.

    First, consider the case when both the high and low wages are above the unskilled wage rate.

Speci…cally, suppose that a fraction       of the population earns wage wH and a fraction 1            earns

wage wM , where wH > wM . The labor payments of each type are valued by the government at

wage rate wL ; where wL < wM : The enforcement, hidden income and shirking constraints are the

same as above, with the di¤erence that the low skilled type is now receiving wage wM and paying

taxes   M wM   +   M.   In this case, the general pattern of the equilibrium –with the high type paying

more in total and the high type never paying labor taxes –still holds, i.e.:


Remark 4 Even if wM > wL ,          H   = 0 and   H   >    M   + wM   M   under conditions analogous to those

given in Remarks 1 and 3.


    The key di¤erence if wM > wL is that using labor as a screening device now has real social costs,

so it a¤ects the attractiveness of using labor as a screening device. Nevertheless, we show with a

numerical example (provided in Appendix B) that it is still possible to obtain similar equilibria,

i.e.:


Remark 5 Even if wM > wL , it is still possible to obtain an equilibrium where the high type pays

only in money and the low type pays only in labor.


    The model thus provides a potential explanation for labor payments made by those with an

opportunity cost above the unskilled wage rate, despite the fact that these in-kind payments are

ine¢ cient.

    Second, we examine the case when there are three types in the model. With three types, we can

simultaneously consider participation gradients (i.e., does the household pay anything at all) and


                                                      30
the quantity paid conditional on participating. With a numerical example (provided in Appendix

B) we can show the following possibility result:

Remark 6 If there are multiple types and if the cost of hiding income increases with the amount

of income hidden, it is possible to get both a positive participation gradient and a positive income

gradient conditional on participating.

    The example in the appendix provides parameter values for which the pattern outlined in the

above remark will hold at the optimal solution. Moreover, in this numerical example, it is also be

optimal for the middle type, whose wage rate is greater than the unskilled wage rate, to pay in the

form of labor, since these payments serve as a screening device. We have thus provided an example

that encompasses many of the stylized facts: a positive participation gradient, a positive income

gradient conditional on paying, prevalent labor payments, a steeper gradient on money payments

than on labor payments, and labor payments by those whose incomes are greater than the unskilled

wage rate.



6    Alternative Explanations

In this section we discuss other explanations for these methods of local public goods …nance. In

particular, we focus on two alternatives: voluntary contributions and user fees. The …rst possi-

bility we consider is that observed informal tax payments are voluntary contributions, motivated

by altruism or warm glow preferences (e.g., Andreoni 1990). However, the inclusion of informal

taxes in Indonesian village budgets indicates that governments view these payments as a funda-

mental component of the local budget, rather than as charitable contributions which supplement

government expenditures. In addition, there is substantial evidence that these payments are not

purely voluntary. Many of the studies discussed in Section 2, for example, speci…cally describe the

punishments that are imposed on those who do not meet their expected obligations.

    To investigate more systematically the process through which informal tax payments are de-

termined and enforced, we asked both households and village heads in the Indonesia survey to

describe who makes decisions regarding household payments and what the consequences are for


                                                   31
households who do not participate. The …rst question we asked was who makes decisions about

which households participate in such mechanisms (Table 9). Although respondents were allowed to

give multiple responses, only 8% of individual respondents and village heads reported that house-

holds make these decisions for themselves; 84% of households report that decisions are made by

neighborhood, hamlet, or village heads. We observe a similar pattern when respondents are asked

who makes decisions about how much each household is expected to pay: only 20% of households

and 15% of village heads report that households make these decisions for themselves. These consis-

tent responses from individual households and from village heads suggest that the these payments

are not voluntary contributions decided by individuals, but rather part of a system determined at

the community level.

    We then ask respondents about the consequences for not making the determined level of pay-

ment. A substantial number of respondents indicated that they would be expected to make up the

contribution in another way, either by payment at a di¤erent time or in a di¤erent form. Most

strikingly, 17% of individual respondents and 21% of village heads indicated that non-participating

households would be expected to pay a …ne.39                    Interestingly, we …nd that the probability that

a household reports a sanction for failure to pay is signi…cantly higher for wealthier households;

this is consistent with poorer households not reporting sanctions because they are not expected to

make payments (results not reported in the table). Conditional on some type of sanction being

levied, 66% of households stated that the sanction was determined by either the village head or at

a village meeting. Taken together, these …ndings suggest informal tax payments are not analogous

to charitable contributions: informal tax payments are an important component of government

budgets, payment schedules are set by the leader or group, not by the individual, and there are

consequences imposed for non-payment.

    A second alternative hypothesis is that these payments represent pre-paid user fees. A user fee

model would suggest that those who do not pay should be excluded from the public good; however,

virtually none of the individuals or village heads in the Indonesia sample described not being allowed
  39
     It is worth noting that a smaller share of respondents and village heads report that they can replace their required
labor payment with the labor of another individual. If D is high enough that the government does not need labor
as a screening device, allowing replacement labor could be e¢ cient. Otherwise, allowing individuals to replace labor
undermines labor as a screening device.



                                                           32
to use the result of the activity as a possible consequence of non-participation. In addition, a user

fee model would not necessarily generate a positive correlation between household expenditure and

payments, unless demand for the goods was correlated with household income. To examine this, we

examine whether households are more likely to pay for goods for which they bene…t and whether

this could explain the observed positive participation gradient of informal tax payments. We focus

on the two types of goods for which we can clearly separate users from non-users: we examine

whether households who have their own private well are less likely to contribute to water projects,

and whether those with school-age children are more likely to contribute to schools.40

       For countries for which we have disaggregated data on project type, we do see some mixed

evidence of user fees: in some countries, those who are likely to need public water are more likely

to pay for water projects and those with children are more likely to pay for schools (Table 10).41

However, with the exception of Zambia, we do not observe a positive expenditure gradient on

participation for schools or water projects, even in regressions where we do not control for having

children or not having access to private water.              This suggests that while these goods may be

…nanced partially through user fees, these goods are not explaining the overall positive correlation

we found above between participation rates and household expenditure. While these goods may

have a user fee components, other goods, such as roads, health centers, and sanitation systems,

may not.42

       Another limitation of these alternative models is that they cannot, in isolation, fully explain the

observed pattern of labor payments. Each of these models predicts that households should make

payments in labor only if it is e¢ cient to do so. These models do not explain why labor payments

are so prevalent over a large range of the income distribution, nor do they explain why a given
  40
     Note that the within-community sample sizes are not large enough for us to construct meaningful overlapping
samples. Therefore, the results for project type should be interpreted as illustrating the distribution of payments
for the sample of communities for which the share of households making payments to that project type are strictly
between zero and one.
  41
     It is di¢ cult to interpret the coe¢ cient on children in the household since we also include equivalent scale
expenditure. We use this speci…cation because we are primarily interested in the di¤erence in the relationship
between payment and having children in the household across the school and water regressions rather in the level of
the coe¢ cient.
  42
     Moreover, the point estiamtes on log expenditure per equivalent adult do not change substantially depending on
whether we include variables for having children in the household and having a private water source. This suggests
that even for these types of goods, di¤erences in demand for the goods are not driving the participation gradient.




                                                        33
household might make both labor and monetary payments. Explaining the patterns observed in

the data under these models therefore requires introducing failures in the labor market.



7    Conclusion

Informal taxation systems appear to play an important role in local public …nance in developing

countries. We present some of the …rst systematic, cross-country evidence on the prevalence,

magnitude, distributional implications, and forms of informal taxation. We …nd that informal

taxation is prevalent, with 20% or more of households participating in informal taxation schemes

in all but one surveyed country, and more than 50% of households participating in several countries.

Informal taxes exceed formal direct tax payments by most households and can form a substantial

share of households’total tax burdens. In Indonesia, where we can compare informal taxes to local

budgets, we …nd that informal taxation represents the largest source of public …nance under local

control and comprises a substantial share of all development expenditures.

    We propose a simple optimal tax framework that helps to explain many of the stylized facts

about informal taxation we observe in the data. We depart from the …rst best case by introducing

constraints on enforcement (the government may face limits in enforcing its tax schedule) and

constraints on information (individuals can hide income and shirk when working on public labor

projects). The choice between formal and informal taxation represents a trade-o¤ between the two

types of constraints. The model parsimoniously explains the patterns of informal tax prevalence,

the positive income gradient on informal tax payments, and the widespread use of labor payments,

even when such payments appear to be ine¢ cient. While there may be other stories that could

explain subsets of these facts, our model reconciles all of the observed facts in a single framework

that requires relatively few assumptions.

    Our …ndings have a number of implications for thinking about public …nance in developing

countries and for development policy. First, a substantial share of households in many developing

countries participate in extragovernmental mechanisms for the …nance of local public goods. Policies

such as the imposition of formal taxes, paid public works programs, and intergovernmental grants




                                                34
may therefore a¤ect households and communities both directly as well as indirectly, through their

e¤ects on informal taxation mechanisms. To the best of our knowledge, this type of crowd-out has

not traditionally been considered in the analysis of public programs in developing countries.

   Second, to the extent that these payments are thought of as a tax, estimates of formal taxes

may understate the true tax burden faced by households. In particular, the conventional wisdom

that poor households and households in rural areas do not generally pay taxes other than VAT may

be misleading. The potential e¢ ciency costs of these taxes have not, to the best of our knowledge,

been considered; in our framework, e¢ ciency costs arise from possible failure to provide the public

good and ine¢ cient payments in labor.

   Third, failing to take informal taxation into account will lead to underestimates of the size

of the public sector and the level of decentralization. In particular, informal taxation can be

the dominant source of revenue for local communities and may be a non-trivial component of

national spending on public capital improvements in developing countries. While there has been

an increasing push toward decentralization in developing countries, such reforms have generally

led to greater decentralization of expenditures than of revenue collection (Bardhan 2002). Since

informal taxes are collected at the community level, these …ndings indicate that a larger share of

local public goods is …nanced locally than the formal budget …gures would suggest. In addition,

informal taxation generally pays for particular types of goods, so formal tax …gures will distort

estimates of the mix as well as the level of government expenditures.

   Finally, informal taxation is redistributive but regressive, and this pattern is observed in all of

our sample countries. Formal taxes appear to be more progressive than informal taxes, so failing

to take informal taxation into account will result in overestimates of the overall progressivity of the

tax system. The …ndings also suggest that a marginal expansion of the formal tax system through

expansion of the VAT, used to allow communities to reduce informal taxes, could substantially

increase the overall progressivity of the tax system. However, it is important to keep in mind that

most of these formal taxes are not raised by the local community, and determining the appropriate

community-speci…c intergovernmental transfers is challenging. This is a primary reason why local

public goods in developed countries are often …nanced through local taxation.



                                                  35
   The …ndings also have important implications for development policy. Many government pro-

grams, such as community-driven development programs championed by the World Bank and oth-

ers, encourage local co-…nancing of public goods. Given that …nancing through informal taxation

is more regressive than …nancing through the overall tax system, there would need to be other

bene…ts of local co-…nancing to make this co-…nancing optimal. For example, requiring local co-

…nancing might help reveal information about the local willingness to pay for local public goods, or

it could improve project sustainability by encouraging ongoing maintenance of local public goods.

Alternatively, as discussed above, it is possible that additional central …nancing of public goods

might crowd out these types of locally-…nanced public goods, altering both the level and type of

public goods provided. There could also be other consequences of formal versus informal …nancing

on community institutions and social networks. Understanding how central government policies

interact with informal taxation is an important direction for future research.




                                                36
References
Abramitzky, R.: 2008, The Limits of Equality: Insights from the Israeli Kibbutz, Quarterly Journal
    of Economics 123(3), 1111–1159.

Alesina, A., Baqir, R. and Easterly, W.: 1999, Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions, The Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 114(4), 1243–1284.

Andreoni, J.: 1990, Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of Warm-Glow
    Giving, The Economic Journal 100(401), 464–477.

Bagnoli, M. and Lipman, B.: 1989, Provision of Public Goods: Fully Implementing the Core
    through Private Contributions, Review of Economic Studies 56(4), 583–601.

Banerjee, A. and Du‡o, E.:       2006, Addressing Absence, Journal of Economic Perspectives
    20(1), 117–132.

Banerjee, A. and Newman, A.: 1998, Information, the Dual Economy, and Development, The
    Review of Economic Studies 65(4), 631–653.

Bardhan, P.: 2002, Decentralization of Governance and Development, Journal of Economic Per-
    spectives 16(4), 185–205.

Barkan, J. D. and Holmquist, F.: 1989, Peasant-State Relations and the Social Base of Self-Help
    in Kenya, World Politics 41(3), 359–380.

Barkan, J., McNulty, M. and Ayeni, M.: 1991, Hometown voluntary associations, local development
    and the emergence of civil society in w. nigeria, The Journal of Modern African Studies 29(3).

Beard, V. A.: 2007, Household Contributions to Community Development in Indonesia, World
    Development 35(4), 607–625.

Benjamin, D.: 1992, Household composition, labor markets, and labor demand: Testing for sepa-
    ration in agricultural models, Econometrica 60(2), 287–322.

Bergstrom, T., Blume, L. and Varian, H.: 1986, On the Private Provision of Public Goods, Journal
    of Public Economics 29(1), 25–49.

Besley, T. and Coate, S.: 1992, Workfare versus welfare: Incentive arguments for work requirements
     in poverty-alleviation programs, American Economic Review 82(1), 249–61.

Besley, T. and Coate, S.: 1995, Group lending, repayment incentives and social collateral, Journal
     of Development Economics 46(1), 1–18.

Bice, D. C. and Hoyt, W. H.: 2000, The impact of mandates and tax limits on voluntary contribu-
     tions to local public services: An application to …re protection services, National Tax Journal
     53(1), 79–104.

Bird, R.: 1990, Intergovernmental Finance and Local Taxation in Developing Countries: Some
     Basic Considerations for Reformers, Public Administration and Development 10(3), 277–88.



                                                37
Brunner, E. and Sonstelie, J.: 2003, School …nance reform and voluntary …scal federalism, Journal
    of Public Economics 87(9-10), 2157–2185.
Burgess, R. and Stern, N.: 1993, Taxation and Development, Journal of Economic Literature
    31(2), 762–830.
Deaton, A.: 1997, The Analysis of Household Surveys: A Microeconometric Approach to Develop-
    ment Policy, World Bank, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Eckaus, R. S.: 2003, Some consequences of …scal reliance on extrabudgetary revenues in China,
    China Economic Review 14(1), 72–88.
Falk, A., Fehr, E. and Fischbacher, U.: 2005, Driving forces behind informal sanctions, Economet-
     rica 73(6), 2017–2030.
Fan, J.: 1992, Design-adaptive nonparametric regression, Journal of the American Statistical As-
     sociation 87(420), 998–1004.
Fehr, E. and Gachter, S.: 2000, Cooperation and punishment in public goods experiments, The
     American Economic Review 90(4), 980–994.
Ferris, J. M.: 1984, Coprovision: Citizen Time and Money Donations in Public Service Provision,
     Public Administration Review 44(4), 324–333.
Ghatak, M.: 1999, Group lending, local information and peer selection, Journal of Development
    Economics 60, 27–50.
Glazer, A. and Konrad, K. A.: 1996, A Signaling Explanation for Charity, The American Economic
    Review 86(4), 1019–1028.
Gordon, R. and Li, W.: 2005, Tax structures in developing countries: Many puzzles and a possible
    explanation. Mimeo, University of California, San Diego.
Hausman, J. A., Hall, B. H. and Griliches, Z.: 1984, Econometric models for count data with an
    application to the patents-r and d relationship, Econometrica pp. 909–938.
Khwaja, A.: 2007, Can good projects succeed in bad communities? Mimeo, Harvard University.
Larrabure, L.: 1966, Cooperacion popular: A new approach to community development in peru,
    International Labour Review 94, 221.
Masclet, D., Noussair, C., Tucker, S. and Villeval, M.: 2003, Monetary and nonmonetary punish-
    ment in the voluntary contributions mechanism, American Economic Review 93(1), 366–380.
Mbithi, P. and Rasmusson, R.: 1977, Self Reliance in Kenya: The Case of Harambee, Nordic Africa
    Institute.
Miguel, E. and Gugerty, M. K.: 2005, Ethnic diversity, social sanctions, and public goods in kenya,
    Journal of Public Economics 89(11-12), 2325–2368.
Mirrlees, J.: 1971, An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation, Review of Economic
    Studies 38, 175–208.


                                                38
Ngau, P. M.: 1987, Tensions in Empowerment: The Experience of the "Harambee" (Self-Help)
    Movement in Kenya, Economic Development and Cultural Change 35(3), 523–538.

Njoh, A.: 2003, Self-Help Water Supply in Cameroon - Lessons on community Participation in
    Public Works Projects, Edwin Mellen Press, New York, NY.

Olken, B. A.: 2005, Revealed community equivalence scales, Journal of Public Economics 89, 545–
    566.

Olken, B. A. and Onishi, J.: 2007, Should aid be conditional on performance? experimental design
    for a …eld experiment in indonesia, Technical report, Harvard University.

Olson, M.: 1965, The Logic of Collective Action, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Ostrom, E.: 1991, Governing the Commons, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Perroni, C. and Scharf, K.: 2007, Taxation and Property Rights.

Prud’homme, R.: 1992, Informal local taxation in developing countries, Environment and Planning
    C: Government and Policy 10, 1–17.

Rao, V.: 2004, Symbolic public goods and the coordination of collective action: A comparison of
    local development in india and indonesia. Mimeo, The World Bank.

Roseman, S. R.: 1996, "How We Built the Road": The Politics of Memory in Rural Galicia,
    American Ethnologist 23(4), 836–860.

Thomas, B. P.: 1987, Development through Harambee: Who Wins and Who Loses? Rural Self-help
   Projects in Kenya, World Development 15(4), 463–481.

Tomsho, R.: 2001, Class struggle: Fund-raising drive for schools leaves manchester disunited, The
   Wall Street Journal (February 6, 2001).

Townsend, R.: 1994, Risk and insurance in village india, Econometrica 62(4), 539–591.

Townsend, R.: 1995, Financial systems in northern thai villages, Quarterly Journal of Economics
    110(4), 1011–1046.

Wilson, L.: 1992, The Harambee Movement and E¢ cient Public Good Provision in Kenya, Journal
    of Public Economics 48(1), 1–19.

Winerip, M.: 2003, On education; giving green or turning red, The New York Times (February 26,
    2003).

Wooldridge, J. M.: 1999, Distribution-free estimation of some nonlinear panel data models, Journal
    of Econometrics pp. 77–97.

Wooldridge, J. M.: 2002, Econometric analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, MIT Press,
    Cambridge, MA.




                                               39
Figure 1: Comparison of formal and informal taxes




                                        Albania                                                                                  Ethiopia                                                                     Indonesia 2007




                                                                            10
         .8




                                                                                                     .5




                                                                                                                                                                                           .8
                                                                                                                                                                     6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                     .4
                                                                                             8
         .6




                                                                                                                                                                                           .6
                                                                            % of expenditure




                                                                                                                                                                     % of expenditure




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      % of expenditure
                                                                                                                                                                                   4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                        .3
                                                                                      6
     Density




                                                                                                  Density




                                                                                                                                                                                        Density
       .4




                                                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                                                                                 .2
                                                                               4




                                                                                                                                                                      2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
         .2




                                                                                                                                                                                           .2
                                                                                                     .1
                                                                            2




                                                                                                                                                                     0
         0




                                                                            0



                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                  10         11         12           13          14                                          2          3            4            5            6                                  11      12           13           14          15
                               Log equivalent expenditure                                                                Log equivalent expenditure                                                        Log equivalent expenditure

                           Informal taxes             Total formal taxes                                             Informal taxes             Total formal taxes                                     Informal taxes            Total formal taxes
                           Direct formal taxes        Density                                                        Direct formal taxes        Density                                                Direct formal taxes       Density



                                     Philippines                                                                             Vietnam 2002




                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                     .8
                                                                            3
         .8




                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                     .6
                                                                            % of expenditure




                                                                                                                                                                     % of expenditure
             .6




                                                                                       2




                                                                                                                                                                               3
     Density




                                                                                                 Density
                                                                                                  .4
      .4




                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                            1



                                                                                                     .2
         .2




                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                            0
         0




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                     0
                       6     6.5        7        7.5       8          8.5                                        5             6               7                8
                                Log equivalent expenditure                                                               Log equivalent expenditure

                           Informal taxes             Total formal taxes                                             Informal taxes             Total formal taxes
                           Direct formal taxes        Density                                                        Direct formal taxes        Density




Notes: Tax variables are plotted as non-parametric Fan regressions of each variable against log equivalent household expenditure. These regressions do not include community
fixed effects. For comparison, we also plot a histogram of log equivalent household expenditure. To keep the graphs readable, we exclude the bottom 0.5% and top 0.5% of the
household expenditure distribution.

                                                                                                                                       40
Table 1: Data sources
                                                                                                                                           Labor                         Money
                                                                                                         Sample size
                                                                                                         (number of     Recall      Payment                    Payment
                         Database Name                   Year                    Sample                  households)    period      indicator    Quantity      indicator     Quantity
Albania    Living standards measurement survey           2005 Nationally representative                     3,840       1 year         X            X
Ethiopia   Ethiopian rural household survey              1997 Only rural areas                              1,482       1 year         X            X
Guatemala National survey of living conditions           2000 Nationally representative                     7,276       1 year         X
Indonesia Health and education service survey            2007 Only rural areas, focus on poorer areas      11,676       1 year         X            X                X           X
Nicaragua Living standards measurement study survey 1998 Nationally representative                          4,209       5 years        X                             X
Nigeria    Nigeria living standards survey               2004 Nationally representative                    19,159       1 year         X
Panama     Living standards survey                       2003 Nationally representative                     6,363       1 year         X                             X
Philippines Living condition Survey                      2003 Only rural areas, focus on poorer areas       2,398      6 months        X            X
Vietnam    Household living standards survey             2002 Nationally representative                    29,426       1 year         X            X                X           X
Zambia     Living condition monitoring survey            1998 Nationally representative                    16,788       5 years        X                             X
Notes: For more details on each of the surveys, please see Appendix A..



Table 2: Summary statistics
                                        Albania      Ethiopia Guatemala Indonesia Nicaragua Nigeria                Panama Philippines Vietnam            Zambia
Household size                             4.4          7.3          5.2           3.8          5.5      4.8         4.0           5.1         4.4         5.4
Number of workers per household            1.6          1.6          2.1           1.7          1.7      1.5         1.4           1.9         2.5         1.9
Expenditure per capita (in PPP $)         3396          554         2338          1112         2850      489        3514           938        1368         744
GDP per capita (in 2000 PPP$)             4731          814         4048          3423         2910      941        6129          4250        2274         774
% urban                                    47            0           43             0           57        45         64              0         24           36
Age (Household head)                       52            47          44            47           45        48         48             47         48           41
Years of education (Household head)        9.6          2.5          4.1           6.5          4.3      5.1         8.3           5.7         7.0         6.6
Notes: Each cell presents the mean of the variable in the row in the dataset listed in the column. When GDP is not available for the survey year, we used the most
recent data.




                                                                                      41
Table 3: Summary of informal tax payments
                                  Philippines   Albania    Ethiopia   Guatemala     Indonesia    Panama     Nigeria   Vietnam     Nicaragua    Zambia

             Recall
             Period                6 months      1 year     1 year       1 year       1 year      1 year    1 year     1 year      5 years     5 years

                        All          0.33         0.09       0.51         0.37         0.76        0.32      0.26       0.59         0.20        0.23
            Any         Rural        0.33         0.12       0.51         0.51         0.76        0.48      0.32       0.62         0.26        0.27
 Panel A
            payment
                        Urban                     0.07                    0.18                     0.24      0.20       0.49         0.16        0.15


            Any         All          0.33         0.09       0.51         0.37         0.76        0.19      0.26       0.24         0.15        0.18
            labor       Rural        0.33         0.12       0.51         0.51         0.76        0.34      0.32       0.28         0.22        0.23
            payment     Urban                     0.07                    0.18                     0.11      0.20       0.13         0.09        0.08


            Any         All                                                            0.28        0.22                 0.50         0.08        0.08
 Panel B    money       Rural                                                          0.28        0.30                 0.51         0.07        0.07
            payment     Urban                                                                      0.18                 0.45         0.08        0.09


            Both        All                                                              0.27        0.09                  0.15        0.02      0.03
            money
                        Rural
            and labor
            payments Urban
Notes: Each cell presents the mean of the variable listed in the row in the dataset listed in the column. Some surveys only contained information
about labor payments; for these surveys, participation rates given in Panel A will be identical to participation rates for “any labor payment” given in
Panel B.




                                                                                        42
Table 3: Summary of informal tax payments (continued)
                                 Philippines   Albania   Ethiopia   Guatemala     Indonesia   Panama     Nigeria   Vietnam    Nicaragua    Zambia

                                     1.1         0.2        14.1                     5.7                              3.1
                       All
                                    (4.2)       (0.6)      (28.3)                   (13.2)                           (7.3)
         Amount of
         labor                       1.1         0.2       14.1                      5.7                              3.5
                       Rural
         payment                    (4.2)       (0.6)      (28.3)                   (13.2)                           (7.7)
         (in days)
                                                 0.1                                                                  1.6
                       Urban
                                                (0.6)                                                                (5.6)


                                     3.3         1.8       27.6                      7.5                             12.8
                       All
         Conditional                (6.8)       (1.2)      (34.6)                   (14.7)                           (9.8)
         amount of                   3.3         1.6       27.6                      7.5                             12.8
         labor         Rural
         payment                    (6.8)       (1.0)      (34.6)                   (14.7)                           (9.7)
         (in days)                               2.1                                                                 12.9
                       Urban
                                                (1.3)                                                               (10.1)
 Panel
   C
                                                                                     8.9                             13.5
                       All
         Amount of                                                                 (167.4)                          (19.8)
         money                                                                       8.9                             13.2
         payment       Rural
         (in 2000                                                                  (167.4)                          (18.4)
         PPP US$)                                                                                                    14.5
                       Urban
                                                                                                                    (23.6)


                                                                                     32.5                            27.2
         Conditional   All
                                                                                   (318.2)                          (20.4)
         amount of
         money                                                                       32.5                            25.8
                       Rural
         payment                                                                   (318.2)                          (18.3)
         (in 2000
                                                                                                                     32.0
         PPP US$)      Urban
                                                                                                                     (25.8)
Notes: For reference in interpreting the monetary amounts in Panel C, the average annual per capita expenditure in these samples (in PPP$) is 1112 for
Indonesia and 1368 for Vietnam. Conditional amounts reported are conditional on making any payment.


                                                                                      43
Table 4: Informal Taxation, Expenditure, and Formal Taxation
                                                           Philippines   Albania     Ethiopia   Indonesia    Vietnam
 Informal tax as a share of HH expenditure
 All households                                              0.0023       0.0004      0.0377     0.0143       0.0085
 Conditional on informal tax > 0                             0.0066       0.0037      0.0681     0.0183       0.0141

 Informal tax as a share of HH Total Formal + Informal Tax payments
 All households                                            0.0694      0.0048      0.268      0.1656     0.1570
 Conditional on informal tax > 0                           0.2036      0.0457     0.4922      0.2115     0.2607
Notes: The included countries are the countries for which we have quantity data on informal tax payments.
Please see Appendix A for details on the formal tax payment calculations.
Table 5: Comparison to other local budgets in Indonesia
 Per household value of:                                                           Mean         Informal taxes as percent of….
 From Indonesia household survey:
 Informal taxes                                                                  49.86                   .
 Direct formal taxes                                                             29.16                 171%
 Indirect formal taxes                                                          158.88                  31%

 From village budget data:
 Total annual village budget:                                                      43.67               114%
 Total village development expenses:                                               23.87               209%
 Total village routine expenses:                                                   15.29               326%

 Village revenue from inter-governmental transfers:                                19.48               256%
 Village revenue from local formal taxes/fees:                                      4.25              1173%
 Village revenue from on-books informal taxation                                   13.09               381%
 Village revenue from other sources:                                                6.86               727%

 From district budget data:
 Total annual district budget                                                   696.65                   7%
 Total district development expenses:                                           231.85                  22%
 Total district routine expenses:                                               464.80                  11%

 District revenue from inter-governmental transfers and other sources:         721.66                   7%
 District revenue from local formal taxes/fees:                                 17.50                285%
 District revenue from other sources:                                           28.49                175%
Notes: All data comes from Indonesia. Village and district budgets are from 2001, and are inflated to 2007 Rupiah using the Indonesian CPI. Village budget data
are from the 2003 Census of Villages; District budget data are from the World Bank. All are the per-household amounts for the 19 districts where we have
complete data from the household survey, the village budget data, and the district budget data. All amounts are reported in 2000 PPP US$, as in the previous
tables, which translates to US$1 = Rp. 3571. Note that districts have small budget surpluses in 2001; this was the first year of decentralization, so districts likely
were still adjusting to their new roles.

                                                                                           44
Table 6: Informal taxation vs. household expenditure
              Philippines      Albania     Ethiopia       Guatemala      Indonesia           Panama        Nigeria       Vietnam       Nicaragua       Zambia
Panel A:Participation margin, with community fixed effects (conditional logit model)
Any             -0.018         0.456***     0.159           0.160          0.196**            0.427***     0.107*         0.439***      -0.094          0.111***
payment         (0.117)       (0.097)      (0.159)         (0.100)        (0.087)            (0.065)      (0.056)        (0.060)        (0.122)        (0.042)
Observations     2200           2487        1165            5074            6188               5963         9036          24521           2669          10271

Panel B: Total payments, with community fixed effects (Poisson model)
Total           0.395*        0.334***      0.127***                         0.387***                                    0.080***
payments       (0.213)       (0.053)       (0.054)                          (0.041)                                     (0.025)
Observations     2143          1784          1062                           10840                                        26899

Panel C: Total payments, with community fixed effects, conditional on payments > 0 (Poisson model)
Total            0.229*        0.122***     0.111**                       0.364***                                          0.001
payments        (0.117)       (0.043)      (0.049)                       (0.041)                                           (0.021)
Observations       655            254            587                          9053                                          17310
Notes: Each cell reports the estimates from a separate regression, with robust standard errors clustered at the village level in parentheses. Panel A reports
results from conditional logit estimates, where the dependent variable is a dummy for making any informal tax payments, the independent variable is log
household expenditure per equivalent adult, and the conditioning variable is the village. Panel B reports results from conditional Poisson QMLE models,
where the dependent variable is the quantity of informal tax payments (where labor payments are converted to monetary units at the household’s predicted
wage rate), the independent variable is log household expenditure per equivalent adult, and the conditioning variable is the village. Panel C reports results
from an analogous model to Panel B but without conditioning on the household having made a positive informal tax payment.




                                                                                        45
Table 7: Formal taxes vs. household expenditure: quantities
                   Philippines       Albania          Ethiopia      Indonesia               Vietnam

Panel A: Informal taxes, with community fixed effects
Total payments      0.395*         0.334***         0.127***          0.387***          0.080***
                   (0.213)        (0.053)          (0.054)           (0.041)           (0.025)
Observations         2143           1784              1062           10840              26899

Panel B: Direct formal taxes, with community fixed effects
Total payments      1.526***         1.433***       0.418***          1.372***          0.691***
                   (0.198)          (0.083)        (0.134)           (0.075)           (0.114)
Observations        2073              3358           1197             11591             20407

Panel C: Total (direct + indirect) formal taxes, with community fixed effects
Total payments      0.901***          1.009***        0.798***        1.102***          1.289***
                   (0.104)           (0.006)         (0.056)         (0.022)           (0.038)
Observations        2259              3838            1197            11674             29422

Notes: Each cell reports the estimates from a separate regression, with robust standard errors clustered at the village
level in parentheses. All results are from conditional Poisson QMLE models, where the dependent variable is given in
the table, the independent variable is log household expenditure per equivalent adult, and the conditioning variable is
the village.




                                                                                       46
Table 8: Labor and money payments
                Indonesia      Panama        Vietnam       Nicaragua       Zambia

Panel A: Participation margin
Labor           0.190**       0.137           0.003        -0.099          0.065
payment        (0.085)       (0.090)         (0.093)       (0.130)        (0.044)
Observations     6433         5782           14753          2225           8902

Money            0.720***      0.634***       0.560***     -0.057          0.167***
payment         (0.077)       (0.067)        (0.059)       (0.150)        (0.059)
Observations     7313          5716           23780         1405           6701

Panel B: Quantities
Labor           0.260***                     -0.018
payment       (0.039)                        (0.036)
Observations 10840                           15826

Money           1.446***                       0.220***
payment        (0.208)                        (0.026)
Observations     7632                          25429
Notes: See Notes to Table 6. All specifications include community fixed effects.




                                                                                      47
Table 9: Decisions about informal tax payments
                                                                                      Respondent
                                                                             Individual    Village Head
 1. Who makes decisions about which households participate?
 Village/hamlet/neighborhood head                                               84.2              79.0
 Village/hamlet/neighborhood meeting                                            49.5              54.6
 Each household decides for themselves                                           8.0               8.1

 2. Who determines how much is expected from each household?
 Village/hamlet/neighborhood head                                               69.1              56.0
 Village/hamlet/neighborhood meeting                                            51.1              60.1
 Each household decides for themselves                                          20.4              14.7

 3. What is the sanction imposed on a household if they do not
 participate?
 Replace at another time                                                        10.6              12.7
 Give materials/food                                                            11.1              19.5
 Replace with other person                                                       5.2               9.0
 Pay another person to replace you                                               2.0               5.6
 Pay a fine                                                                     17.0              20.8
 Not allowed to use result of activity                                           0.1               0.7
 Excluded from local activities                                                  0.4               1.2
 No specified sanction                                                          62.3              53.3

 4. If applicable, who determines this sanction?
 Village/hamlet/neighborhood head                                                 66.3               36.0
 Village/hamlet/neighborhood meeting                                               66.7              61.7
 Each household decides for themselves                                             22.3              21.0
Notes: All data comes from Indonesia. Multiple responses were allowed for each question. The full set of
choices given for questions 1, 2, and 4 were: village head, hamlet head, neighborhood head, village
meeting, hamlet meeting, neighborhood meeting, each household decides for themselves, religious
leaders, other informal leaders, and other. For question 4, the choice of no sanction / not applicable was
also given. The full set of choices given for question 3 was: replace at another time, give materials/food,
replace with another person, pay another person to replace you, pay a fine, not allowed to use result of
activity, excluded from local activities, other, and no official sanction.




                                                                                       48
Table 10: User fees
                             Indonesia                Nicaragua                  Nigeria                    Panama                      Zambia                  Philippines
 Panel A: School Contributions

 Children in the HH      0.476**                 0.617***                    0.172                  2.106***                      0.827***                   1.094*
                         (0.199)                  (0.173)                   (0.113)                  (0.228)                       (0.112)                   (0.626)

 No private water         -0.121                   0.186                                              -0.37                        0.464*                    -0.204
                          (0.346)                 (0.263)                                            (0.359)                       (0.248)                   (0.538)

 Log expenditure per       0.351    0.307          -0.09       -0.137       0.0246    -0.0107        -0.204**    -0.459***        0.130***    0.0786*         0.362     0.284
 equivalent adult         (0.234)   (0.248        (0.122)     (0.115)       (0.098)   (0.096)         (0.102)     (0.095)          (0.049)    (0.047)        (0.362)   (0.394)

 Observations              1308      1308           1743       1743          2860       2860           4767        4767             8389        8389          384        384



 Panel B: Water Contributions

 Children in the HH      0.322**                   0.436                                            0.365***                        0.183                    -1.077
                         (0.152)                  (0.393)                                            (0.112)                       (0.167)                   (1.145)

 No private water          0.112                 3.382***                                            1.190*                       1.438***                   -0.653
                          (0.239)                 (0.484)                                            (0.623)                       (0.375)                   (1.032)

 Log expenditure per       0.248    0.192          -0.167      -0.088                                 0.048        0.004            0.132     0.146*         -0.191    -0.170
 equivalent adult         (0.168)   (0.165        (0.258)     (0.221)                                (0.135)      (0.133)          (0.089)    (0.082)        (2.030)   (1.817)

 Observations              1397       1398            1076        1076                                  3282         3282            4096         4096           102      102
Notes: Each column reports results from conditional logit regressions, as in Panel A of Table 6, except that the dependent variable is restricted to participation in payments for
schools (Panel A) or participation in payments for water systems (Panel B). The first column for each country includes a dummy variable for missing water source.
Households were defined as beneficiaries of public water if their listed primary source of drinking water was publicly provided, man-made, and more complex than a simple
dug well. Natural sources (river, spring, rain, etc.), public or private dug wells, and other private water sources (piped water, tube wells, etc.) are not counted. Sources such as
shared tube/piped wells and community water systems (publicly provided piped water, etc.) are included. Households were defined as beneficiaries of schools if they had at
least one member of school age (defined as between ages 4 and 14 years).




                                                                                         49
