NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS THE U.S. LOSING ITS PREEMINENCE IN HIGHER EDUCATION?
James D. Adams
Working Paper 15233
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15233

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2009

The Andrew W. Mellon and Alfred P. Sloan Foundations supported the data collection underlying
this project. I thank Charles Clotfelter, Charles Phelps, two readers, and conference participants for
comments. The staff of Folsom Library, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, provided valuable assistance
in locating the historical data discussed in this paper. Of course, I am responsible for any remaining
errors. This paper was presented at the NBER Conference on American Universities in a Global Market
held in Woodstock, Vermont, October 2-4, 2008. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by James D. Adams. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Is the U.S. Losing Its Preeminence in Higher Education?
James D. Adams
NBER Working Paper No. 15233
August 2009
JEL No. I23,J31,L31,O31
ABSTRACT
The expansion of U.S. universities after World War II gained from the arrival of immigrant scientists
and graduate students, the broadening of access to universities, and the development of military research
and high technology industry. Since the 1980s, however, growth of scientific research in Europe and
East Asia has exceeded that of the U.S., suggesting convergence in world science and engineering
and a falling U.S. share. But the slowdown of U.S. publication rates in the late 1990s is a different
matter, in that the rise of science elsewhere does not imply a U.S. slowdown in any obvious sense.
Using a panel of U.S. universities, fields and years, evidence is found of a slowdown in the growth
of resources. In turn, this has caused a deceleration in the growth of research output in public universities
and university-fields falling into the middle 40 percent and bottom 40 percent of their disciplines.
These developments can be traced to slower growth in tuition and state appropriations in public universities
compared to revenue growth, including from endowment, in private universities.

James D. Adams
Department of Economics
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
3406 Russell Sage Laboratory
Troy, NY 12180-3590
and NBER
adamsj@rpi.edu

I.

Introduction

For more than half a century U.S. universities have led the world in research and graduate
education, building on firm foundations laid down in the 19th century, and rising to new heights
during the 20th century. But in recent years doubts have begun to arise concerning the future of
U.S. higher education, considered as a producer of graduate and professional students as well as
scientific discoveries. The two are complementary: faculty that are not at the research frontier
are less likely to produce top PhDs and MDs, and conversely, faculty who lack top students are
less likely to do cutting-edge research. It follows that this paper’s emphasis on research extends
to advanced students1. Furthermore, a strong research enterprise improves the quality of
undergraduate education in the long run and contributes to the ability to undertake advanced
training. As far as higher education is concerned, none of this is new.
The U.S. is losing share in scientific research, and perhaps in papers accepted in top journals
(Hicks, 2007), in part because the number of countries that devote significant resources to
scientific research has increased. This implies intensified competition for scientific and
engineering talent and also greater competitiveness of foreign high technology firms (Freeman,
2006). But in addition to growth overseas, a slowdown has taken place within the U.S. The
growth rate of financial resources of U.S. public universities has declined and this has reduced
the growth rate in their publications2. This development is important, because public universities
account for a large share of U.S. science.
It may come as a surprise to hear that U.S. universities could be in danger of losing their
preeminence, since top U.S. private and public universities invariably rank near the pinnacle of
world institutions (Shanghai Jiao Tong University, various years). But university growth
1

In confirmation of this point, the National Research Council rankings of graduate programs reveal a strong positive
correlation between research and the quality of graduate programs. See National Research Council (1995).
2
See Ehrenberg (2006) and Adams and Clemmons (2009).

overseas implies that this dominance may not last forever. Moreover, public universities in the
U.S. have struggled in recent years.
To understand how top private universities in the U.S. have reached unparalleled heights at
the same time that top public universities have fallen behind, it is necessary to explain the
organization of U.S. higher education. It is a mixed public-private system. Top U.S. private
universities rely on federal grants, endowment, gifts, and tuition to hire the best faculty, select
the best students, and sustain their competitive advantage. In this they are not constrained by
state interests. The situation is otherwise with U.S. public universities, whose charter, beginning
with the Morrill Act of 1862, enjoins them to support state industries by providing affordable and
practical higher education. If state budgets contract, or if competition for state funds strengthens,
then funding diminishes and the competitive advantage of U.S. public universities declines. A
pillar of public support for higher education, its accountability to state interests, erodes and
becomes a constraint on university growth. In recent years this appears to have taken place.
The paper’s focal point is a panel of universities and fields observed over time. Main
findings from an analysis of these data are as follows. Starting with growth facts, I find that
research output grows at about the same rate in the late 20th century in private schools as in
public, until the 1990s, when public university growth slows down. This is despite the fact that
stocks of Research and Development (R&D), which are mostly federally funded, rise appreciably
faster in public universities. A slowdown in papers and in papers per dollar of R&D is evident in
the late 1990s, again in public universities. Given the challenges of measuring R&D, I provide
faculty counts as a supplementary measure. It turns out that faculty grow at a slower rate than
papers so research productivity indeed rises. Once again, though, it rises more slowly in public
universities, especially during the late 1990s. In addition, the evidence reveals that current funds

2

rise more rapidly in private universities, suggesting that in public universities, faster growth of
(mostly federal) R&D stocks is cancelled by slower growth in tuition and state appropriations.
Hence, faster growth of current funds in private schools contributes to faster growth of wages
and research output in these universities.
Continuing with regression findings, I show that public and private universities obtain
similar percentage increases in scientific papers and citation-weighted papers from equal
(percentage) increases in R&D, graduate students, and current funds, so that differences in
growth of research output between the two sets of institutions are the result of differences in
growth of resources. Here private universities have recently held the advantage. Departments
ranked in the top 20 percent of their disciplines obtain a larger increase in papers for the same
increase in R&D and students than departments of lower rank. Graduate students contribute
more to papers in top 20 percent departments than elsewhere, suggesting the high degree of
complementarity of faculty and graduate students at the top of the quality distribution.
Compensation in private universities rises faster than it does in public universities by almost
one percent per year. Compared to public universities, where the wage structure is relatively flat,
compensation in private schools is higher at all ranks and rises more markedly for full professors.
This suggests incentives for researchers, especially senior researchers, to migrate from public to
private universities. Combined with slower growth in current funds in public universities, this
helps to produce slower growth in their research output than in that of private universities.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Sections II and III provide an historical
perspective on U.S. universities. Section II recounts the expansion of research in U.S.
universities before, during, and after the Second World War. This is the period in which U.S.
universities progress relative to the rest of the world. Section III considers the U.S. contribution

3

to world scientific output since the 1980s. The share of the U.S. declines sharply during this
period. While this is inevitable in the face of postwar recovery and world economic
development, the section also points to a slowdown in research output during the 1990s in the
U.S., due largely to a deceleration in the growth rate of resources in U.S. public universities.
Section IV introduces panel data covering 110 top U.S. universities and 12 main science
fields during 1981-1999. Section V presents growth facts concerning university research.
Section VI begins with regressions in which research output is the dependent variable and
concludes with wage regressions. Section VII discusses the evidence and draws conclusions for
the future of U.S. higher education.

II.

U.S. Universities Since World War II

A. Pre-War Setting
Prior to World War II and quite unlike the present day, federal Research and
Development (R&D) was located inside the U.S. military (Mowery and Rosenberg, 1989, pages
92 ff.). Agricultural research is the exception. It was conducted in land-grant colleges founded
by the Morrill Act of 1862 and the Land-Grant Act of 1890, extending the 1862 Act to state
agricultural and mechanical colleges for blacks. In addition, the Hatch Act of 1887 established
experiment stations close to the land-grant colleges. Huffman and Evenson (1993, Ch. 1)
provide a moving summary of these developments3.
The first statistical evidence on university R&D in the U.S. derives from balance sheet
data in 1935-1936. The data are contained in Research—A National Resource, Volume I

3

The democratic and equal-opportunity conditions set by the early U.S. patent system (Khan, 2005) may have
complemented the later establishment of universities focused on the agricultural and mechanical arts—the very type
envisaged by the Morrill Act.

4

(National Resources Committee, 1938, Section 6)4. A survey of 60 universities yielded total
research expenditures of 50 million $. Of this amount, 16 million was earmarked for experiment
stations, much of this funded by the Department of Agriculture5. Of the remaining 34 million,
17 derived from endowment, 8 from foundations, 4 from gifts, 2 from contract research, and 2
from state government. Therefore, the federal government’s main role in university research was
its support for agriculture.
Bush (1945, P. 86) contains estimates of research expenditure by sector from the 1930s
through World War II. The data are limited to natural science6. Using as a basis the figure of 50
million $ reported in National Resources Committee (1938), this yields 25 million $ for natural
science research in 1936. Using survey data on research faculty, this figure is then extrapolated
backward to 1930 and forward to 1942 to arrive at natural science R&D for universities. This is
the relatively crude university series shown in Figure 17.
The above summarizes the prewar setting. Events surrounding World War II led to a vast
expansion of university R&D. First, before the war, immigration of scientists from Europe
significantly increased the science and engineering work force. Second, during the war, a sharp
rise in defense research increased the demand for scientists and engineers, which the Cold War
institutionalized8. Third, after the war, the GI Bill helped finance college education for returning
soldiers, which subsequently produced a spike in enrollments and increased post-war demand for
faculty. I discuss each of these factors in turn.
4

Individual evidence on university R&D exists before 1935-1936. The University of Chicago conducted an internal
survey of research costs in 1929-1930 and the University of California undertook a similar survey in 1928-1929.
But these data lack the comparative breadth of the National Resources Committee survey.
5
In 1940 federal R&D expenditures were 74 million $, of which 29 million $ or 39%, consisted of Department of
Agriculture R&D (Mowery and Rosenberg, 1998, p. 27). Clearly, agricultural research assumed a much larger role
in the federal government and universities than it does today.
6
In these early data, natural science includes biological, mathematical and physical science, plus engineering.
7
Industrial R&D statistics are obtained by multiplying industrial researchers by R&D per worker of 4,000 $. See
Research—A National Resource, Volume II (National Resources Planning Board, 1941, Section IV).
8
By an increase in demand I mean throughout a shift to the right of the demand curve for scientists and engineers.

5

B. The Intellectual Migration from Europe, 1933-1944
The supply of highly skilled scientists to the United States increased due to the flight
from Hitler’s Europe, but by how much, and in what proportion? The main statistical source is
Davie (1947), who directed data collection for the Committee for the Study of Recent
Immigration from Europe9. Using the criterion of “refugee, arrival from Europe as place of last
residence”, statistics of immigration and naturalization yielded 22,842 refugees in the
professions during 1933-1944. The refugees were assigned to detailed occupations: 507 were
chemists, 2,471 engineers, 3,415 professors and teachers, and 1,907 were “scientists or literary
persons,” yielding a total of 8,300 refugees in science, engineering and related professions. In
1938 the National Resources Committee, using American Men of Science, 6th Edition (1938),
estimated that 28,000 U.S. men and women were researchers in the natural sciences, and that
22,000 more were in the humanities and social sciences (National Resources Committee, 1938,
p. 171) for a total of 50,000 across all sectors of the economy10. Thus, while the intellectual
migration from Europe during the 1930s was small by modern standards, it was large for the
time. Put another way, if half of the roughly 8,000 refugees in science and engineering and
related fields were engaged in research—not excessive, given their occupations—then this
constitutes an increase of 4,000 persons on a base of 50,000, or 8%. And since they specialized
in natural science and engineering, then the increase could be almost 4,000 on a base of 28,000,
or 14%11.

9

Fermi (1971) recounts individual biographies of this wave of immigrants by detailed occupation, including
scientists and engineers by their separate specialties. Her time period, 1930-1941, is earlier than that of Davie
(1947), whose perspective I adopt here.
10
The Committee judged that of the existing stock of 50,000 researchers, 5,000 or 10% were in the first rank.
11
Following the usage of Bush (1945) and Davie (1947), in this section natural science refers to biology, medicine,
mathematics and statistics, and engineering, in addition to chemistry and physics.

6

There is reason to think that even this understates growth at the highest levels of research.
Table 1 illustrates12. Twelve refugees had won a Nobel Prize by 1947, the most prestigious
international award13. Using a sample collected by Davie (1947) of 707 refugees who served on
university faculties in Europe, 203 persons were accounted distinguished in their disciplines, of
which 181 were in natural science. To assess the meaning of this, turn to Table 2, which
compiles U.S.-resident Nobel Prize winners by decade. The number of foreign-born is shown in
parentheses for each subject area, except for the sum across areas, where the foreign-born appear
as column two14. Noting that 23 prizes had been won by U.S. residents by 1940, with none
foreign-born except for one award, I conclude that the intellectual migration from Europe
increased resident Nobel Prize winners by 50%15.
Table 2 also shows that major improvements in U.S. universities were underway by the
1930s. Across areas, the number of native-born prizes rises from one to 17 per decade during
1901-1940. Excluding economics prizes—since these did not exist until 1969—the total of 17
prizes for the 1930s is half the native-born total, per decade, during 1971-2007.

C. Increase in Federal R&D During World War II
Besides the increase in the prewar supply of highly skilled scientists and engineers, the
increase in military R&D during and after the war produced a sustained rise in demand for
scientists and engineers. Figures 1 and 2 illustrate16.

12

The data are compiled from Appendix C of Davie (1947).
The Fields Medal in mathematics dates from 1936 and competes with the Abel and Wolf prizes. Other awards of
distinction, such as the National Medal of Science in the U.S., are national in scope.
14
In this table, Nobel Prizes in science include chemistry, physics, and physiology or medicine.
15
The foreign-born award belongs to Albert A. Michelson, for the Michelson-Morley experiment on the invariance
of the speed of light.
16
The data on federal R&D are of higher quality during this period than the data on academic and industrial R&D,
because they derive from annual cost accounts. All these data are crude by standards of the present day.
13

7

Figure 1 shows R&D expressed in millions of 1958 $ in industry, government, and colleges
and universities during 1930-1944. The data are reported every two years17. They show that
federal R&D rises from less than 200 million in 1940 to over 1.2 billion by 1944.
To the benefit of U.S. universities the Cold War produced a sustained rise in the demand for
scientists and engineers. Figure 2 shows Federal R&D in 1958 $ for the years 1947-196818.
Total federal R&D amounted to one billion in 1947, rising to 12 billion by 1968. Nearly all
R&D expenditures were on defense, the Atomic Energy Commission, or NASA.

D. Postwar Demand for Higher Education
Mobilization produced a wartime decline in male college enrollment and degrees. But under
the GI Bill this decline was succeeded by a large spike around 1950. Figure 3 shows B.A.-B.S.
degrees from 1932-196019. Baccalaureate degrees earned by men rise during the 1930s, then
decline from a peak of 100 thousand in 1940 to a trough of 50 thousand in 1946, and finally
spike to 350 thousand in 1950. By comparison, the decline and recovery of degrees earned by
women are slight. As the stock of excess demand for education diminished during the 1950s
baccalaureate degrees fell and did not regain their 1950 peak until the mid 1960s.
Figure 4 shows Ph.D. degrees from 1932-196020. These increase from two to almost four
thousand during the 1930s, decline to two thousand by 1946, and increase to 10 thousand in
1960. Unlike baccalaureate degrees, the flow of PhDs rises smoothly, reflecting the strength of
long-run prospects for advanced skills.

17

To convert current into constant $ I have used the implicit GDP deflator with 1958 set to 1.0. This chart, as I have
noted, derives from Bush (1945, p. 86).
18
The source of the R&D data is U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (1975), Part 2, series W 126,
129, 137, and 138. These are deflated by the implicit GDP deflator for government purchases of goods and services
(indexed to 1958) that appears in U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (1975), Part 1, series E 13.
19
The data on BA and BS degrees derive from U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (1975), Part 1,
series H 752-754.
20
The data on PhD degrees derive from U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (1975), Part 1, series
H 761-763.

8

World War II and the Cold War led to sustained growth in U.S. academic science.
Throughout the subsequent period, growing demand for undergraduate and graduate education
fueled continued expansion of U.S. Universities.

III. World Scientific Output Since the 1980s
Having discussed forces that led to expansion of research in U.S. universities from the 1930s
to the 1980s, I now examine the recent role of the U.S. in world scientific research. I shall use
scientific papers as a measure of the public or “commons” aspects of science21. Figure 5 shows
relative growth of papers in the U.S. compared to the EU-15 group of European countries, East
Asia, and rest of the world22. Clearly U.S. papers grow slowly compared to most regions and
growth equals zero from 1997-2002. The EU-15 countries surpass the U.S. in total publications
by 1997 and they maintain this lead into the 21st century. East Asia grows more rapidly than any
other region, including the EU-15, but it does so from a small base.
Figure 6 constructs regional shares in world scientific publications over the period 19882005. Definitions of the regions differ slightly from Figure 523. The EU-23 supersedes the EU15 and the Asia-10 countries replace East Asia24. On these broader definitions Europe’s share of
world scientific papers surpasses that of the U.S. in 1996. The U.S. share falls from 38% to 29%
during this period. The EU-23 share peaks in 1998 but then declines. All shares decline except
Asia-10, with the U.S decline the fastest of all.

21

Alternative measures of commercial licenses and patents are beyond the scope of this paper.
The EU-15 consists of Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. These are the EU countries before
the addition of countries of Eastern Europe. East Asia consists of Japan, China, South Korea, Singapore, and
Taiwan. The source of Figure 5 is Appendix Table 41, Chapter 5, National Science Board (2006).
23
The source of these data is Appendix Table 41, Chapter 5, National Science Board (2006) and Appendix Table 34,
Chapter 5, National Science Board (2008).
24
The EU-23 countries are the EU-15 plus new member countries Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania, and Slovenia. The Asia-10 countries consist of East Asia (Japan, China, South Korea,
Singapore, and Taiwan) plus India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, and Thailand.
22

9

Figures 7-9 display regional shares in world citations in 1992, 1997, and 200325.
The charts show an accelerating decline in the U.S. share of citations, though nowhere is this as
great as the decline for papers. The EU-15 gain share; and the share of East Asia, while it is
small, grows the fastest. At the end of the period, because of gains in Europe, 75% of citations
are still received by America and Europe compared with 70% at the start.
Figure 10 depicts the U.S. share in the top 1%, top 5%, and top 10% most cited papers from
1992-200526. The share erodes at every level, and though it is hard to see the percentage decline
is less for top 1% papers than top 5% papers. The top 1% share declines from 65% of the world
total in 1992 to 55% in 2005. This is a decline of 15 percentage points (10/65). The top 5%
share declines from 38% to 30%, a decline of 21 percentage points. So erosion in share is less at
higher levels of citation impact, though some may see this as cold comfort.
But what does all this mean? Share data tell us little about welfare. Output adjusted for
quality, and output relative to input, are what matter for growth and technical efficiency of an
industry, and universities are no exception to this rule. All we can say is that the growth rate of
U.S. scientific publications has fallen and that growth is slow relative to other regions, but we
have not addressed the factors that drive this slowdown.
Foreign competition for science and engineering students is unlikely to be responsible27. If
that were the reason, then the skill of foreign science and engineering graduate students entering

25

The data source is Appendix Table 61, Chapter 5, National Science Board (2008).
The data source is Appendix Table 63, Chapter 5, National Science Board (2008).
27
In the long run, arguments concerning the diffusion of science and R&D vary in their implications for welfare of
advanced countries like the U.S. If technology converges in science and in industrial research then the share of
innovative products produced in advanced countries will decline. Standard models build on the theory of trade with
differentiated products (Helpman and Krugman, 1986). North-South models of innovation, imitation, and trade
based on this approach (Krugman, 1979; Grossman and Helpman, 1991) assume that all innovation occurs in North,
while South merely imitates. But if advanced human resources arise in South as well, then innovation is distributed
across both North and South, as Freeman (2006) points out. In that case the profits from new products are also
distributed across both regions and North can lose some industries with supra-normal profits. Applying this line of
reasoning to universities as an industry suggests that the U.S. could lose the lead in some sciences which in turn
26

10

U.S. universities would have undergone serious decline in recent years. But this seems
implausible given the attractiveness of U.S. education and employment. Alternatively, the
slowdown could represent crowding out of U.S. authors in top journals (Hicks, 2007), or
diversion to commercial activities (Toole and Czarnitski, 2007), or earmarking to less efficient
institutions (De Figueiredo and Silverman, 2006).
The recent slowdown could derive from other domestic causes and this is the approach that I
am about to pursue. I show in Section V that growth of scientific publication in U.S. private
universities did not slow down much in the 1990s compared with the 1980s. In contrast, a
pronounced deceleration did occur in public universities. In explaining the difference, a
deceleration in resource growth during the 1990s seems to be the most likely explanation for the
slowdown in public universities. I explore this hypothesis in Sections V and VI.

IV. Panel Data on U.S. Universities
A. Data Construction
With the goal of explaining the slowdown in U.S. academic research, I turn to empirical
work using a panel of 110 top U.S. universities. I begin by describing the data. In their raw
form they consist of 2.4 million scientific papers, published during 1981-1999, that have at least
one author from a set of leading U.S. universities. These universities account for more than 80
percent of U.S. academic research during this period28.

might contribute to less effective industrial research in the U.S. But countervailing forces also apply if product
varieties grow with the world economy. First, knowledge flows to industries in advanced countries will increase,
including universities, so that scientific discoveries and inventions of new products could increase. Second, the
larger world economy that results from South’s entry into advanced nation status would create markets for North,
including in scientific research. So it is not clear whether North gains or loses as a result of South’s development.
28
According to National Science Board (2002), Appendix Table 5-4, in 1999 the top 100 U.S. universities account
for $22.10 billion of R&D out of $27.49 billion of R&D for all U.S. universities. This equals 80.4 percent. National
Science Board (2008), Appendix Table 5-11 indicates that in 2006 the top 100 account for $38.09 billion out of
$47.76 billion for all U.S. universities. This equals 79.8 percent. Since the sample consists of the top 110 and not
the top 100, its share in R&D expenditures exceeds 80 percent. Publication data reflect R&D spending, so the
publication share also exceeds 80 percent.

11

Papers consist of articles, reviews, notes, and proceedings. The data source is ThomsonReuters Scientific29. Papers follow the field that Thomson assigns to the journal in which they
appear30. Field in this case is one of 88 subfields. To link the data to the National Science
Foundation’s (NSF) CASPAR database, I assign each of the 88 to one of NSF’s 12 main fields31.
The data record publication year, journal field, institutional affiliation, address
information on city, state, and country, and author names as well as number of authors32.
Address information is used to identify university affiliations of those who collaborate on a paper
and to compute fractional papers. By fractional, I mean that if a paper is written by researchers
in two universities, then each university is assigned half the paper. If three collaborate, then each
receives a third, and so on33. I add up fractional papers by university, field, and year to form
“effective” papers produced in a university-field. By treating the data in this way I avoid
multiple counting of papers of U.S. universities taken as a whole. Likewise I compute (forward)
citations received by a paper in its first five years including year of publication, and I calculate
fractional five-year citations in the same manner as for papers, but excluding citations from the
same institution. I accumulate fractional citations by university, field, and year to form an

29

The journal set consists of approximately 5500 journals that were active in 1999 as well as 1600 inactive
(renamed or out of print) journals that were cited by active journals.
30
This assignment is reasonable for specialized journals because of the breadth of fields that I use. But the method
produces serious errors for the one percent of journals (about 70) that fall into Thomson-Reuters’s Multidisciplinary
category. Thomson treats this category as part of biology because biology accounts for the largest number of its
papers. Multidisciplinary journals include Nature, Science, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
USA, and Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society. Wholesale assignment to biology here is clearly
wrong. But to correct the problem would require article (not journal) assignments to fields. Also, some
Multidisciplinary journals are primarily focused on biology. Therefore, the problem applies to less than one percent
of the journals.
31
The twelve fields are: agriculture, astronomy, biology, chemistry, computer science, earth sciences, economics
and business, engineering, mathematics and statistics, medicine, physics, and psychology.
32
There is no limit on the number of authors. The maximum number in the sample is 210 while the mean is 2.36.
33
The cumulative distribution of universities listed on papers is: 1 university, 79.6%; 2 universities or less, 96.8%; 3
universities or less, 98.3%; and 4 universities or less, 99.5%. It follows that the fractions assigned are almost always
1, ½, 1/3, or ¼.

12

estimate of “effective” citation-weighted papers in a university-field34.
These steps yield research “output” in a university, field and year. Following along these
lines I form a panel of universities, fields and years. The panel combines papers and citations
with university-field level (R&D), university-field PhD students and post-doctoral students, and
characteristics of doctoral programs; as well as financial characteristics of parent universities.
The measure used for R&D is a calculated depreciated stock based on past R&D expenditures.
The NSF-CASPAR database of universities, a compendium of NSF surveys, is the source for
university R&D and for graduate and post-graduate students. The HEGIS (Higher Education
General Information Surveys) surveys of the U.S. Department of Education provide financial
data at the university level on tuition revenues, state appropriations (for public universities),
endowments, auxiliary revenues from fees, and total revenues. The National Research Council
(NRC) 1993 Survey of Doctoral Programs (NRC, 1995) includes rankings of PhD programs, and
I use these to stratify departments by relative standing35.
In the basic panel of universities I consider only leading university-fields (“departments”)
from the top 110. Their number depends on size of field: I include the top 25 universities in
astronomy, the top 50 in agriculture, chemistry, computer science, economics and business, earth
sciences, mathematics and statistics, physics, and psychology, and the top 75 in biology,
medicine, and engineering. Summing across fields, and accounting for the fact that 48 formal
schools of agriculture exist, the panel consists of 648 top university-fields. My purpose in
breaking out few individual schools in small fields and more in large fields is to avoid empty

34

It is tempting to think of university-fields as departments, but this is misleading. The same field can be practiced
by more than one department and (rarely) multiple fields can be practiced within one department.
35
NRC ranks are not available for agriculture and medicine. For these fields I sort universities by their 1998 R&D
and assign a rank of 1 to the university with the largest R&D and so on in descending order.

13

cells for universities where fields are small or non-existent36. The result is a panel that contains
papers and citation-weighted papers for 648 university-fields in 12 main sciences during 19811999. This implies a total of 12,312 observations before exclusions due to missing values. In
some cases I stratify the data into top 20 percent, middle 40 percent, and bottom 40 percent
university-fields. A field that contains 50 university-fields has 10 in the top 20 percent, 20 in the
middle percent, and 20 in the bottom 40 percent, and so on. The university-field dimension
allows for greater variability of R&D stock, graduate students, and other variables within a
university. It increases the robustness of the findings when university dummies are included.
The price of this detail is that lagged faculty counts must be replaced by lagged R&D stocks and
a moving average of graduate students. These are the primary indicators of resources that are
available at the university, field and year level.

B. Descriptive Statistics
Table 3 contains descriptive statistics for major variables. The table reports means,
standard deviations, minima, and maxima. Groups consist of all, private, and public universities.
The last two are the groups used in the rest of the empirical work.
I begin with research output. Mean (fractional) papers in all universities are 177 per
university-field and year. They are slightly larger in private schools. The data indicate
considerable variation, especially among private schools. The field with the most papers is in a
private university. The mean of five-year (fractional) citations received (citation-weighted
papers) is 520 per university, field and year. This is 33% higher in private schools and 17%
lower in public schools. Again the maximum occurs in a private university.

36

The size of the remainder of the top 110 equals an average university-field in the individual top 25, 50, or 75
schools. This reflects the positive skew of academic R&D. For more on this point see Adams and Griliches (1998).

14

For comparison I report faculty counts. Since these exist only at the university level they
indicate total research labor37. The average school employs slightly more than 1,200 faculty;
private schools employ 800; and public schools employ 1,500. A smaller faculty in private
schools produces the same papers per university-field, but appreciably more citation-weighted
papers, than do faculty in public schools. Note that I compare total faculty in universities with
papers and citations at the university-field level. But this comparison is also valid at the
university level (Adams and Clemmons, 2009).
Research & Development (R&D) stock signifies lagged resources that enter into research.
It is the depreciated sum of total R&D from federal and other sources in a university-field over
the previous 8 years38. The depreciation rate is 15%; underlying R&D flows are expressed in
millions of ’92 dollars using the BEA university R&D deflator (Robbins and Moylan, 2007).
R&D stock in field i , university j , at time t is
(1)

R & D Stockijt = ∑τ =1 (0.85)τ r ij , t −τ
8

Mean R&D stock is about 80 million. Research output varies more than R&D, and private
universities produce more research than expected, given their R&D stocks, suggesting that other,
less readily observed resources are greater in these universities.
Financial statistics of tuition, state appropriations, and endowment derive from HEGIS.
These are expressed in millions of ’92 dollars using the implicit GDP deflator. The data are at
the university level39. Financial resources could be used to support more and better faculty. For
example, tuition in private universities is used to cover start-up packages for assistant professors

37

The data include untenured as well as tenure track faculty. In the Top 110 about 90% are tenure track according
to HEGIS. Note that data on faculty by university and field have not been collected since 1985.
38
I chose an 8-year lagged stock because the NSF CASPAR R&D data begin in 1973 and papers begin in 1981. It is
therefore the maximum length of stock that is available given the data.
39
One difficulty with the financial variables is that they are not available for the late 1990s. This causes an
appreciable loss of data as we shall see.

15

in science and engineering (Ehrenberg, Rizzo, and Jakubson, 2007). Not surprisingly, and
despite smaller enrollments, private schools have larger tuition revenues and larger (non-tax)
endowments. State appropriations capture the “tax endowment” of public universities. I
construct the following measure of current revenue in university j :
(2)

Revenue j , t = Tuition j ,t −1 + Public * State Appropriat ions j, t-1

In (2) Public is a dummy indicator equal to one in public universities and zero otherwise so that
in private universities revenue is tuition, since Public equals zero. But in public universities it is
tuition plus state appropriations on the assumption that appropriations substitute for tuition in
public universities. I lack a history of revenue, but I lag (2) by one year in the research output
equations to approximate lagged resources. I treat endowment separately from revenue, since it
is a stock, and since it may be earmarked for different uses. Note that I use the endowment stock
because endowment income is poorly measured in HEGIS.
The moving average of the stock of graduate students over the previous three years
captures numbers of research assistants:
(3)

Graduate Students ij, t = 0.333 * ∑τ =1 Students ij , t −τ
3

Table 3 shows that public universities employ more graduate students. But numbers of
undergraduates are also larger, requiring more of the graduate students to serve as teaching
assistants. Besides this, large public university programs in engineering include masters as well
as PhD students. For these reasons, (3) is likely to be a noisy indicator of research assistance,
and yet it is the best measure that I have.
I use the ratio of auxiliary/total revenues (from HEGIS) to indicate financial duress.
Auxiliary revenues are fee-for-service charges for residence halls, food services, athletics,

16

student unions, stores, and movie theaters40. I divide auxiliary by total revenues to abstract from
size of university. The mean of this ratio is 0.10, although it ranges from zero to 0.30.
To motivate the use of auxiliary/total revenues, suppose that tuition is price-controlled in
a public university. This could occur in states that guarantee tuition to families of students, since
the states must then cover tuition if the price cap were to be lifted (Rizzo, 2006). If fees were
increased in small amounts, then they might substitute for tuition in this setting. Likewise,
private universities with small endowments and gifts could use fees to finance their operations.
Fees in this interpretation resemble hidden prices for university attendance.
Table 4 reports correlations among auxiliary/total revenue, enrollment/faculty, tuition
plus state appropriations per student, and endowment per student. The enrollment/faculty ratio,
or the student-teacher ratio, is positively correlated with auxiliary/total revenue. Since an
increase in the student-teacher ratio spreads limited resources over more students, it also may
indicate financial duress41. Tuition plus state appropriations per student and endowment per
student capture more abundant resources per student. They are the opposite of financial duress
(Ehrenberg, 2002). They should be, and are, negatively correlated with the financial duress
indicators, which in this study are auxiliary/total revenue and enrollment/faculty.

V.

Growth of University Research

I now use the university panel data described in Section IV to provide an overview of the
growth of university research. Understanding these facts is helpful in interpreting the regression
analysis of university research in Section VI. To this end, I have composed three summary
tables that are designed to facilitate discussion of trends in university research productivity and
the U.S. slowdown in publication rates during the 1990s.
40

Hospital revenues are separate from auxiliary revenues.
An alternative view is that a higher student-teacher ratio automatically increases the share of auxiliary fees. It is
by no means perfect as an indicator of financial duress.

41

17

Table 5 presents totals of papers, citation-weighted papers, PhD degrees awarded, and R&D
stock in private and public universities. The data consist of 620 university-fields (out of 648
possible), observed over 1982-1999, for which there are no missing values. To aid in the
interpretation, I report values relative to 1982 in square brackets. In brief, the data tell us that the
output of papers grows by slightly more (slightly less) than 50 percent in private (public)
universities; that citations grow by 125 percent in both groups (from 1982-1995); and that PhDs
grow by a third in both. Since citations rise with the growing ease of citation and with the
number of researchers who cite, citation growth is best regarded as an upper bound on the
growth of research output. But since papers have genuinely become more influential, growth of
papers is a lower bound. Therefore, growth of research output lies between 50 and 125 percent.
This provides a broad range of growth in research output, but what about input? I start by
examining the behavior of R&D stock deflated by the implicit GDP deflator. This grows by 105
percent (130 percent) in private (public) schools. R&D growth exceeds publication and PhD
growth: surely, one supposes, this is a recipe for a slowdown in research productivity. But R&D
growth is overstated, because the GDP deflator understates cost increases in universities and
overstates growth of real R&D. The evidence in Table 13 below, on rising real compensation of
faculty, helps to make this clear.
For this reason I prefer the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) price index for university
R&D (Robbins and Moylan, 2007), because it takes university wage costs into account, and I use
the BEA index to deflate R&D stock in all the regressions to follow. When I use the BEA index
instead of the implicit GDP deflator to calculate real R&D, I find that R&D in private
universities grows by 72 percent, not 105 percent. Likewise I find that growth in public schools
is 93 percent, not 130 percent. Using the improved deflator real R&D grows by 70 (90) percent

18

in private (public) universities, while research output grows by 50/125 percent in both. In this
way the gap narrows between growth of articles and growth of real R&D.
Even so, growth of real R&D is likely to be overstated despite the use of the BEA deflator.
First, inter-university grants probably grow in importance during this time because of large
projects in biology and other fields. Since grants are not apportioned among schools in the
statistics until well after 1999, R&D is increasingly over-counted because of this. Second, an
increasing amount of funding could be targeted for training of graduate students rather than
faculty research. To assess research productivity with more accuracy it would be useful to
separate funds for research from funds for pure training. A related point might be important, if
universities move from institutional to grant support of graduate students. To that extent, grants
replace internal funds and they are not additional funds for research. I mention these problems
not because I have solutions to them but in the interest of producing better statistics on university
R&D in the future.
Table 5 shows that publications in private universities grow more slowly than R&D stock.
The same point applies even more strongly to public universities. While growth of papers slows
down during 1995-1999 in private universities, it virtually stops in public universities. However,
the growth rate of papers recovers somewhat during 2000-2005 (see Figure 5) so this slowdown
is to some extent temporary42.
Table 6 constructs ratios of papers, citations, and PhD students to R&D stocks using the GDP
and BEA deflators, and it examines their growth. Using the BEA deflator, papers per million $
decline over time in private schools by -11% but the decline is -23% in public universities.
Citations per million also grow significantly faster in private universities. In comparing research
42

For all academic institutions, total scientific papers published fell from 139,168 in 1995 to 138,472 in 1999. But
by 2005 this total had increased to 159,972. Numbers of scientific papers reflect year of entry into the database
rather than year of publication. See National Science Board, 2008, Chapter 5, Appendix Table 5-36.

19

productivity, it is useful to remember that faculty compensation rises by almost one percent
faster a year in private universities. Almost paradoxically this may explain why papers
(citations) per million $ of R&D fall less (rise more). It is because labor quality grows at a faster
rate in private universities due to faster wage growth in these universities. Finally, PhD students
per million $ decline by 50 percent in both types of university.
Table 7 takes a different look at university resources. It records enrollment, tenure track and
non-tenure track faculty, tuition (in public universities, tuition plus state appropriations). All
variables are at the university level. Values relative to 1982 are again placed in square brackets.
These measures track teaching loads as well as human and financial resources over time.
Growth in enrollments in both private and public institutions is about 10 percent by 1997.
Since PhD degrees increase by one third, enrollment shifts towards (more costly) graduate
education. Numbers of faculty grow by 25 percent in private universities, but by eight percent in
public universities. Most of the growth in private universities occurs at the end, during a period
of rapid growth in stock market and endowment values. Its effects will be felt in the 21st century.
Tuition revenue grows by 124 percent in private universities but tuition plus state appropriations
in public universities grow by just 46 percent. The divergence in resources becomes obvious
during the 1990s. It helps to account for differences in private-public productivity, since I shall
show that current revenues support research.
Endowments grow at the same rate in all institutions, though the difference in endowment
per faculty remains large. It is 1.39 million in private universities versus 0.15 million in public
universities. Endowment is simply too small in most public institutions to affect faculty
resources very much.

20

Together Tables 5 and 7 provide a new perspective on university research productivity.
Table 5 shows that papers increase by 50 percent during this period, while citation-weighted
papers increase by 125 percent. Table 7 shows that faculty increase by 10-25 percent. Papers
per faculty increase by either measure, and this draws attention to the point made earlier, that
growth of university R&D is overstated. At the same time, research productivity in public
universities has clearly fallen behind that of the privates.

VI. Regression Findings
A. Equation Setup
To better understand the determinants of research productivity, I turn to a regression analysis
of the university, field and year panel. Tables 8 and 9 present pooled OLS regressions for private
and public universities. By pooled, I specifically mean regressions that combine fields in a given
university. As I have shown, the university-field dimension of the data allows for variability
within universities that helps to identify effects of R&D stock and other variables.
The regressions follow three basic formats that I describe next. Let yijt be the logarithm
of research output (papers or citations) in field i , university j , at time t , let xijt consist of
logarithms of R&D stock, graduate students, and current revenue defined by (1), (3) and (2); and
let z jt stand for financial variables at the university level (endowment in logarithms;
auxiliary/total revenue, and enrollment/faculty). Also, Di is a vector of field dummies.43 Then
the “total” equation that omits university dummies is:
(4)

yijt = α + β 0 t + β x′ xijt + δ i′Di + e j + uijt

Financial variables z jt are omitted from (4), but they are included in (4') below:
43

In other regressions I include shares of full and associate professors to capture aging effects. The shares are
insignificant. Unlike individual productivity of scientists (Stephan and Levin, 1991, 1992) where age is significantly
negative, at the university and field level rank is insignificant. One explanation for the difference is that selective
pressures favor more productive researchers. Promotion in the aggregate counteracts individual aging.

21

(4')

yijt = α + β 0 t + β x′ xijt + γ z′ z jt + δ i′Di + e j + uijt

In (4) and (4′) e j is a university error component that may be correlated with the right hand
variables while uijt is a transitory component that is uncorrelated over time both with itself and
with the contemporaneous right hand variables.
The “within” equation adds university dummies to (4'):
(5)

yijt = α + β 0 t + β x′ xijt + γ ′z z jt + δ i′Di + δ ′j D j + uijt

In (5), the vector of university dummies D j absorbs the university error component, so that
e j =δ ′ j D j 44.

I also include time trend in (4), (4′), and (5) to indicate residual growth. If trend increases
when university effects are included, then this may indicate that research output shifts towards
universities where output grows more slowly (Adams and Clemmons, 2009).

B. Pooled Regressions: Private Universities
Table 8 reports estimates for private universities. Following (4), equation 8.1 includes trend,
R&D stock and the stock of graduate students. All are highly significant, and together they
explain most of the variation in papers45. The elasticity of R&D stock is 0.41 while that of
graduate students is 0.16. It follows that an expansion of R&D and graduate students of 10
percent results in 5.7 percent more papers in private universities, indicating diminishing returns
to research resources. Following (4′) 8.2 adds financial variables. Lagged tuition is linked to an
increase in papers, but this is not statistically significant. The coefficient of endowment is
positive and marginally significant. Auxiliary/total revenue and enrollment/faculty (financial
duress) reduce research output, but again are not statistically significant. As in (5), equation 8.3
44

See Hsiao (2003, Chapters 2 and 3) for derivations of estimators of the slope coefficients in total and within
regressions.
45
See Adams and Griliches (1998) for a related analysis.

22

adds university dummies. Tuition revenue now enters significantly as do the indicators of
financial duress. In 8.2 and 8.3, trend becomes insignificant so that growth of research output is
fully explained. R&D stock and graduate students decline slightly, but remain significant.
Equations 8.4-8.6 explain five-year citations received. While the elasticity of R&D stock
increases compared to the earlier regressions for papers, that of graduate students declines and
becomes insignificant. Endowment is linked to an increase in citations, suggesting that private
universities use endowment to buy release time and hire star faculty. As with papers, trend is not
significant once the financial indicators are included.
In all these production functions and those in succeeding tables, the sum of the output
elasticities across R&D stock, graduate students, tuition revenue, and endowment is less than 1.0.
This suggests decreasing returns to scale in university research and limits to university size,
consistent with Adams and Clemmons (2009). The relevance of this point is that, allowing for
fixed costs of research and after the efficient scale is reached, research may be better shifted to
universities in which it was previously missing. I shall return to this point in the summary and
conclusion in Section VII.

C. Pooled Regressions: Public Universities
Table 9 reports results for public universities. In general, output elasticities of R&D stock
are less than in Table 8 for private schools. One difference, though, is the larger elasticity of the
stock of graduate students, about 0.1 higher and significant throughout. This may indicate that
graduate student assistants are funded in public universities, to a larger extent, by means other
than R&D, such as teaching assistantships. Research output rises, usually significantly, with
tuition plus state appropriations. Endowment does not contribute to research output in public
universities, because amounts per faculty member are too small to matter. Auxiliary/total

23

revenues and enrollment/faculty enter with the expected negative signs, but are insignificant
once university effects are taken into account.
The trend coefficient is also greater in the public university regressions. The coefficient of
trend is even higher in the “within” regressions (9.3 and 9.6) than in total. Again, this may
reflect a shift of research towards schools where output growth is slower (Adams and Clemmons,
2009). Some of trend growth could also be due to knowledge flows from private universities,
since knowledge flows are more likely to take place from higher to lower ranked departments
(Adams, Clemmons, and Stephan, 2006) and since top departments are more often found in
private universities.

D. Regressions Stratified by Rank of University-Field
Let us now consider university-fields stratified into groups according to top 20, middle 40,
and bottom 40 percent rankings. Table 10 contains frequency distributions of the top 20, middle
40, and bottom 40 by private and public ownership. The top 20 and middle 40 percent account
for most of the private school observations. In contrast public school observations cluster in the
middle and bottom 40 percent. Even so, public universities contain almost half of the top 20
percent university-fields. The stratified regressions take this into account by analyzing
differences in quality wherever they occur.
Table 11 reports estimates of (4′) and (5). It shows results for the top 20, middle 40, and
bottom 40 percent in Panels A, B, and C respectively. Because I separate university-fields into
groups by rank, the regressions are stratified, though they are pooled across fields46. I focus on

46

Following Section IV, top 20 percent regressions include the top five in astronomy, the top 15 in biology,
medicine, and engineering, and the top 10 in all other fields. Middle 40 percent regressions include the next 10 in
astronomy, the next 30 in biology, medicine, and engineering, and the next 20 in all other fields. Bottom 40 percent
regressions include the bottom 10 in astronomy, the bottom 30 in biology, medicine, and engineering, and the
bottom 20 in all other fields.

24

key variables consisting of trend, R&D, and graduate students, not reporting results for the
financial variables, although these are included in the regressions.
Top 20 percent university-fields obtain more research output from R&D and graduate
students than the middle or bottom 40 percent47. Indeed, graduate students in the bottom 40
percent fail to make any significant contribution to research. This implies that their primary
duties are to teach and work on thesis research. This and the faculty time needed for dissertation
work, reduce the net student contribution to zero in bottom 40 percent university-fields.
Below the top 20 percent the pattern in the trend coefficients suggests that research
output grows more rapidly in the within regressions, which include university effects, than in the
total regressions that exclude these effects. As before, this pattern could be due to a shift in
output towards universities in which growth is less (Adams and Clemmons, 2009).

E. Faculty Compensation and Wage Structure
The empirical work concludes with a regression analysis of faculty compensation by
professorial rank—or in other words, the academic wage structure. Studying this structure could
help us to further understand the financial condition of universities. The dependent variable is
the logarithm of wages plus fringe benefits in ’92 $ at the full and assistant professor ranks48.
These are university-wide averages, since HEGIS, which is their source, does not collect wage
data by university-field. Since compensation is an average I cannot estimate a typical wage
equation where wages are a function of education, experience, and tenure. But faculty quality is
reflected in the logarithm of the university-wide R&D stock per faculty, the logarithm of tuition
47

These results are similar to findings for Top 10 universities not reported here. The Top 10 are selected on the
basis of top 10 citation impact per paper in a set of 21 fields during 1981-1993. Schools ranked as top 10 most
frequently among these fields are considered a Top 10 University. They include eight private schools (Harvard,
Yale, Chicago, MIT, Stanford, Princeton, Cornell, and California Institute of Technology) as well as two public
schools (Berkeley and the University of Washington). It should come as no surprise that top 20 percent universityfields predominate in Top 10 universities.
48
All monetary variables beside R&D are deflated by the GDP implicit price deflator indexed to 1992.

25

revenue per faculty (private schools) or tuition plus state appropriations per faculty (public
schools), the logarithm of endowment per faculty, and the financial duress indicators,
auxiliary/total revenue and enrollment/faculty. In constructing per capita variables on the right
hand side of the wage equations, I lag the number of faculty to limit division error bias. Besides
the above I include trend to capture general wage growth, and a cost of living indicator for
whether a university is located in a large city (in the U.S., a Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical
Area). The specification is:
(6)

Log( Wage jt ) = α + β 0 t + β L Large City + β ′x jt + u jt

These are “total” wage regressions that omit university effects because wage variation is
insufficient in the within-university dimension to permit a “within” specification.
Table 12 contains the results. The dependent variable in 12.1 and 12.4 is the logarithm of
full professor compensation; in 12.2 and 12.5 it is the logarithm of assistant professor
compensation; and in 12.3 and 12.6 it is the difference of the two.
Starting with the results for full and assistant professors, the trend coefficients show that
real compensation grows at about 1.5 percent a year, all else equal, but faster in private
universities, especially at the assistant professor level, where it grows at 2.5 percent49. Location
in a large city raises private school wages by 5-10 percent, although it has no significant effect
on wages in public schools, probably because state institutions are mostly located outside large
cities. For full professors in private universities, R&D stock and endowment increase
compensation. Besides trend, the only significant determinant of compensation in public
universities is current revenue consisting of tuition plus state appropriations.

49

The compensation gap between private and public universities rises at the rate of 0.8% a year. In simple
regressions that include trend and intercept, I find that, relative to the GDP deflator, both full and assistant professor
compensation grows at 2.3% per year in private universities and at 1.5% per year in public universities. Top 10
university compensation grows at 2.2% per year. R2s for these regressions range from 0.3-0.5.

26

Equations 12.3 and 12.6 display the results for the difference in compensation for full and
assistant professors. In the private university equation (12.3), we see that location in a large city,
tuition, and endowment increase the wage premium for senior faculty, but trend and
enrollment/faculty decrease it. In the public university equation (12.6), the wage structure is flat
across ranks. Together the findings suggest that successful researchers have an incentive to
move to private universities that increases with the rank of full professor.

VII. Discussion, Synthesis, and Conclusion
Is the U.S. losing its preeminence in higher education? The evidence presented in this paper
suggests that in a relative sense it is. Sections II and III tell a story of rapid postwar expansion of
U.S. universities, followed by a tapering off after 1980. A series of natural experiments took
place in the 1930s and 1940s that contributed to this growth. Because of their exogeneity, these
early events may in time capture the imagination of researchers studying higher education.
In the early years growth of U.S. universities was aided by refugee scientists, with foreign
graduate students playing a larger role after 1980. Additional early factors that contributed to
expansion of U.S. universities include a broadening of access to universities, increased military
research during World War II and the Cold War, and the expansion of high technology industries
during the postwar period. Since the 1980s we observe more rapid growth of academic research
in Europe, and especially East Asia, that implies convergence in world science and engineering
and a decline in the U.S. share.
But this is not the entire story. Most recently, in the 1990s, we observe a slowdown of
publication output in the U.S. This becomes the central puzzle of the paper, and Sections IV-VI
address it using panel data on universities, fields and years. In Section IV I describe the panel,
and in Section V I present growth facts concerning U.S. university research. These reveal that

27

much of the slowdown in publication is located in public universities. While R&D stocks grow
more rapidly in public than private schools, current revenues grow more slowly. This suggests
that public universities fall behind because of slower growth in their financial resources.
The regression findings in Section VI indicate a fairly similar if not perfectly identical
production process in public and private universities. On average, both obtain similar increases
in scientific papers from similar combined increases in R&D, graduate students, tuition revenues,
and endowment. This is true even though graduate students play a larger role in public
universities, perhaps because research is cross-subsidized by teaching assistantships more of the
time. In view of this broad similarity, a divergence in research output over time, in which public
universities fall behind, can only be accounted for by a lower rate of increase in public university
resources, as Section V reveals.
In support of this hypothesis compensation in private universities rises almost one percent a
year faster than in public universities. And besides, wages are flat across professorial rank in
public universities, whereas they rise noticeably with rank in private universities. All this
suggests reasons for top scientists to migrate from public to private universities. Therefore, in
several ways slower growth in current revenues in public universities produces slower growth of
research as well.
At the same time, (mostly federal) research funding expands at a faster rate in public schools
(Adams and Clemmons, 2009). Together this tells an interesting story of state and federal policy
interactions. Even as (mostly federal) R&D is expanding, the states are subjected to a portion of
rising health care costs under Medicaid. In addition, some are subject to mandated equalization
of K-12 education expenditures which raise the cost of elementary and secondary education
(Murray, Evans, and Schwab, 1998). Towards the end of the period some states commit

28

themselves to pre-paid tuition plans that are inadequately funded (Rizzo, 2006). So growth of
mostly federal research dollars is cancelled out by the slower growth of state dollars in public
universities.
An obvious question that arises is whether this situation will persist. If it is temporary, then
the downward fluctuations of finances of public universities during the 1990s would be
compensated by upward fluctuations at a later time, leaving public institutions on the same
unaltered trend line with little to be concerned about in the long run. But if the situation is
permanent and state funding remains below trend and perhaps increasingly so, then top public
universities would have to seek alternative sources of funding to begin to catch up to top private
universities. They might for example, seek to obtain freely floating tuition from parents of
students anywhere in the world. But this solution seems unlikely given the charters of state
universities and ownership of their real assets by the states. More likely is a gradual removal of
tuition price controls to in-state families amidst a frank recognition that price caps deny public
universities the resources that are essential to a good education. Still another solution revolves
around increased commercialization of university inventions as well as increased sales of
merchandise and entertainment, though the latter are hardly consistent with the academic
missions of these institutions. All these adjustments to the new realities seem destined to occur
slowly, so that relative shortfalls of public universities are likely to persist for years to come.
On a world-wide scale, the relatively faster growth of universities in newly industrializing
countries will continue. This is because this growth is part of a convergence process in the
developing world, in which steady state incomes and growth rates increase as a function of
increases in education and stocks of knowledge. Even if funding problems of U.S. public

29

universities could be resolved through improved mechanisms of finance, the decline in the U.S.
share of world science will likely persist.
Yet another possibility arises. All that we have seen in this paper, which covers more than 80
percent of academic research in the U.S., consists of a fixed set of top 110 institutions. Tables 8,
9 and 11 show that these universities are subject to decreasing returns to scale in research, since
the sum of the output elasticities of R&D stock, graduate students, and financial resources is less
than one. Since this is the definition of decreasing returns, one might suppose that beyond the
efficient scale, more growth could be obtained at less cost by spreading research funds over a
wider range of universities. Of course, organizational assets in smaller research institutions are
not necessarily the equal of those in top 110 schools. It follows that if sustained growth of
research output is the objective, then the challenge is not only that of spreading resources across
more schools, but also that of replicating the assets of top universities. At present, growth
appears to be more rapid in universities where this kind of replication remains an open question.

30

References
Adams, James D., and Zvi Griliches, “Research Productivity in a System of Universities,”
Annales D’Economie et de Statistique 49/50 (1998): 127-162
______________, J. Roger Clemmons, and Paula E. Stephan, “Standing on Academic Shoulders:
Measuring Scientific Influence in Universities,” Annales D’Economie et de Statistique
79/80 (2006): 1-30
______________, and J. Roger Clemmons, “The Growing Allocative Inefficiency of the US
Higher Education Sector,” in Richard B. Freeman and Daniel Goroff, editors, Science
and Engineering Careers in the United States, Chicago: University of Chicago Press
for NBER, 2009
Bush, Vannevar, Science: The Endless Frontier, Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office, 1945
Davie, Maurice R., Refugees in America: A Report of the Committee for the Study of
Recent Immigration from Europe, New York: Harper and Brothers, 1947
De Figueiredo, John M., and Brian S. Silverman, “Academic Earmarks and the Returns to
Lobbying,” Journal of Law and Economics 49 (October 2006): 597-625
Education Commission of the States, ECS State Notes: Financial Aid, “Merit Scholarships,” July
2001
Ehrenberg, Ronald G., Tuition Rising: Why College Costs So Much, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2002
__________________, Michael J. Rizzo, and George H. Jakubson, “Who Bears the Growing
Cost of Science at Universities?” in Ronald G. Ehrenberg and Paula E. Stephan, editors,
Science and the University, Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press, 2007
31

__________________, editor, What’s Happening to Public Higher Education?, Westport,
Connecticut: Praeger, 2006
Fermi, Laura, Illustrious Immigrants: The Intellectual Migration from Europe, 1930-1941,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1971
Freeman, Richard B., “Does Globalization of the Scientific/Engineering Workforce Threaten
U.S. Economic Leadership?” Innovation Policy and the Economy 6 (2006): 123-158,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 2006
Helpman, Elhanan, and Paul R. Krugman, Market Structure and Foreign Trade: Increasing
Returns, Imperfect Competition, and the International Economy, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1986
Hicks, Diana M., “Global Research Competition Affects Measured U.S. Academic Output,” in
Paula E. Stephan and Ronald G. Ehrenberg, editors, Science and the University,
Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press, 2007
Hsiao, Cheng, Analysis of Panel Data, 2nd Edition, New York: Cambridge University Press,
2003
Huffman, Wallace E., and Robert E. Evenson, Science for Agriculture, 1st Edition, Ames, Iowa:
Iowa State University Press, 1993
Khan, Zorina, The Democratization of Invention: Patents and Copyrights in American
Economic Development, 1790-1920, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005
Krugman, Paul R., “A Model of Innovation, Technology Transfer, and the World Distribution of
Income,” Journal of Political Economy 87 (April 1979): 253-266
Mowery, David C., and Nathan Rosenberg, Technology and the Pursuit of Economic Growth,
New York: Cambridge University Press, 1989

32

__________________________________, Paths of Innovation: Technological Change in 20th
Century America, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1998
Murray, Sheila E., William N. Evans, and Robert M. Schwab, “Education-Finance Reform and
the Distribution of Education Resources,” American Economic Review 88 (September
1998): 789-812
National Research Council, Research-Doctorate Programs in the United States: Continuity
and Change, Washington, DC, National Academy Press, 1995.
National Science Board, Science and Engineering Indicators 2002 (in two volumes),
Arlington, VA, National Science Foundation, 2002
___________________, Science and Engineering Indicators 2006 (in two volumes),
Arlington, VA, National Science Foundation, 2006
___________________, Science and Engineering Indicators 2008 (in two volumes),
Arlington, VA, National Science Foundation, 2008
National Resources Committee, Research—A National Resource, Volume I.—Relation of
the Federal Government to Research, Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office, 1938
_________________________________________________________, Volume II.—Industrial
Research, Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1941
Nobel Archives, www.nobel.org
Rizzo, Michael J., “State Preferences for Higher Education Spending: A Panel Data Analysis,
1977-2001,” in Ronald G. Ehrenberg, editor, What’s Happening to Public Higher
Education?, Westport, Connecticut: Praeger, 2006
Robbins, Carol A., and Carol E. Moylan, “Research and Development Satellite Account Update:

33

Estimates for 1959-2004, New Estimates for Industry, Regional, and International
Accounts,” Survey of Current Business 87 (October 2007): 49-92
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Institute of Higher Education, “Academic Ranking of World
Universities,” http://ed.sjtu.edu.cn/ranking.htm, various years
Stephan, Paula E., and Sharon G. Levin, “Research Productivity over the Life Cycle: Evidence
for Academic Scientists,” American Economic Review 81 (March 1991): 114-132
_______________________________, Striking the Mother Lode in Science: The Importance
of Age, Place, and Time, New York: Oxford University Press, 1992
Toole, Andrew A., and Dirk Czarnitzki, “Life Scientist Mobility from Academe to
Industry: Does Academic Entrepreneurship Induce a Costly ‘Brain Drain’ on the Not-forProfit Research Sector?” Discussion Paper No. 07-072, Center for European Economic
Research, Mannheim, Germany, 2007
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United
States: Colonial Times to 1970, Parts 1 and 2: Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1975

34

Source—R&D $, Bush (1945), P. 86; Implicit GDP Deflator, U.S.
Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (1975), Part 1,
Series E13

Source—R&D $, U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the
Census (1975), Part 2, Series W126, W129, W137, and W138;
Implicit GDP Deflator, Ibid, Part 1, Series E13

35

Source—U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census
(1975), Part 1, Series H752-H754

Source—U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census
(1975), Part 1, Series H761-H763

36

Source—National
Source—National Science
ScienceBoard
Board(2006),
(2006),Chapter
Chapter4,5,
Appendix
Table
41
Appendix Table 41

Source—National Science Board (2006), Chapter 5, Appendix Table 41;
National Science Board (2008), Chapter 5, Appendix Table 34

37

Source, Figures 7-9—National Science Board (2008), Chapter 5, Appendix Table
61

38

Source—National Science Board (2008), Chapter 5, Appendix Table 63

39

Table 1—Statistics of the Intellectual Migration
From Europe to the United States, 1933-1944
Field

Biology; Physiology or
Medicine
Chemistry
Physics or Astronomy
Mathematics
Literature
Economics
Total

Nobel Prize
Winners a

Distinguished
Refugees b

Sample of Refugee
Professors c

2

72

91

1
6
n. a.
3
n. a.

28
40
41
15
7

63
77
53
65
60

12

203

409

Notes: a These are Nobel Prize winners by the time of Davie (1947). b Distinguished
Refugees are compiled by Davie (1947), pages 432-440, from Who’s Who in America
(1944-1945) and American Men of Science (1944). c Sample consists of 707 refugees in
Davie (1947) who were formerly on university faculties in Europe, of which 409 were in
the disciplines shown.

40

Table 2—Nobel Prizes Won by U.S. Residents, 1901-2007
Total
Laureates

Total
ForeignBorn

Science a
(ForeignBorn)

Literature
(ForeignBorn)

Peace
(ForeignBorn)

Economics b
(ForeignBorn)

1901-1910

2

1

0

1

n. a.

1911-1920

3

0

1
(1)
1

0

2

n. a.

1921-1930

5

0

2

1

2

n. a.

1931-1940

13

0

9

2

2

n. a.

1941-1950

22

5

2

5

n. a.

1951-1960

29

7

1

1

n. a.

1961-1970

32

10

1

3

1

1971-1980

52

14

1981-1990

48

15

1991-2000

52

12

3
(3)
1
(1)
1

1
(1)
1
(1)
1

2001-2007

46

9

0

2

All Years

304

73

15
(5)
27
(7)
27
(10)
40
(7)
37
(11)
39
(9)
31
(6)
229
(56)

12
(4)

21
(2)

8
(3)
9
(2)
11
(3)
13
(3)
42
(11)

Period

Notes: a Science Nobel Prizes include separate awards in physics, chemistry, and in
physiology or medicine. b The Nobel prize in economics began in 1969. Thus
economics prizes for the 1961-1970 decade are limited to 1969-1970. Data compiled
from Nobel Archives at www.nobel.org .

41

Table 3—Descriptive Statistics,
Panel of Universities, Fields, and Years
Variable

Analytical Level

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Papers a
All Universities
Private “
Public “

University-Field
“
“

176.8
183.1
173.6

210.9
256.2
183.2

0.5
1.3
0.5

2,559.1
2,559.1
1,317.6

Five-Year Citations Received a
All Universities
Private “
Public “

University-Field
“
“

520.1
693.8
430.8

1,078.9
1,518.7
743.4

0
0.9
0

21,954.2
21,954.2
7,710.8

University
“
“

1,236.3
802.1
1,459.9

614.6
371.6
595.0

42
179
42

3,083
2,461
3,083

University-Field
“
“

83.3
83.4
83.3

112.7
116.6
110.6

0.0
0.0
0.2

1,441.1
828.9
1,441.1

Tuition Revenues (millions of ’92 $) d
All Universities
Private “
Public “

University
“
“

120.4
158.1
101.0

83.9
94.7
70.2

0.7
13.0
0.7

547.4
547.4
413.0

State Appropriations (millions of ’92 $) d
All Universities
Private “
Public “

University
“
“

155.9
11.1
230.5

132.0
30.6
97.8

0
0
23.9

489.7
160.8
489.7

Endowment (millions of ’92 $) d
All Universities
Private “
Public “

University
“
“

553.9
1,118.9
258.7

890.7
1,029.4
632.7

0.013
55.3
0.013

6,553.7
6,553.7
5,089.6

Number of Faculty b
All Universities
Private “
Public “
Stock of R&D (millions of ’92 $) c
All Universities
Private “
Public “

42

Table 3—Descriptive Statistics,
Panel of Universities, Fields, and Years
Variable

Analytical Level

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

University-Field
“
“

258.7
198.3
289.8

343.1
363.1
328.1

0.0
0.0
0.0

4,904.0
4,904.0
2,705.0

Auxiliary/Total Revenues d
All Universities
Private “
Public “

University
“
“

0.096
0.077
0.105

0.045
0.040
0.045

0.006
0.006
0.007

0.302
0.245
0.302

Enrollment/Faculty f
All Universities
Private “
Public “

University
“
“

21.5
16.4
24.1

6.4
4.9
5.4

4.8
6.5
4.8

40.1
28.9
40.1

Graduate Students e
All Universities
Private “
Public “

Notes: Period is 1982-1999. Sources of the data are described in the text and include: ThomsonReuters Scientific, the CASPAR database of the National Science Foundation, and the HEGIS
database of the National Center for Education Statistics. a Papers and citations received are
fractionally assigned to universities in the manner described in the text. b The number of faculty
is the number of tenure-track plus non-tenure track faculty. These data derive from HEGIS. c
The stock of R&D is defined at the university-field level. It derives from the NSF-CASPAR
database of universities. d All the financial variables derive from HEGIS. e The number of lagged
graduate students is for a university-field. It is an average over the previous three years. These
data derive from the NSF-CASPAR database of universities. f The enrollment data derive from
HEGIS.

43

Table 4—Correlations Among Financial Indicators
(Significance Levels in Parentheses)
Auxiliary/
Total Revenue
Auxiliary/
Total Revenue

Enrollment/
Faculty

Tuition + State
Appropriations/
Student

Endowment/
Student

1.00

Enrollment/
Faculty

0.17
(<0.0001)

1.00

Tuition + State
Appropriations/
Student

-0.41
(<0.0001)

-0.50
(<0.0001)

1.00

Endowment/
Student

-0.25
(<0.0001)

-0.35
(<0.0001)

0.21
(<0.0001)

1.00

Notes: see text and Table 3 for data sources and definitions of the financial indicators.

44

Table 5
Scientific Papers, PhDs and R&D Stock
By University Type, Selected Years
[Value Relative to 1982 in Brackets]
University Type, Variable
Panel A. Private Schools
Papers
5-year Citations
PhD Degrees a
R&D Stock (mill. of ’92 $) b
Using GDP Implicit Price Deflator
Using BEA University R&D Input Deflator

Panel B. Public Schools
Papers
5-year Citations
PhD Degrees a
R&D Stock (mill. of ’92 $) b
Using GDP Implicit Price Deflator
Using BEA University R&D Input Deflator

1982

1986

1990

1995

1999

27,591
[1.00]
83,641
[1.00]
48,374
[1.00]

30,776
[1.12]
110,371
[1.32]
48,512
[1.00]

33,342
[1.21]
140,938
[1.69]
55,178
[1.14]

40,022
[1.45]
187,763
[2.24]
60,278
[1.25]

41,952
[1.52]
--

10,296
[1.00]
11,927
[1.00]

11,709
[1.14]
13,109
[1.10]

14,641
[1.42]
15,435
[1.29]

17,775
[1.73]
17,873
[1.50]

21,099
[2.05]
20,478
[1.72]

49,851
[1.00]
101,746
[1.00]
116,709
[1.00]

56,312
[1.13]
125,394
[1.23]
117,402
[1.01]

63,566
[1.28]
173,066
[1.70]
126,311
[1.08]

73,985
[1.48]
229,657
[2.26]
153,026
[1.31]

74,158
[1.49]
-155,505
[1.33]

18,400
[1.00]
21,312
[1.00]

21,771
[1.18]
24,366
[1.14]

27,963
[1.52]
29,468
[1.38]

36,385
[1.98]
36,567
[1.72]

42,257
[2.30]
41,030
[1.93]

63,840
[1.32]

Note: see the text and Table 3 for data sources and definitions of the variables. Data are a
balanced panel of university-fields, defined as a matched sample that includes the same
observations in all years. The sample includes all the data. Papers and 5-year Citations
Received are fractional and are adjusted for collaboration among universities. a PhD degrees are
specific to university-fields and belong to 12 main fields of science and engineering: agriculture,
astronomy, biology, chemistry, computer science, earth science, economics and business,
engineering, mathematics and statistics, medicine, physics, and psychology. b R&D stock is
deflated by the GDP implicit price deflator in the first row, and by the BEA University R&D
input deflator (Robbins and Moylan, 2007) in the second row. Both price indexes are
normalized to 1992.

45

Table 6
Research Output/R&D Stock
By University Type, Selected Years
University Type, Variable
Panel A. Private Schools
Papers/R&D Stock
Using GDP Implicit Price Deflator
Using BEA University R&D Input Deflator
5-year Citations/R&D Stock
Using GDP Implicit Price Deflator
Using BEA University R&D Input Deflator
PhD Degrees/R&D Stock
Using GDP Implicit Price Deflator
Using BEA University R&D Input Deflator
Panel B. Public Schools
Papers/R&D Stock
Using GDP Implicit Price Deflator
Using BEA University R&D Input Deflator
5-year Citations/R&D Stock
Using GDP Implicit Price Deflator
Using BEA University R&D Input Deflator
PhD Degrees/R&D Stock
Using GDP Implicit Price Deflator
Using BEA University R&D Input Deflator

1982

1986

1990

1995

1999

2.68
2.31

2.63
2.35

2.28
2.16

2.25
2.24

1.99
2.05

8.12
7.01

9.43
8.42

9.63
9.13

10.56
10.51

---

4.70
4.06

4.14
3.70

3.77
3.57

3.39
3.37

3.03
3.12

2.71
2.34

2.59
2.31

2.27
2.16

2.03
2.02

1.75
1.81

5.53
4.77

5.76
5.15

6.19
5.87

6.31
6.28

---

6.34
5.48

5.39
4.82

4.52
4.29

4.21
4.18

3.68
3.79

Note: see the text and Table 3 for data sources and definitions of the variables. Data are a
balanced panel of university-fields, defined as a matched sample that includes the same
observations in all years. The sample includes all the data, except for endowment. Papers and 5year Citations Received are fractional and adjusted for collaboration among universities. R&D
stock is deflated by the GDP implicit price deflator in the first row for each of the variables, and
by the BEA University R&D input deflator (Robbins and Moylan, 2007) in the second row. Both
price indexes are normalized to 1992.

46

Table 7
Enrollment, Faculty, and Financial Resources
By University Type, Selected Years
[Value Relative to 1982 in Brackets]
University Type, Variable
Panel A. Private Schools
Enrollment
Faculty
Tuition (mill. of ’92 $) a
Endowment (mill. of ’92 $) b

Panel B. Public Schools
Enrollment
Faculty
Tuition + State Appropriations (mill. of ’92 $) a
Endowment (mill. of ’92 $) b

1982

1986

1990

1997

403,875
[1.00]
21,527
[1.00]
2,975
[1.00]
13,768
[1.00]

413,824
[1.02]
22,352
[1.04]
4,034
[1.36]
19,531
[1.42]

428,522
[1.06]
23,246
[1.08]
5,026
[1.69]
27,645
[2.01]

446,495
[1.11]
26,960
[1.25]
6,668
[2.24]
37,361
[2.71]

1,895,564 1,908,438 1,999,802 2,053,056
[1.00]
[1.01]
[1.06]
[1.08]
80,112
80,458
84,448
86,158
[1.00]
[1.00]
[1.05]
[1.08]
14,554
17,400
19,706
21,242
[1.00]
[1.20]
[1.35]
[1.46]
4,524
6,879
8,309
12,619
[1.00]
[1.52]
[1.84]
[2.79]

Note: see the text and Table 3 for data sources and definitions of the variables. Data are a
balanced panel, defined as a matched sample that includes the same observations in all
years. This sample includes all the data except for endowment. Enrollment consists of all
students, both graduate and undergraduate, in the fall of each year. Faculty include both
tenure-track and non-tenure-track personnel. a Tuition and State Appropriations end in
1997 owing to suspension of data collection in the HEGIS surveys beginning in 1998. b
Endowment data end in 1996 instead of 1997 owing to suspension of data collection in
the HEGIS surveys beginning in 1997. The endowment data are missing for about 20
percent of universities so the matched sample is smaller than for other variables. Deflator
for revenue and endowment is the implicit GDP deflator indexed to 1992.

47

Table 8—OLS Research Regressions: Private Universities
(Robust, Clustered S.E. in Parentheses)
Log (Papers)

Log (5-year Citations)

Variable or Statistic
Eq. 8.1

Eq. 8.2

Eq. 8.3

Eq. 8.4

Eq. 8.5

Eq. 8.6

Field Dummies Included

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

University Dummies Included

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

Total

Total

Within

Total

Total

Within

-0.0035
(0.0087)
0.294**
(0.036)
0.132*
(0.055)
0.270*
(0.129)
0.055
(0.071)
-1.832*
(0.796)
-0.009*
(0.004)

0.0333**
(0.0042)
0.563**
(0.059)
0.092
(0.054)

0.0097
(0.0070)
0.474**
(0.052)
0.083
(0.057)
0.186
(0.130)
0.205**
(0.070)
-1.517
(1.438)
-0.029*
(0.012)

-0.0112
(0.0121)
0.377**
(0.043)
0.088
(0.066)
0.624**
(0.214)
0.196**
(0.076)
-1.233
(1.001)
-0.004
(0.005)

2,636
0.88
0.407

2,523
0.85
0.641

2,454
0.87
0.597

2,454
0.90
0.536

Regression Structure
Time Trend
Log (R&D Stock in mill. of ’92 $)
Log ( Graduate Students)
Log (Tuition Rev. in mill. of ’92 $)
Log (Endowment in mill. of ’92 $)
Auxiliary/Total Rev.
Enrollment/Faculty
Number of Observations
R-squared
Root MSE

0.0102** -0.0018
(0.0025) (0.0050)
0.413** 0.369**
(0.045)
(0.039)
0.157** 0.127**
(0.049)
(0.047)
0.137
(0.086)
0.102*
(0.050)
-1.912
(0.985)
-0.015
(0.008)
3,255
0.84
0.471

2,636
0.86
0.448

Note: see the text and Table 3 for data sources and definitions of the variables.

48

Table 9—OLS Research Regressions: Public Universities
(Robust, Clustered S.E. in Parentheses)
Log (Papers)

Log (5-year Citations)

Variable or Statistic
Eq. 9.1

Eq. 9.2

Eq. 9.3

Eq. 9.4

Eq. 9.5

Eq. 9.6

Field Dummies Included

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

University Dummies Included

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

Total

Total

Within

Total

Total

Within

0.0115**
(0.0017)
0.341**
(0.034)
0.288**
(0.042)

0.0023
(0.0026)
0.338**
(0.034)
0.215**
(0.038)
0.267**
(0.063)
0.019
(0.011)
-1.384**
(0.401)
-0.009*
(0.004)

6,552
0.84
0.429

4,678
0.86
0.400

Regression Structure
Time Trend
Log (R&D Stock in mill. of ’92 $)
Log ( Graduate Students)
Log (Tuition + State Appropriations
in mill. of ’92 $)
Log (Endowment in mill. of ’92 $)
Auxiliary/Total Rev.
Enrollment/Faculty
Number of Observations
R-squared
Root MSE

0.0144** 0.0415** 0.0236** 0.0448**
(0.0018) (0.0031) (0.0049) (0.0028)
0.335** 0.416** 0.406** 0.397**
(0.035)
(0.042)
(0.041)
(0.042)
0.173** 0.232** 0.156** 0.127**
(0.041)
(0.053)
(0.046)
(0.046)
0.142**
0.224*
0.163
(0.048)
(0.092)
(0.084)
-0.018
0.050** -0.044**
(0.010)
(0.018)
(0.018)
0.124
-2.389**
0.459
(0.157)
(0.634)
(0.349)
-0.004*
-0.008
-0.002
(0.002)
(0.006)
(0.005)
4,678
0.90
0.342

5,088
0.83
0.634

Notes: see the text and Table 3 for data sources and definitions of the variables.

49

4,378
0.85
0.595

4,378
0.89
0.506

Table 10
Relationship of Rank of University-Fields
To Private and Public Schools
(Row Percents in Parentheses)
University Type

Rank of University-Field
Top 20%

Middle 40%

Bottom 40%

All

Private

72
(33.6%)

90
(42.1%)

52
(24.3%)

214
(100%)

Public

56
(13.8%)

160
(39.4%)

190
(46.8%)

406
(100%)

Notes: see the text for data sources and a description of the underlying panel data. Data consist of
620 private and public university-fields from 103 universities after exclusion of missing values.
Top10 universities include eight private and two public schools.

50

Table 11—Stratified OLS Research Regressions:
Top 20, Middle 40, and Bottom 40 Percent University-Fields
(Robust, Clustered S.E. in Parentheses)
Log (Papers)
Variable or Statistic

Panel A: Top 20 Percent University-Fields
Equation No.
Time Trend
Log (R&D Stock in mill. of ’92 $)
Log (Graduate Students)
Number of Observations
R-squared
Root MSE
Panel B: Middle 40 Percent University-Fields
Equation No.
Time Trend
Log (R&D Stock in mill. of ’92 $)
Log (Graduate Students)
Number of Observations
R-squared
Root MSE

Total
Within
Regression Regression

Log (5-year Citations)
Total
Regression

Within
Regression

Eq. 11.1

Eq. 11.2

Eq. 11.3

Eq. 11.4

0.0089*
(0.0035)
0.310**
(0.057)
0.157**
(0.049)

0.0119**
(0.0044)
0.284**
(0.076)
0.196**
(0.062)

0.0249**
(0.0050)
0.278**
(0.058)
0.139**
(0.052)

0.0158*
(0.0079)
0.270**
(0.077)
0.193**
(0.075)

1,501
0.89
0.365

1,501
0.91
0.328

1,407
0.91
0.447

1,407
0.92
0.413

Eq. 11.5

Eq. 11.6

Eq. 11.7

Eq. 11.8

0.0063*
(0.0030)
0.297**
(0.034)
0.151**
(0.041)

0.0178**
(0.0034)
0.266**
(0.037)
0.135**
(0.053)

0.0337**
(0.0046)
0.301**
(0.042)
0.075
(0.047)

0.0475**
(0.0057)
0.304**
(0.048)
0.043
(0.062)

3,077
0.89
0.349

3,077
0.93
0.283

2,877
0.89
0.492

2,877
0.92
0.420

51

Table 11—Stratified OLS Research Regressions:
Top 20, Middle 40, and Bottom 40 Percent University-Fields
(Robust, Clustered S.E. in Parentheses)
Log (Papers)
Variable or Statistic

Panel C: Bottom 40 Percent University-Fields
Equation No.
Time Trend
Log (R&D Stock in mill. of ’92 $)
Log (Graduate Students)
Number of Observations
R-squared
Root MSE

Total
Within
Regression Regression

Log (5-year Citations)
Total
Regression

Within
Regression

Eq. 11.9

Eq. 11.10

Eq. 11.11

Eq. 11.12

0.0114*
(0.0041)
0.222**
(0.044)
0.083
(0.051)

0.0231**
(0.0030)
0.203**
(0.038)
0.100
(0.057)

0.0414**
(0.0054)
0.264**
(0.049)
-0.006
(0.055)

0.0539**
(0.0064)
0.252**
(0.051)
0.089
(0.069)

2,736
0.81
0.447

2,736
0.87
0.374

2,548
0.84
0.624

2,548
0.89
0.541

Notes: see the text and Table 3 for data sources and definitions of the variables. Top 20, middle
40, and bottom 40 percent groups are ranked according to field using 1993 NRC rankings, except
for agriculture and medicine, where, because of missing data, university-fields are ranked by size
of R&D expenditure. All regressions include field dummies. Total regressions exclude
university dummies while within regressions include them. Also included are Log (Tuition +
Public*State Appropriations), Log (Endowment), Auxiliary/Total Revenue, and
Enrollment/Faculty.

52

Table 12—Faculty Compensation Equations
(Robust, Clustered S.E. in Parentheses)
Private Universities
Variable
or Statistic

Year
Large City (1 if yes, 0 if no)
Log (R&D Stock/ Faculty)
Log ((Tuition + Public* State
Appropriations)/ Faculty) a
Log (Endowment/ Faculty)
Auxiliary/Total Revenue
Enrollment/Faculty
No. of Observations
R-squared
Root MSE

Public Universities

Full

Asst

Full-Asst

Full

Asst

Full-Asst

12.1

12.2

12.3

12.4

12.5

12.6

0.0174**
(0.0031)
0.098**
(0.025)
0.039**
(0.015)
0.080
(0.057)
0.040
(0.021)
-0.068
(0.287)
-0.006
(0.003)

0.0257**
(0.0031)
0.052*
(0.024)
0.054**
(0.017)
-0.035
(0.053)
-0.014
(0.023)
-0.260
(0.245)
-0.001
(0.004)

-0.0083**
(0.0021)
0.046**
(0.014)
-0.015
(0.010)
0.116**
(0.042)
0.054**
(0.012)
0.192
(0.148)
-0.005*
(0.002)

0.0139**
(0.0016)
0.032
(0.029)
0.017
(0.021)
0.137
(0.073)
0.011
(0.008)
-0.095
(0.271)
-0.004
(0.003)

0.0155**
(0.0015)
0.017
(0.020)
0.019
(0.018)
0.121*
(0.056)
-0.003
(0.008)
-0.329
(0.182)
-0.002
(0.002)

-0.0014
(0.0010)
0.016
(0.024)
-0.003
(0.011)
-0.002
(0.037)
0.013
(0.007)
0.206
(0.170)
-0.002*
(0.001)

485
0.77
0.078

485
0.68
0.088

485
0.44
0.053

879
0.47
0.108

879
0.55
0.093

879
0.12
0.068

Notes: see the text and Table 3 for data sources and definitions of the variables. Dependent
variable is Log (Wage + Fringe Benefits) in equations labeled “Full” for full professors, and
“Asst” for assistant professors; it is the difference in the logarithm of wage + fringe benefits for
full and assistant professors in equations marked “Full-Asst”. a The variable “Public” equals 1 if
a university is public, and 0 otherwise, so the variable equals the logarithm of tuition for private
universities and the logarithm of tuition + state appropriations in public universities.

53

