                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          A PARSIMONIOUS MACROECONOMIC MODEL FOR ASSET PRICING

                                           Fatih Guvenen

                                       Working Paper 15243
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15243


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2009




For helpful conversations and comments, I thank Daron Acemoglu, John Campbell, V.V. Chari, Jeremy
Greenwood, Lars Hansen, Urban Jermann, Narayana Kocherlakota, Per Krusell, Martin Lettau, Debbie
Lucas, Sydney Ludvigson, Rajnish Mehra, Martin Schneider, Tony Smith, Kjetil Storesletten, Harald
Uhlig (the Editor), Ivan Werning, Amir Yaron, five anonymous referees, as well as seminar participants
at Duke University (Fuqua), Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Ohio State University, University
of Montréal, University of Pittsburgh, University of Rochester, UT-Austin, UT-Dallas, NBER Economic
Fluctuations and Growth meetings, NBER Asset Pricing meetings, the SED conference, and the AEA
winter meetings. Financial support from the National Science Foundation under grant SES-0351001
is gratefully acknowledged. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Fatih Guvenen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
A Parsimonious Macroeconomic Model for Asset Pricing
Fatih Guvenen
NBER Working Paper No. 15243
August 2009
JEL No. E21,E32,E44,G12

                                               ABSTRACT

In this paper, I study asset prices in a two-agent macroeconomic model with two key features: limited
participation in the stock market and heterogeneity in the elasticity of intertemporal substitution in
consumption (EIS). The model is consistent with some prominent features of asset prices that have
been documented in the literature, such as a high equity premium; relatively smooth interest rates;
procyclical variation in stock prices; and countercyclical variation in the equity premium, in its volatility,
and in the Sharpe ratio. While the model also reproduces the long-horizon predictability of the equity
premium, the extent of predictability is smaller than in the data. In this model, the risk-free asset market
plays a central role by allowing the non-stockholders (who have low EIS) to smooth the fluctuations
in their labor income. This process concentrates nonstockholders’ aggregate labor income risk among
a small group of stockholders, who then demand a high premium for bearing the aggregate equity
risk. Furthermore, this mechanism is consistent with the very small share of aggregate wealth held
by non-stockholders in the US data, which has proved problematic for previous models with limited
participation. I show that this large wealth inequality is also important for the model’s ability to generate
a countercyclical equity premium. Finally, when it comes to business cycle performance the model’s
progress has been more limited: consumption is still too volatile compared to the US data, whereas
investment is still too smooth. These are important areas for potential improvement in this framework.


Fatih Guvenen
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
4-151 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN, 55455
and NBER
guvenen@umn.edu
1      Introduction
Since the 1980s, a vast body of empirical research has documented some interesting and
puzzling features of asset prices. For example, Mehra and Prescott (1985) have shown
that the equity premium observed in the historical US data was hard to reconcile with a
canonical consumption-based asset pricing model, and as it later turned out, with many
of its extensions. A parallel literature in financial economics has found that the equity
premium was predictable by a number of variables including the dividend yield, challenging
the long-held view that stock returns follow a martingale (Campbell and Shiller (1988)).
Other studies have documented that the expected equity premium, its volatility, and the
ratio of the two—the conditional Sharpe ratio—move over time following a countercyclical
business cycle pattern (Schwert (1989), and Chou, Engle, and Kane (1992)).
    In this paper, I ask if these asset pricing phenomena can be explained in a parsimonious
macroeconomic model with two key features: limited participation in the stock market and
heterogeneity in the elasticity of intertemporal substitution in consumption (EIS). The lim-
ited nature of stock market participation and the concentration of stock wealth even among
stockholders is well documented. For example, until the 1990s more than two-thirds of US
households did not own any stocks at all, while the richest 1% held 48% of all stocks (Poterba
and Samwick (1995), and Investment Company Institute (2002)). As for the heterogeneity
in preferences, the empirical evidence that I review in Section 3 indicates that stockholders
have a higher EIS than non-stockholders. The interaction of these two features is important,
as will become clear below.
    I choose the real business cycle model as the foundation that I build upon, to provide
a contrast with the poor asset pricing implications of that framework that are well-known,
which helps to highlight the role of the new features considered in this paper. Specifically, I
study an economy with competitive markets and a neoclassical production technology subject
to capital adjustment costs. There are two types of agents. The majority of households (first
type) do not participate in the stock market where claims to the firm’s future dividend stream
are traded. However, a risk-free bond is available to all households, so non-stockholders can
also accumulate wealth and smooth consumption intertemporally. Finally, consistent with
empirical evidence, non-stockholders are assumed to have a low EIS, whereas stockholders
have a higher elasticity. To clarify the role played by different preference parameters, I employ
Epstein-Zin preferences and disentangle risk aversion from the EIS. I find that heterogeneity
in risk aversion plays no essential role, whereas heterogeneity in the EIS (and especially the
low EIS of non-stockholders) is essential, for the results of this paper.

                                               2
      I first examine a benchmark version of the model in which labor supply is inelastic.
The calibrated model is consistent with some salient features of asset prices, such as a high
equity premium with a plausible volatility, and a low average interest rate. Furthermore, the
variability of the interest rate is very low in the US data, which has proved challenging to
explain for some previous models that have otherwise successful implications. The standard
deviation of the risk-free rate is about 4% − 6.5% in the present model, which is still higher
than in the US data, but quite low compared to some of these earlier studies. So, the present
paper provides a step in the right direction as far as interest rate volatility is concerned.
      Although there are now several papers that have made progress in explaining these un-
conditional moments in the context of production economies,1 some aspects of asset price
dynamics have proved more difficult to generate. The present model is consistent with the
procyclical variation in stock prices; the mean reversion in the equity premium; and the
countercyclical variation in the expected equity premium, in its volatility, and in the condi-
tional Sharpe ratio. While the model also reproduces the long-horizon predictability of the
equity premium, the degree of predictability is quantitatively small compared to the data.
      This paper, as well as earlier models with limited participation, build on the empirical
observation, first made by Mankiw and Zeldes (1991), that stockholders’ consumption growth
is more volatile (and more highly correlated with returns) than that of non-stockholders.
Therefore, a high equity premium can be consistent with the relatively smooth per capita
consumption process in the US data, since stockholders only make up a small fraction of the
population. Existing theoretical models differ precisely in the economic mechanisms they
propose for generating this high volatility of stockholders’ consumption growth.
      The mechanism in this paper differs from earlier studies (most notably, Saito (1995) and
Basak and Cuoco (1998)) in some crucial ways. In particular, in these earlier models non-
stockholders consume out of wealth, which they must invest in the bond market given the
absence of any other investment opportunity. As a result, each period stockholders make
interest payments to non-stockholders, which leverages the capital income of stockholders,
thereby amplifying their consumption volatility. Although this is a potentially powerful
mechanism, it only works quantitatively if these interest payments are substantial, which in
turn requires non-stockholders to own a substantial fraction of aggregate wealth. But, in
reality, non-stockholders own only one-tenth of aggregate wealth in the United States, and
this counterfactual implication has been an important criticism raised against these models.
  1
    Jermann (1998), Boldrin, Christiano, and Fisher (2001), Danthine and Donaldson (2002), Storesletten,
Telmer and Yaron (2007), and Uhlig (2006), among others.


                                                   3
   One contribution of this paper is to propose a new economic mechanism, which avoids this
counterfactual implication. Specifically, the mechanism results from the interaction of three
factors. First, non-stockholders receive labor income every period, which is stochastic, and
trade in the bond market for smoothing the fluctuations in their consumption. Second, be-
cause of their low EIS, non-stockholders have a stronger desire for consumption smoothing—
and therefore need the bond market much more—than stockholders (who have a higher EIS
and an additional asset for consumption smoothing purposes). However, and third, since
the source of risk is aggregate, the bond market cannot eliminate this risk and merely real-
locates it across agents. In equilibrium, stockholders make payments to non-stockholders in
a countercyclical fashion, which serves to smooth the consumption of non-stockholders and
amplifies the volatility of stockholders, who then demand a large premium for holding ag-
gregate risk. As shown in Section 6.3, this mechanism is consistent with a very small wealth
share of non-stockholders precisely because it is the cyclical nature of interest payments that
is key, and not their average amount (which can very well be zero).
   The same mechanism also explains why the equity premium is countercyclical. Essen-
tially, because non-stockholders have very low wealth they become effectively more risk averse
during recessions when their wealth falls even further (because with incomplete markets value
functions have more curvature at low wealth levels.) This is not the case for stockholders
who hold substantially more wealth. Consequently, during recessions, non-stockholders de-
mand more consumption smoothing, which strengthens the mechanism described above—i.e.,
increased trade in the bond market, more volatile consumption growth for stockholders—
generating a higher premium in recessions. In Section 5, I quantify the contribution of these
channels to both the level and countercyclicality of the equity premium.
   I also investigate the extent to which labor supply choice can be endogenized without
compromising overall performance. Cobb-Douglas utility does not appear to be suitable for
this task: it results in a deterioration of asset pricing results and generates labor hours much
smoother than in the data. One reason for these results is that these preferences do not allow
an independent calibration of the EIS and the Frisch labor supply elasticity, which are both
crucial for my analysis. This poor performance perhaps does not come as a surprise in light
of the earlier findings: for example, Lettau and Uhlig (2000), Boldrin et al. (2001, hereafter
BCF), and Uhlig (2006) uncover various problems generated by endogenous labor supply in
asset pricing models and identify certain labor market frictions that successfully overcome
these difficulties. Incorporating the same frictions into the model with Cobb-Douglas utility
could also improve its performance, although this is beyond the scope of the present paper.

                                               4
   Next I consider the utility specification first introduced by Greenwood, Hercowitz, and
Huffman (1988, GHH) and find that it performs better: it preserves the plausible asset
pricing implications of the model with inelastic labor fairly well, and generates business
cycle implications in the same ballpark as existing macroeconomic models. While these
results suggest that GHH preferences could provide a promising direction for endogenizing
labor supply in this class of models, there is still much room for improvement: consumption
volatility remains significantly higher than in the US data, whereas investment volatility is
still too low. Therefore, the progress made by this model has been rather limited in tackling
these well-known shortcomings shared by many macro-asset pricing models. A potentially
fruitful approach could be to introduce certain labor market frictions, such as wage rigidities,
that have been found to improve asset pricing models along these dimensions (Uhlig (2006)).
   This paper is related to a growing literature that builds models for jointly studying asset
prices and macroeconomic behavior. In addition to the papers cited in footnote 1, Dan-
thine and Donaldson (2002) construct an entrepreneur-worker model, in which the worker
lives hand-to-mouth and there is no labor supply choice. In this environment, labor con-
tracts between the two agents act as “operational leverage” and affect asset prices in a way
that is similar to limited participation. Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2007) build a
heterogeneous-agent model and show that persistent idiosyncratic shocks with countercycli-
cal innovation variance generate plausible unconditional moments. As noted earlier, one
difference of my paper is the focus on the dynamics of asset prices, which is not studied in
these papers. Finally, in terms of integrating recursive preferences into macro-asset pricing
models, an important precursor is Tallarini (2000), who shows how one can fix the EIS and
increase the risk aversion in the standard RBC model to generate a high market price of risk
without causing a deterioration in business cycle properties. The present paper goes one
step further by introducing limited participation, preference heterogeneity, and adjustment
costs and generates a high equity premium with a risk aversion that is much lower than in
Tallarini (2000). Other notable contributions that are contemporaneous to the present paper
include Campanale, Castro, and Clementi (2007) and Gomes and Michaelides (2008), who
build full blown macro-asset pricing models with recursive preferences; and Uhlig (2007),
who provides a convenient log-linear framework for asset pricing with recursive preferences,
labor-leisure choice, and long-run risk. I further discuss some of these papers later below.
   The paper organized as follows. The next section presents the model and the parametriza-
tion is discussed in Section 3. Sections 4 and 5 contain the asset pricing results and the
mechanism. The macro implications are presented in Section 6 and Section 7 concludes.

                                               5
2        The Model
Households. The economy is populated by two types of agents who live forever. The
population is constant and is normalized to unity. Let µ ∈ (0, 1) denote the measure of
the second type of agents (who will be called “stockholders” later). Consumers are endowed
with one unit of time every period, which they allocate between market work and leisure. I
consider three different preference specifications in this paper that can be written as special
cases of the following Epstein-Zin recursive utility function:
                                                                                        1
                                                                               i
                        "                                                          #
                                                                           1−ρ         1−ρi
                                                                  1−αi  1−α i
                   Uti = (1 − β) ui (ct , 1 − lt ) + β Et Ut+1
                                                           i
                                                                                                       (1)


for i = h, n, where throughout the paper the superscripts h and n denote stockholders and
non-stockholders respectively; c and l denote consumption and labor supply, respectively. For
the parametrizations I consider below, the risk aversion parameter for static wealth gambles
will be proportional to αi , and the EIS will be inversely proportional to ρi , although the
precise relationship will also depend on the choice of u. As indicated by the superscripts, the
two types are allowed to differ in their preference parameters.
        It should be emphasized that the choice of recursive preferences is made mainly for
clarity: by disentangling risk aversion from the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, these
preferences allow us to examine the impact of heterogeneity in the EIS on asset prices without
generating corresponding differences in risk aversion that could confound the inference.2,3

The Firm. There is an aggregate firm producing a single consumption good using capital
(Kt ) and labor (Lt ) inputs according to a Cobb-Douglas technology: Yt = Zt Ktθ L1−θ
                                                                                  t   , where
θ ∈ (0, 1) is the factor share parameter. The technology level evolves according to:
                                                                   iid
                                                                 ε ∼ N 0, σε2 .
                                                                             
                            log (Zt+1 ) = φ log (Zt ) + εt+1 ,

        The firm’s managers maximize the value of the firm, which equals the value of the fu-
    2
     This expositional advantage notwithstanding, the ability to calibrate risk aversion and EIS separately
is not essential for the main substantive results of the paper. This can be seen by comparing the results
reported here to the working paper version (Guvenen (2006)), which uses CRRA preferences.
   3
     Habit preferences also break the reciprocal relation between the RRA and EIS parameters. However,
as is well-known, these preferences can generate a high equity premium even in a simple RBC model with
inelastic labor supply and capital adjustment costs (Jermann (1998)). Therefore, using habit in the present
model would confound the mechanisms created by habit with those studied here (e.g., resulting from limited
participation). Having said that, given the popularity of habit preferences in the recent business cycle
research (see, e.g., Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005)), future work should explore the implications
of a model that combines habit formation with limited stock market participation.


                                                      6
ture dividend stream generated by the firm, {Dt+j }∞
                                                   j=1 , discounted by the marginal rate of
                                                             ∞
substitution process of firm owners, {β j Λt,t+j }j=1 . Specifically, the firm’s problem is:
                                               "∞                      #
                                                  X
                            Pts = max Et               β j Λt,t+j Dt+j                                        (2)
                                         {It+j ,Lt+j }
                                                         j=1


subject to the law of motion for capital, which features “adjustment costs” in investment:
                                                                         
                                                                     It
                                    Kt+1 = (1 − δ) Kt + Φ                     Kt .                            (3)
                                                                     Kt

       Pts is the ex-dividend value of the firm, and I normalize the number of shares outstanding
to unity (for convenience) so that Pts is also the stock price. The adjustment cost function
Φ (·) is concave in investment, which captures the difficulty of quickly changing the level of
capital installed in the firm.
       Every period the firm sells one-period bonds, at price Ptf , to finance part of its investment.
The total supply of these bonds is constant over time and equals a fraction, χ, of the average
capital stock owned by the firm (as in Jermann (1998), Danthine and Donaldson
                                                                             (2002)).
                                                                                     As
a result, the firm makes net interest payments in each period in the amount of 1 − Ptf χK
to bond owners.4 An equity share in this firm entitles its owner to the entire stream of future
dividends, which is given by the
                               profits
                                       net of wages, investment, and interest payments:
          θ 1−θ                     f
Dt = Zt Kt Lt − Wt Lt − It − 1 − Pt χK.

       Financial Markets. In this economy, the firm’s equity shares (stocks) and one-period
bonds issued by the firm are traded. The difference between the two groups is in their
investment opportunity sets: the “non-stockholders” can freely trade the risk-free bond, but
they are restricted from participating in the stock market. The “stockholders,” on the other
hand, have access to both markets and hence are the sole capital owners in the economy.
Finally, I impose portfolio constraints as a convenient way to prevent Ponzi schemes.

Individuals’ Dynamic Problem and the Equilibrium.                                    In a given period, the port-
folio of each group can be expressed in terms of the beginning-of-period capital stock, K, the
aggregate bond holdings of non-stockholders after production, B, and the technology level,
   4
     The introduction of corporate debt into this framework allows me to model bonds as a positive net
supply asset, which is more realistic. However, the Modigliani-Miller theorem holds in this framework in the
sense that stockholders are able to fully undo the effect of leverage in their portfolio. Therefore, the existence
of leverage has no effect on quantity allocations, which I have verified by solving the model without leverage.



                                                         7
Z. Let Υ denote the aggregate state vector (K, B, Z) . The dynamic programming problem
of a stockholder can be expressed as follows:
                                                                                              1
                                                                                 1−ρi
                          "                                                              #
                                                                                             1−ρi
         h
                                                  
                                                       h    0    0
                                                                         1−αi  1−α i
        V (ω; Υ) = max
                    0 0
                        (1 − β) u (c, 1 − l) + β  E  V   (ω   ; Υ  ) | Z                            (4)
                      c,l,b ,s


s.t.
                     c + P f (Υ) b0 + P s (Υ) s0 ≤ ω + W (K, Z) l                                   (5)
                                               ω 0 = b0 + s0 (P s (Υ0 ) + D (Υ0 ))                  (6)
                                              K 0 = ΓK (Υ) , B 0 = ΓB (Υ)                           (7)
                                                0
                                               b ≥ B,                                               (8)

where ω denotes financial wealth; b0 and s0 are individual bond and stock holdings, respec-
tively; ΓK and ΓB denote the laws of motion for the wealth distribution which are deter-
mined in equilibrium; and P f is the equilibrium bond pricing function. The problem of a
non-stockholder can be written as above with s0 ≡ 0, and the superscript h replaced with n.
Finally, the stock return and the risk-free rate are defined as usual: Rs = (P s0 + D0 ) /P s − 1
and Rf = 1/P f − 1, and the equity premium is denoted by Rep ≡ Rs − Rf .
   A stationary recursive competitive equilibrium for this economy is given by a pair of
value functions, V i (ω i ; Υ) , i = h, n ; consumption, labor supply, and bond holding decision
rules for each type of agent, ci (ω i ; Υ) , li (ω i ; Υ) , and bi0 (ω i ; Υ) ; a stockholding decision
rule for stockholders, s0 ω h ; Υ ; stock and bond pricing functions, P s (Υ) and P f (Υ) ; a
                                 

competitive wage function, W (K, Z) ; an investment function for the firm, I (Υ) ; laws of
motion for aggregate capital and the aggregate bond holdings of non-stockholders, ΓK (Υ) ,
ΓB (Υ) ; and a marginal utility process, Λ (Υ) , for the firm, such that:
   1) Given the pricing functions and the laws of motion, the value function and decision
rules of each agent solve that agent’s dynamic problem.
   2) Given W (K, Z) and the equilibrium discount rate process obtained from Λ (Υ) , the
investment function I (Υ) and the labor choice of the firm, L (Υ) , are optimal.
                                         
    3) All markets clear: (a) µbh0 $h ; Υ +(1 − µ) bn0 ($n ; Υ) = χK/P f (Υ) (bond market);
(b) µs0 $h ; Υ = 1 (stock market); and (c) L (Υ) = µlh $h ; Υ + (1 − µ) ln ($n ; Υ) (labor
                                                                

market), where $i denotes the wealth of each type of agent in state Υ in equilibrium.
   4) Aggregate laws of motion are consistent with individual behavior: K 0 = (1 − δ) K +
Φ (I (Υ) /K) K, and B 0 = (1 − µ)bn ($n , Υ) .
   5) There exists an invariant probability measure P defined over the ergodic set of equi-
librium distributions.
                                                    8
3    Quantitative Analysis
The solution to the recursive competitive equilibrium is obtained using numerical methods.
In addition to the well-known challenges associated with solving incomplete markets asset
pricing models (cf., Krusell and Smith (1997) and Storesletten et al (2007)), the present
model is further complicated by the presence of (i) capital adjustment costs, (ii) Epstein-Zin
preferences, and (iii) leverage. These features raise a number of issues that we now discuss.
    First, because markets are incomplete, one cannot solve for allocations first and then
obtain prices as is typically done in representative agent models. Instead, allocations and
pricing functions must be solved for simultaneously. Second, the three features mentioned
above introduce important non-linearities into equilibrium functions, making it essential to
start the algorithm with good initial guesses and update them very slowly. Third, asset prices
are well-known to be more sensitive to approximation errors (much more so than quantity
allocations). Furthermore, some key variables in the model exhibit significant volatility and
are, therefore, not confined to narrow regions of the state space, so the accuracy of local (e.g.,
log-linear, etc.) approximations is not always easy to ensure. So, instead, I approximate the
equilibrium functions over the entire state space using multi-dimensional cubic splines and
check that equilibrium conditions (1–5 above) are satisfied at all grid points. Finally, the
wealth distribution (which is a relevant state vector in this model) is not approximated by
moments as done by Krusell and Smith (1997), but instead its evolution is tracked exactly
via the functions ΓK and ΓB . Of course, this is only feasible here because there are two types
of agents, so the wealth distribution has only two dimensions. Overall, the algorithm I use
trades off speed for precision, and is therefore not very fast but delivers accurate results.
    I now provide an outline of the algorithm for the CONS model, which contains all the
essential components. A supplemental computational appendix contains further details.

Step 0. Initialization. Choose appropriate grids for ω h , ω n (each agent’s wealth holdings)
      and Υ = (K, B, Z) . Off-grid values for all functions are obtained by cubic spline inter-
      polation. Initial guesses for equilibrium functions are obtained by solving a simplified
      version of the model with no adjustment costs (ξ = ∞), no leverage (χ = 0), and with
      CRRA utility (α = ρ). The algorithm for this simplified model is essentially the same
      as steps 1 − 5 below (with no need for step 2-c because P s ≡ K), but is much more
      stable. Let superscript j index the iteration number. Set j = 1 and start the iteration:
Step 1. Solve each agent’s dynamic problem (defined by equations (4)-(8)). These are
      standard Bellman equations and are solved via value function iteration. The fact that

                                                9
      preferences are of the Epstein-Zin form poses no additional difficulty in this step—in
      fact, it makes it easier in certain ways. More on this in the appendix.
Step 2. Update equilibrium functions: Λj−1 , I j−1 , Dj−1 , P s,j−1 , ΓjK .
       (a) Use ch,j (ω; Υ) and V h,j (ω; Υ) obtained in step 1 to construct the stochastic
            discount factor Λj (Υ,Z 0 ). Using Λj solve the firm’s problem ((2) and (3)) to
            obtain I j (Υ).
                                                                      
       (b) Obtain Dj (Υ) = ZK θ L1−θ − W L − I j (Υ) − 1 − P f,j−1 (Υ) χK, and update
            ΓjK (Υ) : K 0 = (1 − δ) K + Φ (I j (Υ) /K) K.
                                         e0         s,j−1
       (c) Define the temporary
                        h            P (Υ) ≡ P
                                variable                  (Υ)
                                                            . Now
                                                                i iterate for m = 1, ..., M :
           Pem (Υ) = E βΛj (Υ, Z 0 ) Dj (Υ0 ) + Pem−1 (Υ0 ) | Υ . Set P s,j (Υ) = PeM (Υ) .

Step 3: Update the bond pricing function, P f,j−1 . The method here follows Krusell and
      Smith (1997) closely. First, solve:
                                                                                  1
                                                    h                    1−ρ  1−ρ
                                                                        i 1−α
               h                             1−ρ        h,j 0  0 1−α
             V (ω; Υ, qb) = max
             e
                             0  0
                                   (1 − β) c     + β E V (ω ; Υ )    |Υ
                                  b, s

                           s.t.          c + qbb0 + P s,j (Υ) s0 ≤ ω + W (K, Z)

      and equations (6)-(8) (and with s0 ≡ 0 for the non-stockholder). The only difference
      between this problem and the individual’s original Bellman equation is that here the in-
      dividual views the current period bond price as some arbitrary parameter qb, which is not
      necessarily equal to P f,j−1 (Υ) . This problem generates bond holding rules ebh (ω; Υ, qb)
      and ebn (ω; Υ, qb) which explicitly depend on qb. Then, at each grid point, search over
      values of qb to find q ∗ such that the bond market clears, i.e., excess demand is less than
      10−8 . Then set P f,j (Υ) = q ∗ (Υ) .
Step 4: Obtain ΓjB (Υ) : B 0 (Υ) = (1 − µ) ebn ($n , Υ,q ∗ (Υ)).
Step 5: Iterate on Steps 1 to 4 until convergence. I require maximum percentage discrep-
      ancy (across all points in the state space) between consecutive iterations to be less than
      10−6 for P f , 10−4 for P s , and 10−6 for aggregate laws of motion. Further tightening
      these convergence criteria has no noticeable effect.

As further described in the appendix, additional checks are conducted to ensure the accuracy
of the solution. For example, one should also test if the stock market clears at all state points,
which is not explicitly imposed by the algorithm above. It indeed does: the maximum
µs0 $h ; Υ − 1 < 10−5 . Another useful check is to see if increasing the number of grid
          


                                                 10
points changes the results: doubling the number of points in ω and K directions and tripling
in the B direction (simultaneously) had no noticeable effect on the statistics studied in the
paper. Further details are provided in the supplementary computational appendix.

3.1      Baseline Parametrization

A model period corresponds to one month of calendar time to approximate the frequent
trading in financial markets. Because asset pricing statistics are typically reported at annual
frequencies and macroeconomic statistics are reported at quarterly frequencies, I aggregate
financial variables and quantities to their respective reporting frequencies to calculate the
relevant statistics as explained below. Table I summarizes the baseline parameter choices.
      The capital share parameter, θ, is set to 0.3. The functional form for Φ is specified as
a1 (It /Kt )1−1/ξ + a2 , as in Jermann (1998), where a1 and a2 are constants chosen such that
the steady state level of capital is invariant to ξ. The curvature parameter ξ determines the
severity of adjustment costs. As ξ approaches infinity, Φ becomes linear, and investment
is converted into capital one for one (frictionless economy limit). At the other extreme, as
ξ approaches zero, Φ becomes a constant function, and the capital stock remains constant
regardless of the investment level (exchange economy limit). I set ξ = 0.40, which is broadly
consistent with the values reported in the empirical literature (see Christiano and Fisher
(1998) for a survey of existing estimates). Because there is also a fair amount of disagreement
about the correct value of ξ, in Section 6.2 I also conduct sensitivity analysis with respect to
this parameter. The calibration of the capital accumulation equation is completed by setting
δ to 0.0066, implying a quarterly depreciation rate of 2%. As for the technology shock, I
match the first order autocorrelation of 0.95 of the Solow residuals at quarterly frequencies
by setting φ = 0.976 at monthly frequency. I discretize the AR(1) process for Zt using a
15-state Markov process. The innovation standard deviation, σε , is set later below.
      Given the absence of idiosyncratic shocks in the present model, it does not seem realistic
for borrowing constraints to bind frequently for entire groups of population. Therefore, in
the baseline case I calibrate these constraints to be quite loose—equal to 6 months of labor
income for both types of agents—which almost never bind in the simulations.5 As for the
calibration of the leverage ratio, Masulis (1988, Table 1.3) reports that the leverage ratio
(debt/book value) of US firms has varied between 13% and 44% from 1929 to 1986. With
my calibration, the leverage ratio in the model is set to 15% of the average equity value and
  5
    In the supplementary appendix, I show that if constraints were tight enough to bind frequently, if
anything this raises the equity premium.


                                                 11
                                     Table I: Baseline Parametrization

               Parameter                                                                           Value
                             Parameters calibrated outside the model
                  β∗       Time discount rate                                   0.99
                  1/ρh     EIS of stockholders                                   0.3
                  1/ρn     EIS of non-stockholders                               0.1
                  µ        Participation rate                                    0.2
                  φ∗       Persistence of aggregate shock                       0.95
                  θ        Capital share                                        0.30
                  ξ        Adjustment cost coefficient                          0.40
                  δ∗       Depreciation rate                                    0.02
                  B        Borrowing limit                                      6W
                  χ        Leverage ratio                                       0.15
                      Parameters calibrated inside the model (to match targets)
                  σε∗      Standard deviation of shock (%)              1.5/1.5/1.1
                    h   n
                  α = α Relative risk aversion                                     6

     “*” indicates that the reported value refers to the implied quarterly value for a parameter that is calibrated to
     monthly frequency. W is the average monthly wage rate in the economy. The last two parameters are chosen to
     (1) match the standard deviation of H-P filtered output in quarterly data (1.89%) and (2) generate an annual
     Sharpe ratio of 0.25. The standard deviation values refer to CONS/CD/GHH models, respectively.




fluctuates between 11% and 32%. Moreover, this calibration also ensures that the firm is
always able to pay its interest obligations, so the corporate bond is default-free.

   Participation Rates. The model assumes a constant participation rate in the stock
market, which seems to be a reasonable approximation for the period before the 1990s
when the participation rate was either stable or increasing gradually (Poterba and Samwick
(1995, Table 7)). In contrast, during the 1990s participation has increased substantially:
from 1989 to 2002 the number of households who owned stocks increased by 74%, and by
2002 half of the US households had become stock owners (Investment Company Institute
(2002)). Modeling the participation boom in this later period would require going beyond
the stationary structure of the present model, so instead, I exclude this later period (1992−)
both when calibrating the participation rate and when comparing the model to the data. I
set the participation rate in the model, µ, to 20%, roughly corresponding to the average rate
from 1962 to 1992 (a period during which participation data is available). Note that even
during times when participation was higher, households in the top 20% have consistently
owned more than 98% of stocks (Poterba and Samwick (1995, Table 9)).

                                                           12
   Utility Functions. I consider three different specifications for the period utility func-
tion. First, to provide a simple and well-known benchmark, I begin with the case where labor
supply is inelastic (i.e., leisure is not valued) and assume that the period utility function is
                                                    i
of the standard power form: u (c, 1 − l) = c1−ρ . This is a useful benchmark that allows a
direct comparison to the existing literature where inelastic labor supply is the most common
assumption. In addition, this case allows us to illustrate the key mechanisms resulting from
limited participation in their simplest form. To distinguish between different versions of the
model, I will refer to this case as the “CONS model.”
   The remaining two specifications feature valued leisure for a full-blown quantitative anal-
ysis. The first one features a Cobb-Douglas function (hereafter, the “CD model”) commonly
                                                             1−ρi
used in macroeconomic analysis: u (c, 1 − l) = cγ (1 − l)1−γ       . However, one restrictive
property of this functional form is that ρi and γ jointly pin down the EIS, the fraction of time
devoted to market work, and the Frisch labor supply elasticity. In other words, choosing the
two parameters to match the first two empirical magnitudes automatically pins down the
Frisch elasticity, which is a serious restriction given that we are interested in constructing a
model that allows to study macro quantities and asset prices jointly. To overcome this diffi-
                                                            1+γ
                                                                 1−ρi
culty I use a third utility function: u (c, 1 − l) = c − ψ l1+γ        , introduced by Greenwood
et al. (1988, hereafter the “GHH model”). This specification has three distinct parameters
that can be chosen to separately target the three parameters mentioned above. This feature
will be useful in the analysis that follows.

   Preference Parameters. There is a large body of empirical work documenting het-
erogeneity in the EIS across the population (see Guvenen (2006) for a more comprehensive
review of the empirical evidence). These studies find that, by and large, non-stockholders
(and the poor in general) have an elasticity of substitution that is very low—close to zero—
while stockholders (and the wealthy in general) have an EIS that is higher. For example,
Blundell et al. (1994) estimate that households in the top income quintile have an EIS that
is three times that of households in the bottom quintile of the distribution. Similarly, Barsky
et al. (1997) estimate the distribution of the EIS parameter in the population and find the
average to be below 0.2, but also find the highest percentiles to be exceeding unit elasticity.
   One theoretical explanation for this observed heterogeneity is provided by Browning and
Crossley (2000). They start with a model of choice where agents consume several goods
with different income elasticities. Because the budget share of luxuries rises with wealth,
the aggregate consumption bundle of wealthy individuals have more goods with high income


                                               13
elasticities than that of poor individuals. Browning and Crossley (2000) prove that this ob-
servation also implies that luxuries are easier to postpone than necessities, and consequently,
that the EIS (with respect to total consumption) increases with wealth. Since stockholders
are substantially wealthier than non-stockholders, this also implies heterogeneity in the EIS
across these two groups as found in these studies. To broadly capture the empirical evidence
described above, I set the EIS of non-stockholders to 0.1 and assume an EIS that is three
times higher (0.3) for stockholders (in all versions of the model).6 Finally, I set β equal to
0.9966 (monthly) so as to match the US capital-output ratio of 2.5 in annual data.
       With Cobb-Douglas preferences, there is only one additional parameter, γ, which is chosen
to match the average time devoted to market activities (0.36 of discretionary time). I continue
to keep the EIS values of both groups as above. However, as noted above, γ and ρi also
determine the Frisch labor supply elasticity, which means that assuming heterogeneity in
the EIS also implies unintended heterogeneity in the Frisch elasticity: 1.35 for stockholders
and 0.69 for non-stockholders. Although such heterogeneity is difficult to justify with any
empirical evidence I am aware of, there seems to be no practical way to get around this
problem with CD preferences. I will return back to this caveat later.
       The GHH specification provides more flexibility, with two additional parameters. The
Frisch elasticity is now equal to 1/γ for both types of agents, which I set equal to 1. This value
is consistent with the estimates reported in Kimball and Shapiro (2003). However, there is
a fair degree of disagreement in the literature about the correct value of this parameter, so
I also discuss below the effect of different values for γ on the results. The average hours
                                               1/γ
worked is given by: L = W (κ) / ((1 + γ) κ)         , where W (κ) is the average wage rate in
the economy whose dependence on κ is made explicit. For a target value of L = 0.36, this
equation is solved to obtain the required value of κ.
       The existing empirical evidence on the risk aversion parameter is much less precise than
one would like. Moreover, the limited evidence available pertains to the population average,
   6
     Although in this paper I do not explicitly model the source of the heterogeneity in the EIS (so as not
to add another layer of complexity), one way to do this would be by assuming non-homothetic preferences
following Browning and Crossley’s analysis. Specifically, suppose that both agents have identical utility
                                                                          1−ρ
functions featuring “benchmark consumption levels”: uit = cit − aC t           / (1 − ρ) , where C t is aggregate
consumption. With this specification, the EIS is rising with the consumption (and, therefore, the wealth) of
an individual. But, furthermore, wealth inequality in this framework is mainly due to limited participation
and is quite robust to changes in the curvature of the utility of both agents (see Guvenen (2006) for a detailed
analysis of this point). Therefore, with these preferences stockholders continue to be much wealthier and,
consequently, consume more than non-stockholders. By choosing ρ and a appropriately, one can generate
the same EIS values, assumed (exogenously) in the present paper. The supplemental appendix presents the
details of such a calibration that broadly generates the same asset pricing results as in the CONS model.


                                                       14
whereas what will matter for asset prices in this framework is the risk aversion of stockholders,
who constitute only a small fraction of the population, making those average figures even less
relevant. Therefore, I calibrate the risk aversion of stockholders indirectly, i.e., by matching
the model to some empirical targets. (I also conduct a sensitivity analysis in Section 6.2.)
    Specifically, I first consider the CONS model. I choose the two parameters that are free at
                    
this point αh , σε to match two empirical targets: (1) the volatility of H-P filtered quarterly
output (1.89%) and (2) an annual Sharpe ratio of 0.25. I then set the risk aversion of non-
stockholders equal to the same value. My target value for the Sharpe ratio is somewhat lower
than the 0.32 figure in the US data (Table II). This is because forcing the model to explain
the full magnitude of the risk premium is likely to come at the expense of poor performance
in other areas, such as macro behavior or asset price dynamics, which I am also interested
in analyzing. The present choice is intended to balance these different considerations.
        For practical considerations, I restrict the parameter search to integer values in the αh
direction (from 2 to 10) and consider 0.1 increments in the σε direction (from 0.05% to 2%). I
minimize an equally weighted quadratic objective written in the percent deviation from each
empirical target. The minimum is obtained for σε = 1.5% (quarterly standard deviation)
for the CONS model with αh = 6. For the CD and GHH models, I keep the risk aversion
parameter at this value and choose σε in each case to match output volatility. The resulting
values are σε = 1.5% in the CD model and σε = 1.1% in the GHH model.7
        These values of the innovation standard deviation are close to the values used by BCF,
Danthine and Donaldson (2002), and Storesletten et al. (2007) in a context similar to ours.8
Nevertheless, these figures are quite high compared to the direct estimate of the volatility
of Solow residuals for the post war period, which is about 0.7%. This suggests that it may
be more appropriate to interpret the exogenous driving source in this class of models as
encompassing more than just technology shocks (such as fiscal policy shocks, among others).


4         Model Results: Asset Prices

4.1        The Unconditional Moments of Asset Prices
    7
     These volatility figures are helped a bit by the choice of a monthly decision frequency and time aggre-
gation of the resulting simulated data. If, instead, the model were solved at quarterly frequency, the values
of σε necessary to match the same targets would be 10–15% higher depending on specification.
   8
     BCF use permanent shocks with σε = 1.8% per quarter, Storesletten et al. (2007) also use permanent
shocks with σε = 3.3% per year. Danthine and Donaldson (2002) use a two-state Markov process with
persistence of 0.97 and a σε = 5.6% per quarter.


                                                     15
  Table II: Unconditional Moments of Asset Returns, Model with Inelastic Labor Supply

                                   US Data                       CONS Model
         αh , αn                                      6/6       6/6       6/6                                6/12
         1/ρh , 1/ρn                                0.3/0.1   0.3/0.3   0.1/0.1                             0.3/0.1
                                                   A. Stock and Bond Returns
         E(Rep )                   6.17 (1.99)       5.46       2.44      7.65                                5.52
         σ(Rep )                   19.4 (1.41)       21.9       15.3      27.2                                22.0
         σ(Rs )                    19.3 (1.38)       20.6       14.7      27.0                                20.8
         E(Rep )/σ(Rep )           0.32 (0.11)       0.25a      0.16      0.28                                0.25
         E(Rf )                    1.94 (0.54)       1.31       3.20      0.24                                1.35
         σ(Rf )                    5.44 (0.62)       6.65       4.55      8.52                                6.71
                                                    B. Price-Dividend Ratio
         E(P s /D)                 22.1 (0.58)       27.2       25.9      29.5                                27.1
         σ(log(P s /D))            26.3 (1.67)       26.6       13.8      38.7                                26.9
         σ(∆ log D)                13.4 (0.94)       19.1       14.0      24.2                                19.1
                                                C. Consumption Growth Volatility
         σ(∆ log ch )                          b
         σ(∆ log cn )
                                  > 1.5−2.0          2.42       0.78      1.12                                2.44
      a The Sharpe ratio of 0.25 is one of the two empirical targets in the calibration. All statistics are reported in
      annualized percentages. Annual returns are calculated by summing up log monthly returns. The numbers in
      parenthesis in the first column are the standard errors of the statistics to reflect the sampling variability in the
      US data.
      b The value reported here represents an approximate lower bound for this ratio based on the empirical evidence

      discussed in Section 5.1.




I begin by discussing the unconditional moments of stock and bond returns, and then turn
to the conditional moments in the next section. Table II displays the statistics from the
simulated model along with their empirical counterparts computed from the historical US
data covering the period 1890–1991.9 I first examine the inelastic labor supply case shown in
column 2. This case provides a useful benchmark, both because it is the most common case
studied in the literature and because it allows one understand the key mechanisms generated
by limited participation without the added complexity of labor supply choice.

The Equity Premium. As shown in the second column of Table II, in the calibrated
model the target Sharpe ratio of 0.25 is attained with a moderately high risk aversion of
6. Clearly, a given Sharpe ratio can be generated by many different combinations of equity
  9
    The data are taken from Campbell (1999). The stock return and the risk-free rate are calculated from
Standard and Poor’s 500 index and the six-month commercial paper rate (bought in January and rolled
over in July), respectively. All returns are real and are obtained by deflating nominal returns with the
consumption deflator series available in the same data set.


                                                              16
premium and volatility, so matching this target does not say anything about the numerator
and the denominator. The corresponding equity premium is 5.45%, which is slightly lower
than the historical figure of 6.2%. The volatility of the equity premium is 21.9% compared
to 19.4% in the data. Therefore, the model generates an equity premium with mean and
volatility that are in the right ballpark compared to the data.

       The Mechanism. The high equity premium is generated by a general equilibrium
mechanism that amplifies stockholders’ consumption growth volatility and does so in a pro-
cyclical fashion, causing them to demand a high equity premium. Specifically, the mechanism
results from the interaction of three features of the model, which reinforce each other. First,
limited participation creates an asymmetry in consumption smoothing opportunities: facing
persistent (aggregate) labor income shocks, non-stockholders have to exclusively rely on the
bond market, whereas stockholders have another margin—they can also adjust their capital
holdings. Second, because of their low EIS, non-stockholders have a stronger desire for a
smooth consumption process compared to stockholders. The combination of these two effects
imply that non-stockholders need the bond market much more than stockholders. Third,
and importantly, the bond market is not a very effective device for consumption smoothing
in the face of aggregate risk, because it merely reallocates the risk rather than reducing it,
as would be the case if shocks were idiosyncratic. As a result, non-stockholders’ desire
for smooth consumption is satisfied via trade in the bond market, at the expense of higher
volatility in stockholders’ consumption. Moreover, since these large fluctuations in stock-
holders’ consumption are procyclical, they are reluctant to own the shares of the aggregate
firm that performs well in booms and poorly in recessions. Therefore, they demand a high
equity premium. In Section 5, I quantify the role of this mechanism and contrast it with
earlier models of limited participation, such as Saito (1995) and Basak and Cuoco (1998).

The Risk-Free Rate. Turning to the risk-free rate, the mean is 1.3%, which compares
well to the low average interest rate of 1.9% in the data. It is important to note that the
low risk-free rate is helped by the fact that the model abstracts from long-run growth and
preferences are of the Epstein-Zin form. To see this, consider the following expression for
the log risk-free rate, which holds as a fairly good approximation:10

                                rtf ≈ − ln β + ρh Et ∆ log cht+1 + κ,
                                                                
                                                                                                     (9)
  10
    For an exact derivation of this expression, human wealth would need to be tradeable. Although this is
not the case in the present model, the equation holds fairly well and provides a useful approximation.



                                                   17
where κ contains terms that involve the volatility of consumption and wealth, which turns
out to be secondary for the present discussion.
   With secular growth, the consumption growth term on the right-hand side would be
non-zero—unlike in the present model—pushing the average risk-free rate up. For example,
taking an annual growth rate of 1.5%, and setting ρh = 3.33 as calibrated above, would
imply rtf = 5.85%. As is well-known, this “risk-free rate puzzle” is even more severe with
CRRA utility, because in this case it would be the risk aversion parameter that would
appear in front of the second term, which is αh = 6 in this case, implying rtf = 10.2%.
This discussion reiterates the well-known point that models with CRRA utility functions
and long-run growth that match the equity premium typically imply a high average interest
rate. Epstein-Zin preferences mitigate this problem if one assumes an EIS that is higher
than the reciprocal of the risk aversion parameter, as is the case here.
   Another well-documented feature of the interest rate—and as it turns out, a challenging
one to explain—is its low volatility. The standard deviation is 5.44% in the historical sample,
although different time periods (such as the post war sample) can yield values as low as 2%
per year (see, e.g., Campbell 1999 for a discussion). The corresponding figure is 6.65% in the
model (and further falls to 4.1% with endogenous labor supply below). Although this figure
is higher than the empirical values, the low volatility of the interest rate has turned out to
be quite difficult to generate, especially in macro-asset pricing models. For example, as I
report in Table III, this volatility is 24.6% in BCF and 10.6% in Danthine and Donaldson
(2002); it is 11.5% in Jermann (1998) (not reported). Thus, the present model provides a
step in the right direction. So, what explains the relatively low variability of interest rates
in the model?
   To understand the mechanism, consider the bond market diagram in Figure 1. The left
panel depicts the case of a representative agent with a low EIS, which is a feature common
to the models mentioned above. For example, both the endogenous and the external habit
models imply a low EIS (despite differing in their risk aversion implications). With a low EIS,
however, the interaction of the resulting inelastic (steep) bond demand curve with a bond
supply that is perfectly inelastic at zero (because of the representative-agent assumption)
means that even small shifts in the demand curve—due to labor income shocks and the
consequent change in the demand for savings—generate large movements in the bond price,
and hence, in the risk-free rate.
   In the present model, the mechanism is different. First, for the following discussion it
is convenient to label non-stockholders’ bond decision rule as the “bond demand” and the

                                              18
                                                   Figure 1: Determination of Bond Price Volatility
                                 Representative Agent Model with Low EIS                                                      Limited Participation Model

                          1.5                                                                               1.5
                                                                        Bond supply

                                                                                                                                                           −Bh2



                         1.25                                                                          1.25                                         −Bh1




                                                   {
         Price of Bond




                                                                                            Price of Bond
                                Price Volatility
                           1                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                   Price Volatility   {

                                                                                                                                                             Bn2
                         0.75                                                                          0.75
                                                                         Bond demand
                                                                                                                  −Bh: stockholders’ supply                 Bn1
                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                  B : non−stockholders’ demand

                          0.5                                                                               0.5
                                                            0                                                                                0
                                                     Quantity of Bond                                                                 Quantity of Bond




negative of stockholders’ bond decision rule as the “bond supply.” Now, notice that the
majority—80%—of the population (non-stockholders) have a very low EIS as before, imply-
ing very inelastic bond demand (right panel). Turning to bond supply, the key difference
here is that it is not inelastic at all. In fact, the stockholders’ supply curve is rather flat, both
because of their higher EIS and because they have another asset—equity in the firm—that
can act as a partial substitute for bond. As a result, a shift in the bond demand curve
(resulting from fluctuations in non-stockholders’ labor income) of similar magnitude as be-
fore now results in smaller fluctuations in the interest rate, and the rest is reflected in the
variability of trade volume.

   The Price-Dividend Ratio. The average price-dividend (P/D) ratio in the CONS
model is 27.2, which is about 20% higher than the average of 22.1 in the data. Its volatility
is 26.6%, which compares fairly well with the empirical figure (26.2%). Finally, the volatility
of dividend growth is 19.1%, which is too volatile compared to the 13.4% figure in the US
data. This high volatility is due to the leverage in the capital structure and is one of the
dimensions that the labor supply choice will help with.

4.2    The Role of Preference Heterogeneity

One advantage of Epstein-Zin utility is that it allows me to easily examine the effects of
heterogeneity in the EIS and risk aversion parameters on asset prices. I conduct three
experiments reported in the last three columns of Table II. First (column 3), I keep all
aspects of the baseline parametrization intact, but only increase non-stockholders’ EIS from

                                                                                       19
0.1 to 0.3, which eliminates all preference heterogeneity from the model. With this change,
the equity premium falls significantly, from 5.5% to 2.44%, and its volatility falls from 21.9%
to 15.3%. More importantly, the price of risk falls from 0.25 to 0.16. Moving down the
column, the volatilities of all variables go down—by 30% to 50%. This makes some variables,
such as the P/D ratio, too smooth compared to the data, while bringing some others closer
to their empirical counterparts, such as the interest rate and dividend growth volatilities.
Overall, these results show that the EIS of non-stockholders has a major impact on asset
prices, perhaps most importantly on the equity premium and the Sharpe ratio, which are
key statistics that this model seeks to explain.
   Second, an alternative way to eliminate preference heterogeneity is by reducing the EIS
of stockholders from 0.3 to 0.1, which, as could be anticipated, has qualitatively the opposite
effect (column 4). The equity premium now increases to 7.65%, but the volatility is also
higher at 27.2%. As a result, the rise in the Sharpe ratio remains rather modest: it is 0.28,
up from 0.25. Finally, other volatilities, that of the interest rate, P/D ratio, and dividend
growth, are also significantly higher. Therefore, stockholders’ EIS has a larger effect on
volatilities, but a smaller one on the Sharpe ratio.
   The two experiments above also reveal another role played by the EIS heterogeneity. As
mentioned earlier, in the US data stockholders’ consumption growth is more volatile than
                             
non-stockholders’: σ ∆ log ch /σ (∆ log cn ) > 1.5−2.0 (see section 5.1 for more details). The
baseline CONS model is consistent with this empirical fact, generating a ratio of volatilities
equal to 2.42 (panel C of Table II). However, if preference heterogeneity is eliminated, this
ratio falls from 2.42 to 0.78 in column 3 and to 1.12 in column 4. This is because stockholders
have access to two separate assets that they can use to smooth consumption effectively, and
absent preference heterogeneity they choose to do exactly that. (Notice that this result also
explains why reducing stockholders’ EIS in column 4 above had a small effect on the Sharpe
ratio.)
   To summarize the findings so far, the low EIS of non-stockholders plays an important
role in generating a high Sharpe ratio, whereas lowering stockholders’ EIS has a larger effect
on asset price volatilities but only a small effect on the Sharpe ratio; furthermore, it creates a
counterfactually low consumption growth volatility for this group. The baseline calibration—
with EIS heterogeneity—generates results consistent with both asset prices and the relative
consumption volatility of the two groups.
   Third, and finally, in the last column I examine the effect of non-stockholders’ risk aver-
sion, by doubling it to 12. Comparing column 5 to the baseline case in column 2 shows

                                               20
that this change has a minor effect, if at all, across the board. Surprisingly, doubling the
risk aversion of 80% of the population has very little impact on the unconditional moments
of asset prices. Loosely speaking, this is due to the fact that non-stockholders’ only direct
effect on asset prices is through the bond market, and their (precautionary) bond demand
is largely determined by their EIS, but very little influenced by their risk aversion.11

4.3       Asset Prices with Endogenous Labor Supply

In the previous section I have found that the benchmark model with inelastic labor supply
generated plausible behavior for the unconditional moments of stock and short-term bond
returns. Nevertheless, labor supply choice is central for any serious macroeconomic analysis.
Therefore, I now relax the inelastic labor supply assumption and consider the two utility
functions—Cobb-Douglas and GHH—described above.

Results. Table III reports the results (columns 2–4). To provide a comparison, the last
two columns display the same set of statistics from two leading macro-asset pricing models
proposed in the existing literature, namely BCF and Danthine and Donaldson (2002). The
first paper features an endogenous labor-leisure choice, whereas the latter paper has inelastic
labor and is more comparable to the model analyzed in the previous section.
       With Cobb-Douglas utility (CD model, column 2), the first point to observe is the rather
large fall in the equity premium, which is now 2.65% (compared to 5.5% with inelastic labor
supply), accompanied by a smaller fall in the volatility (which is 15.4% compared to 21.9%
before), resulting in a fall in the Sharpe ratio from 0.25 to 0.17. Moving down the column,
notice that both the risk-free rate and dividend growth are less volatile than before, and now
are closer to their respective empirical values. The P/D ratio is also less volatile and is now
too smooth compared to data. Overall, I view these results as a step backward compared to
the model with inelastic labor supply.
       I next turn to the GHH model in column 3, which delivers a more respectable equity
premium level of 4.2%, with a volatility of 17.5%. The resulting Sharpe ratio is 0.24, slightly
lower than in the model with inelastic labor supply. Furthermore, the volatility of the risk-
free rate is 4.1%, which is lower than the model with inelastic labor supply (at 6.65%). As
noted earlier, this low volatility is also an important improvement of this model over earlier
production economy models. As for the price-dividend ratio, the volatility is about 70% that
  11
    Furthermore, in the supplementary appendix I also report the results on asset price dynamics for αn = 12
and find that they are very similar to the case with αn = 6.


                                                    21
  Table III: Unconditional Moments of Asset Returns, Model with Elastic Labor Supply

                                   US Data                           Model                           BCF            D-D
       Endog. leisure?                                CD            GHH            GHH              Linear          None
                                                                    Baseline     (low Frisch)
                                                         A. Stock and Bond Returns
       E(Rep )                    6.17   (1.99)       2.65    4.21        4.03     6.63                              5.23
       σ(Rep )                    19.4   (1.41)       15.4    17.4        18.1       −                              25.3
       σ(Rs )                     18.7   (1.38)       14.8    16.5        17.9     18.4                              24.3
       E(Rep )/σ(Rep )            0.32   (0.11)       0.17    0.24        0.22     0.36a                            0.21
       E(Rf )                     1.94   (0.54)       2.87    1.42        1.73     1.20                              1.32
       σ(Rf )                     5.44   (0.62)       4.91    4.10        4.46     24.6                             10.61
                                                           B. Price-Dividend Ratio
       E(P s /D)                  22.1   (0.58)       25.7    24.7        25.9       −                                −
       σ(log(P s /D))             26.3   (1.67)       13.6    17.8        19.1       −                                −
       σ(∆ log D)                 13.4   (0.94)       14.8    11.2        11.9       −                               4.55
        a BCF  report the time average of the conditional Sharpe ratio, Et (Rep )/σt (RS ), instead of the unconditional
        Sharpe ratio reported in the present paper. The statistics from BCF refer to their benchmark model (called the
        “preferred two sector model”) and has the best overall performance. The statistics from Danthine and Donaldson
        (2002, D-D) are from their Table 6, right column with smoothed dividends, which generates the best overall
        performance. A “—” indicates that the corresponding statistic has not been reported in that paper. In column
        4, the Frisch elasticity is set to 0.5, and the σε is recalibrated to 1.3% per quarter to match output volatility.




in the data, but higher than in the model with CD preferences. The volatility of dividend
growth now falls to 11.2% annually. Overall, the model with GHH preferences display asset
pricing behavior that is comparable to the model with inelastic labor supply.
      In the next column, I explore the impact of lowering the Frisch elasticity closer to the
values reported in the micro literature. I set 1/γ to 0.5 following Domeij and Floden (2006),
who survey existing micro studies and argue that part of the reason for the very low estimates
is the bias arising from ignoring borrowing constraints. This change in calibration has a
relatively modest effect on statistics: most notably, the equity premium falls slightly to
4% and the Sharpe ratio to 0.22. As I discuss in Section 6.1, the main drawback of this
calibration is that it implies a labor hours process that is too smooth, which is also why
macroeconomists typically use higher values similar to that in the baseline calibration.
      It is useful to compare these results to earlier studies. In the working paper version, BCF
show that introducing a flexible labor supply choice reduces the equity premium substantially,
from 4.45% to 0.15%, and the Sharpe ratio from 0.27 to 0.03.12 One goal of their paper, then,
 12
      See Boldrin et al. (1999, Table II). The statement in the text is based on comparing the results in column


                                                               22
is to identify some prominent labor market frictions that overcome this difficulty associated
with endogenous labor supply. Their baseline model features such a framework that matches
the historical equity premium as well as a number of other unconditional moments (reported
in column 4 of Table III below).
   In comparison, here flexible labor supply choice has a smaller negative impact on the
Sharpe ratio, especially with GHH preferences. This difference stems from two sources. First,
BCF employ a specification where utility is linear in leisure and separable from consumption.
Consequently, fluctuations in labor hours have no direct effect on utility, which makes it
relatively costless to smooth consumption fluctuations by adjusting one’s labor supply. The
only loss comes from the fact that to smooth fluctuations, labor supply would need to move
in the opposite direction dictated by the substitution effect: rise in recessions when wages
are low and fall in expansions when wages are high. In contrast, with the non-separable
preferences in this paper, agents do care about fluctuations in leisure as well as how leisure
co-moves with consumption, which makes it more costly to adjust labor supply to suppress
fluctuations in the marginal utility of consumption. Second, with GHH preferences there is
no wealth effect on labor supply choice, so labor hours are strongly procyclical due to the
substitution effect of wages over the business cycle, making it an even less effective tool for
smoothing fluctuations in marginal utility. As a result, the price of risk does not fall as much
in this framework when labor supply choice is endogenized.


4.4     The Dynamics of Asset Prices
I now examine the extent to which the limited participation model captures some salient
aspects of asset price dynamics. As mentioned earlier, some of these features, such as the
countercyclical price of risk, have been difficult to generate in some asset pricing models.
The results reported below are from the GHH model, but I found these statistics to be
remarkably robust across the different specifications analyzed in this paper.13


4.4.1    Mean Reversion and Predictability of Returns

I begin with the price-dividend ratio, which is procyclical in the model, consistent with
empirical evidence, with a correlation of 0.73 with output. The procyclicality follows from the
fact that when the persistent technology shock hits the economy, the stock price capitalizes
4 to column 8.
  13
     The supplementary appendix reports the counterparts of the tables in this section for the CONS and
CD models.


                                                  23
                Table IV: The Autocorrelation Structure of Key Financial Variablesa

                                                                          Autocorrelation at lag j (years):
                                                                      1          2         3         5           7
            s       f
          r −r
                US Data                                             .03       −.22       .08     −.14          .10
                Model                                              −.03       −.03      −.02     −.02         −.02
          Pj                                        
                i=1 ρ[   rs −rf       t
                                          , rs −rf       t−i
                                                               ]
                US Data                                             .03       −.19      −.11     −.29         −.15
                Model                                              −.03       −.06      −.08     −.13         −.15
     a Statistics
                from the model are calculated from annualized values of each variable, except for the stock price,
     which is taken to be the value at the end of the year.




all future productivity gains upon impact and thus increases substantially, while the initial
response of dividends is muted due to the gradual rise of the capital stock after the shock
(because of adjustment costs), making the ratio of the two variables procyclical.
   A second well-known observation concerning the equity premium is that it tends to
revert to its mean over time. The first row of Table IV displays the autocorrelations of the
equity premium from the US data. Notice that these autocorrelations are close to zero, which
makes it difficult to measure them precisely. As a result, they are not uniformly negative. To
circumvent this problem, an alternative statistic used in the literature aggregates consecutive
autocorrelation coefficients, which reveals a stronger pattern of mean reversion (row 3). The
second and fourth rows display the model counterparts of the two measures of mean reversion,
which are consistent with the signs and rough magnitudes of these statistics in the data.
   The finding of mean reversion is a clear departure from the martingale hypothesis of
returns and is closely linked to the predictability of returns documented by Campbell and
Shiller (1988), among others. To show this, I first regress log stock returns on the log price-
dividend ratio using the historical US data (panel A of Table V). The well-known pattern
documented in the literature can been seen here: the coefficients are negative, indicating
that a high price-dividend ratio forecasts lower returns in the future. Moreover, both the
coefficients and the R2 values are increasing with horizon. The model counterpart is reported
in the last two columns. The coefficient estimates and the R2 s are consistent with empirical
results: predictability is modest at the one-year horizon but increases steadily, reaching 35%
at the seven year horizon. The coefficients also increase quickly first and then grow more


                                                                      24
                     Table V: Long-Horizon Regressions on Price-Dividend Ratioa

                                                     US Data               Model
                           Horizon (k )         Coefficient    R2      Coefficient             R2
                                                            A. Stock Returns
                                  1                 −.21       .07       −.19                  .09
                                  2                 −.36       .12       −.40                  .16
                                  3                 −.41       .13       −.49                  .22
                                  5                 −.70       .23       −.77                  .28
                                  7                 −.87       .27       −.91                  .35
                                                            B. Excess Returns
                                  1                 −.22       .09       −.11                  .02
                                  2                 −.39       .14       −.20                  .04
                                  3                 −.47       .15       −.29                  .06
                                  5                 −.77       .26       −.42                  .10
                                  7                 −.94       .33       −.49                  .12

         a The table reports the coefficients and R2 values of the regression of log stock returns (top panel) and log

         excess returns (bottom panel) on the log price-dividend ratio. Horizon (k ) is in years.




slowly. Overall, the model generates significant predictability of stock returns.
       Turning to excess returns in panel B (first four columns), the predictability in the US
data is evident again. The last two columns report the same regressions using simulated
data. The coefficients on the price-dividend ratio are negative and increase in absolute value
with horizon consistent with the data. However, the amount of predictability is smaller than
in the data: the R2 of the regression is only 12% at the seven year horizon compared to 33%
in the data. Thus, the model is qualitatively consistent with excess return predictability, but
does not quantitatively capture the total magnitude observed in the US data.

4.4.2       Countercyclical Variation in the Price of Risk

I now examine the cyclical behavior of the conditional moments. Figure 2 plots the typical
simulated paths of the expected equity premium and Sharpe ratio against output over a
period of 200 years.14 Consistent with the US data (Chou et al. (1992)), both the expected
premium and the Sharpe ratio rise visibly in recessions and fall in expansions (correlation
with output: −0.55 and −0.63, respectively). Moreover, the conditional volatility is also
  14
    Each series is rescaled by its standard deviation and shifted vertically to fit in the same graph. Thus,
while the amplitudes are not informative, the comovement between the series is preserved.


                                                             25
           Figure 2: The cyclical behavior of expected excess returns and the Sharpe ratio.


                                                                Sharpe ratio (correlation w/ output = −0.63)




                           Scaled Time Series

                                                    Expected excess return (correlation w/ output = −0.55)




                                                                                                 Output

                                                0       20      40      60      80     100     120     140     160   180   200
                                                                                       Year




countercyclical with a correlation with output of −0.42 (to save space, the plot is not included
in the figure). The conditional moments are also quite variable: the 95% confidence interval
for the expected excess return extends from 1.3% to 4.8%, and the 95% confidence interval
for its conditional volatility extends from 9.1% to 18.5%. The fact that expected returns are
more variable than conditional volatility (as measured by their coefficient of variation) results
in the countercyclicality of the Sharpe ratio mentioned above. With few exceptions,15 this
countercyclicality of the market price of risk has been difficult to generate in consumption-
based asset pricing models. In the next section, I explain the new mechanism in this model
which generates this result.


5          Understanding the Sources of Equity Premium
The large and countercyclical equity premium arises from the interaction of (i) limited stock
market participation; (ii) the low EIS of non-stockholders; and (iii) consumption smoothing
in the face of persistent (aggregate) labor income shocks. What distinguishes the mechanism
in this paper from earlier models of limited participation is (ii) and (iii), which makes the
timing of trade in the bond market the driving force behind the high equity premium. In
this section I quantify this mechanism. Because labor supply choice adds another level of
complexity to the analysis, in this section I focus on the CONS model.
    15
         Most notably, Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Bansal and Yaron (2004).


                                                                                     26
5.1    Why Is There a High Equity Premium?

The annual standard deviation of consumption growth in the CONS model is 3.61% for
stockholders but only 1.48% for non-stockholders. To quantify the sources of stockhold-
ers’ consumption volatility, I first substitute the equilibrium conditions (3-a,b) as well as
the expression for dividends into the budget constraint of a stockholder, and after some
straightforward manipulation I obtain:

                                                        B − P f B0
                                                                   
                                     θZK θ L1−θ − I
                                                   
                               h
                              c = W+                  −                                 (10)
                                           µ               µ
                                 |     {z           } |    {z      }
                                             Ah              ah


   This expression provides a useful decomposition. Part of the variation in stockholders’
consumption comes from aggregate sources, that is, fluctuations in wage and capital income,
which is denoted by Ah . The scaling factor 1/µ that appears in Ah reflects the fact that
aggregate capital income risk is concentrated among stockholders, since they are the sole
capital owners in this economy. However, this risk only has a modest contribution to the
volatility of their consumption, as will become clear shortly. A second part of variability
arises from trade with the non-stockholders in the bond market: the component denoted
by ah ≡ B − P f B 0 /µ measures the net interest payments received by non-stockholders,
                   

which is made by stockholders indirectly through the firm they own. Using equation (10),
stockholders’ consumption growth volatility can be approximated as:

                                                     ah                    ah
                                                                           
                      h                  h                            h
                          
        var ∆ log c           ≈ var(∆ log A ) + var ∆ h + 2cov ∆ log A , −∆ h .         (11)
                                                     A                     A

   Similarly, non-stockholders’ consumption can be written as: cn = W + B − P f B 0 / (1 − µ) ,
                                                                                   

and the variance of their consumption growth is obtained by replacing Ah and ah in equation
(11) with An ≡ W and an ≡ −ah µ/ (1 − µ) , respectively.
   The top panel of Table VI shows that interest payments are very small on average, making
up a small fraction of consumption: E (ai ) /E (ci ) is less than 1.01% for both stockholders
and non-stockholders. However, interest payments are volatile, and more importantly, they
vary systematically with the business cycle. This is shown in the lower panel, which dis-
plays the fraction of consumption growth variance explained by each of the three terms in
equation (11). For stockholders, only 18.5% of consumption growth variance is attributable
to fluctuations in aggregate income, despite the fact that this component makes up nearly


                                                  27
            Table VI: Decomposition of Consumption Volatility and Equity Premiuma

                                                             Fraction of E (ci ) explained by:
                                                             E (Ai ) /E (ci )    E (ai ) /E (ci )
 (1) Stockholders                                                 1.011              0.011
 (2) Non-stockholders                                             0.995              0.005
                                                                      Fraction of σ (∆ log ci ) accounted for by:
                                                                                   2
                                                                                            i                          i
                                       σ 2 (∆ log ci )       σ 2 (∆ log Ai )       σ 2 (∆ Aa i )     2σ(∆ log Ai ,−∆ Aa i )
 (3) Stockholders                        (3.61%)2                 0.185              0.340                  0.475
 (4) Non-stockholders                    (1.48%)2                 3.13                0.61                  −2.74
       ai   = h, n. See the text and equation (10) for the definitions of ai and Ai




all of their average consumption (row 1). Hence, the concentration of aggregate capital
income risk, included in Ah , contributes only modestly to consumption fluctuations, and
consequently to the equity premium. The main source of volatility for stockholders comes
from the bond market: interest payments, ah , account for the remaining three-quarters of
variance (0.34 + 0.475). What is really crucial for this extra volatility is the timing of in-
                                          
terest payments: corr(∆ log Ah , ∆ ah /Ah ) = −0.947 (which can be calculated from row
3 of Table VI), which means that the payments received by the non-stockholders increase
exactly when aggregate income falls, i.e., in recessions.16 Therefore, consumption smoothing
for non-stockholders comes at the expense of large fluctuations in stockholders’ consumption,
so the covariance term in the third column accounts for nearly half of the total volatility.
The flip side of this story is seen in the variance of non-stockholders: var (∆ log cn ) would
be 3.13 times higher, were it not for the consumption smoothing provided by stockholders
through the bond market (that is, if the bond market were shut down, so aht ≡ 0).

A Comparison to Earlier Models. The mechanism proposed in this paper differs from
earlier models with limited participation in two key dimensions. First, in Saito (1995) and
Basak and Cuoco (1998) non-stockholders begin life with some financial wealth but do not
have a labor income flow. The only way to sustain consumption is then by investing this
wealth in the bond market. As a result, each period non-stockholders receive substantial
interest payments from stockholders, which in turn leverages the capital income of the latter
group and amplifies their consumption volatility. Although this is a potentially powerful
  16
     This negative correlation is not due to the appearance of Ah in the first term as well as in the denominator
of the second term. To verify this, I also calculated corr(∆ log Ah , ∆ah ) = −0.953, which is as negative as
the reported correlation.


                                                               28
mechanism, for it to work, interest payments needs to be substantial—as large as the con-
sumption of non-stockholders—which in turn implies that non-stockholders must hold a large
fraction of aggregate wealth. This counterfactual implication has been one of the main criti-
cisms raised against these models. In contrast, as noted above, the interest payments in the
present model are very small, and as we shall see below, the fraction of aggregate wealth
held by non-stockholders is also small and consistent with empirical evidence. Instead, the
amplification here is generated by the cyclical nature of these payments that serve to insure
non-stockholders against aggregate fluctuations.
       The mechanism in Danthine and Donaldson (2002) is more closely related to the present
paper. In their model, entrepreneurs smooth fluctuations in their workers’ consumption at
the expense of extra volatility in their own consumption, which results in a high equity
premium. An important difference from the present model is that this smoothing happens
through insurance within the firm, instead of being through the bond market. As a result,
the bond price is determined by the entrepreneurs alone (and not jointly with workers, which
is the case here). It would be interesting to know if this difference would result in different
implications for asset price dynamics, which is not explored in that paper.
       A second difference from previous models is that here preference heterogeneity is essential
for amplifying stockholders’ consumption volatility relative to that of non-stockholders. This
point has already been discussed in Section 4.2, so I do not repeat it here. But it is important
to note that this feature contrasts with the previous papers mentioned above, where non-
stockholders have no choice but to lend to stockholders simply to survive, which amplifies
the consumption volatility of the latter group regardless of preference heterogeneity.
Empirical Evidence. Finally, the high volatility of stockholders’ consumption relative to
that of non-stockholders is well documented empirically. For example, Mankiw and Zeldes
(1991) find the ratio of standard deviations to be 1.6 using PSID data, although their con-
sumption measure consists of only food expenditures, which is likely to understate the true
volatility ratio for non-durables. Attanasio, Banks, and Tanner (2002) use expenditures on
non-durables and services from the UK Family Expenditure Survey and calculate stockhold-
ers’ volatility to be 1.5 to 2 times larger than that of non-stockholders.17 Another piece of
evidence comes from A"ıt-Sahalia, Parker and Yogo (2004) who document that the sales of
luxury goods (such as expensive French wine, charitable donations, rents on luxury condos
  17
    These figures are likely to be downward biased because existing measures of stockholders’ consumption
are based on micro data sets that contain few “extremely rich” households, i.e., those in the top 1% of the
wealth distribution. At the same time, these households own nearly half of all stocks, and the top 0.5% own
37% of all stocks (Poterba and Samwick (1995)).


                                                    29
in Manhattan, etc.) display volatility that exceeds the standard deviation of aggregate non-
durables consumption by a factor of 5 to 10. They interpret this finding as indicative of
highly volatile expenditures by the very wealthy.

5.2       Why Is the Equity Premium Countercyclical?

It is instructive to start from the following decomposition of the conditional Sharpe ratio that
can be derived under CRRA preferences.18 Although I use recursive utility in the present
model, it turns out that the same decomposition still holds fairly well here, and is useful for
understanding the source of time variation:19
                             ep
                        Et (Rt+1 )                                              ep
                                   ≈ αh × σt ∆ log cht+1 × corrt ∆ log cht+1 , Rt+1
                                                                                   
                SRt ≡        ep                                                       .                   (12)
                        σt (Rt+1 )

   The conditional correlation term in (12) is close to 1 and is very stable over the business
                                                                                      
cycle, and αh is simply a constant. Therefore, equation (12) points to σt ∆ log cht+1 as the
source of time-variation in the Sharpe ratio. Indeed, in the model, SRt is 48% higher during
                                                     
a recession than it is in a boom, and σt ∆ log cht+1 is 39% higher in a recession than in
a boom, explaining a large fraction of the countercyclicality in SRt .20 Moreover, because
                             ep
conditional volatility, σt (Rt+1 ), is also countercyclical—18% higher during recessions—the
                              ep
expected equity premium, Et (Rt+1 ), is 68% higher during recessions compared to booms.
       The natural question that follows is: Why is the stockholders’ consumption growth
volatility countercyclical? To answer this question, two points should be noted. First, a
well-known feature of the consumption-savings problem in the presence of uninsurable in-
come risk is that the value function has more curvature at lower wealth levels and less
curvature at higher wealth levels. While this is well-known in the expected utility case, the
same is true here with recursive preferences, as can be seen from Figure 3, which plots how
  18
     Two additional assumptions that are needed for deriving the decomposition are that portfolio constraints
are not binding, and consumption growth and asset returns are homoskedastic and jointly log-normal.
  19
     Although one can also derive an exact decomposition of the Sharpe ratio with recursive preferences
(Campbell (1999, eq. 22)), I do not use this alternative form because (i) it requires the additional assumption
of complete markets (or human wealth to be tradeable); and (ii) the decomposition has the same form as
the one used here, but adds a second term that involves the covariance of the equity premium with the
return on wealth. The contribution of this second term depends on the values of risk aversion and EIS and,
for the values used in this paper, it does not seem to be of first order importance for the cyclical behavior.
Therefore, I opt for the simpler decomposition. which is useful for discussing the mechanism.
  20
     A recession is defined as the states of the world when output is one standard deviation or more below
the mean, ie., Yt < E(Y ) − σ(Y ). An  expansion is defined 
                                                              analogously:
                                                                            Yt > E(Y ) + σ(Y
                                                                                             ). Using average
output as the dividing line, I get: E σt ∆cht+1 )|Yt < E(Y ) /E σt ∆cht+1 )|Yt > E(Y ) = 1.23.


                                                      30
                Figure 3: Change in the slope of value functions with wealth level
                                                                        −3                  Slope of the Value Function
                                                                     x 10




                       Vnω(ω)−−Aggregate state fixed
                                                            10                                                                                   Non−Stockholders
                                                                                                   Limits of stationary
                                                                                                    wealth distribution

                                                                 8

                                                                 6

                                                                 4

                                                             2
                                                            −1.5             −1   −0.5       0          0.5           1         1.5              2      2.5         3
                                                                                                 Non−stockholders’ wealth
                                                                        −3
                                                                     x 10
                                                                 8
                                 Vhω(ω)−−Aggregate state fixed




                                                                                   Stockholders
                                                                 7                                                        Limits of stationary
                                                                                                                           wealth distribution

                                                                 6

                                                                 5

                                                                 4
                                                                 −10          0      10           20           30          40             50           60       70
                                                                                                   Stockholders’ wealth




the slopes of V h and V n change with ω (keeping aggregate state variables fixed). If markets
were complete, with the formulation of recursive preferences in (1) the value functions would
be linear in wealth (Epstein (1988)), implying that the slopes would be constant in wealth.
This is obviously not the case for either agent in Figure 3, owing to incomplete markets.
      Moreover, and thus second, non-stockholders own substantially less wealth per capita
than stockholders (more on this in Section 6.3). Figure 3 shows the bounds of the ergodic
distribution of wealth for each type of agent, where this difference in wealth levels is evi-
dent. Thus, non-stockholders are on the part of their value function that has high curvature
and a relatively small change in their wealth holdings changes their attitudes toward risk
and, consequently, changes their precautionary savings demand significantly. This is clearly
not the case for stockholders who remain on the very flat part of their value function over
the business cycle. To further illustrate this point, Figure 4 plots the normalized curvature
                                                                               i
of the value function (i.e., risk aversion with respect to wealth gambles), −ωVωω /Vωi , for
each type of agent as a function of realized output using simulated data from the CONS
model.21 I normalize the average value to 1 for both groups so that the vertical axis can be
interpreted as the percentage change in risk attitudes over the business cycle. The effect de-
scribed above can be clearly seen here: non-stockholders’ risk aversion increases significantly
 21
      Risk aversion with respect to wealth gambles depends on the market structure in addition to α.


                                                                                                           31
                                                          Figure 4: Change in attitudes toward risk over the business cycle
                                                                    Non−stockholders                                                                             Stockholders

                                                                              −ωVnωω/Vnω, normalized                                                                            h   h
                                                                                                                                                                         −ωVωω/Vω, normalized
       −ωVωω/Vω Normalized by its Average Value




                                                                                                       −ωVh /Vh Normalized by its Average Value
                                                  1.6                         Regression line                                                     1.6                      Regression line

                                                  1.4                                                                                             1.4

                                                  1.2
                                                                                                                                                  1.2

                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                   1

                                                  0.8
                                                                                                                                                  0.8




                                                                                                                                           ω
       n




                                                  0.6




                                                                                                                                           ωω
       n




                                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                                  0.4
                                                   0.24      0.26        0.28          0.3         0.32                                            0.24   0.26     0.28             0.3      0.32
                                                                       Output (Y)                                                                                Output (Y)



in recessions (and consequently, their demand for insurance), whereas it barely moves for
stockholders. Combining this countercyclical change in non-stockholders’ demand for con-
sumption smoothing with the mechanism described in the previous section implies that there
should be more trade in the risk-free asset market in recessions. This is exactly what happens:
          
ρ aht , Yt = −0.55, which shows that the average size of interest payments increases—in
turn raising stockholders’ consumption growth volatility—during recessions.22
                                                                                        
   Finally, in contrast to the 39% rise in σt ∆ log cht+1 mentioned above, σt ∆ log cnt+1 goes
down slightly—by 10%—in recessions. Of course, this is entirely consistent with the mech-
anism discussed above whereby non-stockholders have an even stronger desire for a smooth
consumption process during recessions. But, because the two groups’ conditional volatilities
move in opposite directions over the business cycle, aggregate consumption growth volatility
exhibits little time variation (goes up by only 8% in recessions), masking the large cyclical
                          
changes in σt ∆ log cht+1 responsible for the countercyclical Sharpe ratio. A corollary to
this observation is that if a researcher studies equation (12) with the aggregate consumption
process (as would be the case in a representative agent framework), the lack of time variation
in the volatility of aggregate consumption growth would lead the researcher to require the
  22
    Notice that the countercyclicality of trade volume reflects larger transfers of both signs in the bond market
during recessions. This
                       can be seen more clearly by calculating:
                                                                   E aht |recession, ∆Yt < 0 = 0.62 >     0.40 =
    h                            h                                                      h
E at |boom, ∆Yt < 0 , and E at |recession, ∆Yt > 0 = −0.66 < −0.43 = E at |boom, ∆Yt > 0 . Thus,
because non-stockholders are more averse to fluctuations during recessions, they borrow more aggressively
when they receive a negative shock to prevent an immediate fall in consumption; and when they receive a
positive shock, they save more aggressively as a buffer stock to self-insure against future negative shocks.



                                                                                                       32
              Table VII: Business Cycle Statistics in the US Data and in the Modela

                                    Data                          Model                         BCF           D-D
      Leisure preferences                            CD          GHH             GHH            linear        none
                                                                 Baseline      low Frisch
                                                                 Volatility
      σ (Y )                      1.89   (.21)      1.97      1.95         1.96                  1.97          1.77
      σ (C) /σ (Y )               0.40   (.04)      0.92      0.78         0.75                  0.69          0.82
      σ (I) /σ (Y )               2.39   (.06)      1.38      1.76         1.86                  1.67          1.72
      σ (L) /σ (Y )               0.80   (.05)      0.07      0.50         0.32                  0.51           —
                                                         Correlation with Output
      ρ (Y, C)                    0.76   (.05)      0.99      0.99         0.99                  0.95          0.96
      ρ (Y, I)                    0.96   (.01)      0.99      0.94         0.97                  0.97          0.93
      ρ (Y, L)                    0.78   (.05)      0.96      0.98         0.99                  0.86           —
      a Thestatistics for the US data are taken from Table 1 in BCF. The model statistics are computed after simulated
      data have been aggregated to quarterly frequency, logged, and then HP filtered.




curvature parameter, α, to be time-varying in order to explain the countercyclicality of SRt .
This is the approach adopted, for example, in Campbell and Cochrane (1999) among others.


6     Model Results: Macroeconomic Quantities

In this section I examine the implications of the model for macroeconomic quantities along
two dimensions. I first analyze the performance of the model for business cycle statistics and
then turn to the cross-sectional implications.

6.1    Business-Cycle Implications

Table VII displays standard business cycle statistics from the US data as well as their coun-
terparts from the CD and GHH models. As before, the last two columns report the corre-
sponding figures from BCF and Danthine and Donaldson (2002) for comparison.

    CD Model. In column 2, the first row reports the volatility of output, which was one
of the two calibration targets and is matched fairly well. The volatility of consumption (nor-
malized by that of output) is about 0.4 in the US data, but is overstated at 0.92 in the model.
In contrast, investment is too smooth, with a volatility of 1.38 in the model compared to 2.39
in the US data. Although these discrepancies are bothersome, the most glaring shortcoming
of the CD model is seen in the behavior of labor hours, which is an order of magnitude

                                                            33
too smooth compared to data (0.07 versus 0.80). However, the behavior of the aggregate
labor supply masks significant heterogeneity between the two groups’ behavior. In particu-
                                                                              
lar, labor hours are quite volatile but countercyclical for stockholders (σ lh /σ (Y ) = 0.77;
correlation with output: −0.96), whereas it is procyclical but smoother for non-stockholders
because of their low Frisch labor supply elasticity (σ (ln ) /σ (Y ) = 0.24; correlation: +0.97).
The behavior of aggregate hours largely mirrors that of non-stockholders (i.e., procyclical
and smooth), because they make up a substantial majority of the population. However,
aggregate hours are even smoother than that of non-stockholders, exactly because the labor
supply of the two groups moves in opposite directions over the business cycle, partly can-
celing each other. To increase the volatility of aggregate hours, one would need to increase
the Frisch elasticity of non-stockholders and/or assume a smaller fraction of households to
be stockholders. Unfortunately, a higher Frisch elasticity also means a higher EIS for non-
stockholders, which contradicts the main empirical evidence this paper builds upon. Because
of this important shortcoming, I conclude that Cobb-Douglas utility does not appear to be
a promising direction to pursue in this framework for endogenizing labor supply.

   Procyclicality of Aggregate Hours. Despite the important shortcomings of the CD
model, the procyclical aggregate hours is an encouraging finding, in light of earlier studies
that have consistently found that capital adjustment costs create countercyclical hours in
representative agent models (cf., BCF and Uhlig (2006)). Thus, it is important to understand
why the present model delivers the opposite result. The answer lies in the specific nature of
the cross-sectional heterogeneity generated by limited participation. To see why this helps,
first note that adjustment costs generate a volatile and procyclical stock price (as in the
data). In a representative agent model, such as the one studied by BCF, this implies a
large positive wealth effect during expansions, which overcomes the substitution effect from
a higher wage rate and causes labor hours to drop during expansions. In contrast, here 80%
of the population are non-stockholders and therefore do not experience the described wealth
effect. Instead, they mainly respond to the substitution effect of higher wages and increase
their labor hours. Although stockholders behave in a similar fashion to the representative
agent described above, they only make up a small fraction of the population. This result
therefore suggests that the countercyclical hours found in earlier studies arises from the
interaction of adjustment costs with the representative agent assumption. By relaxing the
latter, the present model is able to generate procyclical hours with Cobb-Douglas preferences.




                                               34
   GHH Model. Turning to the GHH model, the volatility of consumption is lower,
whereas the volatility of investment is higher compared to the CD model, and the model is
now in the same ballpark as the other two macro-asset pricing models reported in the table.
The more significant improvement is in the volatility of labor hours, where the CD model
failed most dramatically: now, the volatility of hours is much higher than before (equal to half
the volatility of output) and is closer to the data. This improvement is due to the flexibility
afforded by GHH preferences for calibrating the Frisch elasticity independently of the EIS.
Aggregate hours (as well as each group’s labor hours) are also procyclical, which is due to
the lack of wealth effects with GHH preferences. Finally, column 3 reports the statistics from
the GHH model when Frisch elasticity is lowered to 0.5. As seen here, the major impact
of this change is a large fall in the volatility of labor hours, which is a major reason why
macroeconomic studies typically use higher values as in the baseline calibration. To sum
up, the macroeconomic implications of GHH preferences are tolerable—i.e., comparable to
previous macro-asset pricing models—and are significantly better than the CD model.

6.2    Asset Prices versus Macro Performance: Some Trade-offs

As noted earlier, there is a fair amount of uncertainty regarding the values of some key model
parameters, most notably ξ and αh . Therefore, I now examine the effect on asset prices and
macroeconomic volatilities of varying these two parameters over a plausible range.
   I first consider variations in the adjustment cost parameter around its baseline value of
0.4. As ξ is raised from 0.2 to 0.7, it becomes less costly for stockholders to adjust the level
of capital installed in the firm, which makes investment a more effective tool for consumption
smoothing. The effect can be seen in the right panel of Figure 5 (circles), which plots the
combinations of investment volatility and consumption volatility (scaled by output volatility)
implied by the model for each value of ξ. The baseline case is marked by the intersection of
the dashed horizontal and vertical lines. As ξ rises, investment becomes much more volatile
(rises from 1.16 to 2.33) while consumption becomes smoother (from 0.96 to 0.67), bringing
both statistics closer to their empirical counterparts (although the lowest volatility figure for
consumption is still higher than the 0.40 value in the US data).
   Not surprisingly, however, lower adjustment costs and the resulting smoothness of con-
sumption also affect asset prices. This is shown in the left panel, which plots the combinations
of equity premium and Sharpe ratio implied by each value of ξ. Raising ξ from 0.2 to 0.7
reduces the equity premium by a factor of about 1.2 (from 8.20% to 3.67%), which is mostly
driven by a lower volatility of returns (from 28.1% to 16.1%). As a result, the fall in the

                                               35
                    Figure 5: Trade-off between asset prices and macroeconomic volatilities
           0.40                                                                    3
                   Baseline: − −
                                                αh=4, 6, 8, 10
                                                                                  2.5

           0.30
                                                                                          ξ = 0.7, 0.6, 0.5,
   Sharpe Ratio




                                                                                   2




                                                                      σ(I)/σ(Y)
                                                                                          0.4, 0.3, 0.2


                                                                                  1.5
           0.20                                                                                      αh= 10, 8, 6, 4

                       ξ=0.7, 0.6, 0.5,                                            1
                       0.4, 0.3, 0.2

           0.10                                                                   0.5
               0           2           4       6         8       10                 0.5        0.6         0.7         0.8   0.9   1
                                   Equity Premium (%)                                                          σ(C)/σ(Y)



Sharpe ratio is a rather small 24% (from 0.285 to 0.229). This comparison suggests that
the model’s implications for macro volatilities can be improved, at the expense of a smaller
equity premium and a slightly lower Sharpe ratio.
   Next I turn to the risk aversion of stockholders and consider values of αh from 4 to 10.
Starting in the right panel (marked by “squares”), notice that increasing risk aversion has a
very minor impact on the volatilities of investment and consumption (although, qualitatively,
it moves the model in the right direction). It does however have a more significant impact
on asset prices (left panel): the equity premium rises from 4.79% to 6.65% with an almost
equal rise in the Sharpe ratio (from 0.221 to 0.306).
   These two exercises illustrate the trade-offs between the asset pricing and macroeconomic
implications of the model. Together, they suggest that if one is willing to tolerate a risk
aversion as high as 10 for stockholders, adjustment costs could be reduced to, for example,
ξ = 0.6. The higher risk aversion would deliver a sizeable equity premium and Sharpe ratio,
while the low adjustment cost would move macroeconomic volatilities closer to the data.
Nevertheless, a risk aversion of 10 seems quite high, especially for stockholders who are
willingly undertaking substantial risks in financial markets.

6.3               Distributional Implications
Given the central role played by heterogeneity for the asset pricing results of this paper, an
important question to ask is whether or not the implied cross-sectional behavior is broadly


                                                                      36
                                          Figure 6: Evolution of wealth distribution over time
                                                    1




                       Share of Aggregate Wealth
                                                   0.8            Stockholders (Average Share 92%)


                                                   0.6


                                                   0.4


                                                   0.2   Non−stockholders


                                                    0
                                                     0       50             100              150     200
                                                                         Time (Years)


consistent with empirical evidence. I first look at the wealth distribution implied by the GHH
model (Figure 6), which reveals substantial inequality between the two groups: on average
stockholders own 92% of aggregate wealth, whereas non-stockholders own the remaining
8%. (These shares are fairly robust across specifications: stockholders’ share is 86% in the
CD model and 89% in the CONS model.) These figures compare fairly well to the US data,
where in the 1980s and 1990s stockholders owned an average of 82% of all net worth (fungible
wealth, including housing) and more than 90% of financial assets (see Poterba and Samwick
(1995) and Guvenen (2006)). As noted above, this implication for wealth inequality is an
important difference between the present model and earlier models with limited participation,
which required substantial wealth holdings for non-stockholders.
      This discussion, however, raises a question of its own: Is the amount of trade in the
risk-free asset implied by the model quantitatively plausible, or do we need a substantial
amount of trade to sustain the mechanism that generates the equity premium? One way
to answer this question is by looking at the trade volume, which I define as the (absolute)
change in non-stockholders’ bond holdings during a given year compared to the level of their
bond holdings: E (|∆B|) /E(B). This measure is less than 1.1% per year across all versions
of the model reported in Tables 2 and 3. This modest figure perhaps does not come as
a surprise, given the gradual shifts in the wealth shares shown earlier in Figure 6. As an
alternative measure,
                 I compare    the size of non-stockholders’ per capita transactions to their
                  |B−P f B0
                            |
wage income: E       1−µ
                               /E(W ) is less than 1.9% annually across all simulations.23 For
a non-stockholding household with an annual income of $50,000, this upper bound implies a
 23
      To construct the measure, I first annualize the total transactions by adding up Bt − Ptf Bt+1 over 12


                                                                            37
net change, for example in their savings account, of $950 during the year. These relatively
small payments entail large changes in stockholders’ consumption, because they are synchro-
nized across all non-stockholders (i.e., they result from aggregate shocks) and the effect is
concentrated among a small number of stockholders.24


7     Conclusions
I have studied the implications of a two-agent model with limited stock market participation
and heterogeneity in the EIS for asset prices and macroeconomic quantities. My findings sug-
gest that the cross-sectional heterogeneity generated by the interaction of these two features
could be important for several macro-asset pricing phenomena.
    The model highlights a new mechanism for the equity premium that results from the
limited consumption smoothing opportunities available to the majority of the population,
who are non-stockholders. These households turn to the bond market, which effectively
transfers their (aggregate) labor income risk and concentrates it among a small group of
stockholders. As a result, these households demand to be compensated in the form of a
high equity premium. In addition to generating broadly plausible behavior for asset prices,
this mechanism is also consistent with the very low wealth holdings of non-stockholders in
the US data, which has been problematic for previous models of limited participation. This
significant skewness in wealth holdings, in turn, combines with the basic mechanism above
to provide a novel explanation for the countercyclicality of the equity premium: essentially,
because non-stockholders are very poor and poorly insured, they become effectively more risk
averse during recessions when their wealth falls even further. Therefore, stockholders provide
more insurance to these agents and bear more risk during these periods. This leads them to
demand a higher ex ante premium to hold the equity risk. Another appealing implication of
this model is the fairly smooth interest rate process generated by the model despite the very
low EIS of the majority of households (non-stockholders). This result is due to the higher
EIS of the stockholders who are on the other side of the bond market.
    I have also investigated the extent to which the labor supply decision can be endogenized
in this framework. Cobb-Douglas utility gave rise to some counterfactual implications and
therefore did not seem to offer a promising direction. In contrast, GHH preferences did
consecutive months and then take the absolute value. If I instead take the absolute value of monthly
transactions first and then add
                               up, fthe0 
                                          reported figure changes very little: it rises from 1.9% to 1.97%.
  24                           |B−P B |
     To see this, note that E     µ         /E(Cs) = 4.9%.



                                                    38
not cause deterioration in asset pricing implications compared to the inelastic labor case.
At the same time, the model’s implications for some key business cycle statistics, such as
the volatilities of consumption and investment, needs improvement. Therefore, the present
model makes only modest progress in tackling these well-known shortcomings shared by
many macro-asset pricing models.
       A limitation of the present model is that it abstracts from long-run growth. Essentially,
I assume that the economy is stationary in levels to circumvent the difficulties associated
with obtaining a stationary wealth distribution with preference heterogeneity and long-run
growth. Chan and Kogan (2002) are able to generate a stationary wealth distribution by
introducing “benchmark consumption levels” into preferences. Although incorporating a
similar idea into this framework would be a valuable extension, this is beyond the scope of
the present analysis and remains an important area for extension of this model.
       Finally, there are many parallels between the asset pricing results of this paper and
those obtained in the external habit model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999). It turns out
that these similarities point to a deeper connection between the two frameworks: indeed,
the limited participation model studied in this paper has a reduced form representation
that is very similar to Campbell and Cochrane’s model, where the “external habit stock” in
their framework corresponds to the consumption of non-stockholders in the present model.
However, these similarities do not extend to the macroeconomic and policy implications of
the two models, so the limited participation model should not be interpreted as providing
micro-foundations for the particular habit specification used by these authors. These links
between the two frameworks are explored in detail in Guvenen (2009).
       I hope that these results would also encourage further research on the reasons behind
limited participation, which is not addressed in this paper.25 Furthermore, given the central
role played by limited participation in this model, another important research avenue is to
investigate the consequences of the recent trends in participation observed in most countries
for asset prices as well as for wealth inequality and welfare.
  25
    Recently, Gomes and Michaelides (2008) have constructed a life-cycle model where individuals pay a
one-time fixed cost to become a stockholder and argued that in this setting limited participation has a much
smaller impact on asset prices. Their conclusion does not follow from the endogeneity of participation per se,
because one can introduce a one-time cost into the present framework and show that it results in individuals
with high EIS to enter the stock market whereas those with low EIS stay out. With a cost of appropriate
magnitude, the resulting equilibrium is identical to the one studied here. (Further calculations on this fixed
cost are available upon request.) The difference instead appears to come from some of the calibration choices
made by these authors.




                                                     39
References

 [1] Ait-Sahalia, Y., J. Parker, and M. Yogo (2004): “Luxury Goods and the Equity Pre-
     mium,” Journal of Finance, 59, 2959-3004.

 [2] Attanasio, O., J. Banks, and S. Tanner. (2002): “Asset Holding and Consumption
     Volatility,” Journal of Political Economy, 110, 771-92.

 [3] Bansal, R. and A. Yaron (2004): “Risks for the Long-Run: A Potential Resolution of
     Asset Pricing Puzzles,” Journal of Finance, 59, 1481-1509.

 [4] Barsky, B., F. Juster, M. Kimball, and M. Shapiro (1997): “Preference Parameters and
     Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and Retirement
     Survey,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 537-579.

 [5] Basak, S., and D. Cuoco (1998): “An Equilibrium Model with Restricted Stock Market
     Participation,” Review of Financial Studies, 11, 309-341.

 [6] Blundell, R., M. Browning, and C. Meghir (1994): “Consumer Demand and the Life-
     Cycle Allocation of Household Expenditures,” Review of Economic Studies, 61, 57-80.

 [7] Boldrin, M., L. Christiano, and J. Fisher (2001): “Habit Persistence, Asset Returns,
     and the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 91, 149-166.

 [8] Browning, M., and T. Crossley (2000): “Luxuries are Easier to Postpone: A Proof,”
     Journal of Political Economy, 108, 1022-26.

 [9] Campanale, C., R. Castro, and G. Clementi (2007): “Asset Pricing in a Production Econ-
     omy with Chew-Dekel Preferences,” Unpublished Manuscript, Stern School of Business,
     New York University.

[10] Campbell, J. Y. (1999): “Asset Prices, Consumption, and the Business Cycle,” in Hand-
     book of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. Taylor and M. Woodford, Vol. 1, Amsterdam: North-
     Holland, 1231-1303.

[11] Campbell, J. , and J. H. Cochrane (1999): “By Force of Habit: A Consumption Based
     Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” JPE, Vol 107, pp. 205-251.

[12] Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller (1988): “Stock Prices, Earnings and Expected Divi-
     dends,” Journal of Finance, 43, 661-76.

[13] Chan, Y. , and L. Kogan (2002): “Catching Up with the Joneses: Heterogeneous Pref-
     erences and the Dynamics of Asset Prices,” Journal of Political Economy, 110, 1255-85.

[14] Chou, R., R. F. Engle and A. Kane (1992): “Measuring Risk Aversion From Excess
     Returns on a Stock Index, Journal of Econometrics, 52, 210-224.


                                            40
[15] Christiano, L. J., and J. D. M. Fisher (1998): “Stock Market and Investment Good
     Prices: Implications for Macroeconomics, Unpublished Manuscript, Northwestern Uni-
     versity.
[16] Christiano, L. , M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the
     Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113,
     1-45.
[17] Domeij, D., and M. Floden (2006). “The Labor-Supply Elasticity and Borrowing Con-
     straints: Why Estimates are Biased,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 9, 242-62.
[18] Danthine, J-P., and J. Donaldson (2002): “Labor Relations and Asset Returns,” Review
     of Economic Studies, 69, 41-64.
[19] Epstein, L. G. (1988): “Risk Aversion and Asset Prices,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
     nomics, 22, 179-192.
[20] Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and G. W. Huffman (1988): “Investment, Capacity Uti-
     lization, and the Real Business Cycles, American Economic Review, 78, 402-417.
[21] Gomes, F., and A. Michaelides (2008): “Asset Pricing with Limited Risk Sharing and
     Heterogeneous Agents,” Review of Financial Studies, 21, 415-448.
[22] Guvenen, F. (2006): “Reconciling Conflicting Evidence on the Elasticity of Intertempo-
     ral Substitution: A Macroeconomic Perspective,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53,
     1451–1472.
[23] Guvenen, F. (2009): “Limited Stock Market Participation versus External Habit: An
     Intimate Link”, Unpublished Manuscript, University of Minnesota.
[24] Investment Company Institute (2002): “Equity Ownership in America,” available online
     at http://www.ici.org/statements/res.
[25] Jermann, U. J. (1998): “Asset Pricing in Production Economies,” Journal of Monetary
     Economics, 41, 257-275.
[26] Kimball, M., and M. Shapiro (2003): “Labor Supply: Are the Income and Substitution
     Effects Both Large or Both Small?” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Michigan.
[27] Krusell, P., and A. A. Smith, Jr. (1997): “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity, Portfolio
     Choice, and Equilibrium Asset Returns,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 1, 387–422.
[28] Lettau, M. and H. Uhlig (2000): “Can Habit Formation Be Reconciled with Business
     Cycle Facts?” Review of Economic Dynamics, 3, 79-99.
[29] Mankiw, N. G., and S. P. Zeldes (1991): “The Consumption of Stockholders and Non-
     stockholders,” Journal of Financial Economics, 29, 97-112.
[30] Masulis, R. W. (1988): “The Debt-Equity Choice,” Institutional Investor Series in Fi-
     nance, Ballinger Press.

                                            41
[31] Mehra, R., and E. C. Prescott (1985): “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle,” Journal of
     Monetary Economics, 15, 145–161.

[32] Poterba, J., and A. A. Samwick (1995): “Stock Ownership Patterns, Stock Market
     Fluctuations, and Consumption,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 26, 295–373.

[33] Saito, M. (1995): “Limited Participation and Asset Pricing,” Unpublished Manuscript,
     University of British Columbia.

[34] Schwert, G. W. (1989): “Why Does Stock Market Volatility Change Over Time?” Jour-
     nal of Finance, 44, 1115–1153.

[35] Storesletten, K., C. Telmer, and A. Yaron (2007): “Asset Pricing with Idiosyncratic
     Risk and Overlapping Generations,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 10, 519–48.

[36] Tallarini, T. (2000): “Risk sensitive Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
     45, 507-532.

[37] Uhlig, H. (2006): “Macroeconomics and Asset Markets:          Some Mutual Implica-
     tions,”Unpublished Manuscript, University of Chicago.

[38] —— (2007): “Leisure, Growth, and Long-run Risk,” Unpublished Manuscript, Univer-
     sity of Chicago.




                                            42
