                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           CONSUMPTION AND LABOR SUPPLY WITH PARTIAL INSURANCE:
                        AN ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK

                                         Jonathan Heathcote
                                          Kjetil Storesletten
                                         Giovanni L. Violante

                                         Working Paper 15257
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15257


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2009




We are grateful to Jeffrey Campbell, Luigi Pistaferri and Thomas Sargent for useful comments, and
to Greg Kaplan for outstanding research assistance. We thank the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago
and Minneapolis for their hospitality at various stages of this project. Heathcote and Violante’s research
is supported by a grant of the National Science Foundation (SES 0418029). Storesletten thanks the
Norwegian Research Council for support for this research. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Jonathan Heathcote, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Consumption and Labor Supply with Partial Insurance: An Analytical Framework
Jonathan Heathcote, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante
NBER Working Paper No. 15257
August 2009
JEL No. E21,J22,J31

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper studies consumption and labor supply in a model where agents have partial insurance and
face risk and initial heterogeneity in wages and preferences. Equilibrium allocations and variances
and covariances of wages, hours and consumption are solved for analytically. We prove that all parameters
of the structural model are identified given panel data on wages and hours, and cross-sectional data
on consumption. The model is estimated on US data. Second moments involving hours and consumption
show that the rise in wage dispersion in the 1970s was effectively insured by households, while the
rise in the 1980s was not.


Jonathan Heathcote                                  Giovanni L. Violante
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis                 Department of Economics
Research Department                                 New York University
90 Hennepin Ave.                                    19 W. 4th Street
Minneapolis, MN 55401                               New York, NY 10012-1119
heathcote@minneapolisfed.org                        and NBER
                                                    glv2@nyu.edu
Kjetil Storesletten
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Research Department
90 Hennepin Ave.
Minneapolis, MN 55401
kjetil.storesletten@econ.uio.no
1     Introduction
How large is idiosyncratic risk for individual workers, and how does it translate into
cross-sectional dispersion in hours worked, consumption, and welfare? To answer these
questions, we develop a new theoretical framework within which it is possible to follow
the microeconomic lives of individual workers, and at the same time to understand how
these lives aggregate to generate cross-sectional dispersion in the macroeconomy. In our
model, agents face two fundamental sources of risk: shocks to wages and to preferences.
They choose hours worked and risk-free saving. In addition, they have access to insurance
against some but not all shocks. Prices and quantities reflect individual optimization and
market clearing.
    The first result of the paper is that equilibrium allocations for consumption, earnings
and hours can be characterized analytically: they are log-linear in three latent random
variables — an idiosyncratic preference parameter, and two components of idiosyncratic
labor productivity, only one of which is insured in equilibrium. Given allocations in closed
form, first and second cross-sectional moments of the equilibrium joint distribution over
wages, hours worked, and consumption can be expressed as simple functions of structural
model parameters. These moments serve as a powerful lens through which to interpret the
equilibrium mapping between preference parameters and the insurability of idiosyncratic
risk on the one hand, and the evolution of cross-sectional inequality on the other.
    How do we maintain analytical tractability? In the prototypical bond economy with
constant relative risk aversion utility and mean reverting income dynamics (Huggett,
1993; Aiyagari, 1994), agents smooth consumption by adjusting saving inversely with
shocks to income. Aggregate dynamics typically depend on the entire equilibrium distri-
bution of wealth, a high dimensional endogenous state variable, which renders the models
intractable. When shocks are fully permanent, however, there is an equilibrium in which
bonds are not traded (Constantinides and Duffie, 1996). Their result is the starting point
for our framework, but we do not want to buy tractability if the price is an economy in
which labor market shocks translate one-for-one into consumption. On the contrary, there
is evidence of substantial (but not perfect) risk-sharing among households (Attanasio and
Davis, 1996; Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston, 2008).
    We therefore extend the Constantinides-Duffie environment in two ways. First, we
focus on wage risk and allow agents to choose labor supply, thereby endogenizing earnings
and introducing a margin of response to wage shocks though hours worked. Second, we
allow agents to perfectly insure a subset of idiosyncratic risks – through trade in bonds,


                                             1
more sophisticated financial assets, or non-market mechanisms. Intuitively, a model with
full insurance against some risks and no insurance against others is tractable for the same
reason that models with complete markets or autarky are tractable: in the first case,
equilibrium allocations can be characterized without reference to the (nondegenerate)
wealth distribution by exploiting the welfare theorems; in the second case, the wealth
distribution is degenerate. Because the degree of risk-sharing in our framework lies in
between a bond economy and complete markets, the model features “partial insurance.”1
       While labor supply and risk-free savings are perhaps the most obvious margins of
adjustment to idiosyncratic shocks, we allow for additional insurance to capture myr-
iad other adjustment mechanisms and institutions that spread risks across individuals or
over time. Examples include sophisticated financial instruments, government taxation and
transfer schemes, and risk-sharing within a range of networks including families, firms and
unions. Fully structural incomplete-markets models have been developed that explicitly
incorporate a variety of such insurance mechanisms.2 However, simultaneously incorpo-
rating multiple adjustment mechanisms poses obvious numerical challenges. Moreover,
if certain channels are not explicitly modeled, one risks exaggerating or underestimating
the quantitative importance of the mechanisms that are included, depending on whether
they are substitutes for or complements to the mechanisms that are missing.
       Deaton (1997) suggests an alternative approach: “Although it is possible to examine
the mechanisms, the insurance contracts, tithes and transfers, their multiplicity makes
it attractive to look directly at the magnitude that is supposed to be smoothed, namely
consumption.”3 Our framework combines basic self-insurance in the Bewley tradition
(through borrowing/lending and labor supply) with an assumption that insurance—in
some form—exists against a fraction of permanent wage risk. In the spirit of Deaton’s
   1
      Recent examples of models displaying partial insurance include Krueger and Perri (2006), Attanasio
and Pavoni (2007), Blundell et al., (2008), and Ales and Maziero (2009).
    2
      Examples are investigations of self-insurance and individual and family labor supply (Heathcote,
Storesletten and Violante, 2008a), bankruptcy laws (Livshits, MacGee and Tertilt, 2007), consumer
durables (Fernandez-Villaverde and Krueger, 2004), and government redistribution to the poor (Hubbard,
Skinner and Zeldes, 1995; Low, Meghir and Pistaferri, 2006). See Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante
(2009) for a recent survey of this literature.
    3
      Deaton (1997, pages 372–374) writes: “Saving is only one of the ways people can protect their
consumption against fluctuations in their income. An alternative is to rely on other people, to share risk
with friends and kin, with neighbors, or with other anonymous participants through private or government
insurance schemes, or through participation in financial markets.”
   “The problems of implementing such schemes are as obvious as their advantages.. . . As a result, the
schemes are more likely to exist among groups of people among whom information is good, where income
is difficult to hide, and where behavior can be monitored and influenced by the group.”
   “While it is hard to believe that any of these mechanisms could provide complete insurance for poor
households, the very multiplicity of existing mechanisms makes it likely that there is at least partial
insurance through financial or social institutions, and that such risk sharing adds to the possibilities for
autarkic consumption smoothing through intertemporal transfers of money or goods.”

                                                     2
ambition, we then quantify the overall extent of risk-sharing, while remaining somewhat
agnostic about the specific sources. One indication that a large fraction of permanent
innovations to wages is effectively insured is that the increase in dispersion over the life
cycle is much larger for earnings than for consumption (Heathcote et al. 2005).
       A second feature of our model that is new to the heterogeneous-agents incomplete-
markets literature is that we allow for initial dispersion and life cycle shocks to the relative
taste for consumption versus leisure. It is important to incorporate preference hetero-
geneity because there is strong evidence that some part of cross-sectional dispersion in
consumption and hours is unrelated to dispersion in wages. For example, there is sub-
stantial variation in hours worked at fixed wage rates (e.g., Abowd and Card, 1989).
Moreover, over the past forty years there have been substantial changes in the distribu-
tion of household composition and in social norms and attitudes regarding gender roles
in the workplace. Some of the effects of these changes on inequality in hours and con-
sumption are better modeled as reflecting changes in the cross-sectional distribution of
preferences, rather than the distribution of wages.
       The return from tractability is a transparency lacking in standard incomplete-markets
models. In particular, we obtain theoretical closed-form expressions for second moments
of the joint equilibrium distribution of wages, hours, and consumption. These moments
by year and cohort can be used to formally prove that we can identify all structural
parameters defining preferences and idiosyncratic risk, even when allowing for classical
measurement error and time variation in the risk parameters. Identification requires
panel data on wages and hours (as in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics [PSID]) and
cross-sectional data on consumption (as in the Consumer Expenditure Survey [CEX]). An
important insight is that labor supply contains substantial information about the degree
of insurance available to individuals. Thus there is a big payoff from endogenizing labor
supply and earnings, rather than focusing exclusively on moments involving consumption
to identify the extent of equilibrium insurance, which is the typical approach in the
literature (Hall and Mishkin, 1982; Blundell and Preston, 1998; Blundell et al., 2008;
Guvenen and Smith, 2008; Primiceri and van Rens, 2009).
       Our final contribution is to apply these qualitative insights on the connection between
observable second moments and structural parameters by estimating the model using a
minimum distance estimator.4 It is worth emphasizing that because we solve for the levels
of consumption, earnings and hours, we can exploit information contained in the “macro
   4
    Note that estimation would be enormously challenging in a standard incomplete-markets model given
the numerical challenges involved in approximating equilibrium allocations for a single parameterization.



                                                   3
facts”on cross-sectional dispersion in levels that have primarily engaged macroeconomists
(e.g. Castañeda, Diaz-Gimenez and Rı́os-Rull, 2003; Krueger and Perri, 2006; Heathcote
et al., 2008a, Huggett, Ventura and Yaron, 2009) in addition to the “micro facts” on the
distribution of individual growth rates which have long been a focus of labor economists
(e.g., Abowd and Card, 1989; Blundell et al., 2008). Both micro and macro facts con-
tain valuable information about structural parameters, and we use both to identify and
estimate the model.
    One key finding from the estimation exercise is that cross-sectional data yield precise
estimates for preference parameters that are consistent with recent estimates derived
from very different methodologies. Our estimate for the CRRA curvature coefficient on
consumption is 2.02, and our baseline estimate for the Frisch elasticity of labor supply
is 0.38. A second important finding is that labor supply data tell the same story as
consumption data regarding changes over time in the fraction of idiosyncratic productivity
risk that is essentially insurable: both sets of moments indicate that the rise in wage
dispersion until the early 1980s was largely insurable, while the subsequent rise in wage
dispersion reflects larger uninsurable shocks. Over the entire period 1967–1996, around
two-thirds of the rise in idiosyncratic wage risk was insurable.
    Estimation is the natural way to quantify the extent of latent dispersion in preferences.
Preference dispersion is an independent source of variation in hours worked, and those
who work relatively long hours enjoy relatively high earnings and consumption. We
find that preference dispersion accounts for around a third of cross-sectional dispersion
in consumption and hours worked and also helps explain the fact that the empirical
correlation between consumption and hours is strongly positive.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops our framework, derives
the equilibrium allocations, and explains how we preserve tractability. In Section 3 we
present closed-form expressions for all the equilibrium cross-sectional moments of interest.
Section 4 proves how these cross-sectional moments allow us to identify all the structural
parameters of the model. Section 5 describes the data and the estimation algorithm,
and discusses and interprets the estimation results. Section 6 concludes the paper and
discusses a range of further applications and extensions that maintain tractability.


2     Model economy
We first describe the model formally. Next, we discuss in detail the key assumptions.

    Demographics We adopt the Yaari perpetual youth model: agents are born at age


                                              4
zero and survive from age a to age a+1 with constant probability δ < 1. A new generation
with mass (1 − δ) enters the economy at each date t. Thus, the measure of agents of age
a is (1 − δ)δa , and the total population size is unity.

    Preferences Lifetime utility for an agent born (i.e., entering the labor market) at
time t = b is given by
                                         ∞
                                         X
                                    Eb         (βδ)t−b u (ct , ht ; ϕt ) ,                          (1)
                                         t=b

where the expectation is taken over sequences of shocks defined below. Here ct denotes
consumption, and ht is hours worked at time t. Agents discount the future at rate βδ,
where β < 1 is the pure discount factor. Period utility is

                                           c1−γ
                                            t   −1                    h1+σ
                       u (ct , ht ; ϕt ) =         − exp ((γ + σ) ϕt ) t .                          (2)
                                             1−γ                      1+σ
    The parameter γ is the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution for con-
sumption. The Frisch elasticity of labor supply is equal to 1/σ. The variable ϕt is a
time-varying preference weight that captures the strength of an individual’s aversion to
work relative to his preference for consumption.5 We assume that ϕt follows the unit root
process
                                           ϕt = ϕt−1 + χt ,

where the innovation χt is drawn from the distribution Fχt with variance vχt at time t.
Agents entering the labor market at age a = 0 in year t draw an initial realization ϕ0t from
a distribution Fϕ0 t with cohort-specific variance vϕ0 t .

    Productivity shocks The process for individual efficiency units of labor (labor
productivity) wt is given (in logs) by the sum of two orthogonal stochastic components:

                                           log wt = αt + εt .                                       (3)

    The αt component follows a random walk:

                                           αt = αt−1 + ω t ,

where the innovation ω t is drawn from the distribution Fωt with variance vωt at time t.
The second component εt is itself the sum of two orthogonal random variables:

                                               εt = κt + θt .
  5
    In the utility function ϕ is multiplied by preference parameters. This is an innocuous normalization
which simplifies the expressions for equilibrium allocations.



                                                       5
Here θt is a transitory (independently distributed over time) shock drawn from Fθt with
variance vθt , and κt is a permanent component that follows a second unit root process:

                                              κt = κt−1 + η t ,

where the innovation η t is drawn from the distribution Fηt with variance vηt .
       Agents entering the labor market at age a = 0 in year t draw initial realizations α0t
and κ0t from distributions Fα0 t and Fκ0 t with cohort-specific variances vα0 t and vκ0 t . The
initial draws ϕ0t , α0t and κ0t are assumed to be independent.6

       Production Production of the final consumption good takes place through a con-
stant returns to scale technology with labor as the only input. The economy-wide goods
and labor markets are perfectly competitive. By assumption, individual wages equal
individual productivities (units of effective labor per hour worked).

       Information Agents are assumed to take as given the sequences of distributions
{Fϕ0 t , Fα0 t , Fκ0 t Fχt , Fωt , Fηt , Fθt } . Thus they have perfect foresight over future wage dy-
namics.7

       Island partitioning The population in the economy is partitioned across islands, or
groups. Each period, a continuum of new islands is formed, with each island comprising
a continuum of newborn agents who share common sequences {ϕt , αt }∞
                                                                   t=b .
                                                                        8
                                                                          Within an
island, agents are heterogeneous with respect to the sequences {κt , θt }∞
                                                                         t=b . Note that

there is wage dispersion within islands due to the idiosyncratic component (εt ), and wage
dispersion across islands due to the island-level component (αt ). In contrast, there is no
preference heterogeneity within islands.9
       Thus, the economy has a continuum of islands, each inhabited by a continuum of
agents whose mass shrinks at rate δ as time passes. A law of large numbers (e.g., Uhlig,
1996) can be applied twice so that idiosyncratic individual-level shocks “wash out” within
   6
      The initial draws (ϕ0 , α0 , κ0 ) could in principle be correlated if, for example, wages at labor market
entry depend on schooling and schooling depends on the initial preference parameter, ϕ0 . In a previous
version of the paper we allowed for correlation between α0 and ϕ0 , but the estimated correlation coefficient
turned out to be insignificantly different from zero.
    7
      This assumption is not required for tractability. Alternatively, one could assume that the variances
of these distributions themselves follow some stochastic process.
    8
      We segregate individuals across islands by birth year t and fixed effects (ϕ0 , α0 ) because this is
convenient when it comes to solving for equilibrium allocations: as shown later, when individuals are
segregated this way, within-island allocations can be determined using equal-weighted island-level plan-
ning problems. We could alternatively envision groups composed by individuals with different birth years
and fixed effects, as long as all individuals in a group experience the same sequence {ωt , χt }. Such an
approach would yield exactly the same allocations for consumption and hours.
    9
      In Section 5.3 we discuss the implications of introducing within-group preference dispersion.



                                                      6
an island, and island-level shocks induce no aggregate uncertainty in the economy as a
whole (see Attanasio and Rı́os-Rull, 2000, for a similar economy structure).

       Market structure At birth, each agent is endowed with zero financial wealth.10
All assets in the economy are in zero net supply. Within each island, there are complete
insurance markets. In particular, any agent can purchase insurance contracts at date t
that deliver consumption at t + 1 contingent on the realization of their individual shocks
st+1 ≡ (ω t+1 , χt+1 , η t+1 , θt+1 ). Profit-maximizing insurance providers operate in markets
that are competitive, and segmented by island. As a result, in equilibrium agents can pool
                                     
the idiosyncratic shocks η t+1 , θt+1 but not the island-level shocks (ω t+1 , χt+1 ). Asset
trading across islands is exogenously restricted to a risk-free non-contingent bond.

2.1       Discussion
With respect to our specification for preferences, some authors have invoked nonsepara-
bility between consumption and leisure to explain certain features of individual life cycle
data (for a survey, see Browning et al., 1999). In Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante
(2008b) we show that it is possible to solve for the equilibrium of the model in closed
form when consumption and leisure are aggregated in a Cobb-Douglas fashion. Here we
adopt the separable specification because it affords valuable flexibility in distinguishing
between agents’ willingness to substitute consumption and hours intertemporally.
       Preference dispersion in the model is intended to capture various sources of hetero-
geneity and risk which generate cross-sectional variation in hours worked and consumption
that is independent of variation in wages. In addition to actual differences in the relative
weighting of consumption and leisure across agents, our specification also encompasses, in
reduced form, all those factors that create individual-specific wedges in the intratempo-
ral first-order condition. Examples include changes in household composition (and thus
economies of scale) affecting the marginal utility of consumption, shocks to the time en-
dowment available for work (such as disability), and variation in effective marginal tax
rates on labor income. In the Conclusions, we explain how one could explicitly model
both demographic changes and progressive taxation, while retaining tractability.
       The evolution of individual efficiency units/wages (wt ) is taken as exogenous by agents.
However, earnings are endogenous because labor supply is a choice variable, so individuals
have some control over labor income. The statistical process for wages described above
(unit root plus i.i.d. shocks) is quite standard in the literature, and is consistent with the
  10
    It is straightforward to relax the assumption of zero initial individual financial wealth. The key
requirement, as will become clear below, is that average initial wealth on each island is zero.


                                                  7
key features of individual wage dynamics as well as with trends in wage dispersion across
the life cycle. For example, the empirical autocovariance function for individual wages
displays a sharp decline at the first lag, indicating the presence of a transitory compo-
nent in wages. At the same time, within-cohort wage dispersion increases approximately
linearly with age, suggesting the presence of permanent shocks.
       Recently, Guvenen (2007) and Primiceri and van Rens (2009) have revived a long-
standing debate on the extent to which individual wages changes are predictable. We
have labeled all individual wage changes in our environment as shocks. However, as will
become clear, in the context of our model it is difficult to distinguish between insurable
shocks to wages, and changes in wages that are foreseen but not explicitly insurable.
       Our model allows for two potential exogenous drivers of the evolution of the joint
equilibrium distribution of consumption and labor supply across households. The first is
the evolution of the wage distribution, driven by a mix of cohort effects and time effects.
New cohorts enter the economy with cohort-specific dispersion in initial labor productivity,
which generates changes over time in the cross-sectional variance of wages for the economy
as a whole. At the same time, all agents are subject to life cycle productivity shocks,
whose cohort-independent variance changes over time. The second driver of changes in
inequality is changes in the distribution of preference heterogeneity. Symmetrically with
wages, cross-sectional dispersion in preferences reflects a mix of cohort effects and time
effects. When taken to the data, the model is free to assign a large role to wage factors,
non wage factors, or both.
       The market structure of our economy embeds exogenous restrictions on the set of assets
that can be traded, in keeping with the Bewley-Imrohoroglu-Huggett-Aiyagari tradition.
However, instead of restricting the set of assets traded among individuals, we instead
restrict the set of assets that can be traded between islands, while allowing for perfect
risk-sharing within groups. Our economy can achieve any degree of insurance between a
bond economy and a complete markets economy. For vωt = vχt = 0 the market structure
is complete (all islands are alike), while for vηt = vθt = 0 it becomes a standard bond
economy (with a representative agent on each island). In general, it is an economy offering
partial insurance against shocks.11
       We will show that there is sufficient information in the aggregate cross-sectional joint
distribution of wages, hours, and consumption to identify the fraction of productivity
  11
    Microfounding the asset trading friction is beyond the scope of this paper, where we focus on the
empirical content of our environment. One could pursue a microfoundation based on asymmetric infor-
mation about shocks (e.g., better observability of shocks within a group than outside the group) along
the lines of Cole and Kocherlakota (2001), and Ales and Maziero (2009).


                                                  8
variation that is effectively insured, without exploiting any of the model’s predictions
for within-island or between-island inequality. As Deaton (1997) emphasizes, examining
precisely who shares risks with whom and how is a major empirical challenge. In this light,
the fact that we can quantify the scope of overall insurance without having to identify
islands in the data constitutes a strength of our framework.

2.2      Agent’s problem
Let st = {sb , sb+1 , ...st } denote the individual history of the shocks for an agent from birth
year b up to date t, where
                                            
                                                (α0τ , ϕ0τ , κ0τ , θτ )   τ =b
                                     sτ =
                                                (ω τ , χτ , η τ , θτ )    τ >b
with sτ ∈ S = R4 , and st ∈ S t .
    Let bat (st ) and qt denote the quantity and price of riskless bonds, purchased by an
agent of age a with history st , that pay one unit of consumption at t + 1. Let Bta (A; st )
and Qt (A; ω t , χt ) denote the quantity and the price of insurance claims purchased that
pay one unit of consumption if and only st+1 ∈ A ⊆ S. Note that since riskless bonds can
be traded freely across the whole economy, their price does not depend on the individual
state st . Since insurance claims are only sold within islands, their price could in principle
depend on the island-specific history (ω t , χt ).
    An agent’s sequential budget constraint is then
             Z
                                                                    
    ct s + Qt s; ω t , χt Bta s; st ds + qt bat st = wt st hat st + dat st δ −1 ,
     a  t
                                                                                                                   (4)
                   S

where realized wealth at node st = (st−1 , st ) is given by
                                                                             
                                  dat (st ) = Bt−1
                                               a−1
                                                   (st ; st−1 ) + ba−1
                                                                   t−1 s
                                                                         t−1
                                                                               .

For what follows, it is also useful to define “net” financial wealth for an individual with
history st as dˆat (st ) = dat (st ) − [cat (st ) − wt (st ) hat (st )], i.e., wealth net of the financial
income used to finance the gap between current consumption and current earnings.
    The problem for an agent entering the labor market at date t is to maximize (1)
subject to a sequence of budget constraints of the form (4). In addition to these budget
constraints, agents face limits on borrowing that rule out Ponzi schemes, non-negativity
constraints on consumption and hours worked, and have zero initial financial wealth.

2.3      Competitive equilibrium
Given sequences {Fϕ0 t , Fα0 t , Fκ0 t ; Fχt , Fωt , Fηt , Fθt }, a sequential competitive equilibrium is
a set of allocations {cat (st ), hat (st ), dat (st ), bat (st ), Bta (A; st )} and prices {qt , Qt (A; ω t , χt )} for

                                                            9
all dates t, all histories st ∈ S t , and all A ⊆ S such that 1) allocations maximize expected
lifetime utility, 2) insurance markets clear island by island, and 3) the economy-wide
markets for the final good, labor services, and the non-contingent bond clear.

    For what follows, it is convenient to define a set of constants indexed by time and
                                                         R                   
age: Mat ≡ Mθt + Mκt   a
                         , where Mθt = σ/ (σ + γ) log exp 1+σ    σ
                                                                   θ t   dFθt
                                                                                       a
                                                                                , and Mκt =
               R      1+σ
                             a             a
σ/ (σ + γ) log exp σ κt dFκt . Here, Fκt denotes the distribution of the cumulated
value of κ across agents of age a at date t (i.e., for the cohort born at b = t − a).
   We are now ready to state the first theoretical result of the paper, the characterization
of equilibrium allocations for consumption, hours, and wealth.

   Proposition 1 [competitive equilibrium] There exists a sequential competitive
equilibrium characterized as follows:

(i) Consumption and hours are given by
                                         1+σ
                      log cat st       = −ϕt +αt + Mat                                         (5)
                                          σ+γ
                                         1−γ      1           γ
                     log hat   st = −ϕt +     αt + (κt + θt ) − Mat ,                          (6)
                                          σ+γ      σ           σ
      and net financial wealth is given by
                              "                    #     ∞
                                                                                    !1−γ
                                     exp  1+σ
                                                κ
                                             σ t
                                                         X           ca+j
                                                                      t+j (st+j )
            dˆat st = cat st 1 − R         1+σ
                                                      Et     βj                            .   (7)
                                      exp σ κ dFκt  a
                                                         j=1
                                                                       cat (st )

(ii) The prices of the bond and the insurance claims are given by
                                               Z                          
                                                                  1+σ
                      qt = β exp (−γ∆Mt+1 ) exp γχt+1 − γ             ω t+1 dFs,t+1 (8)
                                                S                 σ+γ
                                               Z                          
                  t  t
                                                                 1+σ
         Qt A; ω , χ     = β exp (−γ∆Mt+1 ) exp γχt+1 − γ             ω t+1 dFs,t+1 (9)
                                                A                 σ+γ

      where Fs,t+1 is the joint distribution at t + 1 over (ω, χ, η, θ) and ∆Mt+1 = Ma+1
                                                                                     t+1 −

      Mat = Mη,t+1 + ∆Mθ,t+1 .

(iii) In equilibrium, the bond is not traded across islands.


   We now sketch the strategy for proving Proposition 1 (see the Appendix for details).
We first assume that there is no bond trade between islands and, hence, zero net savings
on each island. Given complete markets within an island, we then apply the first welfare
theorem and show that the allocations that solve a static planner’s problem (with equal
planner weights corresponding to the assumption of equal initial wealth) take the form

                                                 10
(5) and (6). We then show that these allocations can be supported in a decentralized
equilibrium by prices of the form (8) and (9), and verify the no-bond-trade conjecture.12
We discuss the intuition for this no-trade result in more detail in the next section.
       As is clear from Proposition 1, no distributional assumptions are needed to derive
closed-form expressions for the cross-sectional second moments of the joint distribution
over wages, hours, and consumption. The absence of an explicit solution for terms involv-
ing Mat is no obstacle for the empirical analysis, since they can be modeled through age
and time dummies in individual consumption and hours observations. However, a distri-
butional assumption allows us to compute these terms in closed form, further illuminating
the nature of equilibrium allocations and prices.

       Corollary [normality of shocks] Suppose that (α0t , κ0t , ϕ0t , ω t , η t , θt , χt ) are in-
dependently, normally distributed, with variance vx and mean −vx /2 for each random
                                                                  a
                                                              1+σ  vart (ε)
variable x. Then, the term Mat is given by Mat = σ+γ                 2σ
                                                                            , where varta (ε) =
          P
vκ0 ,t−a + a−1
            j=0 vη,t−j + vθt is the variance of the insurable component of the wage within

islands of age a in year t. The risk-free bond price is
                                                                              
              1+σ         1+σ         vω,t+1 vη,t+1 + ∆vθ,t+1               vχ,t+1
qt = β exp γ            γ      +1           −                   + γ (γ + 1)          . (10)
              σ+γ         σ+γ           2            2σ                       2
       This entirely closed-form expression for the equilibrium bond price is useful for under-
standing why our framework is tractable.

       Tractability In general, incomplete-market economies do not admit an analytical
solution, and numerical methods are required to solve for equilibrium allocations. In our
environment, the vector of cumulated values for the shocks (αt , ϕt , κt , θt ), together with
the age a of the individual, contains sufficient information to fully describe equilibrium
choices. The power of this result lies in the fact that these are all exogenous states. Cru-
cially, individual wealth is not an independent state variable, in that it can be expressed
as a function of (αt , ϕt , κt , θt ) and a.
       The reason individual wealth can be excluded from the individual state space is
twofold. First, within a particular island, markets are effectively complete. Thus within-
island allocations can be computed as the solution to the problem of an island-planner
who maximizes island-level welfare subject to an island-level resource constraint. Because
agents are endowed with zero initial wealth, the corresponding planner’s problem accords
all agents equal planner weights. But given these weights, the wealth distribution plays
no further role in the planner’s welfare maximization problem.
  12
    Note that Qt (A; ωt , χt ) = Qt (A). Thus the price of insurance against individual risk is independent
of the island-specific history (ωt , χt ) . Note also that the equilibrium price of insurance against events
st+1 ∈ A reflects both probabilities and state-contingent marginal rates of substitution.

                                                    11
       Second, the inter-island wealth distribution does not show up in allocations because,
in equilibrium, this distribution remains degenerate at zero. The result that there is no
cross-island heterogeneity in desired saving rates is specific to our environment, and can
be explained as follows.
       First, recall that our individuals have three saving motives: an intertemporal motive
given by the interaction of the degree of patience β and the interest rate, a smoothing
motive linked to expected earnings growth, and a precautionary motive reflecting the
variance of island-level shocks ω and χ. A key feature of our model is that each of
these saving motives applies with equal strength across all islands. The intertemporal
motive is the same across islands, because all agents share common discount factor β and
face the same economy-wide risk-free interest rate qt−1 . The precautionary motive is also
identical, reflecting the assumptions that island-level shocks are multiplicative, permanent
and drawn from common distributions Fηt , Fωt , and Fχt , that preferences are in the power
utility class with respect to both consumption and hours worked, and that all islands start
out with zero average wealth. These same features imply a common rate of island-level
earnings growth associated with rising dispersion in the insurable component of wages,
which in turn ensures that all islands have the same smoothing motive.13
       Because the strength of these three saving motives is identical across all islands, there
exists an economy-wide interest rate qt−1 at which, in equilibrium, the (negative) intertem-
poral motive and (negative) smoothing motive exactly offset the (positive) precautionary
motive, and no agent wants to either borrow or lend across islands. The closed-form
expression for the interest rate derived in the corollary helps us visualize this argument.
       Let us begin by taking the limit as σ → ∞ (inelastic labor supply). In the absence
of island-level risk (vω,t+1 = vχ,t+1 = 0), the equilibrium interest rate would satisfy the
standard condition for a complete-markets endowment economy, qt = β. In the presence
of island-level risk, expression (10) simplifies to (ρ − rt+1 ) /γ = (1 + γ) (vω,t+1 + vχ,t+1 ) /2,
where ρ = − log (β) and rt+1 = − log (qt ). The right-hand side captures the precautionary
motive for saving, which is proportional to the variance of the island-level productivity and
preference shocks with the constant of proportionality defined by the coefficient of relative
prudence (−u′′′ (c)c/u′′ (c) = 1 + γ). The left-hand side measures the intertemporal motive
to dis-save, which is proportional to the difference between the rate of time preference and
the equilibrium interest rate, with the constant of proportionality defined by the elasticity
of intertemporal substitution (1/γ). Here, it is clear that the equilibrium interest rate is
  13
    At the individual-level, agents with low draws for the transitory component θ have relatively high
expected earnings growth. However, innovations to the idiosyncratic wage component ε are perfectly
insured within the island, so they play no role in determining the island-level demand for risk-free bonds.

                                                    12
such that the two saving motives exactly offset each other.
   With elastic labor supply, the expression for the interest rate is somewhat more in-
volved, but the interpretation remains similar. An extra term appears involving life cycle
growth in the variance of the insurable component of wages, vη,t+1 + ∆vθ,t+1 . This reflects
a motive to borrow given that cumulating insurable productivity shocks imply expected
growth in earnings and consumption. In addition, allowing for elastic labor supply changes
the constant of proportionality defining the strength of the precautionary motive for sav-
ing in the face of uninsurable productivity risk. In particular, if γ > 1 then labor supply is
adjusted inversely to shocks to wages in order to smooth earnings. In this case, the higher
is the Frisch elasticity of labor supply, the weaker is the precautionary saving motive,
since labor supply provides a hedge against risk (Bodie, Merton and Samuelson, 1992,
develop similar intuition).

   Relation to the literature         Our no-inter-island-trade result represents a gener-
alization of Constantinides and Duffie (1996) in several dimensions. First, in our econ-
omy some risks are insurable, so that the Constantinides-Duffie no-trade result applies
across groups rather than across individuals. This extension is important, because in
Constantinides-Duffie the equilibrium entails no risk-sharing at all, whereas our envi-
ronment allows for insurance within islands/groups. Second, our agents supply labor
elastically, so that the process for earnings is endogenous. This is important because,
as will shortly become clear, data on hours worked are a rich source of information on
the nature of risk and risk-sharing, and endogenizing hours worked allows us to exploit
this information alongside information on consumption choices. The third key extension
relative to Constantinides-Duffie is that our agents are subject to idiosyncratic preference
shocks, in addition to productivity shocks. This is important because we do not want
to impose a priori that all cross-sectional dispersion in consumption and hours worked is
driven by dispersion in wages.
   To our knowledge, it is possible to solve for the equilibrium of incomplete-market
economies analytically only in a few other cases. Caballero (1990) shows that with con-
stant absolute risk aversion utility, the precautionary saving motive in a bond economy is
constant across all agents, independently of the earnings process. Wang (2003) builds on
this result and proves that one can construct an equilibrium in which the risk-free interest
rate is low enough that the negative intertemporal saving motive offsets the positive pre-
cautionary motive, and all saving is driven by the residual consumption-smoothing motive.
Thus equilibrium consumption ends up following the permanent income hypothesis.
   There is also a class of tractable models which consider idiosyncratic risk to human or

                                             13
physical capital. Examples include Benabou (2002), Krebs (2003), and Angeletos (2007).

       Consumption and hours worked Because markets are complete within islands,
while there is no trade between islands, individual-specific shocks are fully insurable, while
island-level shocks are not insurable at all. Thus we will refer to (ηt , θt ) as “insurable
shocks” and to (ω t , χt ) as “uninsurable shocks”. This stark dichotomy is the key to
preserving tractability, while delivering an environment in which the extent of overall
insurance is somewhere in between autarky and complete markets. We now interpret the
equilibrium allocations for hours worked and consumption described in (5) and (6).
       Hours worked are increasing in the insurable component εt , and the response of hours
to insurable shocks (η t , θt ) is defined by the Frisch elasticity, 1/σ. This reflects the fact that
full insurance with respect to εt rules out any income effect on hours worked. Uninsurable
permanent shocks to αt do have an income effect which is regulated by γ. If γ > 1, the
income effect dominates the substitution effect and hours worked decline in response to
an increase in αt . If γ < 1, the relative size of the two forces is reversed, and hours worked
increase. The impact of the preference parameter ϕt on hours and consumption is readily
interpreted: a stronger relative distaste for work (higher ϕt ) reduces labor supply.
       Individual consumption is independent of εt , since these shocks can be fully insured in
equilibrium. Consumption is equal to the uninsurable component of earnings (wages times
hours), which is increasing in the uninsurable component of the wage, αt , and decreasing
in the preference parameter ϕt : stronger distaste for work induces a reduction of hours
worked which transmits to earnings and consumption.
       By assuming normally distributed shocks, we can further refine the expressions for
equilibrium allocations. Substituting the explicit solutions for the dummy variables Mat
in the Corollary into eqs. (5) and (6), it is immediate that consumption is increasing in the
variance of insurable shocks to labor productivity, while hours are decreasing. The logic
for this result is that with endogenous labor supply, greater insurable wage dispersion
increases average labor productivity per hour worked, an important consideration for
welfare analyses.14 In Heathcote et al. (2008b), we discuss the welfare implications of
increased idiosyncratic uncertainty in detail.
       Note that the expression for individual consumption is not what the permanent income
hypothesis would imply. Consumption is still a random walk, but some permanent shocks
(innovations η t ) are fully insurable, and thus do not affect consumption. In other words,
our consumption allocation exhibits “excess smoothness”İt is precisely this feature of the
  14
    By construction, the average wage per worker is independent of the variance of shocks to labor
productivity.


                                                 14
data that has motivated a large amount of recent research aimed at developing “partial
insurance” models that lie in between the bond economy and complete markets (e.g.,
Krueger and Perri, 2006; Attanasio and Pavoni, 2007).

       Insurability versus predictability Two important remarks are in order with re-
spect to insurability. First, our characterization of equilibrium assumes that all within-
island risk-sharing arises from explicit markets and state-contingent financial income flows,
while in reality agents have access to a large range of different smoothing mechanisms,
as we discussed in the Introduction. One could support the same allocations for con-
sumption and hours through a variety of market and non-market insurance mechanisms
(e.g., government redistribution, within-family insurance) as long as these mechanisms de-
liver within-island interpersonal transfers exactly equal, state by state, to the difference
between individual earnings and individual consumption.
       Second, as is often emphasized in the literature (e.g., Cunha, Heckman and Navarro,
2005; Guvenen and Smith, 2008), it is very challenging, in general, to distinguish between
insurability and predictability. This is true in our model as well. Consider the following
variation on the environment described above. Suppose that there are no insurance in-
struments explicitly indexed to η t or θt on the island, just a non-state-contingent bond
with a loose borrowing limit. Suppose also that the statistical representation for the
wage process is unchanged, but that from the perspective of individual agents (not the
econometrician) all future innovations (ηt , θt ) are perfectly foreseen. In this alternative
environment, agents will use the bond to perfectly smooth consumption in the face of
forecastable wage changes ηt and θt . The elasticities of consumption and labor supply to
each of the shocks (ω t , χt , ηt , θt ) will be identical to those in the baseline model. Rather
than imposing additional structure to try to differentiate between insurable shocks and
uninsurable but foreseen fluctuations, we will simply use the label “insurable shocks” as
a catch-all for what in reality is likely to be a mix of both.15

       Indeterminacy of financial wealth              These two considerations have important
consequences for the determination of the “true” equilibrium distribution of financial
wealth. Whether within-island risk sharing is achieved through market or non-market
mechanisms has obvious implications for financial wealth: if all risk-sharing were achieved
though non-market mechanisms, the wealth distribution would remain degenerate at zero.
  15
    Blundell et al. (2008) have suggested that the covariance between consumption growth at t and
income growth at t + n may be informative about current news about future income changes. This
strategy requires longitudinal household survey data on consumption and income, which are not directly
available in the United States.



                                                 15
    Moreover, switching from the “insurable” interpretation to the “predictable” interpre-
tation would also change wealth allocations. In both cases, individual wealth following
history st = {sτ }tτ =b is equal to the difference between the expected present value of life-
time consumption and the expected present value of lifetime earnings. The difference is
that under the insurable view, these expectations are conditional on st (eq. (7)), while un-
der the predictable view, expectations would be conditional on both st and the sequences
of known future innovations {ητ , θτ }∞
                                      τ =t+1 .

    While equilibrium wealth depends on the details of how agents smooth wage shocks,
the efficient responses of consumption and labor supply do not. This is why we focus on
the model’s predictions for the joint dynamics of wages, consumption, and hours worked,
rather than its predictions for wealth.


3     Equilibrium cross-sectional moments
With allocations in hand, we can derive closed-form expressions for cross-sectional mo-
ments of the joint equilibrium distribution of wages, hours, and consumption. These
theoretical moment expressions provide a transparent framework for interpreting the dy-
namics of their empirical counterparts over time and over the life cycle.

    Measurement error          The first step toward making the model operational is recog-
nizing that measurement error is pervasive in micro data. We allow consumption, earnings
and hours worked to be measured with error. Since we compute hourly wages as earnings
divided by hours, measurement error in hourly wages contains errors in both earnings and
hours. We assume measurement error µxt for variable x is classical, i.e., i.i.d. over time
and across agents, has mean zero and variance vµx . Let log x̂t = log xt + µxt denote the log
of the measured (with error) value for x.
    If we abstract from the age/time dummies Mat in the allocations (this same treatment
will be applied to observations for wages, hours, and consumption in the data), then the
measured individual log allocations at time t are given by

                       log ŵt = αt + κt + θ t + µyt − µht                               (11)
                                        1+σ
                        log ĉt = −ϕt +        αt + µct                                  (12)
                                        σ+γ
                                        1−γ          1
                       log ĥt = −ϕt +         αt + (κt + θt ) + µht .                   (13)
                                        σ+γ          σ
    Let ∆ log x
              bt ≡ log x
                       bt − log x
                                bt−1 denote the observed individual growth rate for variable
x. From the above expressions, individual changes in measured log allocations can be


                                                 16
expressed as

                      ∆ log ŵt = ω t + η t + ∆θt + ∆µyt − ∆µht                        (14)
                                           1+σ
                      ∆ log ĉt = −χt +         ω t + ∆µct                             (15)
                                           σ+γ
                                           1−γ        η + ∆θt
                      ∆ log ĥt = −χt +         ωt + t         + ∆µht .                (16)
                                           σ+γ            σ
   Moments in closed form             We now use eqs. (11)–(16) to derive expressions for
the unconditional second moments (variances and covariances) of the equilibrium joint
distribution of wages, hours, and consumption. These expressions are closed-form func-
tions of structural preference, risk, and measurement error parameters. We start from the
moments in levels, which we call the “macro moments”and then move to the variances
and covariances of first differences, which we will refer to as the “micro moments.”

   Macro moments           Let varta (α) denote the variance of cumulated permanent unin-
surable shocks over the life cycle for a cohort of age a at time t, with varta (α) =
          P
vα0 ,t−a + a−1                            a
           j=0 vω,t−j . Similarly, let vart (ϕ) denote the variance of the permanent pref-

erence shocks. The corollary defines the corresponding expression for the variance of
insurable shocks, varta (ε).
   The macro moments involving wages and hours are, respectively,

             varta (log ŵ) = varta (α) + varta (ε) + vµy + vµh                        (17)
                                                 2
                a                 a          1−γ                   1
            vart log ĥ = vart (ϕ) +                   varta (α) + 2 varta (ε) + vµh   (18)
                                             σ+γ                  σ
                            1−γ                 1
      covta log ŵ, log ĥ =         varta (α) + varta (ε) − vµh .                     (19)
                              σ+γ                 σ
   The variance of measured wages is simply the sum of variances of all the orthogonal
productivity components, plus the variances of measurement error in earnings and hours.
   The variance of hours has four components. First, the larger is heterogeneity in the
taste for leisure, varta (ϕ), the larger is cross-sectional variation in hours. Second, the
variance of the uninsurable shock translates into hours dispersion proportionately to the
distance between γ and one. As γ approaches one (the log-consumption case), uninsurable
shocks have no effect on hours. Third, the variance of the insurable shocks increases hours
dispersion in proportion to the Frisch elasticity (squared). Finally, measurement error in
hours contributes positively to observed dispersion.
   The covariance between wages and hours has three components. The effect of uninsur-
able wage shocks on this covariance depends on the value for the curvature parameter, γ.
If γ > 1, then uninsurable shocks decrease the wage-hours covariance, since strong income

                                              17
effects induce low (uninsured) wage workers to work longer hours. Insurable shocks, by
contrast, always induce positive co-movement between hours and wages. Measurement
error in hours reduces the observed covariance between wages (earnings divided by hours)
and hours.
       Covariances involving earnings can be obtained as linear combinations of the three
moments above.
       We now turn to the moments involving consumption:
                                                             2
                              a              a          1+σ
                          vart (log ĉ) = vart (ϕ) +             varta (α) + vµc                     (20)
                                                        σ+γ
                                                    (1 − γ) (1 + σ)
                 covta log ĥ, log ĉ = varta (ϕ) +                   varta (α)                      (21)
                                                         (σ + γ)2
                                           1+σ
                  covta (log ŵ, log ĉ) =      varta (α).                                           (22)
                                           σ+γ
       The variance of consumption is increasing in the variance of uninsurable preference
heterogeneity and uninsurable wage shocks, as expected. Note the role of labor supply: if
γ > 1, then a lower σ (higher Frisch) translates into lower consumption dispersion for a
given varta (α), because labor supply dampens the impact of uninsurable wage shocks on
earnings.
       The covariance between hours and consumption is increasing in the degree of preference
heterogeneity since individuals with higher values for ϕ work relatively few hours, and
thus earn and consume relatively less. The effect of uninsurable wage risk depends on the
value of γ: when γ > 1, a positive uninsurable shock reduces hours worked but increases
consumption.
       The covariance between consumption and wages is only affected by uninsurable wage
shocks: fluctuations in uninsurable productivity affect both wages and consumption in the
same direction. Finally, note that neither of the two covariances involving consumption
are affected by insurable wage shocks or by measurement error. This is a useful property
for proving identification.

       Dispersion in the entire cross section             Since we have filtered out differences in
mean values for allocations across age groups, the expressions for dispersion in the entire
cross section are identical to those above, but without the age a superscripts.16 Thus, for
example,
                          vart (log ŵ) = vart (α) + vart (ε) + vµy + vµh ,                          (23)
  16
    This follows from the variance decomposition vart (x) = E [varta (x)]+vart [E (x|a)], where the second
term is zero if we abstract from the terms Mat in the allocations.



                                                   18
                           P∞
where vart (α) = (1 − δ)     a=0   δ a varta (α) is the unconditional cross-sectional variance of
the uninsurable component of log wages, and vart (ε) and vart (ϕ) are the corresponding
variances for the insurable component of wages and for preference dispersion.
                                                                                    a−1
   Dispersion over the life cycle           Let ∆varta (log x
                                                            b) = varta (log x
                                                                            b) − vart−1 (log x
                                                                                             b)
be the within-cohort change (i.e., between age a − 1 in year t − 1 and age a in year t) in
the variance of log x
                    b:

                     ∆varta (log ŵ) = vωt + vηt + ∆vθt                                     (24)
                                                    2
                           a                    1−γ              1
                     ∆vart log ĥ = vχt +                 vωt + 2 (vηt + ∆vθt )             (25)
                                                σ+γ             σ
                                        1−γ        1
               ∆covta log ŵ, log ĥ =        vωt + (vηt + ∆vθt )                           (26)
                                          σ+γ        σ
                                                      2
                             a                  1+σ
                      ∆vart (log ĉ) = vχt +              vωt                               (27)
                                                σ+γ
                                            (1 − γ) (1 + σ)
               ∆covta log ĥ, log ĉ = vχt +                   vωt                          (28)
                                                  (σ + γ)2
                                          1+σ
                ∆covta (log ŵ, log ĉ) =     vωt                                           (29)
                                          σ+γ
   Note, first, that none of these moments involve measurement error, reflecting our
assumption that the variance of measurement error is independent of age and time. Sec-
ond, note that because all shocks in our economy are either permanent or i.i.d., all these
moments are independent of age.
   The rise in wage inequality over the life cycle is determined by the variance of the
innovations to the permanent insurable and uninsurable components, and by the change
in the variance of the transitory insurable component. Wage dispersion will increase
over the life cycle as permanent shocks cumulate. The model suggests that the variance
of hours should be increasing over the life cycle for the same reasons as wages, though
with different weights on the insurable and uninsurable permanent variances. In the
log-consumption utility case, only the former matters for hours.
   Whether the covariance between wages and hours rises or falls over the life cycle
depends on the value for risk aversion and the relative size of permanent and transitory
innovations. When γ > 1, the cumulation of permanent uninsurable shocks pushes the
covariance down as individuals age, while the cumulation of permanent insurable shocks
pulls it up.
   The change in the variance of consumption over the life cycle is determined by the
variances of uninsurable productivity and preference shocks. The uninsurable-wage-shock
multiplier for consumption, (1 + σ)2 / (σ + γ)2 , is exactly one either in the log case or in

                                                19
the case of inelastic labor supply, i.e., σ → ∞.
       When γ > 1, hours move up in response to a negative uninsurable wage shock, while
consumption moves down, driving the consumption-hours covariance down over the life
cycle as varta (α) rises with age. Preference shocks work in the opposite direction: as
varta (ϕ) rises over the life cycle, the covariance between hours and consumption is driven
up. The model predicts that the covariance between consumption and wages will increase
over the life cycle, in proportion to varta (α).
       Expressions for growth in overall cross-sectional dispersion follow naturally from those
above: for variable x,
                                                                                     
             ∆vart (log x                 b) + (1 − δ) vart0 (log x
                        b) = δ∆varta (log x                       b) − vart−1 (log x
                                                                                   b) .

The first term in this expression reflects the change in cross-sectional dispersion within
the set of agents that survive from t − 1 to t. The second term reflects the change in
cross-sectional dispersion as new entrants (with age a = 0) replace the mass 1 − δ of
agents who die off.

       Micro moments        These moments are computed as variances and covariances of
individual changes in log wages and log hours between t − 1 and t.17 Let varta (∆ log x̂)
                                                            
denote the cross-sectional variance of log x̂at − log x̂a−1
                                                        t−1 for the set of individuals of age

a at date t for whom variable x is observed at both t − 1 and t:

                 varta (∆ log ŵ) = vωt + vηt + vθt + vθ,t−1 + 2vµy + 2vµh                  (30)
                                                 2
                                            1−γ              1
                varta ∆ log ĥ = vχt +                 vωt + 2 (vηt + vθt + vθ,t−1 ) + 2vµh (31)
                                            σ+γ              σ
                                  1−γ          1
        covta ∆ log ŵ, ∆ log ĥ =        vωt + (vηt + vθt + vθ,t−1 ) − 2vµh                (32)
                                    σ+γ          σ
       Note that, once again, none of these moments depend on age a. Thus the model implies
that the variances and covariances of individual growth rates should be invariant to age
and thus common across cohorts.


4        Identification
This section exploits the closed-form solutions for cross-sectional second moments to de-
scribe conditions under which one can prove identification of the structural parameters.
  17
    Given the specification of the stochastic process for shocks and measurement error, in the model
covariances of the individual changes are all zero beyond lag one. Moreover, we omit moments involving
changes in consumption since we do not use the limited longitudinal dimension of the CEX.



                                                 20
    The conditions for identification depend on data availability and on the parametric
restrictions one is willing to make. Our baseline scenario (Proposition 2 below) is the
model described in Section 2 under the assumption that one has access to an unbalanced
panel on wages and hours (e.g., PSID) and a repeated cross section on consumption (e.g.,
CEX), both supplying data for the time interval t = 1, ..., T .

    Proposition 2 [identification] Suppose one has access to an unbalanced panel on
wages and hours and a repeated cross section on wages, hours, and consumption from t =
1, .., T . Then, the parameters {σ, γ, vµh , vµy , vµc } as well as the sequences {vϕ0 t , vα0 t }Tt=1 ,
                −1                                  −1
{vκ0 t , vθt }Tt=1 , {vωt , vχt }Tt=2 , and {vηt }Tt=2 are identified. The values vηT + vθT and vκ0 T +
vθT are also identified.

    See the Appendix for the proof.
    We now turn to alternative scenarios which reflect the limitations of current survey
data for the United States. We first assume that one only has access to cross-sectional
data on consumption, hours, and earnings. Next, we assume that the consumption cross
section begins later than the wage/hours panel. Finally, we prove identification when only
one cohort of panel data on wages and hours is available, along with cross-sectional data
on consumption. These three cases would be relevant if one were to estimate the model
using, respectively, (i) only CEX data, (ii) the entire available time series for the PSID
and the CEX, (iii) the NLSY and the CEX.

    Corollary [limited data availability] (A) Suppose we only have access to re-
peated cross-sectional data on consumption, hours, and wages from t = 1, ..., T . Then, the
parameters     {σ, γ, vµy , vµh , vµc }   and   the        sequences   {vωt , vχt , (vηt + ∆vθt )}Tt=2   and
{vϕ0 t , vα0 t , (vκ0 t + vθt )}Tt=1 are identified. (B) Suppose data on consumption are available
only from t = t∗ , with 0 < t∗ < T. Then, the model is identified under the same assump-
tions as in Proposition 2. (C) Suppose wage and hours data are only available for one
cohort from t = 1, ..., T . Then, (vϕ0 , vα0 , vκ0 ) are identified only for the available cohort,
and all other parameters are identified under the same assumptions as in Proposition 2.


5     Estimation
We begin by describing the PSID and CEX samples used for the estimation. Next, we
outline the details of the minimum distance estimator. We then report the parameter
estimates, discuss the fit in various dimensions, and present variance decompositions over
time and over the life cycle. Finally, we perform a robustness analysis on various aspects
of the sample and the model.

                                                      21
5.1       Data
Our data are drawn from two data sets, the Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID), and the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). Our PSID and CEX samples
are those constructed by Heathcote, Perri and Violante (2009). Since these datasets
are widely used, we refer to that paper for a detailed description of these two surveys,
sampling methodology, and variable definitions.
       We use the 1968–1997 waves of the PSID to build an unbalanced panel with informa-
tion on demographic characteristics, individual annual hours, and annual earnings. The
PSID asks questions about earnings in the previous year, so our data refer to the period
1967–1996.18 Since we only use the SRC sample, we do not use sample weights.
       The CEX contains detailed information on nondurable and durable household con-
sumption, as well as on demographic characteristics of household members, individual
earnings, and hours worked. We focus on the quarterly Interview Survey, and we only
retain households for which we have a complete set of quarterly interviews, so that we can
aggregate consumption to an annual frequency in line with data on earnings and hours
worked.19 Our baseline measure of consumption includes expenditures on nondurables,
services, small durables, and an estimate of the service flow from vehicles and housing.
Consistent and continuous data over time are available only since 1980, hence we restrict
attention to the 1980–1996 cross sections and use weights provided in the survey.
       Since we use both the PSID and CEX data jointly, it is important that we apply the
same sample selection criteria across the two datasets. We first drop seriously incomplete
or implausible observations.20 We use an imputation procedure to adjust for top-coding
based on the Pareto distribution. We then select households in which the head is between
the ages of 25 and 59, and works at least 260 hours in the year. In both datasets,
the hourly wage is computed as annual pre-tax labor earnings divided by annual hours
worked.21 To avoid severe selection issues, we use wages and hours for males only. We
  18
     PSID surveys became biannual after 1997. Exploring this more recent data would require appropri-
ately modifying the identification scheme.
  19
     See Attanasio, Battistin and Ichimura (2007) for a study that uses both the Diary and the Interview
Surveys. The former is better designed to capture frequently purchased items (such as food, beverages,
and personal care items), while the latter aims to provide comprehensive information on up to 95% of
the typical household’s consumption expenditures.
  20
     We drop records if 1) there is no information on age for either the head or the spouse, 2) either the
head or spouse has positive labor income but zero annual hours, and 3) either the head or spouse has an
hourly wage less than half of the corresponding federal minimum wage in that year. In the CEX, we drop
households which report implausibly low quarterly consumption expenditures (less than $100, in 2000
dollars). In order to reduce measurement error, we also exclude CEX households flagged as “incomplete
income reporters.”
  21
     Labor earnings are defined in both surveys as the sum of all income from wages, salaries, commissions,



                                                    22
do not equivalize any variables. All monetary variables are deflated using the Consumer
Price Index (CPI).22
    Because our model is not designed to address variation in first moments, we regress
individual log wages, hours, and consumption (the former two in both datasets, the latter
only in the CEX) on year dummies, and on a quartic in age.23 We then use the residuals
from these regressions to construct variances and covariances in levels and first-differences
for all available age/year cells constructed by grouping observations in any given year into
31 age classes: “age” 27 (25–29), “age” 28 (26–30), and so on until “age” 57 (55–59).24

5.2     Estimation method
The structural estimation of the model uses the minimum distance estimator introduced
by Chamberlain (1984), which minimizes a weighted squared sum of the differences be-
tween each moment in the model and its data counterpart.
    The structural parameters to be estimated in the model are preference parameters
{γ, σ}, variances of measurement error {vµh , vµy , vµc } , and the sequences of variances
{vϕ0 t , vα0 t , vκ0 t , vωt , vηt , vχt , vθt }Tt=1 , where T = 30 is the length of the PSID sample, and
T ∗ = 17 is the length of the CEX sample.
    As discussed in Section 4, certain parameter values are not identified at the end points
of our sample period. Thus we make two additional identifying assumptions that allow
us to estimate every parameter. First, we assume that prior to year t = 1 (1967) all
parameter values were constant and equal to their values in 1967. Given this assumption,
we can immediately construct theoretical expressions for all moments in levels and first
differences for all t = 1, ..., T. Moreover, this assumption also identifies (vω1 , vη1 , vχ1 ), the
variances for the permanent shocks in 1967.25 Second, we assume vθT = vθ,T −1 , which
bonuses, and overtime, and the labor part of self-employment income.
  22
     See Heathcote et al. (2009), Table 1, for a summary of the dropped observations at each step of
sample selection, and their Table 2 for a comparison of basic demographic and labor market statistics
across the two datasets. In short, we find that they are broadly consistent, and also line up very closely
with analogous statistics computed from the much larger March Current Population Survey.
  23
     Recall that controlling for age effects in the individual wage, hours, and consumption allocations is
consistent with the way we constructed equilibrium cross-sectional (co-) variances in Section 3.
  24
     The only reason to group observations into five-year age groups is to reduce sampling variation: the
number of observations in some single-age, single-year cells is very small.
  25
     For example, under this convenient assumption:
                                                            1−γ        1
               cov12 log ŵ, log ĥ − cov11 log ŵ, log ĥ    =       vω1 + vη1
                                                                σ+γ        σ
                              var12 (log ŵ) − var11 (log ŵ) = vω1 + vη1
                                                                        2
                                                                        1−γ           1
                            var12 log ĥ − var11 log ĥ       = vχ1 +           vω1 + 2 vη1 .
                                                                        σ+γ          σ



                                                   23
then identifies vηT and vκ0 ,T (see steps 2 and 3 in the proof of Proposition 2).
       One last issue to discuss is that around 1992 (survey year 1993), the first year of
computer-assisted telephone interviewing in the PSID, earnings and hours appear unusu-
ally volatile. This short-lived surge in volatility has been widely attributed to a temporary
increase in measurement error. To account for this, we simply assume that the variance
of measurement error in earnings and hours in 1992 is twice as large as in other years.
       In the baseline estimation, we use J = 6, 981 moment conditions, corresponding to
31 age groups over 30 years for the three moments in levels involving wages and hours,
31 age groups over 17 years for the three moments in levels involving consumption, and
30 age groups over 29 years for the three moments in first differences. Let Λ denote the
(N × 1) vector of parameter values to estimate, with N = 5 + 7T − 1 = 214. Let m (Λ)
denote the (J × 1) vector of theoretical covariances with typical element mj (Λ) , where
the index j = 1, ..., J denotes the position in the vector. Correspondingly, we define m̂ as
the vector of empirical covariances with typical element m̂j .
       Our estimator solves the following minimization problem:

                                  min [m̂ − m (Λ)]′ W [m̂ − m (Λ)] ,                                   (33)
                                    Θ


where W is a (J × J) weighting matrix. Standard asymptotic theory implies that the
          b is consistent and asymptotically normal. Due to the small sample size, we
estimator Λ
make two choices. First, in the baseline estimation we use an identity matrix for W,
but we also report results for the case in which W is a diagonal matrix with entries
corresponding to the number of observations used for each of the J moments.26 Second,
instead of asymptotic standard errors, we compute 90–10 confidence intervals through a
block-bootstrap procedure based on 600 replications.27

5.3       Results
We begin by discussing the parameter estimates. We then analyze the fit of the model
along the time series and life cycle dimensions. In both cases, we perform variance de-
compositions to study the determinants of inequality over the life cycle and over time.
  26
     The bulk of the literature follows this strategy, in light of the Monte Carlo simulations of Altonji and
Segal (1996) who argue that in common applications there is a substantial small sample bias when using
the optimal weighting matrix characterized by Chamberlain.
  27
     Bootstrap samples are drawn at the household level with each sample containing the same number
of observations as the original sample. The implied confidence intervals thus account for arbitrary serial
correlation, heteroskedasticity, and estimation error induced by the first-stage regression of individual
observations on age and time.




                                                     24
       Parameter estimates Table 1 reports parameter estimates and bootstrapped 90–
10 confidence intervals. For our two key preference parameters, we estimate γ = 2.02
and σ = 2.62. In both cases the confidence intervals are narrow. In the context of the
set of moments we use to estimate the model, the key feature of the parameter γ is that
it determines the wealth effect on labor supply associated with uninsurable shocks to
wages. Thus moments involving the covariance between (changes in) wages and hours
are informative about the true value for γ. In a similar spirit, Chetty (2006) argues
that existing empirical evidence on the response of hours to permanent shocks to wages
can be used to bound estimates for risk aversion. An advantage of our fully structural
approach is that we can identify γ in an environment with a mix of uninsurable and
insurable permanent wage shocks, even though these are associated with very different
labor supply responses (see eq. 16).28 The implied Frisch elasticity of labor supply given
our estimate for σ is 0.38, a value that is consistent with the microeconomic evidence for
males (see e.g. Browning et al., 1999). Our estimate for the variance of measurement
error in log hours is 0.036, while we find virtually no measurement error in earnings. The
estimated variance of measurement error in log consumption is 0.033.
       Table 1 reports average estimated values for the time-varying parameters.29 The top
left panel of Figure 1 shows the cross-sectional variance of the uninsurable component of
wages (αt ) implied by our estimates, year by year. The overall variance of the uninsurable
component declines in the 1970s, and then rises sharply in the 1980s. Interestingly, this
pattern broadly accords with the fall of the skill premium in the late 1960s to mid-1970s,
and the subsequent increase in the 1980s and beyond. Under this interpretation, “skill-
biased demand shifts” represent the main source of uninsurable wage shocks.30
       The corresponding picture (top right panel of Figure 1) for the permanent insurable
component of wages (κt ) is somewhat different. The cross-sectional variance of this com-
ponent is generally increasing throughout the first two decades, but declines in the last
decade of the sample. At the same time, the variance of transitory insurable shocks (bot-
tom left panel) grows steadily throughout the sample and peaks in the first half of the
1990s, consistently with Moffitt and Gottschalk’s (2002) findings from estimated earn-
ings dynamics. Overall, the relative contribution of the insurable component of wage
  28
     The intertemporal elasticity of substitution implied by our estimate for γ, 0.5, is within the standard
range of existing estimates.
  29
     See Table 4 in the Appendix for the complete year-by-year set of parameter estimates, and associated
confidence intervals.
  30
     This interpretation is consistent with Heathcote et al. (2008a) who, in the context of an augmented
version of the standard incomplete-markets model, show that skill-biased demand shifts are the main
driver of the rise in consumption inequality.



                                                    25
                                   Table 1: Parameter Estimates
          Preferences                                                 Life cycle Shocks
       σ              γ                              vω               vη              vθ           vχ
     2.633          2.019                           0.004           0.004           0.032         0.001
 [2.503,2.830] [1.942,2.157]                    [0.001,0.009]   [0.001,0.009] [0.026,0.039]   [0.000,0.003]

                 Cohort Effects                                            Measurement Error
      vϕ0              vκ0           vϕ0                             vµy           vµh           vµc
     0.084            0.081         0.045                           0.000         0.036         0.033
 [0.070,0.095]    [0.064,0.098] [0.039,0.051]                   [0.000,0.000] [0.034,0.036] [0.029,0.037]


                          Table 2: Variance Decomposition, 1967 − 1996
                  Total Variance                        Contribution of Variance in
                                       Insurable      Uninsurable                      Measurement
                                                                      Preferences
                                        Wages           Wages                             Error
   var(log ŵ)         0.340             0.161           0.142           0.000            0.037
   var(log ĥ)         0.118             0.023           0.008           0.050            0.037
   var(log ŷ)         0.446             0.308           0.088           0.050            0.000
   var(log ĉ)         0.169             0.000           0.086           0.050            0.033


dispersion rises in the late 1960s and 1970s, and is broadly stable thereafter.
       Figure 1 also shows what part of aggregate dispersion reflects initial heterogeneity
at the time of labor market entry (the dotted line labeled “cohort”) with the remainder
reflecting the cumulation of subsequent permanent shocks.31 The decomposition indicates
that the dynamics of both uninsurable and insurable wage dispersion are largely driven
by shocks received during the life cycle. Put differently, even though initial heterogeneity
in labor productivity is large, differences across adjacent cohorts are small and induce
only slow movements in cross-sectional wage dispersion.
       Cross-sectional dispersion in preferences (bottom right panel) is small relative to dis-
persion in wages, but it shows a constant and slow increase. Contrary to wages, rising dis-
persion in preferences reflects pre-existing heterogeneity rather than subsequent shocks.
One potential explanation for the prominent role of cohort effects is the secular trend
away from the traditional married household, and toward greater variation in household
composition and the gender division of market work.

       Variance decomposition One attractive feature of our cross-sectional moment ex-
pressions is that they are all additively separable in terms capturing the roles of preference
dispersion, insurable wage dispersion, uninsurable wage dispersion, and measurement er-
ror. Thus (co-)variance decompositions are unique and easy to compute given parameter
  31
    In the earlier part of the sample, the decomposition between the contributions of initial dispersion
versus subsequent shocks is somewhat sensitive to the identifying assumptions we make regarding the
parameters that define the wage process prior to 1967.



                                                    26
estimates. In Table 2, we report the average contribution of each component across the
entire 1967–2006 period: in the next section, we discuss changes in dispersion over time.
       Wage dispersion is roughly equal parts insurable and uninsurable in nature, with
a small additional role for measurement error. The effect of differential comovement
between hours and wages for insurable versus uninsurable shocks shows up clearly in the
variance decomposition for earnings: relative to the variance of wages, endogenous labor
supply doubles the variance of the insurable component, and reduces the variance of the
uninsurable component by a third.
       Preference heterogeneity matters for both hours and consumption dispersion: prefer-
ence heterogeneity accounts for almost half of the variance of hours worked, and one-third
of the variance of consumption. Measurement error also plays a large role, accounting for
one-third of the observed variance of hours, and one-fifth the variance of consumption.
       We conclude that there is no unique answer to the question: What determines mea-
sured inequality among households? The answer depends on the variable of interest: for
hours it’s mostly preference heterogeneity and measurement error, for wages and earnings
it’s productivity shocks, while for consumption it’s a mix of all these factors.

       Time series fit Before discussing the model fit in the time dimension, we briefly
describe the evolution of cross-sectional inequality in the data.32 Figure 2 indicates that
the variance of log male wages increases steadily by around ten log points between the
late 1960s and early 1990s, with an acceleration in the 1980s. Over the same period there
is a much smaller increase in the variance of male hours—around two log points. The
correlation between log wages and log hours rises quite dramatically in the first part of
the sample, approaching zero from negative values. These facts combined imply that the
increase in the variance of log earnings is larger than the increase in the variance of log
wages. The variance of log consumption grows by only about five log points between 1980
and 1996, in line with earlier estimates by Krueger and Perri (2006). The correlation be-
tween wages and consumption is positive and increases slightly over time. The correlation
between hours and consumption is around 0.2 and relatively stable.
       These features of the data underlie the parameter estimates in Table 1 and Figure 1,
and given these estimates the model in turn replicates the data very closely.
       As is clear from Figure 2, to match the sharp widening of the wage distribution, the
model requires a large increase in the variance of either the insurable or the uninsurable
  32
    When plotting unconditional moments by year in Figure 2, we average across all age groups within
each year. In both model and data we weight successive age groups by survival probabilities δ = 1−(1/35)
to account for mortality. Thus both model and data exhibit the same stationary age distribution. 90–10
confidence intervals based on bootstrapped samples are plotted around the time series.


                                                  27
component of wages. Before 1980, CEX data are not available, and thus it is primarily
wage and labor supply data which convey information on structural parameters. Over the
first half of the sample, we see a sharp rise in the wage-hours correlation, and a modest
increase in the variance of hours. The model fits both data patterns through a sharp
growth in the insurable wage component, and a relatively small Frisch elasticity (high σ)
which mutes the impact of insurable shocks on hours dispersion.
       The model also replicates the observed average negative correlation between hours
and wages, even though insurable wage dispersion, dominant over this period, induces a
positive correlation. Examining eq. (19) suggests two main factors at work in the model.
First and foremost, uninsurable wage variation pushes the correlation below zero when
γ > 1, since income effects dominate substitution effects. This is precisely what the
estimation delivers for γ. Second, measurement error in hours drives down the correlation
(in both model and data) because wages are measured as earnings divided by hours.
       After 1980 consumption data are available and further inform the estimation.33 Since
the early 1980s, both consumption dispersion and the wage-consumption correlation have
risen, calling for an increase in uninsurable wage dispersion in the model, and a slowdown
in the rise of insurable wage dispersion. This pattern is also consistent with the end of
growth in the wage-hours correlation.
       The main reason why the increase in the variance of consumption is small relative
to the increase in uninsurable wage dispersion is that the estimated value for γ implies
that some portion of uninsurable changes in relative wages show up in changes in relative
leisure rather than consumption. In particular, given γ = 2.02 and σ = 2.62, eq. (20)
indicates that each log point increase in the variance of the uninsurable component of
wages translates into a 0.6 log point increase in the variance of consumption.
       The correlation between consumption and hours is informative about the role of prefer-
ence dispersion. This correlation is positive in the data, while uninsurable wage dispersion
tends to induce a negative correlation when γ > 1 (see eq. 21). The model replicates the
observed positive correlation thanks to preference heterogeneity: households that place
relatively more weight on consumption in utility work longer hours and consume more.
Larger uninsurable wage shocks tend to drive the consumption-hours correlation down
over time. To offset this force and replicate the roughly flat pattern for the correlation in
the data, the estimation calls for a rising time profile for preference dispersion.
       Finally, the model can be used to infer the path for consumption inequality in the
  33
   Information about parameter values before 1980 is also embedded in the moments involving con-
sumption for older cohorts present in the early years of CEX.



                                               28
                        Table 3: Decomposition of Changes in (Co-)Variances
                                      Change over Time                Change over Life Cycle
                                        (1967-1996)                       (1980-2006)
                              Total          Contribution of    Total          Contribution of
                                           vε      vα      vϕ                vε      vα      vϕ
           var(log ŵ)        0.084      0.059 0.025 0.000       0.208     0.095 0.113 0.000
           var(log ĥ)        0.032      0.009 0.001 0.022       0.027     0.014 0.006 0.007
        cov(log ŵ, log ĥ)   0.018      0.023 -0.005 0.000      0.011     0.036 -0.025 0.000
           var(log ŷ)        0.152      0.114 0.016 0.022       0.257     0.181 0.069 0.007
           var(log ĉ)        0.038      0.000 0.016 0.022       0.076     0.000 0.069 0.007
        cov(log ĥ, log ĉ)   0.018      0.000 -0.004 0.022     -0.012     0.000 -0.019 0.007
        cov(log ŵ, log ĉ)   0.020      0.000 0.020 0.000       0.088     0.000 0.088 0.000


1970s, before the start of our CEX sample. Projecting backward, the model predicts
flat or modestly declining consumption inequality pre-1980. As mentioned, this flat then
increasing pattern for consumption inequality parallels the well-known dynamics of the
skill premium over the period. It is also broadly consistent with evidence provided by
Slesnick (2001, chapter 6) and Guvenen and Smith (2008, Figure 4) who, notwithstanding
data comparability issues, use CEX data pre-1980 in order to construct a longer series for
U.S. consumption dispersion.

      Table 3 describes the total predicted changes between 1967 and 2006 for a set of
variances and covariances, and decomposes these changes into components attributable
to changes in insurable wage dispersion, uninsurable wage dispersion, and preference
dispersion. The variance of measurement error is assumed constant over time (except for
the 1992 dummy), and thus contributes nothing to changes in cross-sectional dispersion.
      The table indicates that two-thirds of the overall increase in cross-sectional wage dis-
persion was insurable in nature. As explained above, both labor supply data (namely, the
strong growth in the wage-hours correlation), and consumption data (namely, the modest
rise in the variance of log consumption) point in this direction.
      Interestingly, roughly two-thirds of the predicted increases in the variances of hours
and consumption are attributed to a rise in preference dispersion, and changes in prefer-
ence dispersion are also the main driver of predicted changes in the covariance between
hours and consumption. Therefore, the model indicates that non-wage factors played
a significant role in explaining the dynamics of cross-sectional inequality in the United
States over the period under study.

      Life cycle fit Figure 3 compares the evolution of model and data in the life cycle
dimension.34 In the data, the variance of log wages increases by twenty-one log points,
 34
      These plots are constructed by averaging across cohorts for each age, using only data for the 1980–


                                                      29
approximately linearly, between ages 27 and 57. The variance of log hours has a slight
U-shape, while the correlation between hours and wages declines modestly. The variance
of log consumption grows by about seven log points over the life cycle. As emphasized in
Heathcote et al. (2005), this number represents a much smaller increase than previously
reported in the pioneering work of Deaton and Paxson (1994).35
    The model is able to match the large life cycle rise in wage dispersion and, simultane-
ously, the small rise in consumption dispersion thanks to the fact that most permanent
shocks are insurable (though even uninsurable shocks do not completely pass through to
consumption because they are partially smoothed via labor supply).
    Equation (25) shows that inequality in hours worked will typically increase over the
life cycle in the model, as shocks cumulate. However, the overall increase turns out to
be small, since γ is not too far from one (so increasing uninsurable wage dispersion has
little impact on hours), and the Frisch elasticity is low (so the effect of rising insurable
dispersion is also small).36
    From equation (26) one can see that the model can predict both positive and negative
trends for the correlation between hours and wages over the life cycle, depending on the
relative size of insurable and uninsurable innovations to productivity, as well as on the
value for γ. In the estimation, the two effects roughly offset, so the model predicts a
roughly constant correlation, while in the data this moment has a small downward trend.
    The correlation between consumption and wages grows both in the model and in the
data, by roughly the same amount. However, the model generates a declining pattern
for the consumption-hours correlation while this correlation is hump-shaped in the data.
The cumulation of permanent uninsurable shocks over the life cycle drives this dynamic
(see Table 3) with preference shocks playing a modest offsetting role.
    These life cycle facts are central to understanding how the estimation assigns cross-
sectional dispersion to initial heterogeneity (at age 27) versus subsequent life cycle shocks.
Table 3 indicates that the evolution of dispersion over the life cycle is primarily driven
by shocks to labor productivity, with preference shocks playing in a minor role. This is
2006 period. This ensures comparability across the life cycle profiles based on CEX data and those from
the PSID. The decomposition in Table 3 is based on model estimates corresponding to the same period.
  35
     Deaton and Paxson (1994, Figure 8) report an increase in the variance of log consumption of almost
twenty log points between ages 25 and 55. One reason is that their study covers the period 1980–1990,
precisely when the bulk of the rise in cross-sectional dispersion is concentrated, while our sample covers
a longer time period.
  36
     Within a self-insurance model, Kaplan (2006) can generate the observed decline in the variance of
hours at the beginning of the life cycle. This is due to 1) age effects in the transitory component of
wages which are decreasing at younger ages, and (2) a non-degenerate distribution of initial wealth which
increases the variance of hours for younger agents.



                                                   30
consistent with the estimation results indicating that the bulk of cross-sectional prefer-
ence dispersion is pre-determined at age 27. Intuitively, permanent life cycle shocks to
preferences must be relatively small, since otherwise the model would deliver counter-
factually large life cycle increases in dispersion in consumption and hours worked. At the
same time, substantial initial heterogeneity in preferences is required to match the levels
of inequality in hours, consumption, and the hours-consumption correlation.

       Fit in first-differences Figure 4 documents moments in first-differences, both over
time (top panels) and over the life cycle (bottom panels). Over time, the variance of
changes in log wages shows a slow but continuous rise over the entire sample period, with
a peak in the early 1990s. This moment is matched almost perfectly by the model, since
it plays a key role in identifying the variance of the transitory insurable shock θt . The
variance of growth in hours is quite flat, except for a spike in the early 1990s.
       The measurement error dummy for 1992 allows us to match the spike in the variance
of wage and hours growth in the early 1990s, and the dip around the same time in the
correlation between wage growth and hours growth. By virtue of our assumption that
measurement error doubled in the first year of the new methodology, the model mirrors
these movements.
       The correlation between growth in wages and growth in hours increases in the data
between 1967 and 1990, a trend that is broadly replicated by the model. As discussed
above, this rising correlation reflects an increase over time in the relative share of wage
fluctuations that can be insured.
       Over the life cycle, the model predicts that the (co-)variances of all growth rates should
be constant across age groups. This prediction is in line with the empirical variance of
wage growth and the covariance between wage and hours growth, but not the variance of
growth in hours declines until around age forty. The model replicates the average variance
for wage growth, but under-predicts the observed levels for the variance of hours growth,
and the covariance between hours growth and wage growth. We discuss this shortcoming
of the model in the next section.

       Robustness Exploring alternative specifications sheds more light on the mapping
between model ingredients and parameter values on the one hand, and the large set of
targeted empirical cross-sectional moments on the other.37
       First, we consider an alternative measure for consumption, which excludes durables.
This measure of consumption exhibits slightly higher variance than our baseline mea-
  37
    Table 5 in the Appendix shows how parameter estimates vary across the set of alternative models we
consider.

                                                 31
sure, but a lower covariance with wages. The estimation routine then imputes more
consumption dispersion to measurement error, and less to initial dispersion in the unin-
surable component of wages. Less uninsurable wage dispersion in turn points to a higher
estimate for γ (2.32 rather than 2.02) to replicate the observed wage-hour covariance,
which improves the fit for the correlation between wages and hours over the life cycle by
generating a small decline, as observed in the data.
   Second, we consider a version of the model in which the variances of initial dispersion
for wages and preferences are assumed time-invariant. This has a negligible impact on any
of the preference or measurement error parameter estimates. While this model assumes,
counter-factually, that dispersion among labor market entrants is time-invariant, the fit
for the evolution of aggregate cross-sectional dispersion over time remains good.
   Third, we estimate the model without using any moments in first-differences. Recall
from the corollary that without moments in first-differences we cannot decompose the
overall variance of insurable wage dispersion into permanent and transitory components,
but all other model parameters are still identified. Reassuringly, estimates for these other
parameters are little changed relative to the baseline model.
   Fourth, we consider a version of the model with transitory i.i.d. preference shocks.
These serve as an additional source of variance in hours growth, and thus as a simple
way for the estimation routine to replicate the high observed volatility in hours growth
without relying on big measurement error in hours or a high Frisch elasticity. The effect of
including these shocks is similar to the effect of excluding the moments in first-differences:
the estimated variance of measurement error in hours is reduced and the Frisch elasticity
falls (from 0.38 to 0.22).
   Fifth, we consider more restricted models for preference variation. Assuming no life
cycle preference shocks has relatively little impact, which is not surprising given that these
shocks are estimated to be small in the baseline model. Assuming no initial preference
heterogeneity forces the model to try to replicate the observed cross-sectional dispersion
in consumption and hours through a mixture of more measurement error, and a higher
Frisch elasticity (0.58). The main failure of this restricted model is that it is unable to
generate a positive consumption-hours correlation, a key feature of the data.
   Finally, we tried a model with no transitory shocks to wages. Not surprisingly, this
model does poorly in terms of replicating moments in first differences (notwithstanding
a higher estimate for the variance of measurement error in earnings). However, all other
parameters are little changed, and the fit for moments in levels remains very good. This
finding reflects the fact that in the context of our model, what is important for cross-

                                             32
sectional moments is not whether shocks to wages or permanent or transitory, but whether
they are insurable or uninsurable.


6     Concluding Remarks
This paper has laid out a new theoretical framework to study consumption and labor
supply in the presence of idiosyncratic risk to wages and preferences. A distinguishing
feature of the model is that it can be solved analytically. Tractability is achieved by
extending the environment of Constantinides and Duffie (1996) to incorporate endogenous
labor supply, insurable wage risk, and preference heterogeneity. The model allows for any
degree of risk-sharing between a bond economy and complete markets.
    The framework delivers closed-form expressions for the equilibrium cross-sectional vari-
ances and covariances of the joint distribution of wages, hours, and consumption. These
expressions make the link between structural parameters and observed inequality trans-
parent, permit a formal proof of identification, and facilitate estimation of rich dynamic
models for the structure of wages and preferences.
    The model implies unique decompositions of cross-sectional inequality into components
attributable to insurable and uninsurable wage dispersion, preference dispersion, and
measurement error. Wage and preference dispersion, in turn, reflect a mix of permanent
heterogeneity and life cycle shocks.
    One insight from the moment expressions is that labor supply contains useful informa-
tion on the extent of insurance available to households. This complements evidence from
consumption, the typical focus of the literature (e.g., Blundell and Preston, 1998). We
find that moments involving both hours and consumption paint a coherent picture: over
the 1970s and 1990s, the increase in wage risk was insurable for US households, while
in the 1980s it was largely uninsurable. Non-wage factors, which we capture through
preference heterogeneity, also contributed to rising inequality in hours and consumption.
    The model outlined in Section 2 incorporates the essential ingredients for the main
application of the paper: a study of the factors determining the evolution of US inequality
over time and over the life cycle. The same model can address other issues. First, assuming
lognormal shocks, one can obtain closed-form solutions for the welfare implications of
idiosyncratic wage risk. In a greatly simplified version of our setup, Heathcote et al.
(2008b) show that rising insurable risk can be welfare improving given flexible labor
supply. Second, the allocations can be used to derive closed-form expression for the
transmission coefficients of permanent wage and earnings fluctuations to consumption


                                             33
growth, providing a structural interpretation for the estimates in Blundell et al. (2008).
   In the baseline framework, we have chosen to remain agnostic about the mechanisms
that deliver partial insurance against wage risk, and about the underlying sources of
preference dispersion. The model can be generalized to shed more light on these issues
by explicitly modeling families and taxation, without compromising tractability.
   It is straightforward to reinterpret equilibrium allocations from the baseline model as
arising in the context of a model of families. In particular, if family members belong
to the same island, and family utility is separable between public consumption and each
member’s labor supply, then one of the mechanisms which deliver within-island insurance
is risk-sharing within the family (Hayashi, Altonji, and Kotlikoff, 1996). Dispersion and
fluctuations in household composition are an obvious source of preference heterogeneity
and risk. Modeling these explicitly would require including a measure of household size
as an extra state variable for the household, defining a corresponding stochastic process,
and introducing an equivalence scale for household consumption.
   Our framework can also be extended to incorporate progressive taxation and gov-
ernment redistribution. Following Benabou (2002), we can introduce a balanced-budget
progressive tax/transfer system, where after-tax labor earnings y are given by y = (wh)1−τ
ȳ τ , where τ is the average marginal tax rate (weighted by income), and ȳ is average la-
bor earnings. Explicitly modeling government redistribution this way has several payoffs.
First, we can show that progressive taxation changes the response of labor supply to insur-
able wage shocks, and thus the interpretation of the estimated Frisch elasticity. Second,
by estimating τ we can explicitly quantify the role of progressive taxation as an insurance
mechanism. Third, we can pursue a closed-form welfare analysis of progressive taxation.
   Finally, even though in the baseline framework we have abstracted from aggregate
risk, we can easily introduce economy-wide fluctuations and link idiosyncratic risk to
the aggregate state. The framework remains analytically tractable. In particular, let
the source of aggregate fluctuations be shocks to productivity (the average wage per
efficiency unit of labor). Follow Constantinides and Duffie (1996) by assuming conditional
heteroskedasticity of the four shocks modeled as vjt = αj + β j Zt , where j ∈ {ω, η, θ, χ}.
The framework still yields analytical expressions for aggregate allocations and asset prices.
This extended set-up can be used to study the link between idiosyncratic fluctuations and
aggregate business cycles, the welfare costs of business cycles, and asset pricing.




                                             34
References
 [1] Abowd, John, and David Card. 1989. “On the Covariance Structure of Earnings and Hours
     Changes.”Econometrica, 57(2): 411–445.
 [2] Aiyagari, S. R. 1994. “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving.” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 109(3): 659–684.
 [3] Ales, Laurence, and Pricila Maziero. 2009. “Non-Exclusive Dynamic Contracts, Competition, and
     the Limits of Insurance.” Mimeo, University of Minnesota.
 [4] Altonji, Joseph, and Lewis M. Segal. 1996. “Small-Sample Bias in GMM Estimation of Covariance
     Structures.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 14(3): 353–366.
 [5] Angeletos, George-Marios. 2007. “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Investment Risk and Aggregate Saving.”
     Review of Economic Dynamics, 10(1): 1–30.
 [6] Attanasio, Orazio, Erich Battistin, and Hidehiko Ichimura. 2007. “What Really Happened to Con-
     sumption Inequality in the US?” In Measurement Issues in Economics—The Paths Ahead: Essays in
     Honor of Zvi Griliches, ed. Ernst R. Berndt and Charles R. Hulten. Chicago: University of Chicago
     Press.
 [7] Attanasio, Orazio, and Steven J. Davis. 1996. “Relative Wage Movements and the Distribution of
     Consumption.” Journal of Political Economy, 104(6): 1227–1262.
 [8] Attanasio, Orazio, and Nicola Pavoni. 2007. “Risk Sharing in Private Information Models with Asset
     Accumulation: Explaining the Excess Smoothness of Consumption.” NBER Working Paper 12994.
 [9] Attanasio, Orazio, and José V. Rı́os–Rull. 2000. “Consumption Smoothing in Island Economies:
     Can Public Insurance Reduce Welfare?” European Economic Review, 44(7): 1225–1258.
[10] Benabou, Roland. 2002. “Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous Agent Economy: What
     Levels of Redistribution Maximize Growth and Efficiency?” Econometrica, 70(2): 481–517.
[11] Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Ian Preston. 2008.“Consumption Inequality and Partial
     Insurance.” American Economic Review, 98(5): 1887–1921.
[12] Blundell, Richard, and Ian Preston. 1998. “Consumption Inequality and Income Uncertainty.” Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics, 113(2): 603–640.
[13] Bodie, Zvi, Robert C. Merton, and William F. Samuelson. 1992. “Labor Supply Flexibility and
     Portfolio Choice in a Life Cycle Model.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 16(3–4):
     427–449.
[14] Browning, Martin, Lars P. Hansen, and James J. Heckman. 1999. “Micro Data and General Equilib-
     rium Models.” In Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1, ed. John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford,
     543–633. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
[15] Caballero, Ricardo. 1990. “Consumption Puzzles and Precautionary Savings.” Journal of Monetary
     Economics, 25(1): 113–136.
[16] Castañeda, Ana, Javier Diaz–Gimenez, and José V. Rı́os–Rull. 2003. “Accounting for the US Earn-
     ings and Wealth Inequality.” Journal of Political Economy, 111(4): 818–857.
[17] Chamberlain, Gary. 1984. “Panel Data.” In Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 3, ed. Zvi Griliches and
     Michael Intriligator, 1247–1318. New York: North–Holland.
[18] Chetty, Raj. 2006. “A New Method of Estimating Risk Aversion.” American Economic Review,
     96(5): 1821–1834.
[19] Cole, Harold, and Narayana Kocherlakota. 2001. “Efficient Allocations with Hidden Income and
     Hidden Storage.” Review of Economic Studies, 68(3): 523–542.
[20] Constantinides, George, and Darrel Duffie. 1996. “Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Consumers.”
     Journal of Political Economy, 104(2): 219–240.
[21] Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, and Salvador Navarro. 2005. “Separating Uncertainty from Het-
     erogeneity in Life–Cycle Earnings.” Oxford Economic Papers, 57(2): 191–261.


                                                  35
[22] Deaton, Angus. 1997. The Analysis of Household Surveys. Baltimore: John Hopkins University
     Press.
[23] Deaton, Angus, and Christina Paxson. 1994. “Intertemporal Choice and Inequality.” Journal of
     Political Economy, 102(3): 437–467.
[24] Fernandez–Villaverde, Jesus, and Dirk Krueger. 2004. “Consumption and Saving over the Life Cycle:
     How Important Are Consumer Durables?” Society for Economic Dynamics, Meeting Paper 357b.
[25] Guvenen, Fatih. 2007. “Learning Your Earning: Are Labor Income Shocks Really Very Persistent?”
     American Economic Review, 97(3): 687–712.
[26] Guvenen, Fatih, and Anthony Smith. 2008. “Inferring Labor Income Risk from Economic Choices:
     An Indirect Inference Approach.” Mimeo, Yale University.
[27] Hall, Robert E. and Frederic Mishkin. 1982. “The Sensitivity of Consumption to Transitory Income:
     Estimates from Panel Data on Households.” Econometrica, 50(2): 461–481.
[28] Hayashi, Fumio, Joseph Altonji, and Laurence Kotlikoff. 1996. “Risk–Sharing between and within
     Families.”Econometrica, 64(2): 261–294.
[29] Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2005. “Two Views of Inequality
     Over the Life Cycle.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 3(2-3): 765–775.
[30] Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2008a. “The Macroeconomic
     Implications of Rising Wage Inequality in the U.S.” Mimeo, New York University.
[31] Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2008b. “Insurance and Op-
     portunities: A Welfare Analysis of Labor Market Risk.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(3):
     501–525.
[32] Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten and Giovanni L. Violante. 2009. “Quantitative Macroeco-
     nomics with Heterogeneous Households.” NBER Working Paper 14768.
[33] Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes. 1995. “Precautionary Saving and
     Social Insurance.” Journal of Political Economy, 103(2): 360–399.
[34] Huggett, Mark. 1993. “The Risk-free Rate in Heterogeneous-agent Incomplete-insurance Economies.”
     Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17(5-6): 953–969.
[35] Huggett, Mark, Gustavo Ventura, and Amir Yaron. 2009. “Sources of Lifetime Inequality.” Mimeo,
     Georgetown University.
[36] Kaplan, Greg. 2006. “The Patterns of Lifecycle Inequality.” Mimeo, New York University.
[37] Krebs, Tom. 2003. “Growth and Welfare Effects of Business Cycles in Economies with Idiosyncratic
     Human Capital Risk.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 6(4): 846–868.
[38] Krueger, Dirk, and Fabrizio Perri. 2006. “Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption Inequality?
     Evidence and Theory.” Review of Economic Studies, 73(1): 191–261.
[39] Livshits, Igor, James MacGee, and Michele Tertilt. 2007. “Consumer Bankruptcy: A Fresh Start.”
     American Economic Review, 97(1): 402–418.
[40] Low, Hamish, Costas Meghir, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2006. “Wage Risk and Employment Risk Over
     the Life Cycle.” NBER Working Paper 14901.
[41] Moffitt, Robert and Peter Gottschalk. 2002. “Trends in the Transitory Variance of Earnings in the
     United States.” Economic Journal, 112(3): C68–C73.
[42] Primiceri, Giorgio, and Thijs van Rens. 2009. “Heterogeneous Life Cycle Profiles, Income Risk and
     Consumption Inequality.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 56(1): 20–39.
[43] Slesnick, Daniel. 2001. Consumption and Social Welfare: Living Standards and Their Distribution
     in the United States. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[44] Uhlig, Harald. 1996. “A Law of Large Numbers for Large Economies.” Journal of Economic Theory,
     8(1): 41–50.
[45] Wang, Neng. 2003. “Caballero Meets Bewley: The Permanent Income Hypothesis in General Equi-
     librium.” American Economic Review, 93(3): 927–936.


                                                  36
               Cross−sectional Variance of                                Cross−sectional Variance of
              Uninsurable Wage Dispersion                             Permanent Insurable Wage Dispersion

0.16                                                         0.16

0.14                                                         0.14

0.12                                                         0.12

 0.1                                                          0.1

0.08                                                         0.08

0.06                                                         0.06

0.04                                   Total                 0.04                                  Total
                                       Shocks                                                      Shocks
0.02                                   Cohort                0.02                                  Cohort
  0                                                            0
       1970    1975    1980   1985     1990      1995               1970   1975    1980   1985     1990     1995
                         Year                                                        Year




               Cross−sectional Variance of                                Cross−sectional Variance of
              IID Insurable Wage Dispersion                            Uninsurable Preferences Dispersion


0.15                                                         0.15                                  Total
                                                                                                   Shocks
                                             Total
                                                                                                   Cohort
 0.1                                                          0.1



0.05                                                         0.05



  0                                                            0
       1970    1975    1980   1985     1990      1995               1970   1975    1980   1985     1990     1995
                         Year                                                        Year




Figure 1: Plot of estimated values of all the time-varying parameters of the model. See
Table 4 for the corresponding 90–10 bootstrapped confidence intervals.




                                                        37
              Variance of                         Variance of                           Variance of
              Log Wages                            Log Hours                          Log Consumption
0.55                                0.3                                 0.35

               Data                                 Data                                Data
 0.5                               0.25                                  0.3
               Model                                Model                               Model

0.45                                0.2                                 0.25

 0.4                                                                     0.2
                                   0.15

0.35
                                    0.1                                 0.15

 0.3
                                   0.05                                  0.1
0.25
                                     0                                  0.05
       1970    1980         1990           1970    1980         1990           1970      1980      1990
                Year                                Year                                  Year




           Correlation between                 Correlation between                  Correlation between
         Log Wages & Log Hours            Log Wages & Log Consumption          Log Hours & Log Consumption
 0.3                                0.8                                  0.5
               Data                                Data                                Data
 0.2           Model                0.7            Model                 0.4
                                                                                       Model

 0.1                                0.6                                  0.3

  0                                 0.5                                  0.2

−0.1                                0.4                                  0.1

−0.2                                0.3                                   0

−0.3                                0.2                                 −0.1
       1970    1980         1990           1970    1980         1990           1970      1980      1990
                Year                                Year                                  Year




  Figure 2: Data and model fit for moments in levels along the time dimension. Dotted
  lines denote 90–10 bootstrapped confidence intervals for the empirical moments.




                                                   38
            Variance of                    Variance of                          Variance of
            Log Wages                       Log Hours                         Log Consumption
                                0.3                              0.35
             Data                          Data                                  Data
 0.5
             Model             0.25        Model                  0.3            Model

0.45
                                0.2                              0.25

 0.4
                               0.15                               0.2

0.35
                                0.1                              0.15

 0.3
                               0.05                               0.1

0.25
                                 0                               0.05
       30     40          50          30     40          50              30       40        50
               Age                            Age                                  Age




         Correlation between            Correlation between                 Correlation between
       Log Wages & Log Hours       Log Wages & Log Consumption          Log Hours & Log Consumption
 0.3                            0.8                               0.5

 0.2                            0.7                               0.4

 0.1                            0.6                               0.3

   0                            0.5                               0.2

−0.1                            0.4                               0.1

−0.2           Data             0.3              Data              0                Data
               Model                             Model                              Model
−0.3                            0.2                              −0.1
       30     40          50          30     40          50              30       40        50
               Age                            Age                                  Age




Figure 3: Data and model fit for moments in levels along the age dimension. Dotted lines
denote 90–10 bootstrapped confidence intervals for the empirical moments.




                                            39
               Variance of                      Variance of                   Correlation between
              ∆ Log Wages                       ∆ Log Hours               ∆ Log Wages & ∆ Log Hours
 0.3                              0.25                              0.2

                 Data                             Data                             Data
0.25             Model             0.2            Model              0             Model

 0.2                              0.15                             −0.2


0.15                               0.1                             −0.4


 0.1                              0.05                             −0.6


0.05                                0                              −0.8
       1970     1980     1990            1970    1980     1990            1970    1980     1990
                 Year                             Year                             Year




               Variance of                      Variance of                   Correlation between
              ∆ Log Wages                       ∆ Log Hours               ∆ Log Wages & ∆ Log Hours
 0.3                              0.25                              0.2
                Data                                                              Data
                                                  Data
0.25            Model              0.2                               0            Model
                                                  Model

 0.2                              0.15                             −0.2


0.15                               0.1                             −0.4


 0.1                              0.05                             −0.6


0.05                                0                              −0.8
        30       40          50           30       40         50          30       40       50
                  Age                               Age                             Age




Figure 4: Data and model fit for moments in first-differences along the time dimension
(panels in the upper row) and age dimension (panels in the lower row). Dotted lines
denote 90–10 bootstrapped confidence intervals for the empirical moments.




                                                 40
                                      Appendix
                                  Not for Publication



Proof of Proposition 1
   Guess no bond trade across islands Suppose the net demand for bonds is zero
on every island, for every history st , i.e.
                                Z Z
                                             
                                       bat st dFκt
                                                a
                                                   dFθt = 0.


    Planner problem Given no bond trade between islands and complete markets on
each island, the first welfare theorem applies, so the competitive equilibrium allocation can
be computed as the outcome of an island-specific social planner problem. Since agents on
an island are ex ante identical, the planner weights must be equal for all agents. Moreover,
since each island by assumption transfers zero net financial wealth between periods and
preferences are time-separable, the island-specific planner problem is static.
    The planner problem for an island populated by agents of age a and type (ω t , χt ) is
then given by
                              Z Z  a t 1−γ                                       
                                   ct (s )    −1                     hat (st )1+σ     a
              max                                − exp ((γ + σ) ϕt )                dFκt dFθt
         {ca
           t (s t ),ha (st )}
                     t                  1 − γ                           1 +   σ

subject to the resource constraint
        Z Z                        Z Z
               a t      a
                                                                 
              ct (s ) dFκt dFθt =      exp (αt + κt + θt ) hat st dFκt
                                                                    a
                                                                       dFθt
                                           Z
                                                                  
                                = exp (αt ) exp (κt + θt ) hat st dFκta
                                                                        dFθt .



    Solving for island-specific allocations            The first-order conditions with respect
to cat (st ) and hat (st ) are, respectively,

                                   cat (st )−γ = λt
                   exp ((γ + σ) ϕt ) hat (st )σ = λt exp (αt ) exp (κt + θt ) ,

where λt is the multiplier on the resource constraint at date t. Combining the two condi-
tions gives
                                    α                                  
             a t       a t −γ         t        1                  (γ + σ)
            ht (s ) = ct (s ) σ exp      exp     (κt + θt ) exp −         ϕt .       (34)
                                     σ         σ                     σ

Note that from the first-order conditions, cat (st ) is the same for all agents on the island,
and as such it cannot depend on κt or θt . Using this fact, and substituting (34) into the


                                               41
      planner’s island-specific resource constraint, gives
                       Z
 a t                                     a
ct (s ) = exp (αt ) exp (κt + θt ) dFκt    dFθt
                       Z                                                      
                                       a t −γ        1                  γ+σ          a
         = exp (αt ) exp (κt + θt ) ct (s ) exp
                                            σ          (κt + θt ) exp −       ϕt dFκt   dFθt
                                                     σ                    σ
                                                      Z                               
             a
                    −γ
                  t σ         1+σ              γ+σ                   1+σ               a
         = ct s         exp        αt exp −          ϕt       exp        (κt + θt ) dFκt dFθt .
                               σ                 σ                    σ

    Taking logs:
                                                              Z                                               
                                1+σ             σ                           1+σ
         log cat   s   t
                               =     α t − ϕt +      log           exp           (κt + θ t )         a
                                                                                                   dFκt   dFθt
                                 σ+γ            σ+γ                           σ
                                 1+σ
                               =     αt − ϕt + Mat ,
                                 σ+γ
    which is the expression in Proposition 1.
       From the logarithm of the intratemporal first-order condition (34):
                                     γ           1                  γ+σ
           log hat st              = − log cat st + (αt + κt + θt ) −      ϕt
                                     σ           σ                 σ
                                      1 γ 1+σ            γ γ+σ             1            γ
                                   =    −          αt +     −          ϕt + (κt + θt ) − Mat
                                      σ σσ+γ             σ      σ          σ            σ
                                     1−γ           1            γ
                                   =      αt − ϕt + (κt + θt ) − Mat ,
                                     σ+γ           σ            σ
    which is the expression in Proposition 1.
        Solving for equilibrium prices We now compute prices supporting these alloca-
    tions. Given the candidate expressions for equilibrium consumption, the marginal rate of
    substitution between consumption in st and in st+1 = (st , (ω t+1 , χt+1 , η t+1 , θt+1 )) is

                                                      a+1   t
                                                                                              !−γ
                                                    c t+1 s   , (ω t+1 , χt+1  , η    , θ
                                                                                   t+1 t+1 )
    ma+1   t
     t+1 (s , (ω t+1 , χt+1 , η t+1 , θt+1 )) ≡ β
                                                                     cat (st )
                                                                                                           
                                                           1+σ
                                                  exp −γ σ+γ      (αt + ω t+1 ) + γ ϕt + χt+1 − γMa+1    t+1
                                              = β                                                   
                                                                           1+σ
                                                                exp −γ σ+γ       αt + γϕt − γMat
                                                                                                     
                                                                                          1+σ
                                              = β exp (−γ∆Mt ) exp γχt+1 − γ                     ω t+1 ,
                                                                                          σ+γ

    and the marginal rate of substitution between t and t + 1, it is straightforward to derive
    from the above equation. The prices of the one-period contingent claim, and one-period
    non-contingent bond must then be given by equations (8) and (9), respectively.
        Verifying the no bond trade guess We must now verify the initial conjecture that
    islands do not trade. The marginal rate of substitution between t and t + 1 (hence, bond
    price) implied by the no trade guess does not depend on any island-specific shocks, since
    the expected growth rate of consumption is the same across all islands.    R R Hence,  at the pro-
                                                                                        t     a
    posed bond price qt , the choice of zero net savings on each island (i.e.,     bt (s ) dFκt dFθt =

                                                         42
0) satisfies the Euler equation on every island, confirming the guess. With zero net de-
mand for non-contingent bonds on each island, the world market for bonds must clear by
construction.
    Financial wealth Finally, we compute the implied individual financial wealth. The
net transfer from the planner to an agent with history st and age a in period t is given
by:
                                                               
    a  t
               a   t
                           t
                               a t           wt (st ) ha (st ) a t 
  Tt s     = ct s − w t s h s = 1 −                               ct s
                                                   cat (st )
                                                                                
                           1+σ               σ+γ a                     1+σ         a
           =     1 − exp        (κt + θt ) −      Mt         exp −ϕt +     α t + Mt .
                            σ                 σ                        σ+γ

   The budget constraints in (4) imply that individual net financial wealth at date t must
equal the present discounted value of all future transfers from t + 1 onward, evaluated at
the island-specific stochastic discount factors. Thus we have:
                      ∞
                    X   β j ca+j
                              t+j (s
                                     t+j −γ
                                        )              
        dˆat st = Et           a t −γ
                                              a+j
                                            Tt+j  st+j
                     j=1
                              ct (s )
           ∞                                                         j
                                                                                          !                 !!
           X β j ca+j
                  t+j (s
                         t+j 1−γ
                            )                       1+σ              X                          σ + γ a+j
   = Et                                1 − exp                κt +         η t+i + θt+j       −      Mt+j
           j=1
                     cat (st )−γ                     σ               i=1
                                                                                                  σ
                                     !  ∞
                                                                                !1−γ
                        exp 1+σ κt
                                        X                       ca+j
                                                                 t+j (s
                                                                        t+j
                                                                            )
   = cat s   t
                   1− R       σ
                            1+σ
                                  a Et     βj
                        exp σ κ dFκt    j=1
                                                                  cat (st )

which is the expression in the text. This concludes the proof.



Proof of Proposition 2
   There are several alternative set of moments which identify the model: we pick a
simple and intuitive combination. The proof is organized in four sequential steps.

   1. The five (sets of) parameters σ, γ, {vηt + ∆vθt }Tt=2 , {vωt }Tt=2 and {vχt }Tt=2 are identi-
                                                                                                    
       fied from five within-cohort changes in the macro moments, ∆varta (log ŵ) , ∆varta log ĥ ,
                          
       ∆covt log ŵ, log ĥ , ∆varta (log ĉ), and ∆covta (log ŵ, log ĉ), all available from t = 2
             a

       to t = T.38 Moreover, these parameters can be identified recursively as follows:
  38
    Note that this set of five within-cohort changes constitutes the entire set of independent mo-
ments of this type, because ∆covta (log ĥ, log b  c) can be expressed as a linear function of other moments:
∆varta (log b
            c) = ∆covta (log ĥ, log b
                                     c) + ∆covta (log ŵ, log b
                                                              c). This result follows from the fact that the unin-
surable component of log earnings equals log consumption.




                                                       43
         (i) The Frisch elasticity is identified by39
                                                        
                     a                          a
           1   ∆cov  t   log ŵ, log ĥ  + ∆var t   log ĥ   + ∆covta (log ŵ, log ĉ) − ∆varta (log ĉ)
             =                                                                                         .
           σ             ∆var a (log ŵ) + ∆cov a log ŵ, log ĥ − ∆cov a (log ŵ, log ĉ)
                                  t                      t                            t
                                                                                                      (35)
         (ii) Given σ, {vηt +     ∆vθt }Tt=2
                                        is identified from the denominator of eq. (35):
                                                                             1+σ
           ∆varta (log ŵ) + ∆covta log ŵ, log ĥ − ∆covta (log ŵ, log ĉ) =      (vηt + ∆vθt ) .
                                                                                σ
                                                                                                 (36)
                                        T           T                           a
         (iii) Given σ and {vηt + ∆vθt }t=2 , {vωt }t=2 is identified from ∆vart (log ŵ) , eq. (24).
         (iv) Given σ and {vωt }Tt=2 , γ is identified from ∆covta (log ŵ, log ĉ) , eq. (29).
         (v) Given σ, γ and {vωt }Tt=2 , {vχt }Tt=2 is identified from ∆varta (log ĉ) , eq. (27).
                                                 −1
   2. The variances of transitory shocks {vθt }Tt=1 are identified from the difference between
      the dispersion in growth rates (“micro moments”) and the growth rate of within-
      cohort dispersion (“macro moments”):
                                                                                               2 (1 + σ)
       covta (∆ log ŵ, ∆ log ĥ)+varta (∆ log ĥ)−∆covta (log ŵ, log ĥ)−∆varta (log ĥ) =             vθ,t−1 .
                                                                                                   σ2
                                           −1                                           −1
         Combining the sequence {vθt }Tt=1    with {vηt + ∆vθt }Tt=2 identifies {vηt }Tt=2 . Substi-
         tuting the value for vθ,T −1 into (vηT + ∆vθT ) from step 1 identifies (vηT + vθT ).
   3. The following macro moments, available for all t and evaluated for the youngest age
      group identify the sequence of cohort effects {vϕ0 t , vα0 t }Tt=1 :
                                                     1+σ
                               covt0 (log ŵ, log ĉ) =      vα0 t
                                                     σ+γ
                                                            (1 − γ) (1 + σ)
                              covt0 log ĥ, log ĉ = vϕ0 t +                  vα0 t .
                                                                   (σ + γ)2
                        −1
         Then {vκ0 t }Tt=1 and (vκ0 T + vθT ) are identified from
                                                      (1 − γ) (1 + σ)         1+σ
         covt0 log ŵ, log ĥ + vart0 log ĥ = vϕ0 t +               2    vα0 t +     (vκ0 t + vθt )
                                                             (σ + γ)               σ2

   4. Finally, measurement error can be identified from moments in levels, for example
      those corresponding to the youngest age group:
                                          1−γ            1
                    covt0 log ŵ, log ĥ =         vα0 t + (vκ0 t + vθt ) − vµh
                                            σ+γ            σ
                               0
                           vart (log ŵ) = vα0 t + (vκ0 t + vθt ) + vµy + vµh
                                                            2
                                0                     1+σ
                            vart (log ĉ) = vϕ0 t +              vα0 t + vµc .
                                                      σ+γ
  39
       If γ = 1 the relationship simplifies to
                                                                       
                                      1           ∆covta log ŵ, log ĥ
                                        =
                                      σ   ∆varta (log ŵ) − ∆covta (log ŵ, log ĉ)
so the Frisch elasticity is identified by the increase in the covariance between wages and hours, relative
to the increase in the variance of insurable wage risk.

                                                             44
         This concludes the proof.40 

Proof of Corollary to Proposition 2
    We prove the three parts of the corollary one by one.
                                                                                                a T
    (A) Follow first step 1 of the main proof. Then, for any cohort a identify               {vαt }t=1 from
                                                                                                         
                      a T                                        a       T             a
eq. (22), identify vϕt t=1 from eq. (21), identify vηt + vθt t=1 from covt log ĥ, log ŷ =
                                     
varta log ĥ + covta log ĥ, log ŵ , then identify vµh from eq. (19), identify vµy from eq.
(17), and identify vµc from eq. (20). Finally, repeat step 3 in the main proof for all periods
t = 1, ..., T to identify {vϕ0 t , vα0 t , (vκ0 t + vθt )}Tt=1 .
    (B) The parameters {σ, γ, vµy , vµh , vµc } and the parameters for t > t∗ are identified
as in the main proof using data from t = t∗ , ..., T . The sequence {vθt }tt=1 is identified
                                                                                           ∗


as in step 2 of the main proof. Given values for (σ, γ), equations                    (24)–(26)
                                                                                                    identify
                         t∗
{vχt , vωt , vηt + ∆vθt }t=2 . The moments vart0 (log ŵ) and covt0 log ŵ, log ĥ in equations
                                                                                                           
(17)–(19) jointly identify {vα0 t , vκ0 t }tt=1 . Finally, {vϕ0 t }tt=1 . is identified from vart0 log ĥ
                                               ∗                     ∗



in eq. (18).
    (C) Data for different cohorts is used only to identify different cohort effects (step 3).
This concludes the proof. 




  40
       Note that steps 3 and 4 use all six macro moments which, in levels, are all independent.

                                                     45
                             Table 4: Parameter Estimates: Baseline Model
               vα0 t             vκ0 t             vϕ0 t              vω               vη               vθ               vχ
   1967       0.105             0.044             0.029             0.002            0.003            0.027            0.000
          0.083     0.114   0.034     0.068   0.020     0.034   0.001    0.003   0.002    0.004   0.021    0.032   0.000    0.001
   1968       0.105             0.034             0.038             0.001            0.012            0.010            0.002
          0.085     0.116   0.014     0.058   0.029     0.044   0.000    0.010   0.002    0.016   0.004    0.016   0.000    0.008
   1969       0.099             0.048             0.037             0.000            0.011            0.014            0.000
          0.081     0.111   0.029     0.069   0.030     0.045   0.000    0.003   0.003    0.016   0.009    0.020   0.000    0.004
   1970       0.088             0.054             0.036             0.000            0.007            0.018            0.003
          0.074     0.100   0.037     0.072   0.027     0.043   0.000    0.002   0.001    0.012   0.013    0.023   0.000    0.006
   1971       0.086             0.056             0.037             0.000            0.007            0.013            0.000
          0.073     0.099   0.038     0.073   0.031     0.045   0.000    0.004   0.000    0.012   0.008    0.018   0.000    0.004
   1972       0.087             0.074             0.042             0.006            0.001            0.027            0.005
          0.072     0.097   0.057     0.095   0.035     0.048   0.000    0.009   0.000    0.008   0.021    0.032   0.000    0.009
   1973       0.081             0.082             0.040             0.002            0.005            0.025            0.000
          0.067     0.091   0.066     0.103   0.033     0.046   0.000    0.006   0.000    0.010   0.020    0.031   0.000    0.000
   1974       0.079             0.095             0.038             0.002            0.006            0.026            0.000
          0.065     0.088   0.078     0.114   0.032     0.043   0.000    0.007   0.000    0.010   0.019    0.035   0.000    0.001
   1975       0.073             0.087             0.041             0.000            0.001            0.031            0.003
          0.061     0.083   0.071     0.108   0.034     0.044   0.000    0.001   0.000    0.006   0.024    0.037   0.000    0.005
   1976       0.069             0.097             0.040             0.003            0.005            0.035            0.000
          0.057     0.077   0.080     0.116   0.035     0.044   0.000    0.008   0.000    0.011   0.028    0.042   0.000    0.004
   1977       0.067             0.088             0.041             0.000            0.008            0.021            0.000
          0.055     0.075   0.071     0.105   0.036     0.046   0.000    0.003   0.001    0.012   0.016    0.027   0.000    0.000
   1978       0.064             0.084             0.042             0.000            0.000            0.034            0.000
          0.053     0.072   0.067     0.101   0.037     0.046   0.000    0.001   0.000    0.005   0.026    0.039   0.000    0.000
   1979       0.062             0.084             0.042             0.000            0.006            0.030            0.000
          0.051     0.072   0.067     0.099   0.037     0.047   0.000    0.002   0.000    0.012   0.023    0.037   0.000    0.000
   1980       0.067             0.097             0.044             0.004            0.021            0.022            0.000
          0.058     0.078   0.079     0.111   0.040     0.050   0.000    0.012   0.011    0.027   0.017    0.029   0.000    0.003
   1981       0.064             0.106             0.043             0.000            0.017            0.019            0.000
          0.055     0.076   0.088     0.117   0.038     0.048   0.000    0.004   0.007    0.023   0.013    0.027   0.000    0.000
   1982       0.069             0.111             0.052             0.016            0.000            0.028            0.013
          0.059     0.081   0.092     0.124   0.047     0.055   0.007    0.022   0.000    0.005   0.020    0.034   0.007    0.016
   1983       0.079             0.102             0.051             0.017            0.000            0.026            0.000
          0.067     0.089   0.087     0.117   0.046     0.054   0.008    0.023   0.000    0.008   0.018    0.032   0.000    0.000
   1984       0.078             0.108             0.053             0.008            0.001            0.033            0.000
          0.067     0.088   0.092     0.123   0.048     0.056   0.000    0.015   0.000    0.008   0.026    0.040   0.000    0.000
   1985       0.090             0.116             0.054             0.016            0.006            0.028            0.000
          0.073     0.101   0.100     0.131   0.049     0.058   0.003    0.025   0.000    0.014   0.022    0.036   0.000    0.002
   1986       0.084             0.122             0.056             0.000            0.007            0.031            0.000
          0.072     0.097   0.102     0.135   0.051     0.060   0.000    0.011   0.000    0.012   0.024    0.038   0.000    0.000
   1987       0.091             0.116             0.056             0.009            0.000            0.030            0.000
          0.079     0.102   0.100     0.130   0.050     0.060   0.000    0.016   0.000    0.009   0.023    0.035   0.000    0.000
   1988       0.096             0.114             0.057             0.009            0.000            0.034            0.000
          0.082     0.106   0.096     0.130   0.051     0.062   0.001    0.015   0.000    0.001   0.027    0.042   0.000    0.000
   1989       0.103             0.075             0.056             0.000            0.000            0.041            0.000
          0.086     0.115   0.058     0.093   0.049     0.061   0.000    0.001   0.000    0.000   0.032    0.047   0.000    0.000
   1990       0.093             0.075             0.059             0.000            0.000            0.034            0.000
          0.078     0.107   0.055     0.094   0.051     0.065   0.000    0.004   0.000    0.000   0.026    0.041   0.000    0.000
   1991       0.092             0.066             0.052             0.000            0.000            0.061            0.000
          0.074     0.109   0.045     0.086   0.042     0.059   0.000    0.002   0.000    0.000   0.054    0.068   0.000    0.000
   1992       0.101             0.052             0.052             0.012            0.000            0.048            0.002
          0.079     0.118   0.031     0.077   0.040     0.061   0.001    0.020   0.000    0.005   0.040    0.057   0.000    0.006
   1993       0.098             0.038             0.046             0.007            0.005            0.061            0.000
          0.069     0.124   0.013     0.064   0.034     0.055   0.000    0.016   0.000    0.011   0.051    0.071   0.000    0.000
   1994       0.073             0.040             0.037             0.000            0.001            0.064            0.000
          0.050     0.093   0.016     0.064   0.024     0.046   0.000    0.000   0.000    0.004   0.055    0.073   0.000    0.000
   1995       0.083             0.080             0.046             0.004            0.000            0.050            0.000
          0.083     0.083   0.080     0.080   0.046     0.046   0.000    0.011   0.000    0.003   0.043    0.056   0.000    0.004
   1996       0.083             0.080             0.046             0.012            0.000            0.050            0.003
          0.083     0.083   0.080     0.080   0.046     0.046   0.001    0.022   0.000    0.000   0.043    0.056   0.000    0.009




Notes: The table reports, for each time-varying parameter and each year, the point
estimate and, below, the corresponding 90–10 bootstrapped confidence interval.




                                                                 46
                   Table 5: Parameter Estimates: Alternative Models

                 (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)       (5)     (6)     (7)     (8)     (9)
         σ     2.624    2.710   2.651   3.212     4.537   1.731   2.644   2.741   2.223
         γ     2.016    2.319   2.020   2.377     2.113   1.984   1.952   1.918   1.920
       vµh     0.036    0.036   0.036   0.025     0.026   0.039   0.036   0.034   0.037
       vµy     0.0000   0.000   0.000   0.000     0.010   0.000   0.000   0.029   0.000
       vµc     0.033    0.068   0.034   0.028     0.028   0.095   0.034   0.029   0.035
       v ϕ0    0.045    0.039   0.045   0.057     0.048   0.000   0.053   0.047   0.047
        vχ     0.001    0.001   0.001   0.001     0.001   0.000   0.000   0.001   0.001
       v α0    0.083    0.064   0.081   0.086     0.080   0.080   0.083   0.079   0.079
        vω     0.004    0.005   0.005   0.005     0.004   0.005   0.004   0.004   0.005
       v κ0    0.081    0.099   0.083   0.084      NI     0.085   0.078   0.081   0.082
        vη     0.004    0.004   0.003   0.005      NI     0.003   0.004   0.006   0.004
        vθ     0.032    0.033   0.033   0.035      NI     0.028   0.032   0.000   0.031


Notes: (1) baseline model (see Table 1), (2) consumption definition excludes durables,
(3) constant vα0 , vκ0 , vϕ0 , (4) no moments in first-differences (NI = not identified), (5)
includes transitory preference shocks (set vµy = 0.01), (6) no initial preference dispersion,
vϕ0 = 0, (7) no life-cycle preference shocks, vχ = 0, (8) no transitory wage shocks, vθ = 0,
(9) baseline model with weights proportional to number of observations.




                                             47
