NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DE FACTO AND DE JURE PROPERTY RIGHTS:
LAND SETTLEMENT AND LAND CONFLICT ON THE AUSTRALIAN, BRAZILIAN AND U.S. FRONTIERS
Lee J. Alston
Edwyna Harris
Bernardo Mueller
Working Paper 15264
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15264

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2009

For comments we thank Eric Alston, Lee Cronk, Ernesto Dal Bó, John Ferejohn, Stephen Haber, P.J.
Hill, Gary Libecap, Henry Smith, Ian Wills and participants at: a seminar on social norms at the Institute
for Advanced Study in Princeton; a conference on “Australian Economic History in the Long Run;”
the Research Group on Political Institutions and Economic Policy held at Princeton University; and
a seminar at Monash University. Alston and Mueller acknowledge the support of NSF grant #528146.
Alston thanks the STEP Program at the Woodrow Wilson School at Princeton for their support as
a Visiting Research Scholar during 2008/2009 and The Australian National University for support
as Research Fellow in 2009. We thank Eric Alston for research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Lee J. Alston, Edwyna Harris, and Bernardo Mueller. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

De Facto and De Jure Property Rights: Land Settlement and Land Conflict on the Australian,
Brazilian and U.S. Frontiers
Lee J. Alston, Edwyna Harris, and Bernardo Mueller
NBER Working Paper No. 15264
August 2009
JEL No. D72,Q15,N40,N50,O17,K11
ABSTRACT
We present a conceptual framework to better understand the interaction between settlement and the
emergence of de facto property rights on frontiers prior to governments establishing and enforcing
de jure property rights. In this framework, potential rents associated with more exclusivity drives “demand”
for commons arrangements but demand is not a sufficient explanation; norms and politics matter. At
some point enhanced scarcity will drive demand for more exclusivity beyond which can be sustained
with commons arrangements. Claimants will therefore petition government for de jure property rights
to their claims – formal titles. Land conflict will be minimal when governments supply property rights
to first possessors. But, governments may not allocate de jure rights to these claimants because they
face differing political constituencies. Moreover, governments may assign de jure rights but be unwilling
to enforce the right. This generates potential or actual conflict over land depending on the violence
potentials of de facto and de jure claimants. We examine land settlement and conflict on the frontiers
of Australia, the U.S. and Brazil. We are interested in examining the emergence, sustainability, and
collapse of commons arrangements in specific historical contexts. Our analysis indicates the emergence
of de facto property rights arrangements will be relatively peaceful where claimants have reasons to
organize collectively (Australia and the U.S.). The settlement process will be more prone to conflict
when fewer collective activities are required. Consequently, claimants resort to periodic violent self-enforcement
or third party enforcement (Brazil). In all three cases the movement from de facto to de jure property
rights led to potential or actual conflict because of insufficient government enforcement.

Lee J. Alston
Program on Environment and Society
Institute of Behavioral Science
Department of Economics
University of Colorado at Boulder
Boulder, CO 80309-0483
and NBER
Lee.Alston@colorado.edu
Edwyna Harris
Monash University
Edwyna.Harris@BusEco.monash.edu.au

Bernardo Mueller
University of Brasilia
bmueller@unb.br

2

De Facto and De Jure Property Rights: Land Settlement and Land Conflict on the Australian,
Brazilian and U.S. Frontiers
I.

Introduction
Australia, Brazil and the U.S. are all physically large countries and each had different patterns of

land settlement on their frontiers. We define the frontier as land that is too far from the central
government such that the initial enforcement of property rights by government is prohibitively
expensive. We examine the way in which the extant specified property rights in each country affected
settlement and in particular the potential and emergence of subsequent land conflict. Property rights,
along with relative prices, provide the incentive for settlement and conflict on frontier lands. Property
rights can be either de facto or de jure. By de facto we mean that the property rights are specified by
first person (an individual claims the land) or second person (a group assigns rights or norms emerge)
while de jure rights are specified by a government with recognized authority. Both de facto and de jure
rights may be enforced by first person (self‐enforcement); second person (norms or rules of a group,
club or association) or third party (private militias or government). When land is relatively abundant,
informal de facto property rights may arise to limit dissipation, entice entrants, and yet avoid conflict. As
land becomes scarcer, settlers have the incentive to form a commons arrangement to exclude outsiders
and thereby limit the potential dissipation from the resource. As entrants become increasingly
heterogeneous with respect to endowments, de facto commons arrangements may not suffice to limit
dissipation, and claimants have an incentive to lobby the government to turn their de facto claims into
de jure property rights with government enforcement. But, the economic rents may not be sufficient for
property rights to emerge because political rents may vary from the economic rents.
Because of competing demands for de jure rights by heterogeneous claimants, governments
may opt not to legitimate the de facto claims of the initial entrants yet they may not enforce the
specified de jure rights of alternative claimants. We found that the greater the time between the
specification of de jure property rights and their enforcement the greater the potential for rent
dissipation, particularly violence between those holding and enforcing de facto rights and those with
specified but not enforced de jure rights. The determinants of the specification and enforcement of de
jure property rights depends on the political power of the competing claimants. Where the political
power of incumbents is high (Brazil) de jure rights will tend to support the de facto rights. Alternatively,
where political power is mixed (Australia and the U.S.) the specification and enforcement of de jure
rights may not coincide. Incumbents may retain de facto rights because of little enforcement by the
government, but incur costs to prevent the de jure right holders from exercising their specified rights.

3
The ability to retain de facto rights in the face of someone else holding the de jure rights rests on
political, wealth and violence advantages for the “first possessor” (home court advantage).
In Section II we first present a matrix showing the possible combinations of property rights
which highlights the roles played by economic rents, norms and politics. Following this we present a
demand driven framework for the initial settlement of the frontier which by definition entails
settlement with de facto rights either self‐enforced or second‐party enforced. The framework highlights
the likelihood for conflict over property rights as rents increase. Conflict dissipates some of the rents of
settlement and frequently leads to a demand for de jure property rights. After a discussion of our
demand framework we develop some hypotheses about the political supply of the specification and
enforcement of rights. In subsequent sections we use concepts about economic rent, norms and politics
to analyze the settlement of three frontiers in the 19th century along with the potential and realization
of land conflict over property rights. The frontiers include Eastern Australia (New South Wales and
Victoria), the arid Great Plains region of the U.S., and the emerging coffee frontier in Brazil. We are
interested in examining the emergence, sustainability, and collapse of de facto arrangements as well as
the ultimate specification and enforcement of de jure property rights.
II.

Property Rights and Land Settlement
Property rights affect the timing of settlement as well as the use of land. A full set of property

rights includes the following: 1) the right to use the asset in any manner that the user wishes, generally
with the caveat that such use does not interfere with someone else’s property right; 2) the right to
exclude others from the use of the asset; 3) the right to derive income from the asset; 4) the right to sell
the asset; and 5) the right to bequeath the asset to someone of your choice. If one possesses the full set
of property rights, resources will be utilized optimally. But, a full set of property rights never exists
because there are some margins of use that are too costly to specify and enforce as Ronald Coase (1960)
noted years ago: “sometimes it costs too much to put the matter right.” As a result some attributes may
be either de jure or de facto left as open access.1 Individuals and groups have incentives to expropriate
use rights over attributes that the state leaves as open access. For land settlement this could lead to
different types of behavior which can dissipate the rental value of the land. If land is open to squatting
on the basis of first possession then people will dissipate some resources in the race to claim land
(Anderson and Hill 1990). If land is left in open access, this may lead to overuse of the land in the
familiar problem of the “tragedy of the commons,”unless rules about use become specified and
enforced. Furthermore, unless occupants of land have a formal title to their land, along with the
1

Barzel (1989) makes this point most explicitly and clearly.

4
enforcement by the state, occupants will expend resources defending their claim. In the absence of
formal specification and enforcement of titles to land, individuals will have an incentive to reach
collective agreements to prevent trespass from outsiders as well as expend individual resources to
demarcate and defend claims.
We illustrate the six possible arrangements of property rights in Table 1 where the columns vary
according to who specifies the property rights and the rows vary by who enforces the rights. On both
dimensions the possible actors are first person (the claimant), second party (a group of claimants
collectively) or third party (government or e.g. gunmen). First party specification and enforcement, the
top left cell in Table 1, occurs when scarcity is low. An individual moves to the frontier and claims land.
The person typically demarcates his claim in some fashion and because scarcity is low there is little
threat of his keeping the land. As other claimants move to the frontier the potential for rent dissipation
increases and enforcement may be transferred either to a second or third party. Enforcement by a
second party occurs when norms develop such that new entrants respect existing claims. These norms
are generally based on a shared cultural endowment within a small group. In this case, there is first
party specification but second party enforcement (first column, second row of Table 1). This
arrangement may be sufficient to limit rent dissipation and violence during the early stages of migration

Enforcement of
Property Rights

to the frontier because land scarcity is relatively low.

1st Person Specification
1st Person Enforcement
1st Person Specification
2nd Party Enforcement
1st Person Specification
3rd Party Enforcement

Table 1
Specification of Property Rights
2nd Party Specification
1st Person Enforcement
2nd Party Specification
2nd Party Enforcement
2nd Party Specification
3rd Party Enforcement

3rd Party Specification
1st Person Enforcement
3rd Party Specification
2nd Party Enforcement
3rd Party Specification
3rd Party Enforcement

Where norms do not evolve or are not sufficient to deter encroachment, second party enforcement
may be replaced with third party enforcement of de facto rights (first column, bottom row of Table 1).
At this point, incumbents will hire agents or use local government to enforce their claims.2 Settlers may
employ third parties, who take on the role of a private militia or police force creating a violence
advantage over new comers. Employing agents to enforce member claims is beneficial when individuals
claim large areas reducing their ability to police and defend these claims. Agents may utilize violence to
2

We will discuss in more detail later the advantages of the first possessors, one of which is the capture of local
governments. We will later refer to the advantages as the “home court” advantage.

5
defend their employers’ claims against entrants. Alternatively, individuals may rely on local government
to enforce claims even though specification of de jure rights do not exist or are not in the hands of the
government enforcer. All three cells in the first column indicate that the claimant(s) established de
facto property rights. However, formal commons arrangements that is, the creation of clubs or
associations is absent. For clubs or associations to form either norms must be very strong or the returns
to an individual from the collective must be sufficiently high to rise above the familiar free rider
problem.
As competition for land increases with the number of new arrivals at the frontier there may be a
shift away from first to second party specification. Second party specification leads to the creation of
commons arrangements such as, clubs or associations. Formation of clubs or associations is more likely
when groups are small, homogenous, geographically proximate, and shared norms exist. Once formed
enforcement of the club’s claims may be undertaken by either the first, second, or third party; these
arrangements correspond to the cells in the middle column of Table 1. Exactly who bears the costs of
enforcement once de facto property rights have been established is determined by the interplay of
economics, norms and politics. In some instances, column 2, row 1, clubs define rights but there is still
self‐enforcement. This is a situation where claimants all gain legitimacy from the club and do not intrude
on each other but the defense against outsiders remains in the hands of the individual claimant. A more
general outcome is de facto (commons) specification and enforcement‐ column 2, row 2. For this
reason, one advantage of creating a formal commons is to spread defense costs across a group of
individuals all of whom incur a smaller marginal cost than if they undertook defense individually. In
addition to defense from outsiders, e.g. aboriginals or exclusion of new entrants, there may be other
collective benefits from specification and enforcement in the same hands. If the land is used in common,
then rules about use will limit the dissipation of rents from overstocking. The benefits from organization
are greater for specification and enforcement if there are additional collective goods provided by the
commons for which there exist economies of scale.
In the absence of exogenous shocks, second party specification and enforcement may remain stable
over a long period. However, there may be a point at which second party enforcement is no longer
sufficient to prevent encroachment. For example, legislative changes may induce competition for land,
increasing the costs of collective defense. At this point, the club may find it cost effective to hire third
party enforcement or, local governments may enforce the rights of the commons even though they did
not define the rights. Much like the case where there is first party specification and third party
enforcement, employing agents to enforce member claims is beneficial when the geographical area of

6
defense is large compared with member numbers. Alternatively, the club may rely on government to
enforce member claims even though de jure rights are absent. In this case, local officials enforce de
facto land claims either because club members are local officials or because government officials can
obtain economic and/or political rents from the club. In some instances the association may offer
monetary compensation for government enforcement by paying bribes. Assuming some degree of
democracy exists, political rents are the currency the club can offer local officials in return for
enforcement, specifically votes or campaign contributions.
Column 3 contains the cells for the specification of de jure rights, which by definition means
specification by the authorized government. Government specification often takes place after the
creation of de facto rights and it is at this point that de jure rights can either recognize the de facto
claimants or undermine the existing de facto rights. Governments may choose to define but not enforce
de jure rights – column 3, rows 1 and 2. As with earlier rights structures, economics, norms and politics
may play varying roles over time and space. For example, with an extended suffrage, politicians may
assign property rights to redistribute land away from the de facto claimants, who may have the highest
economic return. Further, if de jure rights do not support the prevailing de facto allocation the
government will increase the potential for conflict if they choose not to enforce the de jure rights – rows
1 and 2. Government specification and first party enforcement means that individuals must defend their
de jure rights against others. In this case, the costs of defense may outweigh the benefits of the de jure
rights, therefore individuals will opt against migration to the frontier. This will lower the likelihood of
conflict between newcomers and incumbents by limiting competition. Government specification and
second party enforcement (middle cell, bottom row of Table 1) exists when the government allocates de
jure rights but enforcement takes place via a commons arrangement. Enforcement by a commons
arrangement may emerge where governments either lack sufficient resources to enforce claims or
choose not enforce de jure rights for political reasons. If clubs did not previously exist prior to
government specification, they may be formed at this point with their sole purpose being to defend the
rights of extant claimants against encroachment. The final and most complete category of de jure rights
is where there is government specification and enforcement of property rights. Here the government
allocates and enforces rights, reducing the potential for conflict because we assume that governments
have a comparative advantage in violence.3

3

This assumption flows from numerous accounts of the role of the state in preventing the dissipation of rents. For
recent treatments see Acemoglu and Robinson (2006) and North, Wallis and Weingast (2009).

7
As discussed earlier economic rents, political rents and norms all play roles in the specification
and enforcement of property rights. To better understand the roles played by each we will first present
a “demand” driven framework for the emergence of property rights. The core of the framework is that
economic rents drive the determination of property rights. We illustrate in Figure 1 the “demand” for
more secure property rights as a function of its scarcity value. In Figure 1 the horizontal axis measures
the relative scarcity of a given resource (from right to left) and the vertical axis measures the net present
value that accrues to the claimant of that resource.4 The line segment ABCDE shows that the net present
value of the resource decreases as it becomes less scarce. We assume that the line segment ABCDE
represents the highest return from using the resource with varying amounts of capital or labor.
Figure 1‐ The Demand for and Evolution of Property Rights

Open access

De facto rights

De jure rights

A

F

G
B
L
C
H

O

D
I

J

K

E

scarcity
of land

The returns from land use given relative prices may be greater for relatively capital intensive
activities e.g., cattle ranching or more labor intensive activities, e.g., pre‐mechanized agriculture. In the
case of land the measure of scarcity value could be the distance of a plot of land to a market center, as
transportation costs are often the main determinant of land value. At point E land is so far from the
market center or so abundant that the economic return is zero. The segment GLCDE represents the net

4

We expand on the framework developed in Alston, Harris and Mueller (forthcoming); Alston, Libecap and
Schneider (1996) and Alston, Libecap and Mueller (1999).

8
present value of land under an open access arrangement. OH represents the opportunity cost of the
settlers with the lowest opportunity cost, given the costs of settling on the frontier.
Settling on the frontier will vary considerably with climatic conditions. For example, the fixed costs
of migrating and sustaining a subsistence standard of living are lower in tropical regions than in colder
climates, where settlers may have to wait a year to plant and harvest crops. In Figure 1, point K
represents the economic frontier where it becomes worthwhile for a settler to migrate to the frontier.5
At points between J and K open access conditions prevail which means that property rights are not
formally defined or enforced, but this does not affect the return to the resource given that it is still
abundant relative to the competition for it. Though land is abundant, migrants may find it worthwhile to
establish norms pertaining to the amount of land claimed.6 This appears relatively easy to do because
initially the settlers are relatively homogeneous with respect to their opportunity costs and typically
other socio‐economic endowments. In terms of our taxonomy this would be second party specification
and first person enforcement.
As the net present value increases, e.g. because of lower transportation costs or higher prices for
the output of the land – represented here as the upward sloping line segment CD as one moves leftward
from K ‐ new users arrive, yet they are able to get access to the resource without detracting much from
the use of those who were already there. At distance IJ resource users still tend to be relatively
homogenous, but the return from an open access resource ‐ ILCJ ‐ is lower than moving to a more
limited commons – IBCJ‐ one in which new entry is restricted. The relatively higher return from a
commons arrangement excluding outsiders creates the demand for informal property rights, which are
sufficient to mitigate the otherwise existing dissipation of the rental stream. It is easier for
homogeneous users to reach agreements concerning exclusivity for two reasons: 1) the claimants
generally share similar cultural norms (endowments); and 2) in some instances there is a common
collective good that will bring people together to reach agreements. With a common cultural
background, potential disputes are easily defused as social pressure along with the incentive to
cooperate yields higher expected returns than confrontation. The most obvious collective good is
common defense to prevent encroachments from potential claimants. Squatting prevails yet the

5

In our figure, distance is the frontier but it could as easily be the quality of soil. Our framework of “rents”
determining arrival times on the frontier under open access conditions is an endowments explanation but for both
commons arrangements to emerge as well as formal rights, norms or politics will matter.
6
We recognize that this assumes that norms are driven partially driven by rents.

9
absence of government‐enforced private property rights does not pose significant costs.7 The wedge
BLC is the marginal return from switching from open access with limited norm specification to collective
or commons arrangements for land in region IJ. In our taxonomy this is a movement from second party
(norm) specification with self‐enforcement to second party specification and enforcement. There is a
gain to having a commons arrangement consisting of de facto property rights, as opposed to open
access, but not yet for having formally defined property rights. That is, the level of competition for land
is sufficiently high that open access would lead to losses, but not sufficiently high for formal property
rights to be an improvement over commons arrangements.
For land in the region OI, closer to the market center, NPVs are higher, and the informal
institutions that developed can no longer cope with the increased competition for the resource. It
becomes necessary to expend effort, time and money to assure continued possession of the resource
and the income derived from it. This may involve incurring costs to exclude others or the cost from sub‐
optimal uses. It may also include the costs to lobbying for changes from de facto to de jure property
rights. At some point it becomes beneficial in the aggregate to have officially defined and enforced de
jure property rights. The increased value that would result from formally defined and enforced de jure
property rights is the pie‐shaped area ABF which represents the increased value of land versus the next
best commons arrangement for property rights. ABF is the potential rent that forms the basis for the
demand for de jure property rights. In our taxonomy this would be a movement from second party
specification and enforcement to third party specification and enforcement. Nevertheless, the
movement from a commons arrangement to de jure property rights entails redistribution which in turn
generates the potential for conflict, an issue we return to later.
Many of the early studies on the evolution of property rights simply assumed that as the area ABF
became sufficiently large de jure property rights would emerge. This notion has been termed the naïve
theory of property rights, as it does not analyze the collective action problems or the politics that
determine the supply of formal property rights (Eggertsson, 1990:250). In order to bring into the analysis
the supply of property rights we extend our model so as to explicitly incorporate the fact that competing
types of settlers with a different set of endowments typically arrive at different times at the frontier.8 In
our case studies these different groups are, in order of arrival; ranchers versus homesteaders for the US;
7

See Anderson and Hill (2002); Eggertsson (1990); Ostrom (1990); and (2009); and Umbeck (1981) for accounts of
local groups allocating resources under “common” arrangements. See Smith (2000) for an analysis of “semi‐
commons” arrangements.
8
Libecap (2007) stresses this point.

10
squatters versus selectors in Australia; and large coffee plantation owners with slaves versus
smallholders in Brazil. By focusing on the different endowments of the competing groups we can analyze
the disputes that arise over land and make inferences about how these differing endowments affect the
political outcome that ultimately decides the form of the property rights that will emerge.
As stated in our initial discussion of Figure 1 the NPV from land may vary by whether the land is put
into cattle or agriculture. Relatively abundant capital versus labor endowed claimants may face separate
NPV schedules due to different access to inputs required to make the land productive, such as capital,
technology or experience. Once we incorporate different payoffs from using the land, it becomes
possible for the first entrant to have higher opportunity costs than the subsequent arrivals, for example
in the US where capital (ranchers) preceded labor (homesteaders), or in Australia where the early
squatters preceded selectors, and in Brazil where large coffee plantation owners preceded smallholders.
These situations are depicted in Figure 2 where two sets of NPVs are superimposed. The set with higher
NPVs for land in a given region is marked with capital letters and, to simplify the exposition, will be
referred to as ‘capital’ whereas the lower set, with non‐capitalized letters, will be referred to as ‘labor’.
As drawn in Figure 2 capital arrives at the frontier at K prior to labor which arrives at k, despite
the fact that capital’s opportunity cost is higher than labor’s, OH>oh. Naturally different relative
opportunity costs and NPVs could lead to labor arriving first.9 Whatever the case, the asynchronous
nature of arrival allows one group to establish and entrench itself on the land, possibly for a long period
of time. When the second type of claimant arrives the NPV curves of the incumbent adjust themselves
to reflect the increased competition. This adjustment would typically involve three movements; (i) an
overall decrease of the NPV at each point; (ii) an increase of the area of the wedges that represent the
gains to having de facto commons arrangements versus open access as well as the gains from de jure
property rights over commons arrangements; and (iii) a rightward shift of points J and I with de facto
commons arrangements and de jure property rights becoming desirable earlier given the presence of a
new entrant. The curves of the entrant already reflect in “Cournot” fashion the NPVs that take into
account the incumbent’s presence.

9

As drawn the figure implies that one type of claimant would always be able to make more productive use of the
land at each distance for a given type of property rights, implying that in order to achieve efficiency the most
valued user should retain the use rights and ultimately the government should allocate property rights to the
highest valued user. However, it can very well be the case that one use of the land, such as ranching, is more
productive in a frontier situation (towards the right of the graph) and another type of use, e.g. agriculture, is more
productive once the frontier has evolved (towards the left). In this case inefficient land use would arise if i) secure
property rights – though these may be informal ‐were not in place to facilitate the transfer of the land to its higher
user, or ii) users are unable to quickly change their use of the land, i.e. ranchers becoming farmers.

11
If we consider Figure 2 to represent the situation after the adjustment of the incumbent’s
payoffs to the threat of entrant’s arrival, we see that to the left of point k both types will find it in their
interest to be on the land. The more to the left, that is, the higher the return to the use of the land, the
greater will be the competition among the groups. The greater this competition the greater will be the
incentive for commons arrangements to emerge and the greater will be the demand for de facto and
later de jure property rights.
Figure 2 – The demand for property rights with competing claimants.
NPV
A

a
F
G
B
f
L
g

b

H
h

O

C

c

l

D

d

I

i

j

k

J

K e

E

scarcity
of land

Initially de jure property rights will be non‐existent, but as value increases, the potential “rents’ will be
an incentive for the government with authority to act which may: sustain the incumbent’s de facto
rights; redistribute the specification and enforcement of de jure rights towards the entrant; or any
myriad intermediate combinations, the most common of which appears to be specification without
enforcement. Clearly the outcome depends on the result of politics, which involves not only the
incumbent and the entrant, but also local and the central governments, including their voters and
constituencies.
The question that arises is whether anything can be said about the determinants of the supply
response by governments. Though we cannot predict specific outcomes, we can discuss the
characteristics of the claimants along with the political institutions in place both of which affect the

12
supply of property rights.10 Once the new entrant has arrived on the frontier there is the potential for
dispute and conflict. This dispute plays out both physically, in loco, as well as politically. It is almost
tautological that ceteris paribus the greater the relative capabilities for violence of one group over the
other, the greater the probability that the emergent de facto property rights will favor that group. But
this prediction can become more precise if we note that the sequential nature of the groups’ arrivals
implies that the early entrant will have a “home court” advantage as it is often easier to defend than to
usurp.11 This advantage is particularly significant in the situation portrayed in Figure 2 where the
incumbent was drawn to the frontier by high benefits rather than by low opportunity costs. In addition
there may be further rents that the incumbents capture through information gathered over time by
being on the land. These benefits translate into economic and potentially political clout that enhances
the home court advantage. Thus the greater the head start of the incumbent, that is, the time between
K and k, and the greater the incumbent’s NPV in that period, the greater the likelihood that the
incumbent will retain de facto property rights. The “home court” advantage should also help in the
political allocation of rights which the incumbent would demand at distance J and the entrant at
distance j. Importantly, which will become clear in our case studies the specification of de jure rights
may be part of the NPV of the entrant. The home court advantage translates into more resources to
lobby for de jure property rights by the incumbent compared to the entrant as well as lobbying for a lack
of enforcement of de jure rights in the case that this caused new entrants. But, lobbying is not the sole
factor determining the government’s specification and enforcement of property rights.
Another important characteristic of the competing claimants for determining the supply of property
rights is the relative size of the gains from having de jure property rights, versus losing completely to the
other claimant. In other words, the claimants would be willing to expend everything above their
opportunity cost to secure the right though in principle one would only need to expend an amount
greater than the alternative claimant. For the “capitalist” he would be willing to expend area HABCD and

10

The degree of suffrage appears to be an important determinant in our case studies.
Smith (2002: S482) argues: “In common‐pool arrangements regimes, exclusion seems to be basic in the sense
that efforts at exclusion are the first methods used to define property in a resource. The evidence from English
land use is consistent with early exclusion.” Smith (2002) gives numerous other examples consistent with current
“rights” holders using exclusion successfully to deter entrants. Acheson’s (1979 and 1988) discussion of the use of
exclusion amongst lobster fishermen is a particularly good example consistent with “home court” advantage.
Smith (2002: S485) also makes the excellent observation that in deciding between governance and exclusion as
mechanisms for controlling behavior on the commons that “a limit on behavior is pointless unless access is limited
first.”
11

13
for labor, she would be willing to expend habcd.12 These areas measure the rents over opportunity cost
from getting effective de jure property rights for each group assuming all entrants within a group have
the same opportunity cost. To the extent that opportunity costs increase for later entrants then the
willingness to pay would be less. In the political world the amount that they would need to pay most
likely would be substantially less because of only needing a winning coalition. It is not the case that we
can simply compare both values and infer that the one with the larger gains will prevail as the outcome
depends as well on other circumstances such as the preferences of the actors involved in the political
process. Nevertheless, we can infer that for any given political process, the differences in the relative
gains to each group will increase their willingness to invest in lobbying and increase the probability of a
favorable outcome to that group13 – though the outcome for the capitalist may simply be a lack of
government enforcement of the extant de jure specified rights of the new entrant.
The distribution of the gains from secure formal property rights among the members of the same
group may also be a characteristic with important consequences for the property rights that get
supplied. Note that in Figure 2 these gains are triangle‐shaped (ABF and abf), implying that some
members of the group receive greater gains from secure private rights than others. One could imagine a
situation in which that area would be closer to a rectangle with most members receiving similar gains.
Under such circumstances the collective action which is crucial for mounting the demand for property
rights may be easier to achieve than in the case where the intragroup heterogeneity is larger.14 Groups
with better collective action will, ceteris paribus, have higher probabilities of being favored by the
political process.
Lobbying by special interest groups matter but politicians also have to pay heed to the preferences
of voters, particularly if the issue is salient and suffrage is universal. Given the centrality of land to
production, especially in agricultural and pastoral economies, the property rights to land are an
important issue in the utility function of individuals. If the franchise is widely held, e.g. all adult males
regardless of land ownership, then we would expect to see the property rights to land favor the small
holder.

12

For the “capitalist” some rents may be used to prevent the enforcement of the de jure rights of labor endowed
claimants whereas for the labor endowed claimants some rents may be expended to have their de jure rights
enforced.
13
See Appendix I for a formalization of this result.
14
Ostrom (2009) has argued that in some situations heterogeneity may be beneficial in overcoming the collective
action problem of organization. This is also well‐know in cartel literature in IO; if there is a member who
disproportionately would win from collective action, this player would incur the costs of organizing and sustaining
the commons arrangement.

14
Finally, we can make inferences regarding the outcomes of the political process by considering even
some very general characteristics of that process. The preferences of the central government are
naturally key determinants of the outcome. Whether those preferences support the incumbent or the
entrant is an important factor, but by no means the sole determinant of the outcome. Where political
support favors the first arrival this adds to the “home court” advantage and greatly increases the
probability that the early arrivals will stay on the land, to a point where de jure property rights might not
even strictly be necessary as de facto rights are bolstered by both political and physical strength. It is
even possible, as we shall see in the Brazilian case, that this situation evolves with the incumbents (large
coffee planters) effectively taking over the government. Where the political support at the center
supports the newer entrant the final outcome still depends on other factors, such as the size of the
“home court” advantage. If the support provided by the central authority is enough to overcome the
resistance of the incumbent we will see the specification of de jure property rights transferring rights
from the incumbent to the entrant. But, in many instances the political will is sufficient to change the de
jure rights but not enough to implement the enforcement of de jure property rights. As such de facto
rights may determine resource use for a long time, a situation we shall see that prevailed in our U.S.
case study for over 50 years. The disjuncture between the specification and enforcement of rights in
many instances appears to be the result of the specification being in the hands of a central government
while the enforcement is in hands of a local government which is captured by the earlier wealthier
arrivals.
In the next three sections we analyze the process of the emergence and evolution of property rights
for land on the frontiers in Australia, the U.S. and Brazil, using the taxonomy and framework above as
guides for the analysis. In all three cases there is an early entrant that is challenged by a subsequent
entrant or potential entrant. In the Australian and U.S. cases commons arrangements emerge to reduce
dissipation within entry groups whereas in Brazil self‐enforcement/third party enforcement limited
dissipation with some collective lobbying later in the political arena. Over time potential or actual
disputes arise between entrant groups and there is a demand by claimants for de jure property rights to
reduce the rent dissipation that emerges from those disputes. This demand is eventually met with a
supply of de jure property rights which in all three cases involves the central government as the key
player and indirectly the interests they represent, which in some cases are the direct contenders and in
other cases more diffuse constituencies such as voters. In each case we show how the characteristics of
the players, the markets that determine the NPVs, and the nature of the political process determine the
property rights that emerge.

15
III.

Settlement of the Australian frontier

Settlement of the Australian frontier began in the late 1820s. Prior to 1820, population was
concentrated around the original convict settlement at Botany Bay, New South Wales (NSW). NSW was
the sole jurisdiction in eastern Australia until the mid 1800s.15 As a penal colony, the British Colonial
Office (BCO) in London determined economic and political policy, including land policies.16 The
representative of this office in NSW, the colonial governor, a military administrator, oversaw the
implementation of directives received by the BCO. During the late 1820s, the BCO attempted to
concentrate settlement within an area known as the Nineteen Counties – the legal limits of
settlement.17 However, several factors caused the spread of population beyond these boundaries to the
frontier: 1) population increases resulted in land scarcity within the settlement limits (Roberts, 1935);18
2) land prices within the Nineteen Counties were high, set at a minimum price of £1 per acre;19 3)
growing demand and rising prices for Australian wool in Britain increased the net present value accruing
from land settlement outside the boundaries (Imlah, 1950; Butlin in Vamplew (ed.) 1987);20 and 4)
inadequate police numbers made the boundaries unenforceable.
Land occupation outside the Nineteen Counties was illegal and these settlers became known as
squatters.21 Squatters (K) preceded labor (k) to the frontier because capital reaped its opportunity cost
15

Tasmania, Victoria, and Queensland became separate colonial jurisdictions during the 1850s.
Captain James Cook declared the Australian east coast British territory in 1770. On settlement in 1788, the
British Crown declared the continent ‘terra nullius’ specifically, the land belonged to no one. This pronouncement
implicitly denied the existence of ownership rights by first inhabitants thereby dispossessing Australian Aboriginals
under the British territorial claim. It followed that all land in Australia, unless expressly granted to individuals as
free hold, was owned by the Crown.
17
Settlement concentration was in part a result of the need to restrain the convict element, but it was also
attributable to the influential writing of colonial theorist, Edward Wakefield an exponent of systematic
colonization. Roberts, 1924; Crowley (1980); and Kociumbas (1988) provide lengthy discussions of Wakefieldian
theories.
18
Of significance is the increase in ‘free’ population (excluding military and convicts) that is, migrants entering
NSW. During this period, free population increased from 12, 846 in 1820 to approximately 50,000 by 1836
(Vamplew, 1987; Roberts, 1935).
19
Burroughs (1967) argues that ₤1 per acre was in excess of the productive value of colonial land due to enormous
quality variation impacting it’s suitability for agriculture.
20
Imlah’s (1950) wool price index for the United Kingdom uses Spanish, Leonesa, Saxon, and Australian price series
to construct estimates from 1822 to 1880. Butlin’s series (Table PC 106‐107) in Vamplew (1987) is for Australian
greasy wool 1850‐1969.
21
Initially, the term ‘squatter’ was used to identify individuals who illegally occupied Crown land within the
settlement boundaries. Evidence suggests these individuals were made up of a mix of those given land grants who
occupied adjacent land to which their grant did not extend; as well as convicts with tickets‐of‐leave or conditional
pardons. Ticket‐of‐leave convicts were given the right to work or live within a given district before their sentence
expired or they were granted a conditional pardon; convicts who obtained conditional pardon were released on
the condition that they did not return to England or Ireland. However, after 1825 exploration across the Blue
Mountains accelerated the movement of squatters outside the Nineteen Counties (this area was defined in 1827).
16

16
before labor, corresponding to the region between GCJ and HDK in Figure 2. Beyond the legal
boundaries of the Nineteen Counties, land was not scarce and squatters occupied where they pleased ‐
corresponding to the distances between points J and K in Figure 2. Australia’s arid climate and
economies of scale in wool production resulted in large land claims on the frontier, on average between
24,000 and 34,000 acres (Roberts, 1935).22 The size of claims meant individuals were unable to
effectively enforce their claims against entrants so squatters employed at least one hut keeper on each
parcel to enforce ownership against later arrivals. In our taxonomy in Table 1, this was first party
specification with third party enforcement. Property boundaries were vague, typically defined by
natural features including rivers and marked trees. It would be expected that the combination of the
lack of de jure rights and imprecise boundaries would increase the potential for conflict among squatters
as scarcity increased. However, there is little evidence of actual conflict. In part, this may have been the
result of third party enforcement that included strategically placed huts across a claim and a physical
presence of employees on runs; but, there is also evidence that informal norms played a role. At this
point there was first party specification with a combination of both second (district squatters) and third
party (employees) enforcement. Two main factors encouraged the creation of informal rights that lead
to second party enforcement by squatters to protect land claims: 1) the illegality of their occupation and
2) the violence potential of Aboriginal tribes. As noted, squatters outside the Nineteen Counties
occupied land illegally. Any conflict between them violent or otherwise brought the possibility of all
claimants being dispossessed by colonial administrators. Correspondence between early settlers in the
Port Phillip district (Victoria) of NSW explicitly acknowledges this incentive in dealing with
encroachments stating:
it would afford the Government pretext for interfering…there is plenty of room for all who may come, and
it would be good policy for us as the leading party to set examples of good fellowship, and establish the
principle of non‐interference as is done in the back settlements at Sydney (Port Phillip Association, Wedge
to Batman 3 September, 1835).

This suggests the potential rents from occupation were high enough to encourage cooperation to
enforce claims against newcomers and prevent government dispossessing all claimants. Further,
squatters settled on land occupied by Aboriginal tribes. Initially, these tribes had a distinct violence
advantage compared with squatters.23 Any violence between squatters had the potential to incite local

22

Eighty percent of Australia receives less than 600mm of rain per annum. On average, one sheep requires 3 acres
of grazing land.
23
There is little evidence that Aboriginals were hostile to white settlers during the early period of occupation.
Later, when squatter numbers increased, the violence advantage went against the Aboriginals and there is

17
tribes. In turn, de facto property rights with first party specification and second party enforcement
acted to limit dissipation of rents by reducing conflict between squatters as well as preventing
Aboriginal violence against settlers (Port Phillip Association, Ball to Mercer 25 February 1836).
Homogeneity and the small numbers of early squatters underpinned these more explicit incentives to
encourage cooperation.
Roberts (1924, 1935) and Weaver (1996) suggest that, at least during the early 1830s, prior to
choosing a run; newcomers to an area would negotiate with any neighbors as to property boundaries.
One of the earliest squatter’s in NSW noted:
It is of great importance not to embroil the Establishment by disputes with neighbours, and (without,
however, weakly giving away to unreasonable objections, and though distance is no doubt an objective), I
think an extensive good Run, not subject to be encroached upon, may sometimes more than compensate
for remoteness (Hogan Papers, 1830‐4 quoted in Roberts, 1935, p. 278).

Where conflict over boundaries did occur, arbitration by other district squatters could be used to
determine the rights of claimants. Each claimant would nominate one arbitrator and those two would
then select a third representative. Once the arbitrators were chosen, the process was relatively formal
with written decisions binding administrators and executors of the disputants; majority rule decision
making; and the allocation of costs to each party. For example, in a boundary dispute between William
Adeney and his neighbor, John Manifold, arbitration documents provide a description of the dispute,
names and residences of disputants, and a sketch map of the final boundaries (Adeney, 1845‐47).
Moreover, the documents note the decision had the same effect of creating a rule for the district as did
those of the NSW Supreme Court (Adeney, 1845‐47).
Evidence suggests that while land claims were subject to first party specification with a
combination of second and third party enforcement, second party specification and enforcement was
used to delineate other key aspects of a squatter’s rights. Specifically, second party specification and
enforcement defined rules of abandonment for each district (Weaver, 1996) and maximum number of
sheep per flock (Curr, 2001). The absence of sheep on a run constituted abandonment however, district
rules permitted periods of non‐use that did not amount to abandonment. For example, in the New
England district of NSW, a run could be left unstocked for a period of six months before it was declared
abandoned (ANSW 4/3660, Macdonald to Colonial Secretary Thomson, 24 August 1844). Implicitly, non‐
use periods recognized the seasonal nature of grazing with respect to water availability and grass
supplies as well as distance from market. All district squatters had an incentive to enforce these rules
substantial evidence to suggest its use by white settlers even in the presence of British colonial policy to afford the
indigenous inhabitants protection. For details of these conflicts refer to Butlin (1982) and Millis (1992).

18
because they all faced the same seasonal and distance constraints. Maximum flock size was considered
approximately 520 sheep. There were two reasons for limitation: one internal to the user and the other
external to other users: 1) localities in which sheep first grazed in NSW were scrubby, creating the
potential for large losses due to the inability for one shepherd to manage a flock larger than 520 (Curr,
2001);24 and 2) if flocks numbered over 520, it was believed that pastures over which the flock travelled
would be wasted and stronger sheep would consume the bulk of the grass. Given flock relocation often
took place via the use of common stock routes, on which sheep still need to graze, norms dictating flock
size reduced the likelihood of overusing common pastures for relocation. Limiting flock size also
reduced the trampling of grass on private land, decreasing the costs associated with sheep having to
travel for food (Roberts, 1935). These norms were collective goods that had private benefits,
corresponding to differences between areas OFBI and OGCJ in Figure 2.
By the late 1830s, increasing scarcity values led squatters to appeal to colonial administrators
and the British government for recognition of their land rights and more secure de jure property rights.25
In other words, squatters were moving toward OI in Figure 2, requiring them to spend greater time and
effort to enforce their land claims and the incomes derived from the resource. The demand for greater
security was not driven by a need to access formal capital markets because mortgages and credit were
acquired relatively easily from British banks in the colony and from private investors. Creditors were
willing to accept sheep as collateral. Instead, it was to ensure that the rights of squatters were enforced
against an increasing number of newcomers to the frontier brought about by the continuing pastoral
boom. In other words, de facto rights, where first party specification was combined with second and
third party enforcement, was no longer sufficient to defend claims against encroachment.
As noted, the BCO determined colonial land policy which attempted to restrict population to the
area within the Nineteen Counties. Nevertheless, in addition to squatters’ demand for de jure rights,
expansion of settlement beyond the boundaries had led to the creation of two explicit incentives for the
BCO to supply more formal rights: 1) NSW had become a critical supplier of wool to British
manufacturers increasing the political and economic importance of Australian land policy for the British
parliament (Burroughs, 1967; Dingle, 1984); and 2) any failure to regulate occupation led to possible
claims of adverse possession via the courts. Continuing the large quantity and high quality of wool
imports from NSW required unconstrained settlement, as the colonial Governor, Richard Bourke advised
the secretary of the BCO:
24

Convicts were early shepherds and they had little incentive to prevent sheep losses.
Burroughs (1967) discusses in some detail the nature of squatters’ lobbying activities in Britain during this
period, pages 315‐319.
25

19
I cannot avoid perceiving the peculiarities which, in this colony, render it impolitic and even impossible to
restrain dispersion within limits that would be expedient elsewhere. The wool of NSW forms at present,
and it likely long to continue, its chief wealth. It is only by free range over the wider expanse of native
herbage which the colony affords that the production of this staple article can be upheld, at its present
rate of increase in quantity, a standard of value in quality. The proprietors of thousands of acres already
find it necessary, equally with the poorer settlers, to send large flocks beyond the boundary of location to
preserve them in health throughout the year (Braim, 1846).

Further, the common law rule of adverse possession gave squatters’ (trespassers) an avenue by
which they could transfer their occupation into freehold title if the owner of the land (the Crown) failed
to act to prevent the trespass within a certain timeframe, usually 20 years.26 However, the BCO was
reluctant to recognize formal titles for squatters’ land claims because this would require ceding
potential revenue from later sale.27 Instead, the BCO introduced annual squatting licenses (Act 7 Wm.
IV., No. 4) that acquiesced squatters’ demands for de jure rights while retaining Crown ownership.
Under the license system, squatters paid £10 annually to occupy as much land as they pleased.
In our taxonomy of specification and enforcement, licenses supported existing first party specification
but transferred enforcement to government. Licenses gave squatters occupancy rights and were
enforceable against all parties except the Crown. Therefore, the Crown could evict squatters at any time
without compensation. Despite this, there continued to be an active market for squatters’ runs.28
Licenses expressly forbade squatters from using land for agricultural purposes. The extent of crop
production that could take place was restricted to a size and quantity sufficient to supply individuals
living or working on the ‘run’. The license system was enforced by Crown Lands Commissioners
appointed in each of the seven districts outside the Nineteen Counties. Commissioners had authority to
refuse license renewal, determine boundary disputes and claims of trespass. The BCO appointed border
police to enforce the decisions of Commissioners should squatters fail to comply. Clause 10 of the
legislation appointing Commissioners to each district, instructed them to act “according to the
established usages and customs of the Colony” (emphasis ours).29 Any departure from custom
established by usage required government sanction (ANSW 4/3660, Colonial Secretary Thomson to
26

Adverse possession had foundation in the English common law rule of disseisin that allowed a trespasser to
acquire imperfect possessory rights that could evolve into perfect legal title if the legal owner did not act to
prevent a trespasser. In Australia, the legal owner was the Crown and unlike in some jurisdictions, historically
individuals could take action for adverse possession against the Crown (a rule that today is codified in statute law
of Australian states).
27
Revenue from sale was to fund migration.
28
As we discuss in the next section, early claimants in the U.S. sold their informal claims indicating that the
commons arrangements prevented dissipation.
29
An Act to continue and amend an Act intituled [sic] “An Act to restrain the unauthorized occupation of Crown
Lands” (2 Vic., No. 19, 1838).

20
Lambie, 29 November, 1843). Therefore, licenses created a mix of both de facto and de jure property
rights on the frontier. For much of the next decade, squatters continued to petition the colonial
governor for greater ownership security because licenses did not alleviate problems of vague
boundaries. Moreover, Crown Land Commissioners faced information constraints so that third party
government enforcement was subject to some contention leading to appeals to the Colonial Secretary
and the governor (ANSW 4/3660, Colonial Secretary Thomson to Lambie, 18 April 1842; ANSW 4/2680
Aitken to Governor George Gipps, 25 March, 1845). A continuation of lobbying efforts indicates growing
competition for land so that informal rights were no longer sufficient to protect the claims of squatters.
It was at this point that increased potential value, the area measured by ABF in Figure 2, would accrue in
a move to third party government specification and enforcement.
Squatters secured greater de jure rights by the middle of the 1840s with the introduction of
longer leases accompanied by pre‐emptive rights to a proportion of the land occupied.30 Leases (third
party government specification) retained a measure of first party specification and third party
enforcement but provided surety of tenure that was absent with annual licenses. Leases could be
granted for one, eight or 14 years depending on a run’s location in the colony. Specifically, a run in
‘settled’ districts (within the Nineteen Counties) could only acquire a one year lease; a run in
‘intermediate’ districts (areas immediately surrounding the Nineteen Counties) acquired an eight year
lease; and in ‘unsettled’ districts on the frontier, a run could acquire a 14 year lease. Further, the
government set rentals at a minimum of £10 for 4,000 sheep with an increment of £2 10 shillings for
every 1,000 sheep thereafter. Under these regulations, during the duration of the lease, land could only
be sold to the occupier. On a lease’s expiration squatters could claim pre‐emptive rights to one block of
640 acres (one square mile) for every 16,000 acres (25 square miles) of leased land at £1 per acre.
Squatters mix of de facto and de jure rights remained relatively unchanged until the mid‐1850s.
By this time, the limited availability of gold caused a now expanded population to pressure government
for land reform. Once gold was nearly exhausted, former miners’ opportunity costs of moving to the
frontier fell so labor was now in the region ohdk in figure 2, and many ex‐miners wanted to turn to
agriculture for a living. Paralleling this, NSW had been divided into four separate colonies, NSW, Port
Phillip (Victoria), Moreton Bay (Queensland), and Van Diemen’s Land (Tasmania).31 On separation from

30

Leases were granted under “An Act to amend an Act for regulating the Sale of Waste Land belonging to the
Crown in the Australian colonies, and to make further Provision for the management thereof” (9 & 10 Vict. cap.
104, 1846).
31
Victoria was granted separated in 1850; Tasmania in 1856; and Queensland in 1859. Western Australia (WA) and
South Australia (SA) were settled in 1827 and 1834 respectively, independently of NSW. WA, initially a free

21
NSW each colony was granted responsible government that is, the right to legislate over its own affairs,
including land policy. Moreover, each of the four colonies now had parliaments elected by the
population. These political changes were critical in terms of determining the supply of de jure property
rights to land.
Prior to separation each colony had representatives on the NSW Legislative Council. The Council
was made up of a number of elected individuals as well as a number appointed by the governor.
However, the Council remained an advisory body with the governor retaining executive power.
Responsible government reduced the power of the governor to the sovereign’s representative in a
colony. Executive power was concentrated on the various ministers appointed from parliamentary
representatives by the nominated parliamentary leader, referred to as the Premier. Premiers were
leaders of factions that formed a majority in the parliament. The organization of parliaments followed
the Westminster system that is, a two house legislature made up of the Legislative Assembly (lower
house) and the Legislative Council (upper house). Election to the upper house remained subject to
property qualifications that resulted in a disproportionate representation of squatting interests for
much of the nineteenth century.32 However, the introduction of universal male suffrage in the late
1850s diluted squatters’ political power. Moreover, fear of social unrest and the potential for violent
uprising similar to the riot which occurred at the Ballarat gold field in 1854, referred to as Eureka
Stockade exerted an important influence on squatters’ support for land reform legislation.33
The Eureka Stockade was a critical turning point in colonial politics. Bate (1988: 46) argues this
uprising generated a shock‐wave that helped carry constitutional reforms that may otherwise have
“founded on the rocks of upper house opposition.” In 1856 Victorian ex‐miners formed the Victorian
Land League calling for the introduction of legislation to allow them to select 650 acres of agricultural
land in the colony.34 By 1860, parliament’s failure to pass several reform measures led to a riot of
settlement, was founded by Captain James Stirling. However, in order to increase labor supply, in the 1830s it
became a penal colony administered by the British Colonial Office. SA was established via Imperial legislation
(South Australia Colonisation Act 4&5 William IV).
32
For example, in 1865 29% of the members of the NSW Legislative Council came from pastoral occupations,
compared with 16% for the next largest occupational group, lawyers. By 1890, 33% of members came from
pastoral occupations, compared with 20% lawyers (Hawker, 1971, Table 24, p. 147).
33
Ballarat was Victoria’s largest gold field and the Eureka Stockade was the pinnacle of tensions between miners
and local officials that had been building from 1852. These tensions primarily resulted from the high costs of the
miner’s license fee and miners’ desires for parliamentary representation. Additional factors continued to exert
pressure on this already tense situation which Bate (1988: 45) argues pushed “the protest movement…into a
rebellion.” The clash between miners and police lasted approximately15 minutes with about 30 deaths.
34
Evidence suggests the Victorian Land League was formed by Chartists, who were agitating for land reform in
Britain. Chartists migrated to Australia in two waves: as convicts, sentenced for transportation as punishment for
political uprisings in Britain; and as migrants during the gold rushes. Chartists had their origins in the formation of

22
20,000 outside the chambers. Similar political movements were formed in NSW, specifically, the NSW
Land League in 1857 however, while political uprising did not occur there, the possibility was not far
from legislators minds. As a result, the potential or actual social unrest caused by agitation for land
reform caused squatter dominated upper houses to pass reform legislation and rely on their significant
home court advantage to defend their claims.35 These factors resulted in a divergence between de facto
and de jure rights with first party specification combined with third party enforcement being replaced
with third party government specification and limited government enforcement.
Squatters’ (incumbents) home court advantage was relatively large even though reform
legislation favored a redistribution of de jure rights to ex‐miners (entrants). The relative strength of this
home court advantage was a function of the economic clout of squatters’ which had been increased by
three factors discussed in section two: 1) squatters’ settlement at the frontier was brought about by
high benefits of sheep grazing not their low opportunity costs of relocating to this region. As a result,
larger rents accrued to these settlers during their uncontested occupation, increasing their economic
clout; 2) squatters’ had a greater head start than ex‐miners in exploiting the returns from land
occupation. In other words, the distance between K and k in Figure 2, was large, increasing squatters’
wealth over time; and 3) rents accruing to squatters’ from formal land rights were higher than for ex‐
miners as a group that is, ABF>abf in Figure 2. Further enhancing the economic dimensions of their
home court advantage, squatters’ had better information about the quality of land at the frontier and
it’s suitability for sheep grazing compared to agriculture. Evidence suggests that in the short run,
squatters succeeded for the most part in protecting their land claims even though reform acted to
curtail the extent of their de jure rights.
To better understand this success we need to analyze the legislation facilitating reform and the
various roles played by special interests that oversaw reform – the colonial Lands Departments and
parliament. Land legislation in the 1860s embodied two guiding principles: land selection before survey
and phasing out squatters’ leases.36 Each colony introduced similar requirements for individuals to
purchase land under selection in terms of land prices, residence expectations, and investment
conditions. Selection permitted anyone to purchase no more than 320 acres at £1 per acre, payable

London’s Working Men’s Association (1836) that campaigned for social and political equality of working classes.
Simms (2006), McIntyre (2004) and Toscano (2007) all discuss the impact of the Chartist movement on Australian
politics during the nineteenth century.
35
Squatters’ British political influence had been reduced by constitutional reform and therefore, they could not
lobby the British parliament to support the continuation of their de facto and de jure rights.
36
WA and SA were the exceptions; WA remained a British colony until 1890, all land policy was determined by the
British Colonial Office; and SA never introduced selection before survey.

23
over a period of three years. A deposit per acre was required at the time of registration, the balance of
which became payable at the end of the three year period. Regulations required ‘selectors’ to reside on
the land for the entire three years and to invest in ‘improvements’ for instance, fences and buildings, to
the value of £1 per acre, per annum. Later requirements also included expectations that selectors
would cultivate a proportion of the land. Selections could be transferred to another party after one
year’s residency. On expiration of the three year conditional purchase, selectors could buy the land or
transfer the claim to a seven year lease. If claims were transferred to a lease, rental payments required
would contribute towards purchase when the lease expired. Regardless of whether the land was
purchased or leased at the end of the three year term, the selector must have fulfilled the conditions.
To do this, they simply had to sign a statutory declaration that they had had fulfilled the residence,
investment, and cultivation requirements. Agents of the Department of Lands were expected to inspect
properties to ensure the declarations were correct, but more often than not they simply took for
granted that selectors were bona fide.
Squatters’ retained pre‐emptive rights to purchase 640 acres from each 16,000 acres at a price
of £2 for each section and they could also select 320 acres of their runs in line with selection clauses. If
they exercised pre‐emptive rights, they were also entitled to lease three times this area for a maximum
of 14 years with rentals determined by stock carrying capacity. In other words, the maximum area of a
squatter’s de jure rights was approximately 2,560 acres, plus 320 acres if they filed for selection. Recall,
on average, squatters de facto claims of the 1830s and 1840s were between 24,000 and 34,000 acres.
As a result, selection legislation substantially curbed the extent of squatters land subject to de jure
rights.
Land reform increased the potential for conflict because the holdings of squatters not claimed
under pre‐emption lease were now subject to government sanctioned competition by selectors. The
increase in conflict potential was a result of the substantial divergence between de facto and de jure
rights brought about by a move to third party government specification that undermined incumbents
prior de facto and de jure specified rights. Land Departments administered the application of the
legislation, appointing Land Agents in each district to file selection claims. Agents sent the applications
to Departments for registration on a weekly basis. Once registered, a survey would be requested.
However, prior to the survey taking place, the Lands Departments would update district maps as to the
location and boundaries of the claim based on descriptions provided by applicants to Land Agents.
District agents used the revised maps to record subsequent claims. The principle of selection before

24
survey imposed an ex‐post problem for administrators brought about by information asymmetries
constraining the effectiveness of third party government enforcement.
Information asymmetries arose because neither Land Agents nor claimants were in a position to
accurately define boundaries of selected land thereby reducing the effectiveness of third party
government enforcement. These problems were only alleviated after a survey had taken place.
Therefore, any delay between a land claim and survey increased the potential for conflict. For this
reason, survey activity had a lagged effect on the potential for conflict. Consequently, a low number of
surveys in any one year would increase the probability that some selections were invalidated in future
years. Evidence from NSW suggests that due to the undersupply of qualified surveyors, the lag between
selection and survey was approximately nine to 12 months (Morris and Ranken, 1883).
Claims could be invalid for several reasons : 1) the parcel selected infringed on government
reserves that is, land set aside for public purposes such as access to water sources; 2) land selected was
owned by squatters under pre‐emptive or claimed under lease rights. In part, the inability to accurately
identify areas to which pre‐emption applied was a result of imperfectly defined boundaries of squatters’
properties that persisted over time. A typical description of squatters’ boundaries:
It followed Mr. Whyte’s ploughed line as far as a rock described by Mr. Grant as situated about 350 yards
from a tea‐tree sapling (should it not touch the rock to be drawn from the nearest point), then a straight
plough‐furrow to be drawn to the intersection of Mr. Henty’s plough‐furrow with a creek or marsh (Henty
to Geelong Crown Lands Commissioner, quoted in Roberts, 1924: 179).

In turn, Crown Land Commissioners, responsible for recording the property boundaries of squatters
within their district, were often unable to exactly identify these areas. As a result, some areas opened
for selection were legally retained by squatters under pre‐emption and associated leases. However,
selectors and Land Agents had no way of knowing this until surveys had been completed and boundaries
defined. As a result, the potential for conflict between squatters and selectors was positively related to
the extent of pastoral occupation in a colony; and 3) claims could be invalid because land had been
applied for earlier by another selector. As the number of surveys increased, a higher number of invalid
claims would be identified and subsequently voided. However, in the years preceding survey, invalid
claims were the source of potential conflict between squatters and selectors, as well as between
selectors. Potential for conflict would also increase with the number of selections per annum.37 As the
number of selections increased so too would information asymmetries caused by inaccurate district
maps resulting from survey delays. The greater the number of selections, the higher the probability that

37

As you can see in Appendix 2 the number of selectors increased significantly over time, peaking in 1874.

25
areas claimed formed part of squatting properties with unclear boundaries or incorporated land already
claimed by another selector.
Compounding the problems accompanying the very principle of selection before survey was the
inefficiencies and understaffing of the surveying branches of the Land Departments. In part, selection
before survey was intended to overcome this constraint to the extension of settlement. However, the
lack of qualified surveyors in Australia delayed surveys, leading to a large number of claims being
revoked over time (refer to Appendix 3 for extent of revocation per annum in NSW and Victoria). The
result was that while land reform created competition between squatters’ (incumbents) and selectors
(entrants), there was a lack of enforcement of selectors’ rights. Entrants’ rights could only be enforced if
the extent of those rights relative to incumbents were clearly defined. Evidence suggests that the
undersupply of surveyors resulted in a lack of definition that consequently reduced the Lands
Departments and parliaments’ ability to enforce the new entrants de jure rights simply because they
could not accurately identify their location. In turn, this increased squatters’ home court advantage.
The undersupply of surveyors remained a significant problem well into the 1870s. As a result, selection
was accompanied by third party government specification but took place in the absence of effective
third party government enforcement because of information asymmetries and the undersupply of
surveyors in Australia. Perhaps surprisingly, while the potential for conflict remained large, there is little
evidence of actual violence occurring during the selection period (1860 to 1884). Rather than a
comparative violence potential mitigating violence, as we will see was the case in the U.S. West, our
explanation for the lack of conflict on the Australian frontier arises from the economic and political clout
of squatters. This acted to strengthen squatters’ home court advantage allowing them to take
advantage of legislative loopholes to defend their land claims. In other words, squatters’ economic and
political power allowed them to ensure a lack of third party government enforcement and use first party
enforcement to defend their claims.
Squatters’ used their wealth and influence to evade reallocation attempts effectively insulating
them against redistribution. There were several methods by which evasion would take place: 1)
“dummying”; 2) “peacocking”; and 3) forcing an auction. Dummying involved squatters’ contracting
with agents, often employees, to select part of their run, register the claim with the Department of
Lands (often under false names), and then sell it back to the squatter for a small fee.38 By employing
dummies to protect claims, squatters were utilizing third party enforcement. Legislation made this
38

In the U.S., ranchers also had hired men file for homestead claims for which the ranchers subsequently
reimbursed their employees.

26
possible because, up until 1880, a selector could transfer their claim after only one year of residence.
Numerous parliamentary inquiries suggest the extent of dummying was widespread employed by both
squatters and selectors.39 Squatters’ wealth advantage permitted them to undertake this practice on a
much larger scale increasing the likelihood they retained large portions of their original holdings.
Data pertaining to the number of selections transferred in NSW from 1862 to 1882, suggest over
50% of original claimants sold their land (Morris and Ranken, 1883 (refer to Appendix 4 for transfers per
annum in NSW)). In itself, this does not suggest that all these transfers were from dummies to
squatters, some transfers may have been the result of climatic factors that caused agriculture to fail.
Specifically, beyond the boundaries of the original Nineteen Counties (from the coast, approximately
200 miles inland), rainfall was less than 20 inches per year making permanent crop production almost
impossible. Selectors, who were already capital constrained, could not raise the funds required for
investment to supplement surface water supplies. Moreover, the blocks of land allocated under
selection were far too small for these settlers to graze sheep, a naturally drought tolerant animal,
suggesting the arid climate may have led to a number of selections being transferred. These transfers
may well have been to district squatters, but it was the premature actions on the part of politicians that
introduced selection that predicated this outcome rather than evasion by squatters. Nevertheless,
evidence suggests that dummying may have been responsible for a large proportion of these transfers
because once legislative amendment prevented transfer before the expiration of three years residency,
the number of transfers drop dramatically from an average of 59% to less that 1 % (Morris and Ranken,
1883).
‘Peacocking’ was another method by which squatters used their wealth to avoid redistribution of
their estates. Peacocking was a practice used primarily by dummy selectors who would pick the vantage
points out of a squatting property so as to render the intervening land useless (Roberts, 1924). For
example, a squatter would have his agents strategically select parcels of his original holdings to create
contiguous water frontage access. This would render the intervening land useless for any other selector,
thereby allowing the squatter to retain the bulk of his run. The information advantage held by
squatters’ and their employees as to land quality assisted them in this practice.

39

For anecdotal evidence on the extent of dummying refer to NSW, Select Committee on the Administration of
Land Laws, Minutes of Evidence, 2nd Progress Report, Legislative Assembly, Votes and Proceedings, 1872/3; NSW,
Select Committee on the Administration of Land Laws, Minutes of Evidence, 3rd Progress Report, Legislative
Assembly, Votes and Proceedings, 1873/4; Victoria, Board of Inquiry into proceedings in relation to certain land
selection in the Wimmera District, Legislative Assembly, Votes and Proceedings, 1873; Victoria, Crown Land
Department Board of Inquiry, Legislative Assembly, Votes and Proceedings, 1874.

27
The final tactic squatters used to evade redistribution was to force land to auction. There were two
options available for squatters to do this; 1) by selecting the same area as a bona fide selector. If the
same parcel of land was chosen by more than one selector, legislation required it was to be put up for
public auction; and 2) squatters could employ agents to select multiple parcels and then forfeit these
claims. As in the case of multiple selectors, once forfeited, land had to be auctioned. Evidence suggests
that between 1862 and 1882 in NSW, on average, 12% of selections were forfeited (Morris and Ranken,
1883 (refer to Appendix 4 for forfeitures per annum in NSW)). However, this may have included
selectors who forfeited their holdings because climatic and economic conditions were not suited to
permanent agriculture. Moreover, these statistics suggest that compared with dummying, forfeiture
may have been less prominent. Nevertheless, forfeiture allowed squatters’ to evade redistribution to
some extent because at auction capital constrained selectors were unable to outbid squatters.40
Three additional factors complemented the wealth advantage of squatters’ increasing their home
court advantage and thus, their ability to secure de jure rights: 1) declaring a public reserve. The ability
for squatters to declare public reserves was a direct result of a lack of qualified surveyors in Australia. In
formulating land reform, parliaments realized that some land should not be subject to selection as it
would, at some future point, be required for public uses – this was particularly true in terms of water
supply. However, during the initial period of selection, a limited supply of surveyors led parliaments to
have squatters identify and nominate suitable areas of reserves. In doing so, parliaments gave
squatters’ an incentive to overestimate the area required for public purposes thereby insulating part of
their runs from selection until after surveys could be carried out. Moreover, because surveyors’ priority
was to survey land claimed under selection, there was a considerable lag time between when a reserve
was declared and when it was surveyed. During the intervening period, squatters’ exploited these areas
to water stock and wash wool.41 A NSW parliamentary inquiry estimated over five million acres of
reserves were drawn up by squatters themselves (NSW, VP, 1872); 2) information asymmetries on land
quality concerning its suitability for agriculture; and 3) much of the area open to selection was arid, and
unable to support small scale permanent agricultural production.42 The inherent mobility advantages of
sheep grazing made the activity drought tolerant with sheep able to be moved long distances at low
40

Squatters were wealthy compared with selectors at the time land reform was introduced however, they also had
a wealth advantage in that they could access relatively cheap capital because legislation permitted them to use
their stock as security for mortgages. Further, they could put liens on their wool to access credit in periods where
they may face capital constraints.
41
Prior to shearing, wool washing reduced the weight of wool and thereby, its transport costs (Butlin, 1964).
42
The same situation arose in the U.S. west where many homestead claims subsequently were abandoned
because the land could not support agriculture (Libecap and Hansen, 2004).

28
costs and therefore, more suited to the more arid parts of the frontier. As a result, agriculture on the
frontier produced a lower rental stream from land than did sheep grazing. This was compounded by
the lack of transport infrastructure to urban markets and high costs of cyclical drought.
These multifaceted approaches to evasion and low returns to agriculture allowed squatters to
prevent the reallocation of their land for much of the selection period. In our specification and
enforcement taxonomy selection took place with third party government specification and enforcement
but enforcement was constrained, and in some cases, entirely absent. The lack of third party
government enforcement was a critical factor that limited the transfer of de jure rights to new entrants.
Counterfactually, the absence of effective government enforcement may have acted to reduce the
number of settlers filing for selection. Moreover, squatters’ evasion efforts, employing both first and
third party (agents) enforcement, were instrumental in the failure of selection to effectively redistribute
colonial lands to small holders. Roberts (1924) states that in NSW over the period of selection eight
sections out of every nine passed to original occupants and, by 1883, over eight million acres of colonial
land was owned by 96 individuals. Further, Morris and Ranken (1883) note that by the middle of the
1880s on average, only 27% of selectors remained on the land arguing that selection had resulted in:
“Unintelligible chaos, in which the rights and interest of all mainly concerned have been the sport of
accident, political interest, and departmental disorder.”
Squatters extensive evasion efforts suggests two things: 1) for much of the 20 years of land reform,
squatters placed a higher value on the land than selectors that is, the size of the wedge OACJ was
greater than oacj in Figure 2 and; 2) the size of squatters pre‐emption claims were too small (Harris,
2008).43 Squatters used their wealth to (illegally) obtain de jure rights in the form of longer term
security of tenure denied to them by colonial governments.44 In part, this was a function of the
continuing pastoral industry boom which ended in the mid‐1880s.45 In short, Australian land reform
efforts suffered from the premature promotion of settled agriculture at the frontier, prior to it being
profitable. Further, third party government specification was not accompanied by effective third party
government enforcement. Both of these factors had the benefit of producing little actual conflict
between squatters and selectors, a situation that also transpired in the high plains of the U.S. West.
43

The restriction on size in arid areas parallels the U.S. case.
In the 1840s, squatters had lobbied for leases up to 26 years in duration. The colonial governor and the BCO did
not approve of this as it would have acted to constrain revenue from later sale. The revenue later played ay a
critical role in assisting migration to the labor scarce Australian colonies.
45
By that time, the introduction of further land reform to induce cooperative settlement underpinned by irrigation
and accompanied by government funding to voluntarily acquire squatting runs, led to a migration of the many
early frontier settlers to urban areas.
44

29
IV.

Settlement of the U.S. Frontier

There have been numerous studies on the overall pattern of settlement of land in the U.S. Here we
want to focus on the settlement of the frontier in the Great Plains, which was occupied by cattlemen,
after the expulsion of Native Americans.46 We focus on the Great Plains because the land was relatively
arid and as such its economic value at the time of settlement did not warrant paying the governmentally
fixed price of $1.25/acre. Nevertheless, the region had economic value for ranching, which is a relatively
capital intensive activity.47 For the first arrivals the land was not scarce and ranchers were free to
occupy where they pleased – this was first person specification and self‐enforcement. In terms of Figure
2 in Section II, the reason that cattlemen preceded labor to the frontier of the Great Plains was that
capital reaped its opportunity cost prior to labor. In Figure 2 this corresponds to the economic frontier
occurring for cattlemen at distance K from the market center – a connection to the railroad for
cattlemen. This was the situation shortly after the Civil War.
The Great Plains naturally consisted of a set of ranges. Dennen (1976: 424) defined a range “as
the watershed of a stream, with the provisions that cattle must drink water at least once a day, and the
extent of a particular range is limited by the distance cattle can wander in 1 day. This is in the
neighborhood of 5 to 10 miles.” The watershed was the basin between two valleys and cattle typically
did not cross valleys but tended to meander within a valley. Over time it was difficult to establish
exclusivity to an entire range because entrants would have an incentive to come to the range as long as
cattle prices increased and/or the railroad network expanded. In the early years of the post civil war
period, the costs were small. But, besides the externalities associated with grazing, once cattle with
different owners occupied the same range the issue of ownership arose.
To establish ownership over their cattle, ranchers branded their cattle and ranchers needed to have
exclusivity to a single brand. On local ranges, it was simple enough for ranchers to recognize brands, but
some cattle would stray across ranges and over time ranchers acted collectively first through local
associations, later state‐wide associations and subsequently with legislative approval. This entailed a
mixture of first and second person specification with second and third party enforcement. The first
territorial legislative assemblies in Montana (1865) and Wyoming (1869) established registration

46

There are many general accounts of the open range period, including Briggs (1940); Dale (1960); Nimmo (1884‐
1885); Osgood (1929); Pelzer (1936); Robbins (1942); and Sandoz (1958). We relied on these accounts for general
overviews. On the specifics of cattlemen’s arrangements and their economic rationale we relied heavily on
Anderson and Hill (2004) and Dennen (1976).
47

Dennen (1976: 423) estimated the land was worth $1.00/acre for ranching.

30
systems (Anderson and Hill, 2004: 149). The registration system of brands established clear ownership
over cattle and thereby facilitated sales of cattle and limited cattle rustling.
If branding was the only problem in establishing exclusivity then there would not have been any
further need for collective action once a registration system was overseen by an organization, e.g. the
Wyoming Stockgrowers’ Association, or the government. But, ranchers faced two threats to the
productivity of their ranges – this means that ranchers were now in the region to the left of J Figure 2.
Current occupants of the range would have an incentive to overstock the range as long as the private
benefit was positive. In addition outsiders would have the same incentive to enter a range as long as the
private benefit was positive. Despite these gains, it is not obvious that cattlemen’s associations would
emerge to solve these problems because of the familiar free rider problem.48 Three factors increased
the likelihood that commons arrangements would emerge: 1) the number of ranchers on a single range
was not large; 2) initially, ranchers were quite homogeneous facilitating cooperation; and 3) ranchers
had to perform a roundup which not only had economies of scale but, if performed multiple times,
inflicted costs on the cattle.
A “roundup” was a bi‐annual activity of collecting the cattle that roamed over the range. Given the
aridity of the region, cattle needed to roam relatively great distances in order to find adequate forage.
In the spring, the round‐up allowed ranchers to assess damages from the winter and to brand calves.
Assigning a brand to a calf was generally not difficult because calves did not stray far from their
mothers. “Maverick” calves, whose mothers presumably died over the winter, were sold at an auction to
those participating in the roundup.49 During the spring and summer, cattle grazed and gained weight
making them ready for the market in the fall, which necessitated another roundup. In principle each
rancher could perform his own roundup but this had several problems. If a rancher performed his own
roundup then he could steal the cattle of other ranchers whereas if all ranchers on the range
participated in the roundup stealing was curbed. Moreover, a common roundup had two overarching
advantages. A roundup was very labor intensive and there were economies of scale in having one
roundup rather than several. The roundup was also stressful on the cattle that had to be herded
together; and this disturbed their grazing. In short, a roundup made obvious economic sense.
The initial issue facing an association was: who was in and who was out. To be a member of a
cattlemen’s association you had to have a range right. A rancher could gain a range right through several
methods. The first rancher in the area acquired rights through “first possession” which was a well
48

Demsetz (1967) argued that property rights would spontaneously emerge to limit dissipation but this minimizes
the collective action problem.
49
In later years, maverick calves were used to help fund the large Wyoming Stockgrower's Association.

31
respected norm.50 Alternatively, ranchers could homestead some land under the provisions of the
Homestead Act of 1862 which allowed the claimant title to 160 acres, if he resided on the land and
cultivated it for five years. A rancher could also file for a pre‐emption claim which meant that he had the
right to purchase 160 acres at $1.25/acre when the government decided to put the land up for auction
at some future date. Land containing water was worth $1.25/acre and many ranchers opted for this
avenue. Many ranchers also filed for land under the auspices of the Timber Acts (1873 and 1878) and
Desert Land Act (1879).51
After formation, one of the first issues confronting a Cattlemen’s Association was to exclude
outsiders, which associations tried to do before overstocking occurred in order to capture rents. This
was accomplished by posting that the range was closed, generally through an announcement in a
newspaper and not allowing an entrant to participate in the collective roundup. Dennen (1976) provides
a succinct example of an association that perhaps acted to late. The Helena Montana Daily Herald of
September 3, 1883 published the following notice:
We the undersigned, stock growers of the above described range, hereby give notice that we consider the said
range already overstocked: therefore we positively decline allowing any outside parties or any parties locating
herds upon this range the use of our corrals, nor will they be permitted to join us in any roundup on said range
from and after this date. Dennen, 1976: 427

Preventing entry from outside cattlemen appears to have been reasonably successful until the
rise in cattle prices in the early 1880s along with the passage of new land laws in the late 1870s: the
Timber Culture Act(s) and Desert Land Act. The Timber Culture Act allowed a claimant an additional 160
acres to a homestead provided that he plant trees on ¼ of the land. This was subsequently amended in
1878 to require the planting of only 1/16th of the lot. The idea behind the Timber Act was again to
benefit farmers. As Osgood(1929: 194 notes:
Congress was made to believe that if the western farmer were wheedled into planting enough
trees, rainfall would be increased to such an extent that the arid West would succumb to the all‐
conquering farmers,… Rain‐making by legislative fiat was something new, even in the varied
history of public land legislation.

In a similar vein the Desert Land Act was meant to help farmers, though the terms were stringent for
farmers. A farmer could purchase 640 acres for $1.25/acre provided that he irrigated the entire plot
50

It appears as if first possession as a norm for allocating rights works well when scarcity is not high – the region J‐
K in Figure 2. For an excellent analysis of the political economy of the use of first possession in the U.S. Midwest
see Kanazawa, Mark T. (1996). For the general use of first possession to allocate property rights see Lueck (2003)
and Libecap (2007).
51
We will discuss the filings under these acts in more detail later because by the 1880s there were a significant
number of allegations that cattlemen, particularly large eastern cattle companies, were abusing the spirit of these
acts by having their ranch hands file for claims which they consolidated into large holdings.

32
within three years. Regardless of the intent of the laws, very few farmers filed claims under the new
land laws. Rather, the new laws enabled cattlemen to secure de jure property rights.
These new acts along with the existing provisions of the Homestead Act and pre‐emption act
enabled large corporate interests to move onto some existing ranges by filing for a de jure property
right. The filings were fraudulent in both the spirit of the law (designed for agriculturalists) and letter of
the law (there were no attempts to comply and no enforcement by the General Land Office). High prices
for cattle along with the ability to acquire land through the various land acts led to a bovine boom
beginning around 1880, with yearly average monthly prices peaking in 1884.52
Dale and Osgood capture the spirit of the boom:
The desire to engage in ranching became almost a craze. Prominent lawyers, bankers and other
business men throughout the East began the formation of cattle companies in order to take
advantage of the wonderful opportunities pointed out to them. Every great city in the East had
men interested either directly or indirectly in ranching. Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and
Washington, together with many lesser cities, all had a number of prominent men who invested
money in ranching enterprises…Members of Congress and Senators or former
Senators...invested large sums of money in the cattle industry (Dale, 1960: 81)
During the eighties, when the scramble to stock the ranges was at its height, the process was
reversed and cattle moved westward in increasing numbers. Feeders found it more profitable to
sell to the western cattleman at the high prices then prevailing, than to buy stock cattle to fatten
for the market. Eastern stock, commonly known on the ranges as 'pilgrims,' 'states' cattle,' or
'barnyard stock' were crowded into the western‐bound stock trains. In 1882‐1884, there were
as many cattle shipped west as east (Osgood, 1929: 91‐93).

The result of the boom was a mixture of de facto and de jure property rights held by many of the
original entrants who formed cattlemen’s associations and de jure property rights held by many of the
larger scale corporations. To protect their “rights” both groups turned to fencing: “Cattlemen were
accused of setting up small barbed‐wire kingdoms to the great detriment of the sturdy pioneer looking
for land”(Osgood, 1929: 193). Fencing did deter entry though members of the range still had to limit
overstocking on their ranges. At this stage property rights on the Great Plains were a mixture of second
party specification/second party enforcement, and third party government specification with self and
second party enforcement.

52

The mean monthly highest price of steers per 100 lbs in Chicago increased from $4.42 in 1879; to $4.75 in 1880;
peaking at $7.52 in 1882. The average yearly high occurred in 1884. The high in 1885 came in January at $5.15 and
declined over the course of the year to end at $4.66. Prices hit their minimum for 1880s in July of 1889 at $2.94,
recovering marginally afterwards, but not rising substantially until the turn of the 20th century (NBER 2009)

33
On corporate ranges, the costs of overstocking were internalized but this was not the case for
ranges operated by Cattlemen’s associations.53 After preventing entry to limit overgrazing, the
occupants of the range had to prevent two externalities: 1) because bulls were used for
impregnating cows, ranchers would have an incentive to put cows and steers on the range but not
bulls. Moreover, it mattered to all that the quality of the bulls was high; and 2) the total number of
cattle on the range had to be limited to prevent overgrazing, which could result in cows having
insufficient weight to withstand the winter. The By‐Laws of the Little Missouri River Stockmen’s
Association provided a clause stipulating the bull to cow ratio:
It is the sense of this Association, and is hereby made binding on its members, that any man who shall
hereafter turn out any female neat cattle upon the range shall place with them, at the time of the
turning loose not less than seven (7) serviceable bulls for every one hundred (100) head of female cattle
which are two years old and upward at that time; …Proved violation of the above rule shall be deemed
a proper subject for the complaint, the penalty to be decided by a majority of the Association present at
the next meeting (Mattison 1950: 203)

Limiting overstocking on all ranges was difficult because to a certain extent it was an ex‐post
problem in that, if ranchers expected high prices or a mild winter then collectively you would want to
stock more cattle than if ranchers expected a harsh winter.54 In any event a procedure needed to be
adopted to ensure overstocking relative to other members. On many ranges, the number of cattle that
one could graze would be in proportion to water rights which were acquired through first possession,
pre‐emption claims, or homesteading. The ability of cattlemen’s associations to prevent overstocking is
mixed but the evidence is clear that in most cases the Cattlemen’s associations produced rents over the
condition of open access. Evidence consistent with the production of rents was the monetary exchange
of range rights:
The agreements regarding such matters as the partition of the range and use of water became
property rights and were frequently bought and sold as land is sold today. Once a man’s range
rights were determined, they were respected by all (Yost 1966: 129; quoted from Dennen 1976:
434).

Dennen (1976: 434) gives evidence of two transactions of range rights. Exclusive of the value of the
cattle and land, Dennen estimates the value of range rights for two ranches and found that the value
reached $200,000 for the sale of range rights on one ranch at the peak of prices in 1884. Dennen also
found that some ranches carried range rights on their accounting books as a positive asset.
53

At the height of the cattle boom in the mid‐1880s all ranges seem to be overstocked because of ex‐post overly
optimistic weather and price expectations.
54
Recent work in behavioral economics, borrowing from psychology and sociology, shows that humans, especially
males, tend to be ex‐post too optimistic.

34
An implication that the commons arrangements are effective is that cattle on such ranges should be
fatter because of preventing overstocking. Cattle can live off their fat for a period of time which means
that in severe winters, the loss rates should be less on ranges with effective Cattlemen’s Associations.
The widespread horrific winter of 1886‐1887 in the West provides us with a natural experiment:
Blizzards struck in the middle of November and continued. The snow, although melting
and freezing, piled higher and higher. By January the ravines and coulees were almost
level with snow. The snow lay for several feet on the plateaus and river bottoms – too
deep for the cattle to get through to the grass. …During February, March and April,
there was considerable speculation among the cattlemen as to what their losses would
be (Mattison 1950: 190).
In his archival research Dennen (1976) found that loss rates varied considerably across ranges in large
part not due to variation in weather but rather due to the effectiveness of organizations to limit entry
and prevent overgrazing. The loss rates in Montana ranged from 10% to 90% depending mostly on the
degree of overstocking (Dennen, 1976: 432). Some overstocking was due to the inability to prevent open
access, particularly along routes for cattle drives. On other ranges, the differences in stocking could be
due to different expectations of weather or prices.55 The losses for the ineffective Little Missouri
Stockmen’s association were so high that the members did not hold a general roundup in the spring of
1887 but waited until July (Mattison, 1950:191, quoting from the Dickinson Press, April 23, 1887).56
The 1880s was a pivotal decade for the fate of de facto and de jure property rights in the Great
Plains. To understand why ranchers won the short run battle over the de facto use of land in the
majority of the Great Plains we need to analyze the various roles played over time by special interests,
the bureaucracy that oversaw the range land – the General Land Office‐ and Congress. We also need to
understand the use of the various land laws in place: the Homestead Act (1862); The Timber Culture
Acts (1873 and 1878); and The Desert Land Act (1877); as well as the proposals emerging from Powell’s
“Report on Arid Lands in the West” (1878) and the report from the Public Lands Commission (1880).
The first proposal to recognize the aridity of the High Plains emerged out of John Wesley Powell’s
“Report on Arid Lands in the West” to Congress in 1878. Powell saw the High Plains as suited for
agriculture only to the extent that farmers worked together in a minimum group of nine to complete an

55

To some extent human optimism may have played a role but uncertainty may also have added to ex‐post
overstocking. McCabe (2004) argues that for nomadic herds in present day Kenya and Tanzania that the optimal
strategy for herders is to stock as much as possible and periodically suffer large losses because of the inability to
predict droughts.
56
The lack of a roundup in 1887 suggests that the Little Missouri range was overstocked and that the association
was either overly optimistic or had a monitoring problem. As a footnote to a footnote: Teddy Roosevelt was a
member of the Little Missouri Stockmen’s Association and was its president for several years.

35
irrigation project and upon its completion the farmers individually secured title to twenty acres.57 Powell
envisioned most of the land in High Plains as suited for pastoralists but here too he proposed that
ranchers band together, similar to the actual workings of Cattlemen’s Associations. Powell proposed
that nine or more ranchers could secure title to 2,650 acres, provided that they had access to water.
Though Powell’s proposals were embodied in two bills sent to Congress along with the Report, Congress
viewed the proposals with suspicion and allegations of supporting land monopolists.58 Indeed the
notion of such large plots was quite foreign to the majority of Congressmen east of the 100th meridian
(Libecap and Hansen, 2004). Perhaps ironically the cattlemen in associations did not support either
Powell’s Report or the various land laws. The early cattlemen seemed to be quite content with the
commons arrangements in place, and they were reluctant to lease or purchase land outside of what
they needed to establish a range right.
Shortly after Powell’s report, Congress convened a Public Lands Commission to report on the overall
disposal of the public domain and to offer some recommendations. The Public Lands Commission issued
a series of reports. In an early report, the Commission proposed a repeal of the pre‐emption laws and
the Timber Act. The Commission also advocated the sale of grazing lands in the High Plains. They
proposed a sliding price scale over time; beginning in 1881 at $1.25/acre, decreasing to $1/acre in 1886,
75 cents in 1890 and eventually falling to 12.5 cents. In a subsequent report the Commission
recommended leasing the public domain for grazing. Again, ranchers did not endorse either the selling
of land or the leasing of land because they preferred their de facto property rights. In a short period of
time, this would change. The Congressional reaction to the proposals of the Commission echoed their
reaction to the recommendations of Powell: members of Congress for the most part disagreed with the
unlimited sale of the public domain. On the minds of many members of Congress was the worry of the
monopolization of land not only by the original cattlemen but moreover by the surge of new entrants
forming cattle corporations. Allegedly many of the new entrants entered fraudulent claims under the
various land acts in place:
Much of this land was taken up by fraudulent means under the provisions of various land laws.
A 'cattle king' employed a number of men as herders called 'cowboys.' The herds of cattle were
located on a good grassy plat of ground, probably along a stream, and each cowboy was
expected and required to make a desert‐land entry, a timber‐culture entry, and possibly entries
under homesteading and preemption. Technically speaking, it was possible under these laws for
one person to take out as much as 1,280 acres...(Robbins, 1942: 251).
57

Powell drew on the successful experience of the Mormons in Utah for this proposal.
Also, a few authors mentioned a prevailing federalist (nationalist) sentiment in Congress with which Powell's
report was totally at odds because Powell advocated local water control and other decentralized controls on
ranges.
58

36

Following 1880, the Pre‐emption, Timber and Stone, Timber Culture, and Desert Land acts came
in for much criticism, since it was apparent that, like the commutation clause of the Homestead
Law, they lent themselves to abuse and fraud. In the eighties the movement was given a great
impetus by the discovery of enormous frauds in which foreign corporations and titled noblemen
were engaged for the purpose of building up vast estates (Gates, 1963: 338).

By the mid‐1880s the ranchers who only five years earlier did not support proposals for the
establishment of de jure property rights on the range, now led the movement for leasing the range. At
the 1884 annual meeting of the National Cattle Growers’ Association a member introduced a resolution
encouraging Congress “to enact such laws as will enable the cattlemen of the West to acquire by lease
the right to graze upon unoccupied lands.” (quoted in Osgood 1929: 201.) Interestingly within the
National Association, the Wyoming delegation which had been the most vocal in opposing the earlier
recommendations of the Public Lands Commission were now the most vocal proponents of leasing.59
The appeals of the Cattlemen fell on deaf ears and Congress maintained the status quo. Despite the
rhetoric for reform, retaining the status quo meant: retaining the de jure property right for
homesteaders but without enforcement; de jure fraudulently acquired property rights for some
ranchers; and de facto rights for the majority of ranchers.
Given the fact that the majority of the ranges were still under de facto property rights, one
might have anticipated that there would be conflict between the homesteaders and the cattlemen.
Indeed there was considerable potential conflict as soon as homesteaders covered their opportunity
costs for moving to the Great Plains – point k in Figure 2‐ beginning in the 1870s.60 Initially
Homesteaders petitioned the General Land Office, their legislators and an in some instances appealed to
the courts. For the most part we found that the majority view in the literature concurs that ranchers
had a dominant violence potential and the federal government opted not to enforce the de jure rights of
homesteaders:

59

Between 1860‐1880, Texas supplied a great deal of the cattle demand generated by the growth of the industry
in the Great Plains region. It may be no coincidence that the leasing idea took hold in the North after years of
contact with Texas cattlemen, many of whom operated under a successful leasing system instituted through the
autonomous land control Texas retained after joining the Union.
60
Sheep herders also encroached on the land of cattlemen, reaching a climax in the first decade of the 20th century
as cattlemen were forced to move to higher elevations. Unlike the homesteaders, the sheep herders did not have a
de jure right and as such the cattlemen felt less constraint in dealing with sheep herders over establishment of de
facto rights. In addition, many of the sheep herders were Mormon and the general populace felt little sympathy
for them. Clearly the violence potential of a cattlemen’s association trumped the violence potential of a
sheepherder. Sheepherders did not naturally band together for a roundup because sheep herds grazed alone and
were tended. O'Neal (1989) documents 120 separate instances of conflict between ranchers and sheep herders
with 50 deaths of sheep herders and their families and the slaughter of over 53,000 sheep. Ultimately, to avoid
conflict, sheepherders migrated to land not as well suited to cattle; more rugged and at higher elevations.

37
…his (the ranchers) control must be extra‐legal and at times illegal. He might keep off other
herds either by fencing the public land or by cooperation with his neighbours. His success in
these methods of trying to solve the problem of maintaining his share of the free pasturage
depended, on the one hand, on the negligence or impotence of the central government in the
enforcement of the land laws, and on the other, on the sanctions of range customs backed, if
necessary, by group force (Osgood, 1929: 116‐117).

The homesteaders had resort to the courts but this was a costly and time consuming process.
Moreover, in the heart of cattle country, e.g. the high plains in Wyoming and Montana, the cattlemen
controlled the local legislatures and courts. This “home court” advantage is analogous to the situation in
Australia described in the prior section. In the early 1880s homesteaders brave enough to settle in the
areas dominated by the ranchers and foolhardy enough to bring cases to the judiciary, found that, if
they were lucky, their cases would be dismissed but in some cases ranchers (or lawmen acting in the
interests of the big operators) employed the tactic of accusing the homesteaders of cattle rustling.
Indeed, the accusation of “rustler” was frequently used to intimidate homesteaders, many of whom
kept a small herd of cattle for self‐consumption as well as sale in order to complement the growing of
crops. If convicted of “rustling” a homesteader would lose his livestock. A clearly biased law was passed
in 1885 in Wyoming allowing inspectors of the Wyoming Stockgrower's Assocation to confiscate any
cattle with "unknown brands" a.k.a. any cattle whose owner was not part of the association which had a
monopoly on registering brands.
The cattlemen also resorted to intimidation and here, ranchers clearly had a violence potential
over homesteaders.61 For this reason there was little actual conflict, particularly once it became clear
that the executive branch would not enforce their rights:
By 1885, the cattle interests were deliberately chasing settlers off their lands, enclosing vast
areas and defending these enclosures with armed riders. …Settlers avoided these localities as
they would the plague (Robbins, 1942: 250‐251).
Most of the means that the Cattle Barons used against the helpless invaders of their domains
were effective. Interference from law enforcement authorities was seldom encountered. If
range rights had no standing under law, they were recognized and respected by officers of the
law and by local courts, and legislatures were seldom successful in overriding them, even though
repeated attempts were made by a few misguided legislators who considered it their
responsibility to serve the best interests of all their constituents (Terrell, 1972: 227).

61

For ranchers this was 2nd party specification and third party (hired hands) enforcement. Not all ranchers resorted
to violence and over time the tide of homesteaders encroached on the territory of the ranchers but the tide did
not swell in the heart of cattle country until the first decade of the 1900s with the increase in the price of wheat as
well as increased enforcement from local, state and federal governments.

38
Yet, the General Land Office (GLO) did little to enforce the rights of homesteaders against
ranchers. The reason for the inaction of the land office was twofold: the GLO was budget constrained
and the large scale ranching corporations had significant clout in Congress – especially in the Senate‐
and through the executive branch, which controlled the GLO. The GLO was under the control of the
Interior Department. The Secretary of the Interior had nearly complete discretion over the appointment
of the Commissioner of the General Land Office. Until the early 1880s the GLO condoned the informal
claims of ranchers and did nothing about the “illegal fencing” of the public domain nor the alleged
fraudulent claims under the land acts. During the term of Commissioner Noah McFarland (1881‐1884)
the GLO was flooded with letters from prospective homesteaders asking the GLO to intervene on their
behalf. McFarland sent agents out west to determine the extent of illegal fencing and the GLO issued a
report to Congress in 1884. Following the report of illegal fencing, newly elected President Grover
Cleveland issued a proclamation in 1885 ordering the removal of all illegal fences. Congress followed by
passing anti‐fencing legislation in 1885.62 Despite the Presidential and Congressional actions, there was
little governmental enthusiasm for enforcing the illegal fencing law, particularly in the Senate.
Commissioner Sparks succeeded McFarland. Sparks was a zealously dedicated civil servant and
advocate of homesteaders. In 1886 he authorized the printing of the names of ranchers who had illegal
enclosures on public lands. Furthermore, he petitioned the War Department to take down the illegal
fences in Wyoming. Sparks also went after the abusive use by ranchers of the land laws to capture de
jure rights: he suspended final action on all land entries in Colorado, the Dakotas, Idaho, New Mexico,
Utah, Washington and Wyoming, along with portions of Kansas, Minnesota and Nebraska. The
suspended acreage tallied approximately 2,750,000 acres (Robbins, 1942: 293). In addition Sparks
publicly advocated the abolition of the extant land laws except for the Homestead Act. Sparks went
even further by advocating that Congress and the Executive limit the ability of land grant railroads to
acquire additional acreage. Clearly, Sparks went too far and all the interested parties except
homesteaders, besieged Congress to stop Sparks. The Senate introduced a bill to protect the extant
entries that Sparks had frozen. Meanwhile, the War Department did not act on the request of Sparks to
cut illegal fences. The situation was at a stalemate until the Secretary of the Interior essentially forced
the resignation of Commissioner Sparks in November of 1887. The Secretary replaced Sparks with a new
Commissioner who was more sympathetic to the interests of ranchers and railroads. By early 1888 the

62

The House supported the interests of the Homesteaders steadfastly, while the Senate was more ambivalent.
Many members of the Senate held interests in ranching operations in the West, though we do not know the total
number of Senators. Part of their “interest” may have been simply bribes.

39
Interior Department revoked the reform platform that was started by McFarland in the early 1880s and
subsequently championed vigorously by Sparks.
The actions of Sparks and Congress did encourage new homestead entrants as well as increased
entries by cattlemen under the existing land laws.63 In addition to the actions of the government, viewed
as supportive by the homesteaders and threatening by the cattlemen, an additional reason for the
increased migration of capital and labor to the frontier was the result of the horrific winter of 1886‐1887
which decimated herds and prompted the failure of many corporations. Capital and labor moved to fill
the vacuum. Naturally, the migrations led to more potential conflicts on the range, but by 1888 the
General Land Office, and Congress opted to stay out of the battle on over rights.64
Though the federal government did not play a role in enforcing the de jure rights of
homesteaders until the 20th century, the gradual migration of homesteaders to the frontier in the late
1880s led to an increase in local support for homesteaders by the press, the legislatures and Courts in
the High Plains, particularly the eastern High Plains (Libecap and Hansen 2004). The change in the local
political climate led to a secular decline in the use of intimidation by cattlemen because it was no longer
effective because over time homesteaders could win in court to uphold their de jure rights.65
Congress amended land laws again in 1891 with the General Revision Act. The Act was quite
sweeping in that it ended cash sales of land; repealed the pre‐emption provisions; repealed the Timber
Culture Acts; and placed additional restrictions on claiming land through the Desert Act. These changes
prevented ranchers from formalizing their de facto claims but the laws did nothing to enforce the de
jure claims of homesteaders. The GLO, continually budget constrained, did not engage in any anti‐
fencing activity until the Presidency of Teddy Roosevelt in 1901. As a result the informal commons

63

“The onslaught of the anti‐monopolists had the effect of stimulating the speculators, cattlemen, lumber and
mining companies to prompt action before the public domain should be closed to them. Land sales and entries
under the Pre‐emption, Timber Culture, Timber and Stone, and Desert Land acts and the cash sales system shot up
to a high point in 1888…” (Gates,1963: 338).
64
With its meager budget the GLO was in no position to enforce the rights of homesteaders. Congress held the
purse strings, opting for rhetorical sympathy for homesteaders but inaction.
65
We stress that we focused on conflict in the regions of the high plains where the cattlemen ruled supreme from
the 1870s until the turn of the 20th century. In the more eastern regions of the high plains, e.g. Kansas, Nebraska
and parts of the Dakotas, there were notably less instances of intimidation throughout the period. In these regions,
activity was more mixed and higher value, with agriculture and ranching increasingly co‐existing though the
ranching became more specialized, e.g. selective breeding and the ranchers possessed de jure rights. The
differences between the lands occupied by the Cattle “barons” (Wyoming and Montana) and the mixed systems
stemmed from the lack of hegemony of the cattlemen in the less arid more easterly regions of the high plains.
From the “get go” the local politicians in more eastern areas fostered migration and championed the notion of
“rain following the plow.” This interpretation is consistent with the narrative of Libecap and Hansen (2004) who
argue that politicians over time viewed the larger voting bloc of homesteaders as their constituents.

40
arrangements of ranchers continued into the 20th century and were eventually replaced with
government leases.66
Roosevelt, who was a prior rancher, though one who suffered considerable losses throughout
his years of ranching from the 1880s until the end of the century, sent out the cavalry in 1901 to enforce
the de jure rights of homesteaders. The first years of Roosevelt's presidency reflect his conservationist
fervor as well as his anti‐monopoly views: “Roosevelt had very positive views about the need for firm
executive control over the nations use of natural resources…Roosevelt vigorously prosecuted
lumbermen, ranchers, miners and power companies that ignored the law “ (Watson, 1976: 127‐128). As
a result Roosevelt wanted to protect the government lands from the large ranching interests turning
their de facto rights into de jure rights. Much of the de facto lands Roosevelt wanted to maintain as
National Forest lands. Roosevelt put the ranchers under increased scrutiny due to his belief that
speculative land interests and monopolists had exploited remaining loopholes and oversights in GLO
policy. Roosevelt’s actions in cutting down illegal fencing resulted in a rapid increase in the number of
homesteads filed in the Great Plains states.67 The increased settlement by homesteaders in the early
20th century prompted the movement of ranching activities onto more arid land in the West. Again there
was little actual conflict because in a show of force between the Cavalry and ranchers, the Cavalry would
win hands down so ranchers opted to move their livestock rather than fight. Throughout the period of
the open range, circa 1870 to 1900, we found only scattered evidence of conflict resulting in violence
because the outcome was generally certain. The collective arrangements of ranchers into Cattlemen’s
Associations, (and individual large corporate claims) prevented entry onto ranges designated as closed
because a potential ranching entrant did not stand a chance against a group of ranchers. Similarly
prospective homesteaders unless backed by the coercive power of state would lose in a violent conflict
against ranchers. Eventually, when homesteaders increased sufficiently to have their voices and rights
upheld by local governments, and the federal government finally acted to enforce de jure property
rights against the de facto property rights of ranchers, the ranchers backed down and allowed
homesteaders in. The saga of the open range demonstrates the interplay of de facto versus de jure
property rights and important role of politics intermediating the two.

66

These leases were preceded by a significant amount of study and debate concerning leases. A portion of the
Public Lands Commission Report in 1915 included a study by Coville of the leasing system prevalent in Texas since
the mid‐19th century.
67
We note that not all of the increased settlement was the result of the activities of Roosevelt. Wheat prices
boomed in the early 20th century before declining dramatically in 1920 (Alston, 1983).

41
V.

Settlement of the Brazilian frontier
In 1822, a few weeks before achieving independence from Portugal, the Emperor of Brazil

suspended the use of sesmarias (large land grants), the main formal means through which land had
been granted since the 16th century, leaving no land law in its place. Over the previous centuries the
colony’s economy had been through a sugar cycle (1550‐1650) and a gold cycle (1700‐1780) both
predominantly based on slave labor. Although the formal route for access to land had been the
sesmarias, which were free and readily available to those who owned slaves, land was not scarce and so
could easily be squatted on. The suspension of the sesmarias was partly a reflection of the abundance of
land, particularly in a period (early 19th century) when economic activity was at an all time low (Furtado,
1959). From 1822 to 1850 there were no formal rules regarding the access and use of land and the issue
was not even mentioned in the new country’s constitution of 1824. After the 1830s, however, the
economic viability of coffee started to improve and plantations quickly started to spread, first in the
region of Rio de Janeiro and then gradually expanding the frontier south towards São Paulo and
eventually westward in the São Paulo interior.
This process of frontier expansion conforms to the dynamics of our model in Section II yet with
some idiosyncrasies given the details of the Brazilian economy in the period when the scarcity of land
started to kick in. The early entrants were large slave owners (referred to as capital in Section II).68
Initially landowners imported slaves to use during the sugar and gold booms but these had been under‐
utilized since the end of the gold cycle in 1780 given the stagnant economy. The slave/landowners were
thus willing to engage in the production of coffee even before coffee prices, as well as those of other
commodities, started to rise after the 1840s. In a sense the landowners were already on the frontier,
though they may not have moved to the frontier given the new relative prices after the sugar and gold
booms ended. There were very few small landowners because the Brazilian economy up to that point
had offered little return for smallholders who could not afford slaves. Few immigrants were willing to go
to Brazil while slavery and large plantations were the norm.69 In this period there was consequently first
person specification and self‐enforcement, which due to low scarcity was easily achieved.

68

Though coffee requires a lot of labor, initially coffee cultivation was performed by slaves, a capital asset from the
owners’ viewpoint. In addition coffee is between a tree and perennial shrub, lending it more to designation of
capital intensive. The relative applications of labor or capital do not affect our analysis of settlement.
69
It remains as puzzle as to why more immigrants did not migrate to the South of Brazil where the return to self‐
sufficient farming appeared to be higher than the return that prospective immigrants reaped in Portugal or in
many other countries. If it was a capital constraint, what prevented an indenture market from arising?

42
As the NPV to land started to rise with the prospect of higher coffee prices and the diffusion of
the habit of drinking coffee throughout the world, the demand for land increased leading to a rapidly
expanding frontier. With higher NPVs competition for the land increased and two separate problems
emerged for the coffee producers. The first problem is that in the absence of any de jure rule for
allocating land the de facto reality had been massive levels of squatting by large landowners covering
huge expanses of land that were not actually occupied or used, given the low level of economic activities
that had prevailed following the end of the gold cycle. Claims overlapped but this did not lead to conflict
while land was beyond the economic frontier –the point that would induce migration.70 With the rise in
NPVs, however, and the prospect of imminent higher returns even from land still beyond the frontier,
conflicts erupted, both physical and legal as competing claimants tried to make their claims prevail.
Dean (1971: 611) states that during this period “...the landowners hired gunmen killed not only
recalcitrant backwoods ‘intruders’, but also other landowners.” Similarly Osório Silva (1996: 133) notes
that “… litigation and disputes over boundaries were in the order of the day, being responsible for a
great part of the fights among families and crimes in the interior.” The need to hire gunmen and lawyers
marks a shift to third party enforcement, while specification was still first party. The costs and rent
dissipation generated by such conflicts was one of the sources of a rising demand for formal property
rights to land by mid‐19th century.
A separate issue which also fueled the demand for a new land law at this time was the pressure
by the English for the end of slavery. Brazil had managed to evade earlier attempts by the British to
impose this prohibition, but by mid‐century it was becoming obvious that the importation of slaves
would have to cease in the near future and complete abolition would eventually follow. As coffee
production was completely based on slave labor and large plantations, this situation required that a new
source of labor, European immigration, be set up to allow a smooth transition. Doing so, however,
involved establishing a land law that would assure that the immigrant labor would effectively be
directed towards the plantations rather that moving to the frontier to squat on land of their own.
Landowners needed to eliminate the availability of free land if they were to retain their privileged
position.71 In other words there was a need to move to third party specification.

70

A similar situation occurred in the Amazon in the 20th century following the collapse of the rubber boom in the
early part of the 20th century until the encouragement by government of new entrants in the 1960s and 1970s.
71
This is a recommendation that had already been made in the Australian context by 19th century British
economist E.G. Wakefield, who was often cited in the parliamentary debates throughout the 1840s in Brazil when
this issue has hotly debated (Dean, 1971: 613; Osório Silva, 1996: 99; Carvalho, 1988: 86).

43
In 1850 a new land law (Lei de Terras No 601) was finally approved and in that same year the
transatlantic slave trade officially and effectively ceased. The law had two main provisions: 1) validation
with no restrictions on all land claims obtained prior to 1850, whether from sesmarias or plain squatting;
and 2) purchase was the only legal means of securing additional land. Given that Parliament essentially
represented the landed elite the validation of squatting was not contentious.72 The second measure was
less consensual as the landowners in frontier São Paulo regions (represented by the Liberal party) faced
plenty of land to be appropriated in the future, while the landowners in the closed Rio de Janeiro
frontier (represented by the Conservative party and closer to Emperor) did not have such opportunities.
The first pass at approving the law in the early 1840s was blocked by the Liberals coming to power, but
upon the Conservative return in 1850 the law was approved imposing the restriction on further
squatting. As we shall see the consolidation of the frontier landowners’ power in the second half of the
19th century implied that this restriction was not enforced and land was continuously squatted for
decades to come. The inability of the central government to apply the law meant that specification
remained in first party hands. The de jure stipulation of purchase would come to play an instrumental
role in impeding the access to land by immigrant laborers after abolition of slavery in 1888. At that point
enforcement and specification would be done by the state governments, but were used primarily in
favor of the landowning oligarchies and to stop immigrant labor from having access to land.
The framework in Figure 1 helps to understand the situation described above. The ideal
situation for the landowners would have been a continuation of slavery and a land law that did not
restrict their expansion into the frontier but simply arbitrated the conflicts among themselves inherent
in that expansion. Such a scenario would yield returns along the upper envelope of the NPV curves,
ABCD. For the landowners this would be the equivalent of the secure property rights situation. The
property rights could even be merely de facto as they would be secure because there are no immigrant
laborers to compete for land. But with the end of slavery that scenario was no longer available. The
alternatives depended on finding a way to successfully substitute immigrants for slaves. If a change in
property rights did not emerge that promoted immigration yet kept the immigrants from seeking their
own land, then the NPV faced by the landowners would be the lower returns GLCD. From the
perspective of the landowners this can be thought of as the open access situation with free entrance
and dissipated rents. If, however, the land law of 1850 achieved its purpose of forcing immigrants to sell
72

Even by the end of the Empire in 1888 only 1.5% of the population had the right to vote. The franchise was
limited to men over 25 with “means.” The electorate voted for an electoral college of sorts which then chose the
deputies. The emperor chose the senators. Over time power tilted in favor of the landowners in Sao Paulo region
and their political representatives

44
their labor for several years before being able to purchase their own land, the return to the plantation
owners would be above the open access situation and below the secure (de facto) property rights
situation. This would be a return along FBCD in Figure 2. We can think of the new land law as a
commons arrangement in the sense that the importation of immigrants and their containment as
laborers rather than owners was a collective good with severe free‐rider problems. In effect this is the
outcome that prevailed once slavery was abolished. Although the higher NPVs associated with slavery
were no longer attainable, a second‐best (from the point of view of the landowners) was achieved
through massive immigration, with the free‐rider problem solved by having the central and state
governments finance and coordinate the immigration process.73
Immigration did not increase all that dramatically immediately after the passage of the 1850
Land Law. Although the importation of slaves had been forbidden it was clear to landowners that the
use of the stock of slaves could be maintained for several decades yet. Given the high returns to coffee
production under slavery, the law was not enforced and the frontier continued expanding through
further squatting on the frontier. The law required that all landowners demarcate and register their
properties so that the State, in principle, could sell the remaining land. In practice landowners did not
register their land and either claimed that any subsequent encroachments had been squatted on prior
to 1850, and were thus legitimized by the Land Law, or were able to lobby successfully for ever later
years as the benchmark for legitimate claims, thus maintaining.
Carvalho (1988: 94) provides a detailed account of how the landowners evaded and ignored all
the restrictions from the Land Law that were contrary to their interest. The sale of land, which,
according to the Law of 1850, was supposed to finance the immigration effort, was insignificant and
when the pressure for the abolition of slavery increased in the 1880s the government had to turn
instead to the general budget. The capture of government by landowners intensified after 1889 when
Brazil became a republic and state governments received significant power and autonomy.74 Most states

73

From 1892 to 1930 the revenue from coffee export tax was 50% of the total tax revenue in São Paulo. During this
period the expenditures on immigration programs were on average 5.2% of the total tax revenue and 10.5% of
coffee tax revenue (data from Holloway, 1980). Therefore it is not the case that the coffee producers were mostly
paying for the immigration themselves. According to Carvalho (1988: 100): “Immigration was financed with
budgetary resources that subsidized transportation, immigration and colonization companies, as well as farmers
and immigrants. The costs were socialized not only among the farmers, but among the taxpaying population
through the public budget, both at the central and at the provincial levels.”
74
The coffee planters in the São Paulo frontier were major players in the overthrow of the Brazilian throne,
together with parts of the army and the urban middle class (Viotti da Costa, 1985). The discontent of planters
arose from both the abolition of slavery and the restriction which the Land Law tried to impose on their ability to
incorporate new land.

45
adopted land legislation that essentially replicated the 1850 Land Law. Although in de jure terms this
legislation prohibited further incorporation of land to the private domain through squatting, in practice
“… the fundamental characteristic of the legislation approved by the states was the liberality towards
the (large) squatters” (Osório Silva, 1996: 255.) It was actually convenient for the local oligarchies to
have the law in place for selective use to keep others from access to land. This period can thus be
interpreted as a switch to third party specification and enforcement.
By the time that the maintenance of slavery was no longer politically sustainable in the 1880s,
the importation of immigrant labor had been effectively organized and the abolition of slavery in 1888
and transition to free labor came about with few tribulations for the coffee planters apart from the
unavoidable move to a second‐best form of labor. The flow of immigrants in the subsequent decades,
especially in São Paulo, the main coffee region, guaranteed a steady availability of labor at low wages
(Bazanezi et al., 2008: 92; Hall, 1969; Halloway, 1980). 75 The period after the proclamation of the
republic in 1889 up to 1930 would be the golden age of coffee with ever‐expanding planted area and
prices kept high by government intervention despite systematic over‐production. It is in this period that
the landowners faced the biggest threat of entry of immigrant laborers who could potentially squat on
marginal land prior to the arrival of the coffee capitalists.
In the Brazilian case the political equilibrium was clearly skewed towards the landowners and
the laborers stood very little chance of winning any dispute for land, whether physical or political. Local
oligarchies dominated access to land and power in their regions, usually through the figure of the all‐
powerful coronel that presided with feudal‐like rights and reigned through a mixture of paternalism and
violence, strengthened by his association to central state politicians to whom he could deliver votes.76
Laborers typically lived and worked on large plantations and were even given the right to plant for their

75

Rivera, Nugent and Saddi (2004) argued that land laws evolved through the 1850‐1920 period in a way that
made property rights more secure as a means to encourage immigration. They create an index of the precision of
the law that varies over time and use this in a first‐order vector autoregression specification, where the other
dependent variable is the annual flow of immigration and the explanatory variables are coffee exports, terms of
trade and presence of slaves (dummy). In the equation where the flow of immigrants is the dependent variable
they are surprised to find that the lagged total precision of the law has a negative effect on immigration as their
story predicted a positive relation. Their result is however perfectly compatible with our analysis where coffee
planters use their clout, including politically through the law, to deny access to land for immigrants and other
potential smallholders.
76
The key to the power of the coronels was the control of the franchise which was not secret. Universal literate
male suffrage existed which gave the franchise over time to 6% by the 1920s. Despite the stipulation of literacy
coronels could deliver the votes of their workers. Workers exchanged their votes as part of the paternalistic
package offered by the coronels. Many aspects of the rural paternalistic system are similar to what prevailed in the
U.S. on large plantations from the 1890s until the mechanization of cotton in the 1960s (Alston and Ferrie, 1993).

46
own use, but access to land ownership was rarely a possibility. Even if one managed to squat on land in
marginal frontier areas, it would typically be difficult to retain the land once the coffee frontier arrived
and competing claims (often with questionable titles) by the large landowners emerged (Osório Silva,
1996: 336). Thus in Brazil the ‘coronels’ effectively preempted the entrants (in Figure 2) and the coffee
planters retained strong de jure and even stronger de facto rights bolstered by their political
dominance.77 This process was not devoid of violent conflict, not only against potential small entrants,
but between the different oligarchy/families that disputed not only land but control of municipal power.
According to Osório Silva (1996: 263 ):
… the benevolence of the state’s land policies towards the squatters did not imply a
democratization of the access to land. … The essential condition for a squatter to become an
owner was to stay on the land that is to be legalized for a sufficiently long time. To stay on the
land does not necessarily mean to cultivate it, but rather to stop others from squatting on it
and/or avoid being removed from the land by the municipal and state authorities in charge of
the public patrimony, who acted with scandalous impartiality. To stay on the land the large
farmer/squatter counted on his own resources (armed henchmen) and sought to stay well
connected with the state authorities. … Thus in the long run the little vigilance that the small
squatters could muster to try to stay on the land was useless. Their permanence on the land was
temporary and unstable; lasting only until stronger forces showed up to kick them out. Osório
Silva, 1996: 336‐337.

After 1930 Brazil initiated in earnest its industrialization process and a shift of power from rural
to urban elites started to take place. By then the extremely concentrated land ownership structure was
consolidated. The process of frontier expansion from that time has followed a similar pattern, where
land is titled long before it is occupied. The peasants that initially occupy the land are the first stage
through which the frontier expands. They are subsequently replaced by large landowners in a process
that Foweraker (1981: 10) notes is mediated by law, the bureaucracy and possibly violence.
The slowness and bias of the legal system, and the very concept of ‘ownership ’of land
work against the peasant on the frontier. Legal right to land always belongs with others, and
their own ‘legal’ claims and protests are always invalidated by the mysterious language of the
law and bureaucracy. … (W)here the provisions of the law are incomplete or insufficient, then
violence is used to force the peasants from the land, or sever their surplus from them.
(Foweraker, 1981: 117)

Only in the 1990s, with the rise of the Landless Peasants Movement (MST), did landless
peasants begin to master this ‘mysterious language’ and start to use the law and bureaucracy to

77

Note that although there are not significant economies of scale for growing coffee, the pattern of production
was overwhelmingly on large farms. This is evidence of the greater importance of politics as a determinant of
property rights rather than endowments being the primary determinant as in Engerman and Sokoloff (1997). We
thank Stephen Haber for pointing this out.

47
achieve access to land through land reform (see Alston, Libecap and Mueller, 1999a,b, 2000,
2008).

VI. Concluding Remarks
In our analytical framework there is a progression of settlement: from squatters, with self‐
enforcement; to de facto commons arrangements; and ultimately to de jure titled land. In the Australia
and the U.S. case studies, the government intervened to encourage premature or inappropriate
settlement which led to either actual conflict or the potential for conflict. In the Brazilian case the
absence of any specified de jure property rights by the government enforcement led to de facto self‐
enforced and third party enforced claims, along with sporadic conflicts. The Australian case exhibited
the least actual conflict between the heterogeneously endowed settlers, the squatters who moved to
the frontier to graze sheep and the selectors who moved to take up agriculture because of government
policies. Little conflict emerged because by the time of the migration of the selectors, the squatters
were wealthy and politically connected and thereby better able to evade the law on limiting acreage.
Moreover, the rental stream from the land was higher for grazing than settled agriculture so over time
squatters could out‐compete the agriculturalists for the land. The U.S. case had a high potential for
conflict but little conflict transpired because of the disproportionate violence advantage of ranchers
over homesteaders. Ranchers moved to the frontier first and progressed from informal claimants, with
norms, to more organized cattlemen’s associations. Homesteaders subsequently attempted to settle on
the land held informally by ranchers but the ranchers through threats of violence dissuaded many
potential homesteaders from filing claims. Instead the homesteaders took their grievances to the
political arena though it took the government over twenty years to enforce their de jure rights. Once the
U.S. cavalry came to the aid of homesteaders, ranchers backed down. The Brazilian case also had a high
potential for conflict with immigrants but with little conflict actually occurring. Large coffee plantation
owners harnessed their political power to prevent competition over land claims persuading the central
and state governments to deny immigrants access to land. The violence advantage of local coronels
reinforced their political power. In turn, this reduced the potential and actual conflict that may have
occurred between the coronels and the immigrants. Nevertheless, conflict did erupt periodically among
the large coffee planters.
The establishment of norms by all original settlers in Australia and the U.S. shared certain
characteristics: 1) The settlers limited the size of claims (or the number of sheep or cattle allowed to
graze); 2) the claimants agreed to uphold the claims of others; 3) the claimants at some point banded

48
together to exclude outsiders; and 4) the claimants petitioned the government for formal recognition
and enforcement of their claims as scarcity values increased. In Brazil because of the huge gains to
claimants from securing land through violence and the absence for many years of any access to de jure
rights, the large planters only acted collectively in the political arena to exclude outsiders (immigrants),
and to legitimate their squatted claims.
In all three cases, the political power of the first claimants influenced the supply of formal
property rights to their claims. In the Australian and US cases, where this political power was relatively
diluted by the extensive franchise, the supply of de jure rights was not in their favor. However, a lack of
enforcement of de jure rights for entrants resulted in incumbents being able to prevent the initial
reallocation attempts by utilizing either a wealth and/or violence advantage. In Brazil the wealth and
political advantage of the initial claimants was overwhelmingly stronger than the potential entrants. Our
cases suggest that de facto rights tend to prevail for a time even in the presence of de jure rights that fail
to support them because of the lack of political will to enforce de jure rights. Generally, the supply of
formal rights to land will be associated with rent dissipation if formal rights do not recognize the status
quo de facto rights. Rent dissipation took the forms of land use inconsistent with relative prices,
political lobbying, violence and threats of violence.

49
References
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson. 2006. Economic Origins of Dictatorships and Democracies.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Acheson, James M. 1987. “The Lobster Fiefs Revisited: Economic and Ecological Effects of Terrioriality in
the Maine Lobster Industry,” in The Question of the Commons: The Culture and Ecology of
Communal Resources. Edited by Bonnie J. McCay and James M. Acheson.
Adeney, William. 1845‐1847. Awards and Correspondence. MS 11920. State Library of Victoria.
Allen, Douglas W. 2002. “The Rhino’s Horn: Incomplete Property Rights and the Optimal Value of an
Asset” Journal of Legal Studies, 31 (June): S359‐S358.
Almeida, Ana .L.O. 1992. The Colonization of the Amazon. University of Texas Press.
Alston, Lee J. 1983. "Farm Foreclosures in the United States During the Interwar Period," Journal of
Economic History, 43, December: 885‐903.
Alston, Lee J. and Joseph P. Ferrie. 1993. "Paternalism in Agricultural Labor Contracts in the U.S. South:
Implications for the Growth of the Welfare State," American Economic Review (September): 852‐
876.
Alston, Lee J., Thráinn Eggertsson and Douglass C. North, eds. 1996. Empirical Studies in Institutional
Change, Cambridge University Press.
Alston, Lee J., Edwyna Harris & Bernardo Mueller, (forthcoming) ‘Property Rights, Land
Settlement and Land Conflict on Frontiers: Evidence from Australia, Brazil and the
U.S.’, In Research Handbook on the Economics of Property Law (Kenneth Ayotte &
Henry E. Smith, eds., Edward Elgar).
Alston, Lee J., Gary. D. Libecap and Bernardo Mueller. 1998. “Property Rights and Land Conflict: A
Comparison of the U.S. Western and Brazilian Amazon Frontiers” in Latin America and the World
Economy Since 1800. Edited by Coatsworth, John H. and Alan M. Taylor. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press: 55‐85.
Alston, Lee J., Gary. D. Libecap and Bernardo Mueller. 1999a. “A model of rural conflict:
Violence and land reform policy in Brazil.” Environment and Development Economics 4: pp. 135‐160.
Alston, Lee J., Gary. D. Libecap and Bernardo Mueller. 1999b. Titles, Conflict, and Land
Use: The Development of Property Rights and Land Reform on the Brazilian Amazon Frontier.
Ann Arbor, The University of Michigan Press.
Alston, Lee J., Gary. D. Libecap and Bernardo Mueller. 2000. “Land Reform Policies : The Sources of
Violent Conflict, and Implications for Deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon.” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management, 39:2, pp. 162‐188.
Alston, Lee J., Gary. D. Libecap and Bernardo Mueller. 2008. “Interest Groups, Information Manipulation
and Public Policy: The Landless Peasants Movement in Brazil.” Working Paper. University of
Colorado.
Alston, Lee J. and Bernardo Mueller. 2004. “Property Rights and the State.” in Claude
Menard and Mary M. Shirley, eds. Handbook for New Institutional Economics,
Norwell MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Alston, Lee J., Gary D. Libecap and Robert Schnieder. 1996. “The Determinants and Impact of Property
Rights: Land Titles on the Brazilian Frontier” Journal of Law Economics and Organization 12, pp.
25‐61.
Anderson, Terry L., and Peter J. Hill. 1975. “The Evolution of Property Rights: A Study of the American
West” Journal of Law and Economics, 18:1, pp. 163‐179.
Anderson, Terry L., and Peter J. Hill. 1990. “The Race for Property Rights” Journal of Law and Economics,
33 (April): pp. 177‐197.
Anderson, Terry L., and Peter J. Hill. 2002. “Cowboys and Contracts” Journal of Legal Studies, 31 (June):
S489‐S514.

50
Anderson Terry L., and Peter J. Hill. 2004. The not so Wild, Wild West: Property Rights on the Frontier,
Stanford University Press.
Anderson, Terry L. and Fred S. McChesney. 1994. “Raid or Trade? An Economic Model of Indian‐White
Relations. Journal of Law and Economics, 37:1, pp. 39‐74.
Anderson, Terry L. and Fred S. McChesney (editors). 2003. Property Rights: Cooperation, Conflict and
Law. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
ANSW 4/2680. Colonial Secretary. Main Series of Letters Received 1826‐1982.
ANSW 4/3660. Colonial Secretary. Main Series of Letters Received 1826‐1982.
Bailey, M. 1992. “Approximate Optimality of Aboriginal Property Rights” Journal of Law and Economics,
35 (April), pp. 183‐198.
Barzel, Yoram. 1989. Economic Analysis of Property Rights. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Barzel, Yoram. 2002. A Theory of the State: Economic Rights, Legal Rights and the Scope of the State.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bassanezi, Maria Silvia C.B., Ana Silvia V. Scott, Carlos A.P. Bacellar and Oswaldo M. S. Truzzi. 2008. Atlas
da Imigração Internacional em São Paulo – 1850‐1950, São Paulo: Editora UNESP.
Bate, Weston. 1988. Victorian Gold Rushes. Melbourne: McPhee Gribble/Penguin Books.
Besley, Timothy. 1995. “Property Rights and Investment Incentives: Theory and Evidence from Ghana”
Journal of Political Economy. 103, pp. 903‐937.
Bogue, Allan G. 1963 (1st print 1958). "The Iowa Claim Clubs: Symbol and Substance," in The Public
Lands, Carstensen, Vernon ed. Madison, University of Wisconsin Press.
Braim, H. A. 1846. A history of NSW: from its settlement to the close of the year 1844. New York: Bently
Press.
Briggs, H. E. 1934. “The Development and Decline of Open Range Ranching in the Northwest.”
Mississippi Valley Historical Review. 20, pp. 521‐536.
Buchanan, James. M. and Gordon Tullock. 1965. The Calculus of Consent: Logical Foundations of
Constitutional Democracy, University of Michigan Press.
Burroughs, Peter. 1967. Britain and Australia 1831‐1855: A study in Imperial Relations and Crown Lands
Administration. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Burton, David H. 1997. Theodore Roosevelt, American Politician: An Assessment.
Madison: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press.
Butlin, Noel G. 1964. Investment in Australian economic development, 1861‐1900,
Melbourne, Cambridge University Press.
Butlin, Noel G. 1982. “Close encounters of the worst kind: modeling Aboriginal depopulation and
resource competition, 1788‐1850” Working Papers in Economic History, Number 8, Australian
National University.
Carvalho, José Murilo de. 1988. Teatro de Sombras: A Política Imperial. São Paulo: Edições Vértice e
IUPERJ.
Clune, D. and Griffith, G. 2006. Decision and Deliberation: the parliament of New South Wales, 1856‐
2003, Federation Press.
Coase, Ronald. 1959. “The Federal Communications Commission” The Journal of Law and Economics, 2
(No 1, October): pp. 1‐40.
Coase, Ronald. 1960. “The Problem of Social Cost,” The Journal of Law and Economics, 3, pp. 1‐44.
Conover, Milton. 1923. The General Land Office: Its History, Activities, and Organization. Baltimore: The
Johns Hopkins Press.
Costa, Emilia Viotti da. 1985. The Brazilian Empire: Myths & Histories. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Coville, Frederick V. 1905. "A Report on Systems of Leasing Large Areas of Grazing Land" Report of the
U.S. Public Lands Commission. Washington: Government Publications: pp. 26‐61

51
Crowley, F. 1980. Colonial Australia 1788 – 1840. Volume One. Melbourne: Nelson Press.
Curr, E. M. 2001 Recollections of Squatting in Victoria, then called the Port Phillip District (from 1841 to
1851), 2nd edition. Melbourne: Melbourne University Press.
Dale, Edward Everett. 1960. The Range Cattle Industry: Ranching on the Great Plains from 1865 to 1925.
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Dean, Warren, 1971. “Latifundia and Land Policy in Nineteenth‐Century Brazil,” Hispanic‐American
History Review, Nov.:606‐625.
Demsetz, Harold. 1967. “Towards a Theory of Property Rights.” American Economic Review, 57:2, pp.
347‐359.
Dennen, R.T. 1976. “Cattlemen’s Associations and Property Rights in the American West,” Explorations
in Economic History, 13, pp. 423‐436.
De Soto, Hernando. 2000. Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism is Failing Outside the West & Why the Key
to Its Success is Right under Our Noses. New York, Basic Books.
Dingle, Anthony. 1984. The Victorians Settling. Melbourne: Fairfax, Syme and Weldon Associates.
Dunham, Harold H. 1963 (1st print. 1937). "Some Crucial Years of the General Land Office, 1875‐1890,"
in The Public Lands, Carstensen, Vernon ed. Madison, University of Wisconsin Press.
Ellickson, Robert C. 1991. Order Without Law: How Neighbors Settle Disputes. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Ellis, David M. 1963 (1st print 1946). "Comment on 'The Railroad Land Grant Legend in American History
Texts'," in The Public Lands, Carstensen, Vernon ed. Madison, University of Wisconsin Press.
Eggertsson, Thráinn. 1990. Economic Behavior and Institutions. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Field, Erica. 2002. “Entitled to Work: Urban Property Rights and Labor Supply in Peru.” Working Paper,
Princeton University. October.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L.Sokoloff. 1997. “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Differential
Paths of Growth Among New World Economies: A View from Economic Historians of the United
States,” in How Latin America Fell Behind. Stephen Haber, ed., Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Ensminger, Jean. 1995. “Changing Property Rights: Reconciling Formal and Informal Rights to Land in
Africa”, 1997, The Frontiers of the New Institutional Economics, Academic Press.
Feder, Gershon and David Feeny. 1991. “Land Tenure and Property Rights: Theory and Implications for
Development Policy” World Bank Economic Review. 3, pp. 135‐53.
Fetherstonhaugh, Cuthbert. 1917. After Many Days. Melbourne: Cole Press
Foweraker, Joe. 1981. The Struggle for Land: A Political Economy of the Pioneer Frontier in Brazil from
1930 to the Present Day. Cambridge University Press.
Gates, Paul W. 1963 (1st print. 1936). "The Homestead Law in an Incongruous Land System," in The
Public Lands, Carstensen, Vernon ed. Madison, University of Wisconsin Press.
Haddock, David D. 2003. “Force, Threat, Negotiation: The Private Enforcement of Rights,” in Property
Rights: Cooperation, Conflict and Law. Anderson, Terry L. and Fred S. McChesney eds, Princeton,
Princeton University Press.
Hall, M. 1969. The Origins of Mass Immigration to Brazil, 1871‐1914, New York: Columbia University,
PhD thesis.
Halloway, Thomas. H. 1984. Immigrantes para o Café, Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra.
Hagedorn, Hermann. 1921. Roosevelt in the Bad Lands. Cambridge: The Riverside Press.
Hansen, Zeynep K. and Gary D. Libecap. 2004. "The allocation of property rights to land: US land policy
and farm failure in the northern great plains" Explorations in Economic History. 41, 103‐129.
Harris, Edwyna. 2008. ‘The Persistence of Correlative Water Rights in colonial Australia: A Theoretical
Contradiction.’ Discussion Papers, Department of Economics, Monash University, No. 11/08.
Hawker, G. N. 1971. The parliament of New South Wales, 1856‐1965, New South Wales Government
Printer

52
Henry, Robert S. 1963 (1st print. 1945). "The Railroad Land Grant Legend in American History Texts," in
The Public Lands, Carstensen, Vernon ed. Madison, University of Wisconsin Press.
Hughes, Jonathan and Louis P. Cain. American Economic History. Addison Wesley.
Imlah, Albert, H. 1950. ‘The Terms of Trade of the United Kingdom, 1798‐1913.’ Journal of Economic
History. 10:2, pp.170‐194.
Kanazawa, Mark T. 1996. “Possession in Nine Points of the Law: The Political Economy of Early Land
Disposal,” Explorations in Economic History 33: 227‐249.
Kociumbas, J. 1988. The Oxford History of Australia. Volume One. Melbourne: Oxford University Press.
La Croix, Sumner J. And James Roumasset. 1990. “The Evolution of Property Rights in Nineteenth‐
Century Hawaii” The Journal of Economic History. 50:4 (Dec.), pp. 829‐852.
Libecap, Gary D. 1978. “Economic Variables and the Development of the Law: The Case of Western
Mineral Rights” Journal of Economic History. 38:2, pp. 399‐458.
Libecap, Gary D. 1989. Contracting for Property Rights. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Libecap, Gary. 1981. Locking Up the Range: Federal Land Controls and Grazing. Cambridge: Ballinger
Publishing Company.
Libecap Gary D. 2007. “The Assignment of Property Rights on the Western Frontier: Lessons for
Contemporary Environmental and Resource Policy” Journal of Economic History. 67, 2 (May): 257‐
291.
Libecap, Gary D. and Zeynep K. Hansen. 2004. “Small Farms, Externalities, and the Dust Bowl of the
1930s.” Journal of Political Economy. 112, 3: (June): 665‐694.
Libecap, Gary D. and Dean Lueck. 2009. "The Demarcation of Land and the Role of Coordinating
Institutions," Working Paper University of California, Santa Barbara.
Lueck, Dean 2003. “First Possession as the Basis of Property” in Property Rights: Cooperation, Conflict
and Law. Anderson, Terry L. and Fred S. McChesney, eds. Princeton, Princeton University Press.
Mattison, Ray H. 1950. “Roosevelt and the Stockmen’s Association” North Dakota History. 17: 3
(July):177‐209
McCabe, J. Terrence. 2004. Cattle Bring Us to Our Enemies: Turkana Ecology, Politics, and Raiding in a
Disequilibrium System. Ann Arbor, University of Michigan Press.
McChesney, Fred S. 2003. “Government as Definer of Property Rights: Tragedy Exiting the Commons” in
Property Rights: Cooperation, Conflict and Law. Anderson, Terry L. and Fred S. McChesney, eds.
Princeton, Princeton University Press
McIntyre, S. 2004. A concise history of Australia, Melbourne: Cambridge University Press.
Mendelsohn, Robert. 1994. “Property rights and Tropical Deforestation” Oxford Economic Papers. 46,
pp. 750‐756.
Mercer, George. 1819‐1838. George Mercer Papers. MS 13166, State Library of Victoria.
Migot‐Adholla, Shem, Peter Hazell, Benoit Blarel and Frank Place. 1991. “Indigenous Land Rights System
in Sub‐Saharan Africa: A Constraint on Productivity?” World Bank Economic Review. 5, pp. 155‐75.
Millis, R. 1992. Waterloo Creek: the Australia Day massacre of 1838, George Gipps and
the British conquest of New South Wales, Sydney: McPhee and Gribble.
Morris, A. and Ranken, G. 1883. Report of Inquiry into the state of Public Lands and the operation of the
Land Laws, New South Wales Legislative Assembly, Votes and Proceedings.
NBER. 2009. NBER Macrohistory: IV. Prices: Us.Wholesale Price of Cattle, Chicago 01/1858‐12/1940.
April 13, 2009 http://www.nber.org/databases/macrohistory/rectdata/04/m04007.dat
New South Wales. 1872/3. Select Committee on the Administration of Land Laws, 2nd Progress Report,
Legislative Assembly, Votes and Proceedings.
New South Wales. 1873/4. Select Committee on the Administration of Land Laws, 3rd Progress Report,
Legislative Assembly, Votes and Proceedings

53
Nimmo, J. 1884‐1885. Report on the Internal Commerce of the United States. House Executive Document
7, Part 3, Serial 2295, 48th Congress, Second Session.
Norlin, Kara.2003 “Political Corruption: Theory and Evidence from the Brazilian Experience,” PhD
Dissertation. University of Illinois.
North, Douglass C., John Joseph Wallis and Barry R. Weingast. 2009. Violence and Social Orders. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
O'Neal, Bill. 1989. Cattlemen vs. Sheepherders: Five Decades of Violence in the West 1880‐1920. Austin:
Eakin Press.
Olson, Mancur. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Osgood, Ernest Staples. 1929. The Day of the Cattleman. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ostrom, Elinor. 1990. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Osório Silva, Lígia 1996. Terras Devolutas e Latifúndio: Efeitos da Lei de 1850, Campinas, Editora da
Unicamp.
Pelzer, L. 1936. The Cattlemen’s Frontier. Glendale California: Arthur H. Clark Co.
Place, Frank and Peter Hazell. 1993. “Productivity Effects of Indigenous Land Tenure Systems in Sub‐
Saharan Africa” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 75, pp. 10‐19.
Port Phillip Association. 1835‐1836. Papers of the Port Phillip Association. MS 10258, State Library of
Victoria.
Roberts, S. H. 1924. History of Australian Land Settlement. Melbourne: Macmillan Press.
Roberts, S. H. 1935. The Squatting Age in Australia 1835‐1847. Melbourne: Melbourne University Press.
Robbins, Roy M. 1942. Our Landed Heritage. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Sandoz, Mari. 1958. The Cattlemen. New York: Hastings House.
Sherow, James E. 2007. The Grasslands of the United States: An Environmental History. Santa Barbara:
ABC‐CLIO.
Smith, Frank E. 1968. "The Development of Public Land Policy," in Public Land Policy. Boulder: Colorado
Associated University Press.
Smith, Henry E. 2000. “Semicommon Property Rights and Scattering in the Open Fields,” Journal of Legal
Studies, Vol. XXIX, N01, 1, pp. 131‐170.
Smith, Henry E. 2002 “Exclusion Versus Governance: Two Strategies for Delineating Property Rights.”
Journal of Legal Studies, Vol. XXXI, (June) S453‐S487.
Stegner, Wallace E. 1954. Beyond the Hundredth Meridian: John Wesley Powell and the Second Opening
of the West. New York: Penguin Press.
Terrell, John Upton. 1972. Land Grab: The Truth About the Winning of the West. New York: The Dial
Press.
Umbeck, John, 1981, "Might Makes Right: A Theory of the Formation and Initial Distribution of Property
Rights," Economic Inquiry, Vol. XIX, pp.38‐59.
Vamplew, W. (ed.). 1987. Australians Historical Statistics. Melbourne: Fairfax, Syme, and Weldon.
Victoria. 1873. Board of Inquiry into proceedings in relation to certain land selection in the Wimmera
District, Legislative Assembly, Votes and Proceedings.
Victoria. 1874. Crown Land Department Board of Inquiry, Legislative Assembly, Votes and Proceedings.
Walton Gary W. and Hugh Rockoff. 2004. History of the American Economy with Economic Applications.
Dreyden Press.
Watson, Richard L., Jr. 1976. The Development of National Power: The United States, 1900‐1919. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company.
Weaver, John, C. 1996. “Beyond the Fatal Shore: Pastoral Squatting and the Occupation of Australia
1826 to 1852. American Historical Review, 101:4, pp. 981‐1007.

54
Weingast, Barry, 1997, The Political Foundations of Democracy and the Rule of Law. The American
Political Science Review, 91:2, pp. 245‐263.
Worster, Donald. 1994. An Unsettled Country: Changing Landscapes of the American West.
Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Wright, R. 1992. A People’s Council: a history of the Parliament of Victoria, 1856‐1990, Melbourne:
Oxford University Press.

55
Appendix 1
In this appendix we show how the magnitude of the NPV associated with having secure private
property affects the willingness of claimants to organize, lobby and fight for those rights. Let πPP be the
NPV a claimant receives if the land becomes private property. The claimant has some expectation of the
probability that his side will win the dispute and get private property. This probability, θ, is a function of
the effort, e, his side puts towards lobbying, fighting, rent‐seeking, persuading, etc. Thus θ(e) is the
probability the claimants will be granted de jure and de facto private property.
Assuming that when one group is granted private property the other gets nothing, the expected
NPV for a claimant is (let the superscript i=k, l represent capital or labor.
,

(1)
,

And the return to effort is:

0

(2)

The optimal amount of effort is given by:
,

(3)

where Ci(∙) is the cost of effort.
This maximization yields the standard result that in equilibrium the marginal benefit of effort equals the
marginal cost of effort.
,

(4)

This expression can be used to determine the effect of a change of the value of land under
private property on claimant i's optimal effort?
,

0

,

(5)

This is positive as the denominator is the second order condition of the maximization problem and
is negative. This means that the greater the total value of the land under private property, that type of
claimant will put in effort towards assuring those rights, which is what we set out to show.
One could argue, however, that to be more accurate the analysis should include the fact that
when deciding the optimal amount of effort each group of claimants would take into account the other
side’s reactions in Cournot fashion. Repeating the exercise above but allowing each sides’ perceived
probability of getting the private property to be θi(ei, e‐i) where –i refers to the other group, the
comparative static result becomes:
,
,

,

|

|

,

,

(6)

56

Given that SOC‐i‐<0 it can be shown that |det|>0 and the final expression is positive if

,

is not

very large. That is, unless the political equilibrium is particularly lopsided even with strategic interaction
among the types of claimants, an increase in the value of the land with private property rights will lead
to an increase in the effort of that group.

57
Appendix 2: Extent of Selection in NSW and Victoria 1862‐1880
Year
1862
1863
1864
1865
1866
1867
1868
1869
1870
1871
1872
1873
1874
1875
1876
1877
1878
1879
1880
a

NSW
Number of
selectionsa
2449
1630
1166
1050
2022
1568
1584
2361
2105
2117
3019
4761
4844
4632
3994
3578
3842
2625
2867

NSW
Number of selections
(acres) a
207675
121493
86475
70432
196043
140511
129634
227992
184287
195043
346585
619386
693489
738523
933713
715440
703902
468121
566774

Victoria
Number of selectionsb

Victoria
Number of selections
(acres)b

3148
5248
9179
8144
11071
7091
6482
7017
9058
6688
5213

322592
487256
797176
1063066
1831698
183520
1040356
1126492
1915129
1032214
752639

Data compiled from Votes and Proceedings of the Legislative Assembly NSW, 1883
Data compiled from Annual Reports of Department of Lands and Surveys, Victorian Parliamentary
Papers, 1870‐1880.
b

58
Appendix 3: Total voided selections per annum, NSW and Victoria, 1862‐1883

Year
1863
1864
1865
1866
1867
1868
1869
1870
1871
1872
1873
1874
1875
1876
1877
1878
1879
1880
1881
1882
1883
a

NSW
Number of
selections a
2449
1630
1166
1050
2022
1568
1584
2361
2105
2117
3019
4761
4844
4632
3994
3578
3842
2625
2867
4983
5158

NSW
Voided
selections (%)a
16.90
10.74
18.61
40.48
13.01
15.37
26.89
14.65
18.19
36.61
48.33
39.68
48.27
45.88
44.79
50.45
27.38
53.75
66.93
19.93
62.43

Victoria
Number of
selections b

Victoria
Voided selections
(%)b

9578
6320
5785
6240
7524
5726
4036
3110
4383
4453

0.02
0.16
1.33
3.56
3.62
4.96
8.77
2.38
1.32
1.15

Data from Morris and Ranken, 1883.
Data compiled from Annual Reports of Department of Lands and Surveys, Victorian Parliamentary
Papers, 1874‐1883.
b

59
Appendix 4: Number of selections transferred and forfeited, NSW 1862‐1883

Year
1862
1863
1864
1865
1866
1867
1868
1869
1870
1871
1872
1873
1874
1875
1876
1877
1878
1879
1880
1881
1882

Number of
selections
2449
1630
1166
1050
2022
1568
1584
2361
2105
2117
3019
4761
4844
4632
3994
3578
3842
2625
2867
4983
5158

Number
Transferred
1240
996
729
645
1298
1020
1031
1510
1331
1279
1829
2777
2779
2661
2556
2128
2011
1090
354
23
3

Transferred
(%)
50.63
61.10
62.52
61.43
64.19
65.05
65.09
63.96
63.23
60.42
60.58
58.33
57.37
57.45
64.00
59.47
52.34
41.52
12.35
0.46
0.06

Source: Adapted from Morris and Ranken (1883)

Number
Forfeited
162
178
258
250
629
244
207
245
209
221
741
1089
889
714
250
209
268
129
43
13
11

Forfeited
(%)
6.61
10.92
22.13
23.81
31.11
15.56
13.07
10.38
9.93
10.44
24.54
22.87
18.35
15.41
6.26
5.84
6.98
4.91
1.50
0.26
0.21

