                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           CORPORATE TAXES AND UNION WAGES IN THE UNITED STATES

                                            R. Alison Felix
                                          James R. Hines, Jr.

                                         Working Paper 15263
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15263


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2009




The authors thank Charles Brown, David Card, Patrick Kline, and Justin McCrary for helpful comments
on an earlier draft of this paper. Adam Pope provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the positions of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by R. Alison Felix and James R. Hines, Jr.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Corporate Taxes and Union Wages in the United States
R. Alison Felix and James R. Hines, Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 15263
August 2009
JEL No. H22,H25,J31,J51

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper evaluates the effect of U.S. state corporate income taxes on union wages. American workers
who belong to unions are paid more than their non-union counterparts, and this difference is greater
in low-tax locations, reflecting that unions and employers share tax savings associated with low tax
rates. In 2000 the difference between average union and non-union hourly wages was $1.88 greater
in states with corporate tax rates below four percent than in states with tax rates of nine percent and
above. Controlling for observable worker characteristics, a one percent lower state tax rate is associated
with a 0.36 percent higher union wage premium, suggesting that workers in a fully unionized firm
capture roughly 54 percent of the benefits of low tax rates.


R. Alison Felix
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
1 Memorial Drive
Kansas City, MO 64198-0001
alison.felix@kc.frb.org

James R. Hines, Jr.
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
343 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
jrhines@umich.edu
1.     Introduction

       There is lively debate over just who bears what part of the corporate tax burden. The
simple fact that corporate tax payments are remitted by corporations is an institutional detail that
carries no implication for the ultimate incidence of these taxes, since in a competitive market the
forces of demand and supply determine the extent to which corporate tax burdens are shifted
onto workers in the form of lower wages or are absorbed by capital owners in the form of
reduced returns. Empirical investigation has the potential to identify the effect of corporate taxes
on wages and returns to capital owners, but in practice faces daunting challenges in attempting to
establish what wages and investment returns would have been in the absence of taxation.

       Economic theory indicates that the incidence of a corporate tax in a competitive market is
determined by the effect of the tax on marginal incentives. High rates of corporate income
taxation discourage business activity by reducing returns to investment. As a result, high tax
rates generally depress demand for capital and labor, thereby reducing the returns earned by
workers and capital owners. Hence the distribution of corporate tax burdens between labor and
capital is a function of demand and supply in relevant markets.

       In settings in which some firms earn economic rents that they may share with employees
and other stakeholders, high corporate income taxes affect the distribution of economic returns
not only by influencing marginal incentives but also by reducing the total volume of economic
rents available to be shared. This process is most evident in the case of firms with unionized
workforces. Firm profitability affects the terms of negotiated agreements between unions and
employers, and high tax rates generally reduce this profitability. As a result, high taxes can be
expected to reduce the wages earned by unionized workers, and thereby reduce the difference
between union wages and non-union wages.

       This paper analyzes the rent sharing aspect of corporate tax incidence by considering the
extent to which unionized workers bear the burden of corporate income taxes in the form of
reduced wages. Specifically, the paper estimates the impact of U.S. state corporate income tax
rates on differences between union wages and non-union wages in 2000. The evidence points to
substantial tax effects: the average gap between union and non-union hourly wages is $1.88
higher in the lowest-tax states than in the highest-tax U.S. states. This difference persists in


                                                                                               1
regressions controlling for observable worker and firm characteristics, and is greater for wages in
capital-intensive industries, which are the most heavily impacted by high rates of corporate
income taxation. Distinguishing states by those with and without right-to-work laws, the effect
of corporate taxes on union wages appears to be stronger in those without right-to-work laws,
where unions have more power, and where their ability to extract rents from profitable firms is
correspondingly greater.

       One aspect of examining union wage premiums rather than wage levels is that state-
specific factors, such as local cost of living differences and unmeasured characteristics of local
labor or local firms, do not influence the resulting estimates as long as they affect union and non-
union wages equally. The evidence suggests that, among firms earning economic rents that can
be shared with unions, the costs of corporate taxation are likewise shared with unions. The
estimates imply that if a firm’s workforce is entirely unionized, then roughly 54 percent of the
cost of higher tax rates is borne by union members in the form of lower wages. The paper does
not directly estimate the impact of corporate taxes on non-union wages, though the estimates
may carry implications for the part of labor compensation that represents rent-sharing, including
any rent-sharing outside of collective bargaining agreements.

       The second section of the paper discusses the incidence of corporate taxes and the effects
of unionization on wages. The third section presents a framework for empirical estimation of the
effects of corporate taxation on union wages. The fourth section describes the data, and the fifth
section presents the results of estimating the determinants of union wage premiums. The sixth
section considers issues presented by multijurisdictional firms, and the seventh section is the
conclusion.

2.     Corporate Tax Incidence and the Determinants of Union Wages

       The effect of corporate income taxes on factor returns depends on the impact of taxes on
factor demands and the extent to which firms share after-tax rents with workers. The modern
general equilibrium treatment of corporate tax incidence began with Harberger’s (1962) study
that identifies the possibility that labor might bear the burden of corporate taxes, yet estimates
that in practice corporate and non-corporate capital together bear roughly the entire burden of a
corporate tax in a closed economy. Gravelle and Kotlikoff (1993) add product differentiation to


                                                                                              2
the closed economy model, finding that capital continues to bear approximately the entire burden
of the tax. These models take markets to be perfectly competitive, from which it follows that
labor is paid its marginal product without any opportunity for a premium.

         In economies that are open to international trade and capital flows there is less scope for
capital to bear the burden of corporate taxes, since domestic capital must earn the after-tax rate
of return available elsewhere or else it is apt to flee. As a result, high tax rates are likely to be
associated with high pretax rates of return and correspondingly reduced capital investment,
which depresses labor productivity and therefore wages, effectively shifting the burden of
corporate taxes onto labor. Several recent studies suggest that labor bears a substantial portion of
the corporate tax burden in open economies. Revisiting the incidence of the corporate tax with
an open economy model, Harberger (1995) finds that the burden of a corporate tax can be more
than fully shifted onto labor in the form of lower real wages. Using a simple general equilibrium
model, Randolph (2006) reports that labor bears 70 percent of the U.S. corporate income tax
burden in a model in which the worldwide capital stock is fixed and the United States accounts
for 30 percent of world capital. Gravelle and Smetters (2006) show that labor may bear less than
70 percent of the corporate tax burden in a model in which international trade and capital flows
are impeded by imperfect substitutability of products produced in different countries, thereby
rendering the economy effectively less open.

         Several recent empirical studies estimate the effect of national corporate taxes on wages.1
Hassett and Mathur (2006) analyze data on average manufacturing wages in 72 countries from
1981-2002, reporting that one percent higher statutory corporate tax rates are associated with one
percent lower wages. Felix (2007) analyzes survey data for 19 countries from 1979-2002,
finding that one percent higher corporate tax rates are associated with 0.7 percent lower wages
after controlling for observable worker characteristics. Arulampalam, Devereux and Maffini
(2007) use company-level European data to estimate the wage effects of tax burdens that differ
between firms; they report that firms with greater tax obligations pay lower wages, the estimates
implying that labor bears close to 100 percent of the corporate tax burden in the long run. Desai,
Foley and Hines (2007) use data on U.S. outbound investment between 1989-2004 to estimate

1
  Auerbach (2006) and Gentry (2007) offer thoughtful surveys of recent contributions to the literature on corporate
tax incidence.


                                                                                                             3
the effects of taxation on local wages and capital returns, constraining the effects to sum to total
tax burdens; the results imply that local labor bears between 45-75 percent of the corporate tax
burden. Each of these studies uses different data and methodologies, yet all conclude that labor
bears a substantial burden of the national corporate tax.2

         Studies of state corporate taxes likewise point to the conclusion that much of the
corporate tax burden is borne by labor. Mieskowski and Zodrow (1985) note that, in theory, a
higher corporate tax should induce capital flight, thereby reducing wages in the state imposing
higher taxes and increasing wages elsewhere.3 McLure (1981) considers the impact of formulas
used by states to apportion income for tax purposes, hypothesizing that the tax burden from the
part of income apportioned according to labor expenses will be borne by immobile labor in the
form of lower real wages. Using 1980 data on wages from 125 U.S. cities, Gyourko and Tracy
(1989) estimate that one percent higher state corporate tax rates are associated with one percent
lower wages. Using data from 1977 to 2005, Felix (2009) finds a smaller effect: a one percent
increase in the state corporate tax rate is estimated to lower wages between 0.14 and 0.36
percent, though the magnitude of this effect appears to have increased over this sample period.

         Although the empirical literature consistently finds a negative relationship between
corporate tax rates and wages, the need to identify what wages would have been in the absence
of taxation poses an important challenge in attempting to isolate the effect of corporate taxes on
wages. Observed wages reflect many local economic and labor conditions, some of which are
inevitably unmeasured and therefore omitted from explanatory variables included in empirical
specifications. To the extent that important omitted variables are correlated with corporate tax
rates, there is the potential for bias and therefore misleading inference. In the U.S. state context,
if union and non-union workers are similarly affected by important omitted state-specific
characteristics, then in comparing how their labor market outcomes are affected by taxation it
may be possible to avoid this source of potential bias.


2
  Riedel (2007) offers a rather different answer based on an analysis of the determinants of wages in multinational
firms located in 15 European countries from 1996-2005. She reports that 10 percent higher tax rates are associated
with 4 percent higher local wages and 1 percent lower wages paid by the same firms in other countries, attributing
the difference to the incentive to incur deductible labor expenses in places where tax rates are high.
3
  Mieszkowski and Zodrow also find that state corporate taxes lower the return to capital in both taxing and non-
taxing states. Consumers in the taxing state face higher prices as a result of corporate taxes but this is offset by the
lower prices faced in non-taxing states.


                                                                                                                 4
        In comparing the wages of union and non-union workers it is helpful to understand the
sources of apparent union wage premiums. Freeman and Medoff (1984) report that relatively
high union wages reflect both the ability of unions to exploit their bargaining positions with
employers and the role of union organizational practices in contributing to labor productivity.
Cross-sectional evidence consistently shows union workers to earn higher wages than apparently
comparable non-union workers, though the problems posed in accurately identifying relevant
worker characteristics are responsible for estimated union wage premiums that vary between 30
percent and zero.4 The study by Hirsch (2004) uses an estimation approach that is typical of the
older literature, analyzing cross-sectional data from the U.S. Current Population Survey to
measure the extent to which unionization and various worker characteristics influence wages.
Hirsch argues that earnings imputations and union status misclassifications biased downward
previous estimates of union wage premiums; after correcting for these two problems, Hirsch
reports a union wage premium of 24 percent. DiNardo and Lee (2004) use a regression
discontinuity approach to compare wages in firms where unions barely won certification
elections to wages in firms where unions barely lost certification elections. DiNardo and Lee
report very little difference between wages in these two cases, suggesting that unions have little
effect on wages and implying that the cross-sectional evidence of significant union wage
premiums might reflect unmeasured worker heterogeneity in which union workers would have
commanded higher wages even without unions. The literature’s modal interpretation of the
evidence is that the true union premium probably lies somewhere between these two extremes,
near 15 percent (Hirsch 2004).

        Unions are able to command wage premiums for their members only in circumstances in
which employers have rents that can be shared with workers. There is ample evidence that union
wage premiums are higher in more profitable firms, and moreover, that firm and industry
profitability is also positively correlated with wages for non-unionized workers, suggesting that
there is an important rent-sharing component to market wages.5 Corporate executive


4
  Lewis (1986) offers a detailed review of the early union wage gap literature, and Belman and Voos (2004) provide
a treatment of more recent contributions.
5
  Svejnar (1986), Currie and McConnell (1992) and Abowd and Lemieux (1993) offer evidence that union wages are
higher in more profitable firms, and Christofides and Oswald (1992) and Budd and Slaughter (2004) similarly find
that union wages are higher in more profitable industries. Interindustry wage studies (e.g., Dickens and Katz, 1987;
Krueger and Summers, 1987, 1988; Katz and Summers, 1989; Blanchflower, Oswald and Sanfey, 1996) consistently


                                                                                                            5
compensation typically includes a substantial and explicit rent-sharing component (e.g., Hall and
Liebman, 1998) designed to align the incentives of managers with the interests of shareholders.
Consequently union wages represent just one of potentially many channels through which
owners of firms share their rents with other stakeholders.

         The apparent union wage premium peaked in 1984 and subsequently trended downward
(Blanchflower and Bryson, 2004).6 Hirsch, Macpherson and Schumacher (2002) examine
factors contributing to the decline in union wage premiums between 1986 and 2001, finding that
46 percent of the decline is due to changes in the union wage gap, 16 percent is due to changes in
worker characteristics and 38 percent is due to sectoral shifts in employment. Belman and Voos
(2004) offer evidence that the decline in union wage premiums varied across industries, and that
the union wage premium actually increased in 11 (of 78) industries between the late 1970s and
mid 1990s. Bratsberg and Ragan (2002) find that differences in union wage premiums between
industries have fallen over time.

         There is considerable evidence (e.g., Clark, 1984) that firms with unionized workforces
earn lower investment returns than other firms, which is consistent with the apparent effect of
unions in raising wages and thereby extracting some of the rents that would otherwise go to
investors. Lee and Mas (2009) report that stock prices of newly unionized firms fall an average
of 10 percent over the following 18 months, and that union vote shares in certification elections
are negatively correlated with subsequent stock returns.7 Combining the corporate tax incidence
literature with the union literature suggests that state corporate taxes may affect union workers in
two ways: by decreasing the wages of all workers and by lowering union wage premiums. This
second effect occurs as corporate taxes reduce firm profitability which in turn leaves unions and
firms with less to share.

3.       Corporate Taxes and Wages



report that wages are higher in more profitable industries, and firm-level evidence (e.g., Hildreth and Oswald, 1997,
and Budd, Konings and Slaughter, 2005) indicates that wages are higher in more profitable firms.
6
  Blanchflower and Bryson examine estimates between 1973 and 2002. Estimates of the union wage premium seem
to have increased in 2001 and 2002, but it is still early to know if this trend will continue.
7
  Lee and Mas use a regression discontinuity method similar to that employed by DiNardo and Lee. They reconcile
the apparent difference in findings by noting that the effect of unionization on stock returns might depend on how
aggressively firms and unions court voters in certification elections.


                                                                                                             6
       In order to estimate the impact of corporate taxes on union wages it is helpful to specify a
model of the firm that incorporates union wage determination. Since labor expenses are
deductible in calculating taxable income, that portion of a firm’s rents that are shared with unions
is not directly impacted by high tax rates. This tax treatment, in turn, has the potential to affect
the kind of bargain that firms strike with unions, so it is very useful to identify the source of any
tax effects on union wage premiums.

       Consider the case in which a corporation produces output with a production
function Q (K , L ) , in which K denotes capital inputs and L denotes labor inputs. The
specification of Q (K , L ) includes the possibility that the corporation has market power and
therefore sells output at a price above cost; the associated rents are captured in a higher value of
Q (K , L ) . The market wage is w, but unionized workers in the firm have the potential to earn
compensation that exceeds market wages. R denotes the aggregate amount by which labor
compensation exceeds reservation wages, so the firm’s total labor cost equals wL + R . The
corporation is entirely equity financed with capital that is capable of earning an after-tax rate of
return of r if deployed elsewhere. Profits are subject to tax at rate τ .

       Owners of the corporation receive economic rents on their investment denoted ρ , where:

(1)                             ρ = (1 − τ )[Q (K , L ) − wL − R ] − rK .

In expression (1) firms are not entitled to deduct the opportunity cost of capital from their taxable
incomes, which is why taxation influences their capital input decisions. Owners of the firm
choose K and L to maximize the value of ρ , subject to any constraints imposed by union
bargaining, in particular the determination of R.

       It is useful first to consider the case in which the firm negotiates with its union over the
magnitude of R independent of the firm’s total employment. In a standard Nash bargaining setup
(see, e.g., Cahuc and Zylberberg, 2004, pp. 382-390), the negotiation chooses R to maximizeψ ,
in which:

(2)                    ψ = R α ρ 1−α = R α {(1 − τ )[Q(K , L ) − wL − R ] − rK }1−α .



                                                                                               7
                dψ
The condition      = 0 implies that:
                dR

                                                      α
(3)                                       R=                     ρ,
                                                (1 − α )(1 − τ )

or

                                        ⎡                    rK ⎤
(4)                               R = α ⎢Q (K , L ) − wL −            .
                                        ⎣                  (1 − τ )⎥⎦

       High tax rates reduce the profits available to distribute to capital owners, whereas rents
allocated to labor unions are deductible in calculating taxable income and therefore not directly
affected by high tax rates. The deductibility of labor expenses reduces the cost of distributing
rents to union members relative to distributing rents to capital owners, but equation (4) indicates
that despite this relative price effect higher taxes reduce union rents by depressing after-tax
returns. Equation (4) implies that union rents as a fraction of total labor compensation can be
expressed as:

                                  R αQ ( K , L )       αrK
(5)                                  =           −α −            .
                                  wL   wL             wL(1 − τ )

       In order to evaluate (5) it is helpful to incorporate the standard effects of high tax rates in
increasing the cost of capital and thereby depressing capital demand, which does not apply to the
cost of labor. The firm’s first-order conditions with respect to choices of K and L are given by
differentiating (1), producing:

                                           ∂Q (K , L )
(6)                                          ∂K        =
                                                          r
                                                                 .
                                           ∂Q (K , L ) w(1 − τ )
                                              ∂L

Consider the case in which the firm earns inframarginal rents but its production function can be
approximated by a constant returns to scale Cobb-Douglas function:

(7)                                       Q (K , L ) = aK γ L1−γ .


                                                                                               8
This production function together with the first order condition (6) implies that factor demands

                 K (1 − τ )w γ
                                                            γ
                                         Q  a⎛K⎞
take the form      =                 and   = ⎜ ⎟ . Applying these conditions to (5)
                 L     r    (1 − γ )     wL w ⎝ L ⎠
produces:

                                               γ
                                 ⎡⎛ γ        ⎞                      1 ⎤
                                             ⎟⎟ γ 1−γ (1 − τ ) −
                          R                       a           γ
(8)                          = α ⎢⎜⎜                                      ⎥.
                          wL     ⎢⎣⎝ 1 − γ    ⎠ r w              (1 − γ )⎥⎦

Expression (8) indicates that union rents as a fraction of total labor compensation is a scalar
function of α , the union’s bargaining power, and a declining function of τ , conditional on w.
One complication in interpreting (8) is that w is potentially a function of τ , since in a
competitive environment higher profit tax rates generally depress wages. Equation (8) implies
that:

                   ⎛ R ⎞
                  d⎜    ⎟                      γ
                   ⎝ wL ⎠ = −αa ⎡ γ ⎤ (1 − τ )γ −1 w γ −2 ⎡γw + (1 − γ )(1 − τ ) dw ⎤ .
(9)
                    dτ          ⎢ r (1 − γ ) ⎥            ⎢⎣                     dτ ⎥⎦
                                ⎣            ⎦

Equation (9) indicates that a higher tax rate reduces the union wage premium (measured as a
fraction of total compensation) if the elasticity of wages with respect to one minus the tax rate is
                            dw (1 − τ )      γ
small in magnitude: if                  <          .
                         d (1 − τ ) w     (1 − γ )

        How responsive should wages be to corporate tax rates? Consider the case in which the
supply of corporate capital is perfectly elastic at the after-tax rate of return r, and (taxed)
corporations are the only demanders of labor. Corporations earning an after-tax return of r must
                                  rK                                         rKτ
have pretax profits equal to             , and therefore tax obligations of          . Their labor costs
                                (1 − τ )                                    (1 − τ )
are wL. In order to maintain a positive supply of corporate capital, given its infinite supply
elasticity, total costs (at unchanging factor demands) must not change as tax rates change, which
requires that:




                                                                                                    9
                                         dw       Kr
(10)                                        =−             .
                                         dτ    L(1 − τ )
                                                         2




        Equation (10) characterizes the extent to which wages would need to fall in order to
prevent taxed corporations from incurring greater total costs as tax rates rise. Since this
condition reflects aggregate economic conditions, and not the features of a single firm, the
capital-to-labor ratio on the right side of (10) presumably reflects an economy average, which in

turn equals
              (1 − τ )w γ , where γ     is the relevant average value of γ , the share of capital in
                  r    (1 − γ )
output. Making this substitution, it follows that (10) implies:

                                         dw          wγ
(11)                                        =−
                                         dτ    (1 − τ )(1 − γ )

                                             dw                wγ
In evaluating (9), it is useful to replace      with − μ                  , in which 0 ≤ μ ≤ 1 reflects the
                                             dτ          (1 − τ )(1 − γ )
extent to which average wage declines offset the cost of tax increases for taxable
corporations: μ = 1 corresponds to a complete offset, whereas μ = 0 corresponds to no
compensating change in wages. Then (9) becomes:

                          ⎛ R ⎞
                         d⎜    ⎟
                          ⎝ wL ⎠ = −αa ⎡ γ ⎤ γ (1 − τ )γ −1 wγ −1 ⎡1 − μ (1 − γ ) γ ⎤ .
                                                     γ

(12)
                           dτ          ⎢ r (1 − γ )⎥              ⎢      (1 − γ ) γ ⎥⎦
                                       ⎣           ⎦              ⎣

                                                              ⎛ R ⎞
                                                             d⎜    ⎟
        Equation (12) indicates that if μ = 1 and γ = γ then  ⎝ wL ⎠
                                                                     = 0 : in a setting in which
                                                               dτ
corporate taxes do not reduce profits, they also do not influence the fraction by which union
wages exceed market wages. For firms in industries in which the labor share exceeds the
economy average, higher taxes even increase the union premium measured as a fraction of
market wages, assuming that labor bears the full cost of corporate income taxes.




                                                                                                    10
                                                      ⎛    R⎞                 ⎛    R ⎞
       A union worker receives hourly compensation of ⎜ w + ⎟ , which equals w⎜1 +    ⎟.
                                                      ⎝    L⎠                 ⎝    wL ⎠
Taking the union wage premium to be modest, it follows from a first-order approximation that
the log of the union wage is given by:

                                 ⎛    R⎞            ⎛    R ⎞           R
(13)                           ln⎜ w + ⎟ = ln w + ln⎜1 +    ⎟ ≈ ln w +    .
                                 ⎝    L⎠            ⎝    wL ⎠          wL

An individual’s wage is determined by:

(14)                                            ln w = β1 X + u ,

in which X is a vector of individual, occupational, and potentially state characteristics, and u is a
residual. The union premium is given by:

                                         R
(15)                                        = β 2 X + β 3 Xτ + ε ,
                                         wL

in which β 3 reflects the impact of using mean values of the variables appearing on the right side
of equation (12) – other than the employer’s capital intensity, which is the element of X that
varies in this expression. It follows from equations (13)-(15) that an individual’s observed wage
is given by:

                                 ⎛    R⎞
(16)                           ln⎜ w + ⎟ ≈ (β1 + Dβ 2 )X + Dβ 3 Xτ + (u + Dε ) ,
                                 ⎝    L⎠

in which D is a dummy variable taking the value one for a union worker and zero otherwise. The
empirical work described in section 5 estimates variants of equation (16).

4.     Current Population Survey Data for 2000

       The empirical work in section 5 considers the determinants of wages in 2000, a recent
year at the end of a long economic expansion, for which there are copious data on wages of
union members and nonmembers. Individual-level data for 2000 are available in the Outgoing




                                                                                               11
Rotation Group public use sample from the monthly Current Population Survey (CPS).8 The
CPS data are widely used in union wage studies because they provide individual-level
information on both union status and wages. The entire 2000 sample contains data on more than
280,000 individuals, though cleaning and restricting the data for analysis leaves 57,426
individual records. The sample is restricted to full-time private sector workers between ages 20
and 65, inclusive, and excludes students, self-employed individuals, and those who work in
agriculture.

        The goal of the analysis is to understand the determinants of the hourly wage rate, which
is calculated by dividing weekly earnings by usual hours worked per week. As displayed in
Table 1, the median hourly wage is $13.54. The CPS imputes earnings for about 30 percent of
the sample. As Hirsch (2004) shows, including individuals with imputed earnings leads to a
downward biased estimate of the union wage gap. Using 2001 data, Hirsch finds that excluding
individuals with imputed earnings increases the union wage gap estimate by five percentage
points. Consequently, individuals with imputed earnings are excluded from the analysis, as are
individuals who report earning less than $5.00 per hour, reflecting (with allowance for rounding
error in reporting) the federal minimum wage of $5.15. In addition, the CPS assigns a top code to
weekly earnings over a specified value. Following the rule-of-thumb as described by Burkhauser,
Feng and Jenkins (2009), top coded earnings are assigned a value equal to 150 percent of the top
code value in the analysis.

        Another important individual variable is union status. An individual is classified as a
union member if they identify themselves as a union member or if they are covered by a union
contract. Eleven percent of individuals in the sample are union members, and as expected, union
members on average earn more than non-union members. The median wage is $16.25 for union
members and $13.06 for non-union members. Union members are older than non-union
members, and a higher percentage of union members are male.




8
  The Current Population Survey is a monthly household survey that started in 1968. Households are interviewed in
four consecutive months, ignored for eight months and then interviewed again the next four months. Each household
is asked about union status and weekly earnings during their fourth and eighth interview. Therefore, we restrict our
sample to these interviews which are termed the “Outgoing Rotation Group”. The National Bureau of Economic
Research (2000) provides extracts of the CPS data that include only individuals in these outgoing rotation groups.


                                                                                                            12
         The CPS data include several demographic characteristics that are typically correlated
with wages. The regressions that follow include controls for age, age-squared, gender, race,
marital status, and years of education. The regressions also include dummy variables for
residence in a metropolitan area, employment by a non-profit firm, occupation dummies, and in
some specifications industry dummies. Occupation dummies are defined using a 2-digit detail
occupation recode provided by NBER (2000) based on the 2000 Census occupation codes; the
sample includes 22 occupations.9 Industry dummies are based on an NBER (2000) created 2-
digit NAICS-based detailed industry classification code, and distinguish 46 industries.10

         The analysis focuses on the effect of state corporate taxes, using the highest marginal
state corporate tax rate and adjusting for deductibility of federal corporate taxes.11 The mean
state corporate tax rate is 6.3 percent. Some of the analysis that follows compares labor market
outcomes in states with very low taxes from outcomes in states with very high taxes, where low-
tax states are those with top marginal corporate income tax rates of four percent or lower, and
high-tax states are those with tax rates greater than or equal to nine percent. The top marginal
state personal income tax rate and the general sales tax rate are also frequently included as
controls. The CPS data do not indicate state of employment, so tax rates are attributed according
to state of residence, which introduces some measurement error in cases in which people live in
one state and work in another.

         Right-to-work laws have the potential to influence union bargaining outcomes by
permitting those who are not union members to work in unionized firms; right-to-work laws are
generally thought to weaken the power of labor unions. In 2000, 21 states had right-to-work
laws (United States Department of Labor, 2009).

         Theory predicts that an employer’s labor-to-capital ratio influences any tax effects on
union wages, since corporate taxes are more burdensome in capital-intensive industries. Industry


9
  There are a total of 23 occupations in the data, but the private sector restriction excludes those who work for the
armed forces.
10
   There are 50 industries in the dataset in 2000, but those who work in agriculture, private households, public
administration and armed services are excluded from the sample.
11
   The highest marginal corporate tax rate is available from several sources including the Tax Foundation (2009) and
the World Tax Database from the Office of Tax Policy Research (2009). In 2000, five states allowed complete or
partial deductions for federal corporate taxes; the state tax rate is correspondingly adjusted following the formula
provided in Chirinko and Wilson (2008).


                                                                                                             13
labor-to-capital ratios are calculated from tax return data reported by the Internal Revenue
Service (2000) by dividing salary and wages by total assets. This measure varies by industry and
ranges from a low of 0.01 in the management of companies and enterprises industry to a high of
0.87 in the health care services (excluding hospitals) industry.

5.       Evidence on Corporate Taxes and Union Wages in 2000

         A first pass at the CPS evidence reveals a strong negative association between state
corporate tax rates and union wage premiums. Figure 1 depicts median hourly wages for four
samples of workers: unionized and non-unionized workers living in two groups of states: those
with very high tax rates and those with very low tax rates. For this purpose, high-tax states are
those with corporate tax rates of nine percent and higher, whereas low-tax states are those with
corporate tax rates of four percent or lower. As the figure illustrates, the difference between
median wages of union members and non-union members is significantly larger in low-tax states
than is the same difference in high-tax states. A similar difference appears when mean wages are
used in place of median wages, as is apparent in the underlying data reported in Appendix Table
A1.

         The theory sketched in section 3 predicts not only that union wage premiums should be
higher in low-tax states, but that the effect of taxation should be most pronounced among
workers whose firms have low ratios of labor-to-capital. This is entirely sensible, since the
corporate tax is a tax on capital, and therefore most heavily impacts firms for which capital costs
represent higher fractions of their total costs. Figure 2 repeats the exercise depicted in Figure 1,
this time first distinguishing workers by the labor-to-capital ratios of the industries in which they
are employed.12 The four leftmost bars in Figure 2 present median wages in industries with high
labor-to-capital ratios: the difference between hourly union and non-union wages is substantial
($2.54) in low-tax states, and nonexistent in high-tax states. The four rightmost bars in Figure 2
present median wages in industries with low labor-to-capital ratios. In this comparison, the
union wage premium is considerably larger in low-tax states than in high-tax states, the



12
  Appendix Table A2 presents variable means and medians distinguished by state tax rates and industry labor-to-
capital ratios. It is noteworthy that some of the union cells depicted in Figure 2 have small numbers of observations,
so there may be considerable sampling variability in comparisons among these cells.


                                                                                                              14
difference ($4.34) greatly exceeding the corresponding difference in industries with high labor-
to-capital ratios.

        Table 2 presents regressions that formalize the comparisons depicted in Figures 1 and 2,
in the process controlling for observable worker attributes that plausibly affect their wages.
Column I of Table 2 reports estimated coefficients from a regression in which log wage is the
dependent variable; the independent variables include worker characteristics, 46 dummy
variables (not reported) for employer industry, 22 occupation dummy variables, a dummy
variable for non-profit employers, and a dummy variable for urban location. Reported standard
errors are bootstrapped (1,000 replications) and clustered at the state level to adjust for lack of
independence among observations of workers in the same states. The standard patterns appear in
the coefficients reported in column I: wages are higher for union members, older workers
(though the marginal effect of additional years declines with age), male workers, married male
workers, Caucasian workers, those with greater years of education, and those in urban areas.

        The regression presented in column II of Table 2 removes the industry dummy variables
and adds corporate tax rates, the interaction of union membership and corporate tax rates,
industry labor-to-capital ratio, the interaction of industry labor-to-capital ratio and union
membership, the interaction of industry labor-to-capital ratio, union membership, and the
corporate tax rate, and state personal and sales tax rates. The -1.1833 coefficient implies that
high state corporate tax rates are associated with lower union wage premiums, while the 4.2198
coefficient on the interaction of industry labor-to-capital ratio, union membership, and the
corporate tax rate implies that the effect of corporate taxes on union wages is strongest in
industries with low labor-to-capital ratios, as theory suggests it should be.

        Using the mean labor-to-capital ratio of 0.194 reported in Table 1, it follows from the
coefficients reported in column II of Table 2 that a one percent higher state corporate tax rate
(e.g., the difference between a seven percent tax rate and a six percent tax rate) is associated with
roughly a 0.36 percent reduction in union wage premiums (1.1833 – 4.2198*0.194 = 0.3647). In
order to judge the magnitude of this effect it is helpful to use the most recent IRS data, covering
tax year 2006, which indicate that U.S. corporations had $1,170 billion of taxable income,
together with salary and wage expenses of $1,720 billion. For a very large firm representing one



                                                                                                15
tenth of one percent of the corporate sector, a one percent increase in the corporate tax rate
imposes a cost of $11.7 million. If the firm’s workforce is entirely unionized, the aggregate
union wage premium paid by the firm is estimated to fall by $6.27 million (0.003647*1,720 =
6.27), offsetting 54 percent of the cost of the tax increase.

       Another way to gauge the significance of the tax effects reported in column II is to
compare them to the estimated union effects. Using mean values for the corporate tax rate
(0.063) and the labor-to-capital ratio (0.194), union membership increases wages by 17.8 percent
(0.3063 – 1.1833*0.063 – 0.5454*0.194 + 4.2198*0.194*0.063 = 0.178), which is almost
identical to the 17.5 percent union wage effect estimated without tax and labor intensity variables
and reported in column I. It is possible to use the coefficients to determine the state tax rate at
which union wage effects are estimated to disappear. Again setting the labor-to-capital ratio
equal to its mean value of 0.194, union wages are 20.0 percent higher than comparable non-
union wages in the absence of taxation (0.3063 – 0.5454*0.194 = 0.200), but then decline by
0.365 percent for every additional one percent of state taxation (1.1833 – 4.2198*0.194), which
implies that union wage effects disappear at a state tax rate of 55 percent (0.20/0.365 = 0.55).
Such an extrapolation goes well beyond the range over which there are any relevant data (the
highest state corporate tax rate during that period was 12 percent, and only 10.1 percent after
adjusting for the deductibility of federal taxes), and therefore is somewhat conjectural, but it is
nonetheless reasonable to expect that a firm facing a state corporate tax rate of 55 percent
together with the U.S. federal corporate tax rate of 35 percent would have very few if any rents
left to share with a unionized workforce.

       Column III of Table 2 reports estimated coefficients from a regression that repeats the
regression reported in column II, except that it does not include the state personal and sales tax
rates as independent variables. Omitting these variables has very little effect on the estimated
coefficients of terms including union and tax interactions. The regression reported in column IV
includes 46 industry dummy variables (and therefore omits the industry labor-to-capital ratio).
The estimated coefficients on interactions between union membership and corporate tax rates are
somewhat smaller than their counterparts reported in column II, though they remain statistically
significant and imply a tax effect on union wage premiums that is of almost identical magnitude
when evaluated at mean labor-to-capital ratios.



                                                                                                 16
         The regressions reported in Table 2 identify tax effects from cross-state differences in tax
rates and within-state differences in capital intensities of different industries interacted with state
tax rates. Table 3 presents wage regressions that abstract entirely from cross-state level
differences by including a complete set of state dummies as explanatory variables. As a result,
these regressions identify tax effects simply from differences in the impact of unionization, and
unionization interacted with industry capital intensities, in states with differing corporate tax
rates.

         The first column of Table 3 presents estimated coefficients from a wage regression that
includes state dummy variables but omits any tax terms. The estimated effects of demographic
variables including age, gender, marital status, race, and years of education are similar to those
appearing in column I of Table 2, and the effect of union membership (15.4 percent higher
wages) is only slightly smaller than that (17.5 percent) obtained without including state dummy
variables. Column II of Table 3 presents estimated coefficients from a regression corresponding
to that presented in column II of Table 2, with the addition of 50 state dummy variables. The
estimated -0.8578 coefficient on the interaction of union membership and the corporate tax rate,
and the estimated 3.5582 coefficient on the union membership and labor-to-capital ratio with the
corporate tax rate, are only somewhat smaller than the corresponding coefficients reported in
Table 2, though together they imply that one percent higher tax rates (evaluated at the mean
labor-capital ratio of 0.194) are associated with a 0.1675 percent reduction in union wages.
Repeating the same exercise as before, this implies that a fully unionized workforce receives 25
percent of the benefits or costs of state tax rate changes.

         The third column of Table 3 adds a complete set of industry dummy variables, which
entails dropping the labor-to-capital ratio as an independent variable. The estimated tax effects
reported in column III are little more than half the magnitude of those reported in column II,
though the impact of the interaction of union status, labor-to-capital ratio, and state corporate tax
rate is at the borderline of statistical significance. Appendix Table A3 presents estimated
coefficients from regressions that do not include state dummy variables but instead include
dummy variables for nine Census divisions of the country, thereby controlling for one aspect of
geography while continuing to identify tax effects from cross-state variation. The four




                                                                                                17
regressions reported in Appendix Table A3 present estimated tax coefficients that are only
slightly smaller than the corresponding coefficients appearing in Table 2.

        The regressions in Tables 2 and 3 pool union members and other workers into the same
sample for estimation purposes, imposing that the coefficients on other variables, such as age and
education, are the same for the two groups. Table 4 presents regressions that relax this
requirement.

        The first two columns of Table 4 present regressions run separately for union members
and other workers. The -0.6706 and 4.3105 coefficients in the first column of Table 4 indicate
that union workers in states with high corporate tax rates receive lower wages (though this effect
by itself is statistically insignificant), and that this effect is attenuated for those who work in
more labor-intensive industries. The 0.6205 and 0.7422 coefficients in column II imply that a
very different pattern appears among non-unionized workers.13 Other regressors, such as age,
gender, education and marital status, have similar coefficients in the regressions reported in
columns I and II, with the magnitudes of the implied effects perhaps a bit smaller in the case of
union workers. The regression reported in column III pools the two samples and permits the
coefficients on variables such as age and gender to vary by union status. In this regression the -
1.3872 and 3.9811 coefficients again imply that union wage premiums are negatively affected by
high corporate tax rates, particularly in industries with low labor intensity. The estimated tax
effects in this regression are larger than those implied by the regression in column II of Table 2,
in which union members and non-union workers are constrained to have the same coefficients on
other variables. Appendix Table A4 repeats these regressions adding a complete set of industry
dummies, reporting somewhat smaller estimated tax effects.

        The regressions reported in Tables 2-4 take the statutory corporate tax rate to be a
measure of corporate tax burdens. In fact, states differ not only in their statutory tax rates but
also in many aspects of their tax bases. These tax base differences are not easily categorized,
and since tax burdens are clearly very heavily influenced by the readily measured statutory tax
rates, the standard procedure of empirical researchers is to use statutory tax rate differences as
indicators of relative tax burdens, understanding that these measures are likely to be imprecise.




                                                                                                 18
           Table 5 presents estimated coefficients from regressions that replace the statutory
corporate tax rate with dummy variables indicating whether the statutory tax rate is nine percent
or higher, or alternatively is less than four percent. The idea behind this replacement is to use a
tax measure that is a coarse function of statutory rates and that thereby captures significant
differences in tax burdens between groups of states. The estimated coefficients in the regression
reported in the first column of Table 5 are consistent with those in Table 2 and elsewhere. The -
0.0924 coefficient on the interaction of union membership and residence in a high-tax state
indicates that union members earn lower wage premiums in high-tax states, whereas the
(statistically insignificant) 0.0433 coefficient on the interaction of union membership and
residence suggests that the opposite is the case for union members in states with very low tax
rates. The estimated effects of labor-to-capital ratios, interacted with union membership and tax
rate dummy variables, are likewise consistent with earlier regression results. The 0.0778
coefficient indicates that high labor-to-capital ratios reduce the effect of high taxes on union
wage premiums, and the -0.3264 coefficient indicates that the same is true in a comparison of
very low-tax states and the excluded middle states with statutory tax rates between four percent
and nine percent.

           Column II of Table 5 presents estimated coefficients from a regression in which the
sample is restricted to residents of very high-tax states and very low-tax states; as a result, the
sample size of 22,647 observations is significantly smaller than the sample of 57,426
observations used to estimate the regression reported in column I. The -0.1385 and 0.4161
coefficients together indicate that union wage premiums in the highest-tax states are lower than
they are in the lowest-tax states, and that this difference is more pronounced for workers in
industries with low labor-to-capital ratios. Evaluated at the mean labor-to-capital ratio of 0.194,
the coefficients imply that the union wage premium is 5.8 percent lower (as a fraction of total
earnings) in the highest-tax states than it is in the lowest-tax states (-0.1385 + 0.194*0.4161 = -
0.0578). Hence significant tax effects on union wage premiums appear even when using a
coarse transformation of statutory corporate tax rates to approximate tax burdens. Appendix
Table A5 repeats these regressions adding industry dummy variables, reporting somewhat
smaller, though nonetheless significant, estimated tax effects.


13
     In column II of Table 4 the interaction of the labor-to-capital ratio, union dummy and corporate tax rate is


                                                                                                                    19
         U.S. states differ in their legal treatment of unions, the most noticeable difference being
that in states with “right-to-work” laws it is not necessary to belong to a union in order to work
for a firm whose workforce is unionized. It is widely understood that right-to-work laws
diminish the power of unions, and thereby potentially reduce wages generally.14 From the
standpoint of analyzing the determinants of union wage premiums, reduced union power in states
with right-to-work laws should correspond to significantly smaller tax effects in these states.

         A first pass at the evidence is consistent with this prediction. The four leftmost bars in
Figure 3 present median wages for workers in states with right-to-work laws, distinguishing
those in the highest-tax states and the lowest-tax states (observations for those in states with
statutory tax rates between four and nine percent are excluded in constructing Figure 3). The by
now familiar pattern of higher union wage premiums in the lowest-tax states does not appear in
states with right-to-work laws, very possibly reflecting the inability of unions in these states to
extract any of the rents associated with low tax rates. The four rightmost bars in Figure 3 present
median wages for workers in states without right-to-work laws, and here there does appear to be
a difference in wage premiums ($2.81 an hour, according to the figures in Appendix Table A6)
between the lowest-tax states and the highest-tax states.

         Table 6 presents regressions that distinguish states by their right-to-work regimes. The
first column of Table 6 presents estimated coefficients from a regression estimated using data
from states with right-to-work laws. The -0.0908 coefficient on the interaction of union
membership and the corporate tax rate is small and not statistically different from zero. The
4.2074 coefficient in column I suggests that union wage premiums in industries with low labor-
to-capital ratios are less negatively affected by state tax rates, but this coefficient is also
statistically indistinguishable from zero.



replaced by the interaction of the labor-to-capital ratio and the corporate tax rate.
14
   After reviewing the existing literature, Moore (1998) concludes that right-to-work laws have the effect of reducing
unions’ organizing efforts and successes. It follows that right-to-work laws have led to a decline in unionization over
the long-run. The evidence on the effects of right-to-work laws on wages is more mixed. According to Moore
(1998), most empirical evidence suggests that right-to-work laws have no impact on wages. There are exceptions:
Carroll (1983) and Garofalo and Malhotra (1992) report large negative effects of right-to-work laws on average
wages of all workers. Farber (1984) finds that union wage premiums are slightly larger in states with right-to-work
laws, interpreting this difference to reflect higher nonpecuniary costs incurred by workers who join unions in states
with right-to-work laws. As a result, these workers may earn higher union wage premiums but lower rents than their
unionized counterparts in states without right-to-work laws.


                                                                                                              20
       The second column of Table 6 presents estimated coefficients from the same regression
run on data for workers in states that do not have right-to-work laws. The estimated -1.2574
coefficient on the interaction of union membership and the corporate tax rate is sizable and
statistically significant, as is the 4.0229 coefficient on the interaction of these variables and the
labor-to-capital ratio. Tax interactions clearly have much stronger effects on union wage
premiums in data drawn from workers located in states without right-to-work laws, as should be
expected from the impact of right-to-work laws on the ability of unions to demand a share of the
tax savings in low-tax locations. The regression reported in column III of Table 6 pools these
data and includes interactions of the union terms with a dummy variable indicating whether a
state has right-to-work laws. The -1.1246 and 3.9625 coefficients in this column are quite
consistent with the results reported in column II for states without right-to-work laws, as they
indicate that in the absence of right-to-work laws union wage premiums are smaller in high-tax
states and that this effect is most pronounced in industries with low labor-to-capital ratios. The
1.0282 coefficient on the interaction of the tax and union terms with a dummy variable for right-
to-work laws implies that the effect of corporate taxes on union wage premiums largely
disappears for workers in states with right-to-work laws. Appendix Table A7 repeats these
regressions adding industry dummy variables, with very similar-looking results.

       Table 7 presents estimated coefficients from regressions that repeat the specifications
reported in Table 6, this time adding state dummy variables, and thereby controlling for wage
effects of individual states and their policies. The estimated -1.0543 and 3.3553 coefficients
appearing in column III of Table 7 are just slightly smaller than the corresponding coefficients in
column III of Table 6, and imply larger tax effects on union wage premiums for firms with mean
labor-to-capital ratios, thereby suggesting that the estimated tax effects in Table 6 reflect
something other than general wage effects that differ across states.

       The evidence presented in Figure 3 and Tables 6 and 7 points strongly toward
heterogeneous effects of taxation on union wage premiums, in which the effects of taxation
greatly diminish in places where unions have reduced power due to the underlying legal regime.
This consideration suggests that it could be important to include right-to-work laws as
explanatory variables in the regressions reported in Table 2. Table 8 presents estimated
coefficients from additional specifications of the regressions appearing in columns II and IV of



                                                                                                21
Table 2, this time adding dummy variables for right-to-work laws, and, in the even-numbered
columns, an interaction of this dummy variable and a dummy variable for union membership.
As is evident from the table, the estimated tax effects are similar to the corresponding estimates
that appear in Table 2. Thus, despite the importance of right-to-work laws in affecting the
influence of taxation on union wages, explicit treatment of this consideration does not change the
prior pattern that union wage premiums are higher in states with low tax rates.

6.       Multijurisdictional Firms

         The analysis to this point concerns the effects of corporate taxes on firms located entirely
within individual states. It is useful to consider how the analysis might be modified in cases in
which firms span several states. There are at least two potentially significant consequences of
having operations in multiple states. The first is that the taxation of multistate firms differs from
the taxation of firms confined to single states: the amount of a multijurisdictional firm’s income
taxed in each state is determined using formulas that apportion the firm’s national income based
on the fraction of its sales, employment, and capital located in the state. The second potential
consequence of multistate operation is that labor bargains struck in one state might affect
contract terms elsewhere.

         Firms with unitary operations in multiple states do not use separate accounting to
determine how much taxable income is earned in each state; instead, they use simple formulas
that apportion national income to a state based on the state’s fraction of total sales, employment
and capital located within the state.15 States differ in their reliance on alternative factors to
apportion national income, and these components of the apportionment formulas interact with
tax rates to create burdens that differ among states. Some states apportion taxable income based
one-third each on sales, employment, and capital, though more commonly half of the
apportionment is based on the location of sales, one quarter on employment, and one quarter on
capital – and other formulas are also used.

15
  Operations are unitary only if they have sufficient connection to each other. Thus, a national petroleum company
with centralized management, procurement and distribution as well as service stations in all 50 states would use
formulas to calculate its taxable income in each state, whereas a New Jersey electronics firm that also owns
restaurants in Hawaii would not: that firm would pay tax on its electronics income to New Jersey, and its restaurant
income to Hawaii. Gordon and Wilson (1986), Goolsbee and Maydew (2000) and Anand and Sansing (2000)
consider the effects of state apportionment formulas on factor demands and the resulting incentives for states to
adopt differing formulary weights.


                                                                                                             22
       The use of formulary methods to apportion taxable income discourages firms from
configuring their operations in ways that would attribute high levels of income to high-tax states.
In particular, there is a tax cost associated with paying high union wage premiums in high-tax
states whose apportionment formulas place significant weight on labor factors, since the labor
portion of the apportionment formula assigns taxable income based on labor compensation,
inclusive of union premiums. A high union premium therefore has the effect of attributing
greater taxable income to the state, which is costly to the extent that the state has a high
corporate tax rate. As a result, bargaining between employers and unions will tend to produce
smaller union premiums in states with high tax rates and significant labor shares in
apportionment formulas, and this is in addition to the effect of high tax rates (together with the
interaction of factor weights in apportionment formulas and the location of sales, employment,
and capital) in reducing the surplus available to distribute to union members. The Appendix
amends the model of section 3 to consider the implications for a firm with unitary operations
distributed across 50 states, and whose state tax obligations are therefore determined by
formulas, concluding that the relevant state tax variable becomes the product of the state tax rate
and one minus the sales share in the apportionment formula.

       It is not known what fraction of corporate income is earned by firms with unitary
multistate operations whose state taxes are therefore determined by formulary apportionment. In
the extreme case in which all firms are subject to formulary apportionment, it is appropriate to
modify the state tax variable in the regressions by multiplying it by one minus the sales factor
weight. Table 9 presents the results of re-running the regressions reported in columns II-IV of
Table 2 using this modified tax variable. The results of the two specifications are very similar,
though the estimated tax effects reported in Table 9 are larger in magnitude than the
corresponding effects in Table 2, reflecting that the modified tax variable has a smaller mean due
to the sales factor adjustment. The -1.5953 coefficient reported in column I indicates that higher
state corporate tax rates (adjusted for sales apportionment) are associated with lower union wage
premiums, and the 6.2956 coefficient indicates that this effect is most pronounced in industries
with low labor-to-capital ratios. Columns II and III report estimated coefficients from
regressions that omit personal and sales taxes, and add industry dummy variables, without
changing the qualitative nature of the results. Consequently the empirical pattern evident in the




                                                                                               23
Table 2 regressions likewise appears when using a tax variable modified for firms with state tax
obligations determined by formulary apportionment.

       Firms with operations in multiple states may have national unions that demand common
compensation packages despite differences across states in costs of living, workforce
characteristics, and state taxes. Strict adherence to common contracts should have the effect of
reducing, or for some firms eliminating, the impact of state taxes on local union wage premiums.
Multistate firms whose employment is concentrated in individual states are likely to offer union
contracts that reflect those states’ tax features, and the employee data will reflect that pattern,
since the bulk of the observations of a firm’s employment will be those of employees whose state
of residence matches the state whose tax policies influence wages the most. Furthermore, firms
facing such national contracts have incentives to undo their effects with selective hiring,
choosing to employ only those workers generating the most surplus in states where the
associated after-tax cost is the highest, and more generally choosing to concentrate operations in
states where the common employment contract restriction is least burdensome. Thus, while the
existence of national union contracts will mitigate the impact of state taxes on local union wage
premiums in some cases, the ability of employers to choose their locations and their employees,
together with the natural concentration of firm activity in individual states, implies that there
should remain a significant effect of state taxes on local union wage premiums.

7.     Conclusion

       High corporate income taxes reduce the after-tax profits of firms earning rents, which are
the same firms that are in positions to pay above-market wages to their employees. Since high
taxes mean that there is less for everyone, it can hardly be surprising that high taxes ultimately
depress union wages, particularly in capital-intensive industries where corporate taxes have the
most impact on a firm’s bottom line.

       The evidence that high tax rates reduce union wage premiums does not directly address
the impact of corporate taxes on wages for the majority of U.S. workers who are not union
members. In the case of perfectly competitive labor markets, the incidence of the corporate tax
depends on how the tax affects demand for labor, which in turn is a function of the effects of
taxation on labor-capital substitution and the reallocation of economic activity between sectors of


                                                                                                24
the economy. But to the extent that there is a rent-sharing aspect of wages in settings without
labor unions, it may be reasonable to expect that the same dynamics would appear, in that higher
taxes would be associated with reduced wages. A similar process could apply to executive
compensation, rent and royalty payments, and any other firm expenses that plausibly include
sharing of economic rents. Consequently, the inframarginal burden of the corporate income tax
may be shared among a number of a corporation’s stakeholders, thereby distributing corporate
tax burdens among the parties who normally benefit from surplus produced within the firm.




                                                                                            25
References

Abowd, John M. and Thomas Lemieux. 1993. “The Effects of Product Market Competition on
     Collective Bargaining Agreements: The Case of Foreign Competition in Canada,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 108, no. 4, pp. 983-1014.
Anand, Bharat N. and Richard Sansing. 2000. “The Weighting Game: Formula Apportionment
      as an Instrument of Public Policy,” National Tax Journal, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 183-200.
Arulampalam, Wiji, Michael P. Devereux, and Giorgia Maffini. 2007. “The Direct Incidence of
      Corporate Income Tax on Wages,” Working Paper 07/07, Oxford University Centre for
      Business Taxation, July.
Auerbach, Alan J. 2006. “Who Bears the Corporate Tax? A Review of What We Know,” in
      James M. Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 20. Cambridge, MA: MIT
      Press.
Belman, Dale and Paula B. Voos. 2004. “Changes in Union Wage Effects by Industry: A Fresh
      Look at the Evidence,” Industrial Relations, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 491-519.
Blanchflower, David G. and Alex Bryson. 2004. “What Effect Do Unions Have on Wages Now
      and Would Freeman and Medoff Be Surprised?” Journal of Labor Research, vol. 25, no.
      3, pp. 383-414.
Blanchflower, David G., Andrew J. Oswald and Peter Sanfey. 1996. “Wages, Profits, and Rent-
      Sharing,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 111, no. 1, pp. 227-251.
Bratsberg, Bernt and James F. Ragan Jr. 2002. “Changes in the Union Wage Premium by
       Industry,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 65-83.
Budd, John W. and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2004. “Are Profits Shared across Borders? Evidence
       on International Rent Sharing,” Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 525-552.
Budd, John W., Jozef Konings, and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2005. “Wages and International Rent
       Sharing in Multinational Firms,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 87, no. 1, pp.
       73-84.
Burkhauser, Richard V., Shuaizhang Feng, and Stephen P. Jenkins. 2009. “Using the P90/P10
      Index to Measure U.S. Inequality Trends with Current Population Survey Data: A View
      from Inside the Census Bureau Vaults,” Review of Income and Wealth, vol. 55, no. 1, pp.
      166 – 185.
Cahuc, Pierre and André Zylberberg. 2004. Labor Economics (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
       2004).
Carroll, Thomas M. “Right to Work Laws Do Matter,” Southern Economic Journal, vol. 50, no.
        2, pp. 494-509.
Chirinko, Robert S., and Daniel J. Wilson. 2008. “State Investment Tax Incentives: A Zero-
       Sum Game?,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, July.


                                                                                          26
Christofides, Louis N. and Andrew J. Oswald. 1992. “Real Wage Determination and Rent-
       Sharing in Collective Bargaining Agreements,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
       107, no. 3, pp. 985-1002.
Clark, Kim B. 1984. “Unionization and Firm Performance: The Impact on Profits, Growth, and
       Productivity,” American Economic Review, vol. 74, no. 5, pp. 893-919.

Currie, Janet and Sheena McConnell. 1992. “Firm-Specific Determinants of the Real Wage,”
        Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 297-304.
Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr. 2007. “Labor and Capital Shares of the
       Corporate Tax Burden: International Evidence,” Working Paper, Harvard University,
       December.
Dickens, William T. and Lawrence F. Katz. 1987. “Inter-Industry Wage Differences and
      Industry Characteristics,” in Kevin Lang and Jonathan Leonard, eds., Unemployment and
      the Structure of Labor Markets. Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell.
DiNardo, John and David S. Lee. 2004. “Economic Impacts of New Unionization on Private
      Sector Employers: 1984-2001,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 119, no. 4, pp.
      1383-1441.
Farber, Henry S. 1984. “Right-to-Work Laws and the Extent of Unionization,” Journal of Labor
        Economics, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 319-352.
Felix, R. Alison. 2007. “Passing the Burden: Corporate Tax Incidence in Open Economies,”
        Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, October.
Felix, R. Alison. 2009. “Do State Corporate Income Taxes Reduce Wages?,” Federal Reserve
        Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, vol. 94, no. 1, pp. 5-30.
Freeman, Richard B. and James L. Medoff. 1984. What Do Unions Do? New York: Basic
      Books.
Garofalo, Gasper A. and Devinder M. Malhotra. 1992. “ An Integrated Model of the Economic
       Effects of Right-to-Work Laws,” Journal of Labor Research, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 293-305.

Gentry, William M. 2007. “A Review of the Evidence on the Incidence of the Corporate
       Income Tax,” Office of Tax Analysis, OTA Paper 101, December.
Goolsbee, Austan and Edward L. Maydew. 2000. “Coveting Thy Neighbor’s Manufacturing:
      The Dilemma of State Income Apportionment,” Journal of Public Economics, vol. 75,
      no. 1, pp. 125-143.
Gordon, Roger H. and John D. Wilson. 1986. “An Examination of Multijurisdictional Corporate
      Income Taxation under Formula Apportionment,” Econometrica, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1357-
      1373.
Gravelle, Jane G., and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. 1993. “Corporate Tax Incidence and Inefficiency
       When Corporate and Non-corporate Goods are Close Substitutes.” Economic Inquiry,
       vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 501 – 516.



                                                                                         27
Gravelle, Jane G., and Kent A. Smetters. 2006. “Does the Open Economy Assumption Really
       Mean that Labor Bears the Burden of a Capital Income Tax?” Advances in Economic
       Analysis & Policy, vol. 6, no. 1, article 3.
Gyourko, Joseph and Joseph Tracy. 1989. “The Importance of Local Fiscal Conditions in
      Analyzing Local Labor Markets.” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 97, no. 5, pp. 1208-
      1231.
Hall, Brian J. and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 1998. “Are CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 113, no. 3, pp. 653-691.
Harberger, Arnold. 1962. “The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax,” Journal of Political
      Economy, vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 215-240.
Harberger, Arnold. 1995. “The ABC’s of Corporation Tax Incidence: Insights into the Open-
      Economy Case,” Tax Policy and Economic Growth. Washington, D.C.: American
      Council for Capital Formation.
Hassett, Kevin A. and Aparna Mathur. 2006. “Taxes and Wages,” working paper #128,
       American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, June.
Hildreth, Andrew K.G. and Andrew J. Oswald. 1997. “Rent-Sharing and Wages: Evidence from
       Company and Establishment Panels,” Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 15, no. 2, pp.
       318-337.
Hirsch, Barry T. 2004. “Reconsidering Union Wage Effects: Surveying New Evidence on an
       Old Topic,” Journal of Labor Research, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 233-266.
Hirsch, Barry T., David A. Macpherson, and Edward J. Schumacher. 2002. “Measuring Union
       and Nonunion Wage Growth: Puzzles in Search of Solutions.” Paper presented at the 23rd
       Middlebury Economics Conference on the Changing Role of Unions, Middlebury,
       Vermont, April.
Internal Revenue Service. 2000. “Returns of Active Corporations,”
        http://www.irs.gov/taxstats/article/0,,id=170726,00.html
Internal Revenue Service. 2006. “Returns of Active Corporations,”
        http://www.irs.gov/taxstats/article/0,,id=170726,00.html
Katz, Lawrence F. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1989. “Industry Rents: Evidence and
       Implications,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Microeconomics), pp. 209-275.
Krueger, Alan B. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1987. “Reflections on the Inter-Industry Wage
      Structure,” in Kevin Lang and Jonathan Leonard, eds., Unemployment and the Structure
      of Labor Markets. Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell.
Krueger, Alan B. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1988. “Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry
      Wage Structure,” Econometrica, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 259-293.
Lee, David and Alexandre Mas. 2009. “Long-Run Impacts of Unions on Firms: New Evidence
       From Financial Markets, 1961-1999,” Working Paper No. 14709, NBER, February.


                                                                                        28
Lewis, H. Gregg. 1986. “Union Relative Wage Effects,” in Orley Ashenfelter and Richard
       Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume II. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
McLure, Charles E. 1981. “The Elusive Incidence of the Corporate Income Tax: The State
     Case,” Working Paper No. 616, NBER, January.
Mieszkowski, Peter and George R. Zodrow. 1985. “The Incidence of Partial State Corporate
      Income Tax,” National Tax Journal, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 489-496.
Moore, William J. 1998. “The Determinants and Effects of Right-to-Work Laws: A Review of
      the Recent Literature,” Journal of Labor Research,” vol. 19, no. 3, pp.445-469.
National Bureau of Economic Research. 2000. “CPS Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups,”
       http://www.nber.org/data/morg.html#faq
Randolph, William C. 2006. “International Burdens of the Corporate Income Tax.” CBO
      Working Paper 2006 – 09.
Riedel, Nadine. 2007. “The Taxation of Multinational Corporations and Union Wage
        Bargaining,” Working Paper, University of Munich, June.
Svejnar, Jan. 1986. “Bargaining Power, Fear of Disagreement, and Wage Settlements: Theory
       and Evidence from U.S. Industry,” Econometrica, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1055-1078.
The Tax Foundation. 2009. “Tax Data from the Tax Foundation,”
      http://www.taxfoundation.org/taxdata/
United States Department of Labor. 2009. “State Right-to-work Laws and Constitutional
       Amendments in Effect,” http://www.dol.gov/esa/whd/state/righttowork.htm
University of Michigan Ross School of Business. 2009. “World Tax Database,”
       http://www.bus.umich.edu/OTPR/otpr/introduction.htm




                                                                                        29
Appendix

        This appendix analyzes the implications of formulary apportionment of state corporate
tax rates for the specification of possible tax effects on union wage premiums.

        Suppose that a firm has unitary operations in more than one state. The firm’s tax
obligation to state i is then:

                                         ⎡                                                           ⎤
                                         ⎢        wi Li + Ri                                    S i ⎥⎥
(A1)            [Q(K , L ) − wL − R ]τ i ⎢si                   + si n
                                                                       Ki
                                                                            + (1 − si − si ) n         ,
                                         ⎢      n
                                                                                                     ⎥
                                         ⎢     ∑    wj Lj + Rj     ∑     Kj                 ∑     Sj ⎥
                                         ⎣     j =1                 j =1                     j =1    ⎦

in which the first bracketed term of (A1) represents the firm’s total U.S. taxable profits, while the
second bracketed term represents the product of the portion of those profits taxed by state i and
state i’s tax rate. si is the labor expense weight in state i’s three-factor formula, si is the capital

share weight, and (1 − si − si ) is therefore the sales weight; Li denotes the number of workers the

firm employs in state i, and wi the wages non-union workers are paid in state i, Ri represents

total union premiums in state i, Ki is the firm’s capital stock in state i, and S i denotes total firm
sales in state i. For simplicity we take the location of final sales to be unaffected by the location
of production. The firm’s total tax obligation to all states is the sum of tax obligations in all
states in which the firm has nexus, and this can be defined as [Q (K , L ) − wL − R ]τ , in which τ is
the average state tax rate, weighted by apportionment weights and the extent of firm activity in a
state, as reflected in the second bracketed term of (A1).

        The tax consequences of operations in state i need not equal a firm’s tax obligation to
state i, since operations in i affect the firm’s tax obligations to all states as determined by the
apportionment formulas. The analysis that follows assumes that the union and the firm negotiate
over the allocation of rents arising from operations in state i, including the tax consequences of
these operations. Denoting the tax consequences as Taxi , and firm rents arising from operations

in state i by ρ i , the analogue to equation (2) becomes:




                                                                                                           30
(A2)                                  ψ i = Ri α ρ i1−α = Ri α [Q (K i , Li ) − wi Li − Ri − rK i − Taxi ]1−α .
                 dψ i
The condition         = 0 implies that:
                 dRi


                                                                          α                     ρi
(A3)                                                        Ri =
                                                                       (1 − α ) ⎛            dTaxi ⎞
                                                                                       ⎜⎜1 +       ⎟⎟
                                                                                        ⎝     dRi   ⎠

Denoting the firm’s total national profits by π , it follows from the definition of τ that:

                                   ⎡ ⎛ n                       ⎞ n                          ⎤
                                   ⎢τ i si ⎜⎜ ∑ w j L j + R j ⎟⎟ − ∑τ j s j (w j L j + R j )⎥
                                   ⎢                                                        ⎥
                          = −τ + π ⎢ ⎝                         ⎠ j =1
                    dTaxi                     j =1
(A4)                                                                     2                  ⎥
                     dRi
                                   ⎢                 ⎛ n               ⎞                    ⎥
                                                     ⎜ ∑wjLj + Rj ⎟
                                   ⎢                 ⎜                 ⎟                    ⎥
                                   ⎣                 ⎝ j =1            ⎠                    ⎦


                ∑τ s (w L                     + Rj )
                n

                         j    j       j   j

Letting τ s ≡   j =1
                       n
                                                       denote the average value of τ j s j , weighted by labor expenses,
                       ∑w L
                       j =1
                                  j   j   + Rj

(A4) can be simplified to:

                                                                                       π
(A5a)
                                                  dTaxi
                                                        = −τ +              n
                                                                                                      (τ i si − τ s )
                                                                        ∑w L
                                                   dRi
                                                                                   j       j   + Rj
                                                                            j =1



                                                        dTaxi       dTaxi
By a similar set of calculations,                                 =       , and it also follows that:
                                                       d (wi Li )    dRi

                                                                   π
(A5b)
                                                  dTaxi
                                                        =      n
                                                                             (τ i si − τ s ) ,
                                                              ∑K
                                                   dK i
                                                                        j
                                                              j =1



in which τ s is the average value of τ j s j , weighted by capital in place. The assumption that the

location of sales is independent of the location of production produces:




                                                                                                                        31
                                              dTaxi
(A5c)                                               =τ .
                                               dQi


        In order to evaluate (A3) it is necessary to include an expression for Taxi , for which it is
helpful to use the following approximation:


(A6)                      Taxi ≅
                                      dTaxi
                                                   (wi Li + Ri ) + dTaxi Ki + dTaxi Qi .
                                   d (wi Li + Ri )                 d (K i )    dQi

Applying (A5a-A5c) to (A6) produces:

                                                   ⎡                                                   ⎤
                                                   ⎢ wL +R                                             ⎥
(A7)    Taxi = τ [Q (K i , Li ) − wi Li − Ri ] + π ⎢ n i i    i
                                                                  (τ i si − τ s ) + nKi (τ i si − τ s )⎥ .
                                                   ⎢ w L +R                                            ⎥
                                                   ⎢∑     j j   j                  ∑     Kj            ⎥
                                                   ⎣ j =1                           j =1               ⎦

Combining (A3), (A5a), and (A7) produces:

                                                     ⎛                              ⎞
                                                     ⎜                              ⎟
                                                     ⎜        π
                        Q (K i , Li )(1 − τ ) − rK i 1 + n
                                                     ⎜
                                                                    (τ i si − τ s )⎟⎟
                                                     ⎜ r∑ K j                       ⎟
(A8)             Ri = α                              ⎝      j =1                    ⎠ − αw L .
                                       ⎡                          ⎤
                                                                                          i i

                                       ⎢          π (τ s − τ s ) ⎥⎥
                                       ⎢1 − τ + n i i
                                       ⎢               wjLj + Rj ⎥
                                       ⎢         ∑                ⎥
                                       ⎣          j =1            ⎦

        In evaluating (A8) it is helpful to apply the firm’s first-order conditions for profit
maximizing choices of factor inputs. The first order condition for the choice of labor inputs is:
∂Q(K i , Li ) dTaxi ∂Q(K i , Li )       ⎛     dTaxi ⎞
             −                    = wi ⎜⎜1 +           ⎟⎟ , which in turn implies:
  ∂Li          dQi    ∂Li               ⎝    d ( w   )
                                                  i i ⎠
                                                   L


                                               ⎡                         ⎤
                           ∂Q (K i , Li )      ⎢      π (τ i si − τ s )  ⎥
(A9a)                                     = wi ⎢1 +                      ⎥.
                              ∂Li              ⎢ (1 − τ ) w L + R ⎥
                                                           n

                                               ⎢         ∑       j j    j⎥
                                               ⎣          j =1           ⎦


                                                                                                             32
By a similar logic, the first order condition for the profit maximizing choice of K i is:


                                                     ⎡               ⎤
                           ∂Q (K i , Li )      r ⎢ π (τ i si − τ s )⎥⎥
                                                     ⎢
(A9b)                                     =           1+               .
                              ∂K i          (1 − τ ) ⎢     n
                                                         r∑ K j ⎥    ⎥
                                                     ⎢
                                                     ⎣    j =1       ⎦

Using the Cobb-Douglas production function in (7), and taking the ratio of (A9a) to (A9b)
produces:

                                          ⎡                                          ⎤
                                          ⎢                                   π      ⎥
                                          ⎢1 − τ + (τ i si − τ s ) n                 ⎥
                                          ⎢                               wj Lj + Rj ⎥
                                    γ ⎣   ⎢                        ∑                 ⎥
(A10)
                           rKi
                                =
                                                                    j =1             ⎦.
                           wi Li (1 − γ )       ⎡                               ⎤
                                                ⎢                          π ⎥⎥
                                                ⎢1 + (τ i si − τ s ) n
                                                ⎢                     r∑ K j ⎥
                                                ⎢                               ⎥
                                                ⎣                        j =1   ⎦

Dividing both sides of (A8) by wi Li , and applying (A10) produces:


                            Ri      Q (K i , Li )         (1 − τ )              α
(A11)                            =α                                          −        .
                           wi Li       wi Li ⎡                             ⎤ (1 − γ )
                                                  ⎢        π (τ s − τ s ) ⎥⎥
                                                  ⎢1 − τ + n i i
                                                  ⎢             wjLj + Rj ⎥
                                                  ⎢       ∑                ⎥
                                                  ⎣        j =1            ⎦

Again applying the production function in (7) yields:


                                                          (1 − τ )
                                 γ
       Ri        ⎡ γ ⎤ γ −1                                                                      α
(A12)       = αa ⎢           ⎥ wi                                                           −          .
                 ⎣ (1 − γ )r ⎦                                                                (1 − γ )
                                                                1−γ                       γ
      wi Li                       ⎡                            ⎤ ⎡                      ⎤
                                  ⎢                            ⎥ ⎢                      ⎥
                                  ⎢1 − τ + πn (τ i si − τ s ) ⎥ ⎢1 + π (τ i sn i − τ s )⎥
                                  ⎢             w j L j + R j ⎥⎥ ⎢⎢     r ∑ K j ⎥⎥
                                  ⎢       ∑
                                  ⎣        j =1                ⎦ ⎣         j =1         ⎦




                                                                                                           33
Equation (A12) is analogous to equation (8) for a setting in which tax obligations are determined
by formulas; if a firm operates in only one state, then τ = τ i and (A12) is identical to equation
(8).

        Consider the case of a firm with operations in all 50 states, diversified so that no single
state strongly affects the value of τ ; such a case maximizes the extent to which the
apportionment formulas influence tax effects. Differentiating both sides of (A12) with respect to
τ i si produces:

         ⎛ R ⎞                                                    ⎡                                    ⎤
      d ⎜⎜ i ⎟⎟                                                   ⎢                          dwi ⎥⎥
                                  γ
                    ⎡ γ ⎤ γ −2                                           π
(A13) ⎝ i i ⎠ = −αa ⎢
          wL
                                ⎥ i w (1 − τ )M γ −1
                                                     M −γ
                                                          (1 − γ )⎢             w  M  −1
                                                                                         +               ,
       d (τ i si )  ⎣ (1 − γ )r ⎦                                 ⎢ n                      d (τ i si ) ⎥
                                                1      2                         i   1

                                                                  ⎢∑ wj Lj + Rj                        ⎥
                                                                  ⎣ j =1                               ⎦

              ⎡                           ⎤          ⎡                      ⎤
              ⎢                           ⎥
                        π (τ i si − τ s ) ⎥          ⎢    π (τ i si − τ s )⎥⎥
              ⎢
in which M 1 ≡ 1 − τ + n                             ⎢
                                            and M 2 ≡ 1 +                     . By a similar calculation,
              ⎢                           ⎥          ⎢                      ⎥
                                                                 n

              ⎢       ∑     wjLj + Rj ⎥              ⎢       r∑ K j ⎥
              ⎣        j =1               ⎦          ⎣          j =1        ⎦

         ⎛ R ⎞                                                    ⎡                                     ⎤
      d ⎜⎜ i ⎟⎟                                                   ⎢                            dwi ⎥⎥
                                  γ
                    ⎡ γ ⎤ γ −2                                         γ       π
(A14) ⎝ i i ⎠ = −αa ⎢
          wL
                                ⎥ i w (1 − τ )M γ −1
                                                     M −γ
                                                          (1 − γ )⎢                w  M −1
                                                                                           +              .
       d (τ i si )  ⎣ (1 − γ )r ⎦                                 ⎢ (1 − γ ) n               d (τ i si )⎥
                                                1      2                            i   2

                                                                  ⎢         r∑ K j                      ⎥
                                                                  ⎣          j =1                       ⎦

While the values on the right sides of (A13) and (A14) are not identical, they are nonetheless
                                        γ
approximately equal, given that                 is roughly equal to the ratio of capital’s share of total
                                     (1 − γ )
output to labor’s share, and that the low state tax rates (Table 1 reports a mean value of 0.063)
imply that M 1 does not differ greatly from M 2 . The effect of tax changes on wi depends on
whether marginal labor demanders are subject to formula apportionment, but it is reasonable to
take the effects to be similar across taxes apportioned according to capital and labor shares.
Consequently, tax effects are proportional to τ i si + τ i si , which is the product of the local
statutory tax rate and one minus the sales apportionment factor.




                                                                                                       34
           Figure 1: Median Hourly Wages in Low‐ and High‐Tax States
   $20.00




   $15.00




   $10.00                                                                       Union
                                                                                Non‐Union


    $5.00




    $0.00
                    Low‐Tax States                 High‐Tax States



 Note: The first 2 bars display median wages of union members and non‐union members,
 respectively, living in low‐tax states. The last 2 bars display median wages of union
 members and non‐union members, respectively, living in high‐tax states. Low‐tax states
 are defined as states with marginal corporate tax rates less than 4 percent; high‐tax
 states are defined as states with marginal corporate tax rates greater than or equal to 9
 percent. The hourly wage is calculated by dividing weekly earnings by the usual number of
 hours worked per week. Union members include individuals who are members of unions
 or are covered by union contracts. Non‐union members include all other individuals.




               Figure 2: Median Hourly Wages in Industries with
                     High and Low Labor‐to‐Captial Ratios
  $20.00



  $15.00



  $10.00
                                                                                 Union
                                                                                 Non‐Union
   $5.00



   $0.00
            Low‐Tax States High‐Tax States Low‐Tax States High‐Tax States

                     High LK‐ratio                   Low LK‐ratio



Note: The first 2 bars display median wages of individuals living in low‐tax states and
working in industries with high labor‐to‐capital ratios. The next 2 bars display median
wages of individuals living in high‐tax states and working in industries with high labor‐to‐
capital ratios. The fifth and sixth bars display median wages of individuals living in low‐tax
states and working in industries with low labor‐to‐capital ratios. The last 2 bars display
median wages of individuals living in high‐tax states and working in industries with low
labor‐to‐capital ratios. Low‐tax states are defined as states with marginal corporate tax
rates less than 4 percent; high‐tax states are defined as states with marginal corporate tax
rates greater than or equal to 9 percent. High labor‐to‐capital ratio industries have labor‐to‐
capital ratios greater than 0.25. Low labor‐to‐capital ratio industries have labor‐to‐capital
ratios less than 0.05. The hourly wage is calculated by dividing weekly earnings by the usual
number of hours worked per week. Union members include individuals who are union
members or who are covered by union contracts. Non‐union members include all other
individuals.




                                                                                                  35
           Figure 3: Median Hourly Wages in States with and without
                              Right‐to‐Work Laws
  $20.00



  $15.00



  $10.00
                                                                               Union
                                                                               Non‐Union
   $5.00



   $0.00
            Low‐Tax States High‐Tax States Low‐Tax States High‐Tax States

                   Right‐to‐Work                 Not Right‐to‐Work


Note: The first 2 bars display median wages of individuals working in low‐tax states with
right‐to‐work laws. The next 2 bars display median wages of individuals working in high‐tax
states with right‐to‐work laws. The fifth and sixth bars display median wages of individuals
working in low‐tax states without right‐to‐work laws. The last 2 bars display median wages
of individuals working in high‐tax states without right‐to‐work laws. Low‐tax states are
defined as states with marginal corporate tax rates less than 4 percent; high‐tax states are
defined as states with marginal corporate tax rates greater than or equal to 9 percent. The
hourly wage is calculated by dividing weekly earnings by the usual number of hours worked
per week. Union membership includes individuals who are union members or who are
covered by union contracts. Non‐union membership includes all other individuals.




                                                                                               36
                                 Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                I       II              III    IV               V       VI
                               Whole Sample           Union Members          Non‐Union Members
                                Mean Median             Mean Median             Mean Median
Hourly wage                    16.886 13.542           17.810 16.250           16.773   13.060
Corporate tax rate              0.063   0.069            0.065  0.078           0.062    0.068
Labor‐to‐capital ratio          0.194   0.131           0.147   0.097           0.199    0.132
Personal income tax rate        0.051   0.060            0.055  0.060           0.051    0.060
Sales tax rate                  0.052   0.060            0.053  0.060           0.052    0.060
Age                            38.452 38.000           41.068 41.000           38.136   37.000
Male dummy                      0.590   1.000            0.718  1.000           0.574    1.000
Married dummy                   0.606   1.000            0.654  1.000           0.600    1.000
White dummy                     0.844   1.000            0.818  1.000           0.848    1.000
Black dummy                     0.099   0.000            0.133  0.000           0.095    0.000
Asian dummy                     0.047   0.000            0.040  0.000           0.048    0.000
Native American dummy           0.009   0.000            0.009  0.000           0.009    0.000
Years of education             13.407 13.000           12.812 12.000           13.481   13.000
Union member dummy              0.108   0.000            1.000  1.000           0.000    0.000
Non‐profit dummy                0.068   0.000            0.061  0.000           0.069    0.000
Metro‐area dummy                0.831   1.000            0.823  1.000           0.833    1.000

Observations                    57603     57603           6195      6195         51408      51408

Note: Columns I and II display variable means and medians for the entire sample. Columns III and
IV display variable means and medians for union members only, and columns V and VI display
variable means and medians for non‐union workers only. The hourly wage is weekly earnings
divided by the usual number of hours worked per week. The corporate tax rate is the marginal
state corporate tax rate for the highest income bracket adjusted for the deductibility of federal
corporate income taxes. The labor‐to‐capital ratio is defined as salaries and wages divided by
total assets as reported on federal corporate tax returns, and varies by industry. The individual
income tax rate is the marginal state individual income tax rate for the highest income tax
bracket. The sales tax rate is the tax rate imposed on general sales. The union member dummy
equals one if the individual is a union member or is covered by a union contract. The non‐profit
dummy equals one if the individual works at a non‐profit firm. The metro‐area dummy equals
one if the individual lives in a metropolitan area. All statistics are weighted using the earnings
weight provided by the CPS.




                                                                                                     37
  Table 2: The Effect of Corporate Income Taxes on the Union Wage Premium
                          Dependent Variable: Ln(Hourly Wage)

Variable                          I               II               III              IV
Corporate tax rate                               0.7502           0.6119           0.7203
                                               (0.5456)         (0.3099)         (0.5486)
Corp tax rate * union                           ‐1.1833          ‐1.1727          ‐0.8618
                                               (0.4408)         (0.4271)         (0.3882)
Labor‐to‐capital ratio                          ‐0.1744          ‐0.1738
                                               (0.0122)         (0.0127)
LK ratio * union                                ‐0.5454          ‐0.5468          ‐0.3574
                                               (0.1016)         (0.0953)         (0.0903)
LK ratio * union * corp tax                      4.2198           4.2308           2.6179
                                               (1.2569)         (1.1844)         (1.1664)
Pers income tax rate                            ‐0.1817                           ‐0.1561
                                               (0.5999)                          (0.6136)
Sales tax rate                                   0.1485                            0.1393
                                               (0.7070)                          (0.7178)
Union member                     0.1747          0.3063           0.3057           0.2568
                               (0.0103)        (0.0332)         (0.0323)         (0.0293)
Age                              0.0384          0.0409           0.0409           0.0384
                               (0.0017)        (0.0017)         (0.0018)         (0.0017)
Age‐squared / 1000              ‐0.3886         ‐0.4147          ‐0.4150          ‐0.3894
                               (0.0179)        (0.0189)         (0.0195)         (0.0180)
Male dummy                       0.1161          0.1156           0.1157           0.1164
                               (0.0060)        (0.0061)         (0.0062)         (0.0059)
Married dummy                    0.0016          0.0050           0.0050           0.0022
                               (0.0064)        (0.0065)         (0.0068)         (0.0063)
Male * married dummy             0.1152          0.1229           0.1228           0.1152
                               (0.0074)        (0.0077)         (0.0076)         (0.0074)
White dummy                      0.0522          0.0607           0.0620           0.0505
                               (0.0179)        (0.0178)         (0.0187)         (0.0169)
Black dummy                     ‐0.0631         ‐0.0554          ‐0.0541          ‐0.0627
                               (0.0209)        (0.0204)         (0.0210)         (0.0200)
Asian dummy                      0.0057          0.0022           0.0019           0.0036
                               (0.0191)        (0.0181)         (0.0198)         (0.0185)
Years of education               0.0585          0.0640           0.0640           0.0584
                               (0.0013)        (0.0015)         (0.0015)         (0.0013)
Non‐profit dummy                 0.0105         ‐0.0484          ‐0.0486           0.0092
                               (0.0115)        (0.0108)         (0.0107)         (0.0110)
Metro‐area dummy                 0.1468          0.1485           0.1505           0.1444
                               (0.0126)        (0.0117)         (0.0132)         (0.0107)

Industry dummies                      Yes           No               No              Yes
Occupation dummies                    Yes           Yes              Yes             Yes

 2
R                               0.4857           0.4587           0.4586          0.4871
Observations                     57426            57426            57426           57426

Note: The dependent variable is the log of hourly wages. The corporate tax rate is
defined as the marginal state corporate tax rate for the highest income bracket
adjusted to allow for the deductibility of federal corporate taxes. The labor‐to‐capital
ratio is defined as salaries and wages divided by total assets as reported on federal
corporate tax returns. The individual income tax rate is the marginal state individual
income tax rate for the highest income tax bracket. The sales tax rate is the tax rate
imposed on general sales. The union member dummy equals one if an individual is a
union member or is covered by a union contract. The non‐profit dummy equals one if
an individual works for a nonprofit organization. The metro‐area dummy equals one if
an individual lives in a metropolitan area. The columns report estimated OLS
coefficients; standard errors are bootstrapped (1,000 replications) and clustered at the
state level. All regressions include dummy variables for 22 occupations. Columns I and
IV include 46 industry dummy variables.



                                                                                            38
     Table 3: The Effect of Corporate Income Taxes on the Union
          Wage Premium (Adding State Dummy Variables)
                   Dependent Variable: Ln(Hourly Wage)

Variable                          I               II              III
Corp tax rate * union                           ‐0.8578         ‐0.5383
                                               (0.3765)        (0.3411)
Labor‐to‐capital ratio                          ‐0.1727
                                               (0.0125)
LK ratio * union                                ‐0.5211         ‐0.3421
                                               (0.0862)        (0.0873)
LK ratio * union * corp tax                      3.5582          2.0704
                                               (1.0248)        (1.0906)
Union member                     0.1542          0.2699          0.2208
                               (0.0097)        (0.0263)        (0.0247)
Age                              0.0376          0.0401          0.0376
                               (0.0016)        (0.0017)        (0.0015)
Age‐squared / 1000              ‐0.3797         ‐0.4054         ‐0.3800
                               (0.0174)        (0.0189)        (0.0165)
Male dummy                       0.1160          0.1154          0.1160
                               (0.0058)        (0.0062)        (0.0060)
Married dummy                    0.0077          0.0105          0.0078
                               (0.0056)        (0.0063)        (0.0055)
Male * married dummy             0.1130          0.1206          0.1128
                               (0.0068)        (0.0072)        (0.0071)
White dummy                      0.0373          0.0451          0.0370
                               (0.0132)        (0.0142)        (0.0131)
Black dummy                     ‐0.0763         ‐0.0702         ‐0.0761
                               (0.0144)        (0.0152)        (0.0147)
Asian dummy                     ‐0.0401         ‐0.0384         ‐0.0398
                               (0.0162)        (0.0177)        (0.0166)
Years of education               0.0582          0.0638          0.0582
                               (0.0015)        (0.0017)        (0.0015)
Non‐profit dummy                 0.0085         ‐0.0463          0.0088
                               (0.0100)        (0.0095)        (0.0102)
Metro‐area dummy                 0.1034          0.1067          0.1036
                               (0.0099)        (0.0110)        (0.0099)

Industry dummies                      Yes          No               Yes
Occupation dummies                    Yes          Yes              Yes
State Dummies                         Yes          Yes              Yes

 2
R                                0.5017         0.4742           0.5021
Observations                      57426          57426            57426
Note: The dependent variable is the log of hourly wages. The
corporate tax rate is defined as the marginal state corporate tax rate
for the highest income bracket adjusted to allow for the deductibility
of federal corporate taxes. The labor‐to‐capital ratio is defined as
salaries and wages divided by total assets as reported on federal
corporate tax returns. The individual income tax rate is the marginal
state individual income tax rate for the highest income tax bracket.
The sales tax rate is the tax rate imposed on general sales. The union
member dummy equals one if an individual is a union member or is
covered by a union contract. The non‐profit dummy equals one if an
individual works for a nonprofit organization. The metro‐area dummy
equals one if an individual lives in a metropolitan area. The columns
report estimated OLS coefficients; standard errors are bootstrapped
(1,000 replications) and clustered at the state level. All regressions
include dummy variables for 22 occupations and 50 states. Columns I
and III include 46 industry dummy variables.




                                                                          39
Table 4: The Effect of Corporate Income Taxes on Union and Non‐Union
                             Hourly Wages
                   Dependent Variable: Ln(Hourly Wage)

                                   I            II            III
Variable                       Union        Non‐Union    Whole Sample
Corporate tax rate              ‐0.6706        0.6205         0.7710
                               (0.7033)      (0.5383)       (0.5056)
Corp tax rate * union                                        ‐1.3872
                                                            (0.5439)
Labor‐to‐capital ratio          ‐0.6161       ‐0.2307        ‐0.1779
                               (0.1035)      (0.0286)       (0.0126)
LK ratio * union                                             ‐0.4544
                                                            (0.1043)
LK ratio * union * corp tax      4.3105        0.7422         3.9811
                               (1.2740)      (0.4481)       (1.2747)
Pers income tax rate             0.1769       ‐0.2247        ‐0.2190
                               (0.7500)      (0.5996)       (0.5870)
Pers income tax rate * union                                  0.4495
                                                            (0.5628)
Sales tax rate                  ‐0.0919        0.1628         0.1764
                               (0.9766)      (0.7216)       (0.6938)
Sales tax rate * union                                       ‐0.2586
                                                            (0.6261)
Union member                                                  0.7199
                                                            (0.1030)
Age                              0.0355        0.0414         0.0415
                               (0.0040)      (0.0017)       (0.0017)
Age * union                                                  ‐0.0057
                                                            (0.0039)
Age‐squared / 1000              ‐0.3399       ‐0.4230        ‐0.4231
                               (0.0480)      (0.0188)       (0.0180)
Age‐squared / 1000 * union                                    0.0780
                                                            (0.0471)
Male                             0.1173        0.1158         0.1080
                               (0.0216)      (0.0061)       (0.0066)
Male * union                                                  0.0695
                                                            (0.0210)
Married                         ‐0.0193        0.0073         0.0073
                               (0.0227)      (0.0073)       (0.0071)
Married * union                                              ‐0.0280
                                                            (0.0213)
Male * married                   0.0904        0.1263         0.1276
                               (0.0262)      (0.0081)       (0.0082)
Male * married * union                                       ‐0.0344
                                                            (0.0279)
White                            0.0298        0.0616         0.0627
                               (0.0500)      (0.0164)       (0.0159)
White * union                                                ‐0.0350
                                                            (0.0455)
Black                           ‐0.0877       ‐0.0525        ‐0.0516
                               (0.0534)      (0.0190)       (0.0188)
Black * union                                                ‐0.0459
                                                            (0.0500)
Asian                           ‐0.0899        0.0136         0.0162
                               (0.0586)      (0.0180)       (0.0177)
Asian * union                                                ‐0.1386
                                                            (0.0605)




                                                                        40
Years of education               0.0482           0.0645            0.0658
                               (0.0021)         (0.0016)          (0.0016)
Years of education * union                                         ‐0.0209
                                                                  (0.0021)
Non‐profit                       0.0109          ‐0.0537           ‐0.0552
                               (0.0156)         (0.0118)          (0.0113)
Non‐profit * union                                                  0.0762
                                                                  (0.0173)
Metro‐area                       0.1096           0.1510            0.1529
                               (0.0182)         (0.0116)          (0.0119)
Metro‐area * union                                                 ‐0.0468
                                                                  (0.0160)

Occupation dummies                  Yes              Yes               Yes

 2
R                                0.3621           0.4670            0.4603
Observations                       6174            51252             57426

Note: The regression reported in Column I includes observations of
union members only; the regression reported in Column II includes
observations of non‐union members only; and the regression reported
in Column III includes observations of all individuals and allows
individual characteristics to vary by union status. The interaction of the
labor‐to‐capital ratio, union dummy and corporate tax rate is replaced
by the interaction of the labor‐to‐capital ratio and the corporate tax rate
in column II. The dependent variable is the log of hourly wages. The
corporate tax rate is defined as the marginal state corporate tax rate for
the highest income bracket adjusted to allow for the deductibility of
federal corporate taxes. The labor‐to‐capital ratio is defined as salaries
and wages divided by total assets as reported on federal corporate tax
returns. The individual income tax rate is the marginal state individual
income tax rate for the highest income tax bracket. The sales tax rate is
the tax rate imposed on general sales. The union member dummy
equals one if an individual is a union member or is covered by a union
contract. The non‐profit dummy equals one if an individual works for a
nonprofit organization. The metro‐area dummy equals one if an
individual lives in a metropolitan area. The columns report estimated
OLS coefficients; standard errors are bootstrapped (1,000 replications)
and clustered at the state level. All regressions include dummy
variables for 22 occupations.




                                                                              41
 Table 5: The Effect of Corporate Income Taxes on the Union Wage Premium in
                            High‐ and Low‐Tax States
                     Dependent Variable: Ln(Hourly Wage)

            Whole Sample                  Only High‐Tax and Low‐Tax States
Variable                          I      Variable                     II
Low‐tax dummy                   0.0073
                              (0.0391)
High‐tax dummy                  0.0686   High‐tax dummy                  0.0726
                              (0.0274)                                 (0.0620)
Low‐tax * union                 0.0433
                              (0.0269)
High‐tax * union               ‐0.0924   High‐tax * union               ‐0.1385
                              (0.0240)                                 (0.0297)
Labor‐to‐capital ratio         ‐0.1743   Labor‐to‐capital ratio         ‐0.1862
                              (0.0128)                                 (0.0245)
LK ratio * union               ‐0.2228   LK ratio * union               ‐0.5628
                              (0.0447)                                 (0.0694)
LK ratio * union * low‐tax     ‐0.3264
                              (0.0741)
LK ratio * union * high‐tax     0.0778   LK ratio * union * high‐tax     0.4161
                              (0.0672)                                 (0.0792)
Pers income tax rate            0.1689   Pers income tax rate           ‐0.0984
                              (0.5701)                                 (0.7879)
Sales tax rate                 ‐0.0088   Sales tax rate                 ‐0.1629
                              (0.7631)                                 (1.6198)
Union member                    0.2405   Union member                    0.2880
                              (0.0136)                                 (0.0213)
Age                             0.0408   Age                             0.0406
                              (0.0017)                                 (0.0019)
Age‐squared / 1000             ‐0.4141   Age‐squared / 1000             ‐0.4075
                              (0.0193)                                 (0.0214)
Male                            0.1155   Male                            0.1156
                              (0.0062)                                 (0.0105)
Married                         0.0052   Married                         0.0112
                              (0.0070)                                 (0.0102)
Male * married                  0.1225   Male * married                  0.1102
                              (0.0070)                                 (0.0118)
White                           0.0573   White                           0.0319
                              (0.0168)                                 (0.0337)
Black                          ‐0.0568   Black                          ‐0.0757
                              (0.0201)                                 (0.0364)
Asian                          ‐0.0014   Asian                          ‐0.0431
                              (0.0182)                                 (0.0388)
Years of education              0.0637   Years of education              0.0652
                              (0.0016)                                 (0.0019)
Non‐profit                     ‐0.0497   Non‐profit                     ‐0.0485
                              (0.0099)                                 (0.0111)
Metro‐area                      0.1506   Metro‐area                      0.1480
                              (0.0104)                                 (0.0183)

Occupation dummies                Yes    Occupation dummies                Yes

 2                                        2
R                              0.4600    R                              0.4618
Observations                    57426    Observations                    22647




                                                                                  42
Note: Column I reports estimated coefficients from a regression that includes
all individuals and uses a low‐tax dummy and a high‐tax dummy instead of
using corporate tax rates. The low‐tax dummy equals one if the highest
marginal corporate tax rate is less than 4 percent, whereas the high‐tax dummy
equals one if the corporate tax rate is greater than or equal to 9 percent.
Column II reports estimated coefficients from a regression that includes
observations of only those individuals living in either low‐tax or high‐tax
states. The dependent variable is the log of hourly wages. The corporate tax
rate is defined as the marginal state corporate tax rate for the highest income
bracket adjusted to allow for the deductibility of federal corporate taxes. The
labor‐to‐capital ratio is defined as salaries and wages divided by total assets as
reported on federal corporate tax returns. The individual income tax rate is the
marginal state individual income tax rate for the highest income tax bracket.
The sales tax rate is the tax rate imposed on general sales. The union member
dummy equals one if an individual is a union member or is covered by a union
contract. The non‐profit dummy equals one if an individual works for a
nonprofit organization. The metro‐area dummy equals one if an individual lives
in a metropolitan area. The columns report estimated OLS coefficients;
standard errors are bootstrapped (1,000 replications) and clustered at the state
level. All regressions include dummy variables for 22 occupations.




                                                                                     43
      Table 6: The Effect of Corporate Income Taxes on the Union Wage
          Premium in States with and without Right‐to‐Work Laws
                   Dependent Variable: Ln(Hourly Wage)

                                      I             II            III
                               Right‐to‐Work    Not RTW      Whole Sample
Variable                           States        States
Corporate tax rate                 ‐0.6762         0.6543          0.2679
                                  (0.8109)       (0.6699)        (0.4639)
Corp tax rate * union              ‐0.0908        ‐1.2574         ‐1.1246
                                  (0.6243)       (0.5382)        (0.5376)
Corp tax rate * union * rtw                                        1.0282
                                                                 (0.8199)
Labor‐to‐capital ratio               ‐0.1607      ‐0.1784         ‐0.1743
                                    (0.0156)     (0.0173)        (0.0119)
LK ratio * union                     ‐0.5639      ‐0.5339         ‐0.5133
                                    (0.1466)     (0.1626)        (0.1618)
LK ratio * union * rtw                                            ‐0.0800
                                                                 (0.2290)
LK ratio * union * corp tax           4.2074       4.0229          3.9625
                                    (2.7245)     (1.9573)        (1.9531)
LK ratio * union * corp tax * rtw                                  0.0518
                                                                 (3.5998)
Pers income tax rate                  0.6334      ‐0.9363         ‐0.3754
                                    (0.6610)     (0.6567)        (0.4946)
Sales tax rate                       ‐0.1097       0.4596          0.2099
                                    (2.0402)     (0.6171)        (0.6573)
Union member                          0.2604       0.2927          0.2790
                                    (0.0368)     (0.0433)        (0.0421)
Union * right‐to‐work                                             ‐0.0068
                                                                 (0.0595)
Right‐to‐work dummy                                               ‐0.0870
                                                                 (0.0197)
Age                                   0.0387       0.0420          0.0405
                                    (0.0015)     (0.0024)        (0.0017)
Age‐squared / 1000                   ‐0.3951      ‐0.4251         ‐0.4101
                                    (0.0172)     (0.0265)        (0.0184)
Male                                  0.1197       0.1134          0.1151
                                    (0.0104)     (0.0073)        (0.0062)
Married                               0.0088       0.0060          0.0079
                                    (0.0081)     (0.0095)        (0.0065)
Male * married                        0.1255       0.1187          0.1221
                                    (0.0137)     (0.0074)        (0.0075)
White                                 0.0599       0.0622          0.0647
                                    (0.0230)     (0.0231)        (0.0185)
Black                                ‐0.0701      ‐0.0308         ‐0.0409
                                    (0.0254)     (0.0235)        (0.0200)
Asian                                ‐0.0260       0.0062         ‐0.0010
                                    (0.0359)     (0.0221)        (0.0200)
Years of education                    0.0586       0.0662          0.0636
                                    (0.0019)     (0.0016)        (0.0016)
Non‐profit                           ‐0.0373      ‐0.0611         ‐0.0510
                                    (0.0142)     (0.0127)        (0.0106)
Metro‐area                            0.1383       0.1434          0.1375
                                    (0.0154)     (0.0130)        (0.0105)

Occupation dummies                      Yes           Yes               Yes
Right‐to‐work dummy                     No            No                Yes

 2
R                                    0.4390        0.4664          0.4631
Observations                          22328         35098           57426




                                                                              44
Note: The regression reported in Column I includes observations of only
those individuals living in states with right‐to‐work laws. The regression
reported in Column II includes observations of only those individuals
living in states without right‐to‐work laws. The regression reported in
Column III includes the whole sample and adds a right‐to‐work dummy
and interaction terms with the right‐to‐work dummy. The right‐to‐work
dummy equals one if an individual lives in a state with a right‐to‐work
law. The dependent variable is the log of hourly wages. The corporate tax
rate is defined as the marginal state corporate tax rate for the highest
income bracket adjusted to allow for the deductibility of federal
corporate taxes. The labor‐to‐capital ratio is defined as salaries and wages
divided by total assets as reported on federal corporate tax returns. The
individual income tax rate is the marginal state individual income tax rate
for the highest income tax bracket. The sales tax rate is the tax rate
imposed on general sales. The union member dummy equals one if an
individual is a union member or is covered by a union contract. The non‐
profit dummy equals one if an individual works for a nonprofit
organization. The metro‐area dummy equals one if an individual lives in a
metropolitan area. The columns report estimated OLS coefficients;
standard errors are bootstrapped (1,000 replications) and clustered at the
state level. All regressions include dummy variables for 22 occupations.




                                                                               45
   Table 7: The Effect of Corporate Income Taxes on the Union Wage
 Premium in States with and without Right‐to‐Work Laws (Adding State
                            Dummy Variables)
                   Dependent Variable: Ln(Hourly Wage)

                                      I            II           III
                               Right‐to‐Work   Not RTW     Whole Sample
Variable                           States       States
Corp tax rate * union               0.0144       ‐1.0697       ‐1.0543
                                  (0.5678)      (0.5359)      (0.5562)
Corp tax rate * union * rtw                                     1.1549
                                                              (0.7986)
Labor‐to‐capital ratio               ‐0.1619    ‐0.1769        ‐0.1729
                                    (0.0156)   (0.0182)       (0.0122)
LK ratio * union                     ‐0.5671    ‐0.5086        ‐0.4904
                                    (0.1240)   (0.1588)       (0.1522)
LK ratio * union * rtw                                         ‐0.1023
                                                              (0.2134)
LK ratio * union * corp tax           4.4640     3.4187         3.3553
                                    (2.1875)   (1.8774)       (1.8081)
LK ratio * union * corp tax * rtw                               0.8651
                                                              (3.3926)
Union member                          0.2514     0.2778         0.2728
                                    (0.0349)   (0.0429)       (0.0429)
Union * right‐to‐work                                          ‐0.0162
                                                              (0.0562)
Right‐to‐work dummy                                            ‐0.1041
                                                              (0.0741)
Age                                   0.0381     0.0417         0.0401
                                    (0.0015)   (0.0024)       (0.0017)
Age‐squared / 1000                   ‐0.3888    ‐0.4199        ‐0.4058
                                    (0.0171)   (0.0269)       (0.0184)
Male                                  0.1206     0.1124         0.1153
                                    (0.0098)   (0.0073)       (0.0059)
Married                               0.0114     0.0101         0.0106
                                    (0.0073)   (0.0087)       (0.0060)
Male * married                        0.1238     0.1179         0.1206
                                    (0.0136)   (0.0077)       (0.0073)
White                                 0.0580     0.0369         0.0451
                                    (0.0205)   (0.0200)       (0.0147)
Black                                ‐0.0791    ‐0.0625        ‐0.0703
                                    (0.0211)   (0.0210)       (0.0159)
Asian                                ‐0.0443    ‐0.0416        ‐0.0384
                                    (0.0338)   (0.0212)       (0.0173)
Years of education                    0.0591     0.0663         0.0637
                                    (0.0019)   (0.0019)       (0.0017)
Non‐profit                           ‐0.0273    ‐0.0583        ‐0.0463
                                    (0.0139)   (0.0123)       (0.0096)
Metro‐area                            0.1164     0.1004         0.1065
                                    (0.0151)   (0.0134)       (0.0103)

Occupation dummies                      Yes         Yes           Yes
Right‐to‐work dummy                     No          No            Yes
State dummies                           Yes         Yes           Yes

 2
R                                    0.4479      0.4771        0.4744
Observations                          22328       35098         57426




                                                                          46
Note: The regression reported in Column I includes observations of only
those individuals living in states with right‐to‐work laws. The regression
reported in Column II includes observations of only those individuals
living in states without right‐to‐work laws. The regression reported in
Column III includes the whole sample and adds a right‐to‐work dummy
and interaction terms with the right‐to‐work dummy. The right‐to‐work
dummy equals one if an individual lives in a state with a right‐to‐work
law. The dependent variable is the log of hourly wages. The corporate tax
rate is defined as the marginal state corporate tax rate for the highest
income bracket adjusted to allow for the deductibility of federal
corporate taxes. The labor‐to‐capital ratio is defined as salaries and wages
divided by total assets as reported on federal corporate tax returns. The
individual income tax rate is the marginal state individual income tax rate
for the highest income tax bracket. The sales tax rate is the tax rate
imposed on general sales. The union member dummy equals one if an
individual is a union member or is covered by a union contract. The non‐
profit dummy equals one if an individual works for a nonprofit
organization. The metro‐area dummy equals one if an individual lives in a
metropolitan area. The columns report estimated OLS coefficients;
standard errors are bootstrapped (1,000 replications) and clustered at the
state level. All regressions include dummy variables for 22 occupations
and 50 states.




                                                                               47
Table 8: The Effect of Corporate Income Taxes and Right‐to‐Work Laws on the
                            Union Wage Premium
                          Dependent Variable: Ln(Hourly Wage)

Variable                          I              II                III        IV
Corporate tax rate               0.2592         0.2853            0.2581     0.2750
                               (0.4536)       (0.4699)          (0.4417)   (0.4567)
Corp tax rate * union           ‐0.7933        ‐1.0042           ‐0.5592    ‐0.7001
                               (0.4213)       (0.3795)          (0.3489)   (0.3564)
Labor‐to‐capital ratio          ‐0.1741        ‐0.1741
                               (0.0117)       (0.0126)
LK ratio * union                ‐0.5419        ‐0.5430           ‐0.3597    ‐0.3608
                               (0.0917)       (0.0917)          (0.0895)   (0.0910)
LK ratio * union * corp tax      4.1355         4.1065            2.5781     2.5626
                               (1.1197)       (1.1303)          (1.1437)   (1.1621)
Pers income tax rate            ‐0.3628        ‐0.3630           ‐0.3281    ‐0.3279
                               (0.4574)       (0.4921)          (0.4738)   (0.4661)
Sales tax rate                   0.2082         0.2070            0.2017     0.2011
                               (0.6090)       (0.6048)          (0.6513)   (0.6287)
Union member                     0.2574         0.2820            0.2183     0.2347
                               (0.0332)       (0.0273)          (0.0281)   (0.0264)
Right‐to‐work                   ‐0.0869        ‐0.0833           ‐0.0820    ‐0.0797
                               (0.0197)       (0.0200)          (0.0189)   (0.0175)
Union * right‐to‐work            0.0398                           0.0266
                               (0.0187)                         (0.0169)
Age                              0.0404         0.0404            0.0380     0.0380
                               (0.0017)       (0.0017)          (0.0016)   (0.0016)
Age‐squared / 1000              ‐0.4096        ‐0.4097           ‐0.3846    ‐0.3847
                               (0.0189)       (0.0184)          (0.0174)   (0.0172)
Male                             0.1152         0.1151            0.1162     0.1162
                               (0.0061)       (0.0062)          (0.0060)   (0.0059)
Married                          0.0079         0.0078            0.0050     0.0050
                               (0.0069)       (0.0063)          (0.0060)   (0.0058)
Male * married                   0.1220         0.1222            0.1145     0.1146
                               (0.0074)       (0.0068)          (0.0074)   (0.0073)
White                            0.0649         0.0647            0.0548     0.0547
                               (0.0186)       (0.0179)          (0.0178)   (0.0178)
Black                           ‐0.0405        ‐0.0409           ‐0.0483    ‐0.0486
                               (0.0199)       (0.0193)          (0.0199)   (0.0192)
Asian                           ‐0.0012        ‐0.0012            0.0002     0.0002
                               (0.0197)       (0.0190)          (0.0198)   (0.0191)
Years of education               0.0636         0.0636            0.0581     0.0581
                               (0.0016)       (0.0016)          (0.0014)   (0.0014)
Non‐profit                      ‐0.0509        ‐0.0509            0.0058     0.0059
                               (0.0104)       (0.0102)          (0.0108)   (0.0106)
Metro‐area                       0.1374         0.1373            0.1339     0.1339
                               (0.0104)       (0.0094)          (0.0100)   (0.0099)

Industry dummies                   No             No                Yes        Yes
Occupation dummies                 Yes            Yes               Yes        Yes
Right‐to‐work dummy                Yes            Yes               Yes        Yes

 2
R                               0.4631         0.4630            0.4910     0.4909
Observations                     57426          57426             57426      57426




                                                                                      48
Note: The dependent variable is the log of hourly wages. The corporate tax rate is
defined as the marginal state corporate tax rate for the highest income bracket
adjusted to allow for the deductibility of federal corporate taxes. The labor‐to‐capital
ratio is defined as salaries and wages divided by total assets as reported on federal
corporate tax returns. The individual income tax rate is the marginal state individual
income tax rate for the highest income tax bracket. The sales tax rate is the tax rate
imposed on general sales. The union member dummy equals one if an individual is a
union member or is covered by a union contract. The non‐profit dummy equals one if
an individual works for a nonprofit organization. The metro‐area dummy equals one if
an individual lives in a metropolitan area. The right‐to‐work dummy equals one if an
individual lives in a state with a right‐to‐work law. The columns report estimated OLS
coefficients; standard errors are bootstrapped (1,000 replications) and clustered at the
state‐level. All regressions include dummy variables for 22 occupations and state right‐
to‐work laws.




                                                                                           49
       Table 9: The Effect of Corporate Income Taxes and the Sales
          Apportionment Weight on the Union Wage Premium
                       Dependent Variable: Ln(Hourly Wage)

Variable                                     I            II          III
Corporate tax rate * (1‐ sales weight)      0.4379       0.5381      0.4236
                                          (0.8200)     (0.6357)    (0.7752)
Corp tax rate * (1‐sales) * union          ‐1.5953      ‐1.6276     ‐1.1929
                                          (0.6504)     (0.6593)    (0.5215)
Labor‐to‐capital ratio                     ‐0.1732      ‐0.1732
                                          (0.0125)     (0.0121)
LK ratio * union                           ‐0.4512      ‐0.4497     ‐0.3252
                                          (0.1001)     (0.0937)    (0.0746)
LK ratio * union * corp tax * (1‐sales)     6.2956       6.2497      4.6508
                                          (2.4534)     (2.2720)    (1.8584)
Pers income tax rate                        0.1364                   0.1474
                                          (0.5083)                 (0.4937)
Sales tax rate                              0.2036                   0.1965
                                          (0.7852)                 (0.7553)
Union member                                0.2775       0.2790      0.2377
                                          (0.0228)     (0.0236)    (0.0184)
Age                                         0.0409       0.0409      0.0384
                                          (0.0017)     (0.0018)    (0.0016)
Age‐squared/1000                           ‐0.4143      ‐0.4141     ‐0.3890
                                          (0.0187)     (0.0194)    (0.0173)
Male dummy                                  0.1155       0.1154      0.1164
                                          (0.0061)     (0.0063)    (0.0058)
Married dummy                               0.0049       0.0050      0.0022
                                          (0.0067)     (0.0070)    (0.0061)
Male * married dummy                        0.1225       0.1226      0.1148
                                          (0.0072)     (0.0073)    (0.0074)
White dummy                                 0.0633       0.0640      0.0530
                                          (0.0179)     (0.0178)    (0.0168)
Black dummy                                ‐0.0537      ‐0.0534     ‐0.0611
                                          (0.0206)     (0.0206)    (0.0199)
Asian dummy                                 0.0023       0.0042      0.0036
                                          (0.0195)     (0.0206)    (0.0184)
Years of education                          0.0641       0.0641      0.0585
                                          (0.0015)     (0.0015)    (0.0013)
Non‐profit dummy                           ‐0.0474      ‐0.0473      0.0105
                                          (0.0102)     (0.0110)    (0.0106)
Metro‐area dummy                            0.1508       0.1516      0.1465
                                          (0.0113)     (0.0132)    (0.0108)

Industry dummies                              No             No        Yes
Occupation dummies                            Yes            Yes       Yes

R‐Squared                                  0.4579        0.4578      0.4864
Observations                                57426         57426       57426




                                                                              50
Note: The dependent variable is the log of hourly wages. The corporate tax
variable is defined as the product of the state corporate tax rate and one minus
the sales share in the apportionment formula. The corporate tax rate is defined
as the marginal state corporate tax rate for the highest income bracket adjusted
to allow for the deductibility of federal corporate taxes. The labor‐to‐capital
ratio is defined as salaries and wages divided by total assets as reported on
federal corporate tax returns. The individual income tax rate is the marginal
state individual income tax rate for the highest income tax bracket. The sales
tax rate is the tax rate imposed on general sales. The union member dummy
equals one if an individual is a union member or is covered by a union contract.
The non‐profit dummy equals one if an individual works for a nonprofit
organization. The metro‐area dummy equals one if an individual lives in a
metropolitan area. The columns report estimated OLS coefficients; standard
errors are bootstrapped (1,000 replications) and clustered at the state level. All
regressions include dummy variables for 22 occupations. Column III includes 46
industry dummy variables.




                                                                                     51
                      Table A1: Summary Statistics for Low‐ and High‐Tax States by Union Status

                              I        II               III       IV               V        VI               VII       VIII
                           Low‐Tax & Union          Low‐Tax & Non‐Union         High‐Tax & Union         High‐Tax & Non‐Union
                              Mean Median                Mean Median               Mean Median                Mean     Median
Hourly wage                  17.512   16.400            16.419    12.667          17.702    15.850           18.489     14.545
Corporate tax rate            0.015    0.022              0.011    0.000           0.094     0.090            0.094      0.095
Labor‐to‐capital ratio        0.121    0.095              0.188    0.131           0.180     0.097            0.208      0.142
Pers income tax rate          0.023    0.034              0.016    0.000           0.062     0.069            0.061      0.065
Sales tax rate                0.059    0.060              0.058    0.063           0.052     0.060            0.053      0.060
Age                          41.200   41.000            37.833    37.000          41.547    41.000           38.715     38.000
Male dummy                    0.740    1.000              0.605    1.000           0.679     1.000            0.560      1.000
Married dummy                 0.669    1.000              0.617    1.000           0.639     1.000            0.596      1.000
White dummy                   0.825    1.000              0.872    1.000           0.835     1.000            0.876      1.000
Black dummy                   0.145    0.000              0.082    0.000           0.120     0.000            0.071      0.000
Asian dummy                   0.019    0.000              0.037    0.000           0.041     0.000            0.050      0.000
Native American dummy         0.011    0.000              0.009    0.000           0.004     0.000            0.004      0.000
Years of education           12.709   12.000            13.296    13.000          12.965    12.000           13.847     14.000
Union member dummy            1.000    1.000              0.000    0.000           1.000     1.000            0.000      0.000
Non‐profit dummy              0.061    0.000              0.058    0.000           0.084     0.000            0.086      0.000
Metro‐area dummy              0.788    1.000              0.824    1.000           0.862     1.000            0.852      1.000

Observations                   1163       1163            9169       9169           1755       1755           10634        10634

Note: Columns I and II display variable means and medians of union members living in low‐tax states; columns III and IV
display variable means and medians for non‐union members living in low‐tax states. Columns V and VI display variable means
and medians for union members living in high‐tax states, and columns VII and VIII display variable means and medians for non‐
union members living in high‐tax states. Low‐tax states are defined as states with marginal corporate tax rates less than 4
percent; high‐tax states are defined as states with marginal corporate tax rates greater than or equal to 9 percent. Union
members include individuals who are members of unions or are covered by union contracts. Non‐union members include all
other individuals. The hourly wage is weekly earnings divided by the usual number of hours worked per week. The corporate
tax rate is the marginal state corporate tax rate for the highest income bracket adjusted for the deductibility of federal
corporate income taxes. The labor‐to‐capital ratio is defined as salaries and wages divided by total assets as reported on
federal corporate tax returns, and varies by industry. The individual income tax rate is the marginal state individual income tax
rate for the highest income tax bracket. The sales tax rate is the tax rate imposed on general sales. The non‐profit dummy
equals one if the individual works at a non‐profit firm. The metro‐area dummy equals one if the individual lives in a
metropolitan area. All statistics are weighted using the earnings weight provided by the CPS.




                                                                                                                               52
      Table A2: Summary Statistics for Individuals Working in Low and High Labor‐to‐Capital Industries in Low‐ and High‐Tax States

                            I          II                   III          IV                V          VI                VII        VIII
                       Low‐Tax & High LK‐ratio          High‐Tax & High LK‐ratio       Low‐Tax & Low LK‐ratio       High‐Tax & Low LK‐ratio
                          Mean      Median                 Mean       Median             Mean      Median              Mean      Median
Hourly wage                16.144      12.500                18.219       14.400           18.970     15.850             21.009     16.825
Union hourly wage          15.538      15.000                16.660       14.400           19.519     20.000             18.401     16.325
Nonunion hourly wage       16.175      12.459                18.411       14.400           18.842     15.000             21.560     16.988
Corporate tax rate            0.011     0.000                  0.094       0.095            0.014      0.022              0.094      0.090
Labor to capital ratio        0.400     0.298                  0.424       0.298            0.028      0.025              0.027      0.026
Pers income tax rate          0.016     0.000                  0.060       0.065            0.021      0.034              0.061      0.065
Sales tax rate                0.059     0.063                  0.052       0.060            0.058      0.060              0.052      0.060
Age                        37.313      36.000                38.974       38.000           39.317     39.000             39.352     39.000
Male dummy                    0.457     0.000                  0.426       0.000            0.677      1.000              0.624      1.000
Married dummy                 0.592     1.000                  0.560       1.000            0.657      1.000              0.627      1.000
White dummy                   0.844     1.000                  0.843       1.000            0.871      1.000              0.876      1.000
Black dummy                   0.105     0.000                  0.098       0.000            0.086      0.000              0.070      0.000
Asian dummy                   0.045     0.000                  0.056       0.000            0.034      0.000              0.050      0.000
Native American dummy         0.006     0.000                  0.003       0.000            0.008      0.000              0.004      0.000
Years of education         13.799      14.000                14.307       14.000           13.389     13.000             13.873     14.000
Union member dummy            0.048     0.000                  0.110       0.000            0.188      0.000              0.177      0.000
Non‐profit dummy              0.139     0.000                  0.202       0.000            0.008      0.000              0.008      0.000
Metro‐area dummy              0.847     1.000                  0.871       1.000            0.786      1.000              0.832      1.000

Observations                      2739        2739              3972         3972             2295        2295              2400        2400

Note: Columns I and II display variable means and medians for individuals living in low‐tax states and working in industries with high
labor‐to‐capital ratios; columns III and IV display variable means and medians for individuals living in high‐tax states and working in
industries with high labor‐to‐capital ratios. Columns V and VI display variable means and medians for individuals living in low‐tax states
and working in industries with low labor‐to‐capital ratios; columns VII and VIII display means and medians for individuals living in high‐
tax states and working in industries with low labor‐to‐capital ratios. Low‐tax states are defined as states with marginal corporate tax
rates less than 4 percent; high‐tax states are defined as states with marginal corporate tax rates greater than or equal to 9 percent. High
labor‐to‐capital ratio industries have labor‐to‐capital ratios greater than 0.25. Low labor‐to‐capital ratio industries have labor‐to‐capital
ratios less than 0.05. The hourly wage is weekly earnings divided by the usual number of hours worked per week. The corporate tax rate
is the marginal state corporate tax rate for the highest income bracket adjusted for the deductibility of federal corporate income taxes.
The labor‐to‐capital ratio is defined as salaries and wages divided by total assets as reported on federal corporate tax returns, and varies
by industry. The individual income tax rate is the marginal state individual income tax rate for the highest income tax bracket. The sales
tax rate is the tax rate imposed on general sales. The union member dummy equals one if the individual is a union member or is
covered by a union contract. The non‐profit dummy equals one if the individual works at a non‐profit firm. The metro‐area dummy
equals one if the individual lives in a metropolitan area. All statistics are weighted using the earnings weight provided by the CPS.




                                                                                                                                   53
 Table A3: The Effect of Corporate Income Taxes on the Union Wage Premium
                      (Adding Regional Dummy Variables)
                          Dependent Variable: Ln(Hourly Wage)

Variable                          I               II               III              IV
Corporate tax rate                              ‐0.1025          ‐0.2068          ‐0.1200
                                               (0.6200)         (0.3721)         (0.6029)
Corp tax rate * union                           ‐0.9237          ‐0.9171          ‐0.6134
                                               (0.4047)         (0.3940)         (0.3652)
Labor‐to‐capital ratio                          ‐0.1732          ‐0.1729
                                               (0.0124)         (0.0123)
LK ratio * union                                ‐0.5358          ‐0.5357          ‐0.3537
                                               (0.0919)         (0.0844)         (0.0893)
LK ratio * union * corp tax                      3.8878           3.8824           2.3593
                                               (1.1209)         (1.0469)         (1.1236)
Pers income tax rate                            ‐0.1231                           ‐0.1065
                                               (0.5811)                          (0.6120)
Sales tax rate                                  ‐0.0141                            0.0174
                                               (0.7167)                          (0.7264)
Union member                     0.1594          0.2779           0.2774           0.2296
                               (0.0097)        (0.0290)         (0.0273)         (0.0266)
Age                              0.0378          0.0402           0.0402           0.0377
                               (0.0016)        (0.0017)         (0.0017)         (0.0016)
Age‐squared / 1000              ‐0.3826         ‐0.4072          ‐0.4072          ‐0.3819
                               (0.0173)        (0.0190)         (0.0182)         (0.0171)
Male dummy                       0.1160          0.1150           0.1150           0.1158
                               (0.0059)        (0.0063)         (0.0063)         (0.0060)
Married dummy                    0.0068          0.0098           0.0098           0.0071
                               (0.0057)        (0.0064)         (0.0064)         (0.0058)
Male * married dummy             0.1142          0.1220           0.1219           0.1141
                               (0.0072)        (0.0072)         (0.0074)         (0.0074)
White dummy                      0.0471          0.0554           0.0552           0.0460
                               (0.0144)        (0.0152)         (0.0155)         (0.0144)
Black dummy                     ‐0.0574         ‐0.0507          ‐0.0513          ‐0.0578
                               (0.0146)        (0.0159)         (0.0161)         (0.0146)
Asian dummy                     ‐0.0237         ‐0.0255          ‐0.0263          ‐0.0243
                               (0.0179)        (0.0186)         (0.0208)         (0.0171)
Years of education               0.0582          0.0638           0.0637           0.0582
                               (0.0014)        (0.0017)         (0.0017)         (0.0015)
Non‐profit dummy                 0.0039         ‐0.0511          ‐0.0511           0.0044
                               (0.0099)        (0.0094)         (0.0100)         (0.0101)
Metro‐area dummy                 0.1266          0.1297           0.1301           0.1258
                               (0.0116)        (0.0115)         (0.0122)         (0.0111)

Industry dummies                      Yes           No               No              Yes
Occupation dummies                    Yes           Yes              Yes             Yes
Region dummies                        Yes           Yes              Yes             Yes

 2
R                               0.4929           0.4652           0.4652          0.4934
Observations                     57426            57426            57426           57426
Note: The dependent variable is the log of hourly wages. The corporate tax rate is
defined as the marginal state corporate tax rate for the highest income bracket
adjusted to allow for the deductibility of federal corporate taxes. The labor‐to‐capital
ratio is defined as salaries and wages divided by total assets as reported on federal
corporate tax returns. The individual income tax rate is the marginal state individual
income tax rate for the highest income tax bracket. The sales tax rate is the tax rate
imposed on general sales. The union member dummy equals one if an individual is a
union member or is covered by a union contract. The non‐profit dummy equals one if
an individual works for a nonprofit organization. The metro‐area dummy equals one if
an individual lives in a metropolitan area. The columns report estimated OLS
coefficients; standard errors are bootstrapped (1,000 replications) and clustered at the
state level. All regressions include dummy variables for 22 occupations and 9 Census
divisions. Columns I and IV include 46 industry dummy variables.

                                                                                            54
  Table A4: The Effect of Corporate Income Taxes on Union and Non‐
       Union Hourly Wages (Adding Industry Dummy Variables)
                  Dependent Variable: Ln(Hourly Wage)

                                   I           II            III
Variable                       Union       Non‐Union    Whole Sample
Corporate tax rate              ‐0.2550       0.6575         0.7448
                               (0.5510)     (0.5441)       (0.5421)
Corp tax rate * union                                       ‐1.0767
                                                           (0.4840)
LK ratio*union                                              ‐0.2648
                                                           (0.1005)
LK ratio * union * corp tax      3.1200       0.3935         2.4097
                               (1.0653)     (0.3843)       (1.2444)
Pers income tax rate             0.1380      ‐0.2006        ‐0.1945
                               (0.6642)     (0.6034)       (0.6180)
Pers income tax rate * union                                 0.4489
                                                           (0.4774)
Sales tax rate                  ‐0.1216       0.1534         0.1633
                               (0.9096)     (0.7152)       (0.7132)
Sales tax rate * union                                      ‐0.2172
                                                           (0.5445)
Union member                                                 0.6751
                                                           (0.0979)
Age                              0.0325       0.0389         0.0390
                               (0.0036)     (0.0016)       (0.0016)
Age * union                                                 ‐0.0060
                                                           (0.0039)
Age‐squared / 1000              ‐0.3086      ‐0.3968        ‐0.3973
                               (0.0427)     (0.0177)       (0.0179)
Age‐squared / 1000 * union                                   0.0779
                                                           (0.0476)
Male                             0.1045       0.1181         0.1094
                               (0.0214)     (0.0062)       (0.0063)
Male * union                                                 0.0643
                                                           (0.0225)
Married                         ‐0.0152       0.0041         0.0041
                               (0.0202)     (0.0066)       (0.0067)
Married * union                                             ‐0.0211
                                                           (0.0207)
Male * married                   0.0860       0.1178         0.1195
                               (0.0239)     (0.0081)       (0.0080)
Male * married * union                                      ‐0.0337
                                                           (0.0276)
White                            0.0178       0.0515         0.0538
                               (0.0468)     (0.0156)       (0.0157)
White * union                                               ‐0.0459
                                                           (0.0480)
Black                           ‐0.1037      ‐0.0576        ‐0.0556
                               (0.0517)     (0.0189)       (0.0192)
Black * union                                               ‐0.0705
                                                           (0.0530)
Asian                           ‐0.0803       0.0132         0.0164
                               (0.0549)     (0.0176)       (0.0175)
Asian * union                                               ‐0.1281
                                                           (0.0640)




                                                                       55
Years of education               0.0411           0.0589            0.0601
                               (0.0020)         (0.0014)          (0.0014)
Years of education * union                                         ‐0.0201
                                                                  (0.0024)
Non‐profit                       0.0282           0.0065            0.0029
                               (0.0261)         (0.0124)          (0.0121)
Non‐profit * union                                                  0.0556
                                                                  (0.0192)
Metro‐area                       0.0919           0.1478            0.1480
                               (0.0156)         (0.0113)          (0.0112)
Metro‐area * union                                                 ‐0.0395
                                                                  (0.0168)

Industry dummies                    Yes              Yes               Yes
Occupation dummies                  Yes              Yes               Yes

 2
R                                0.4111           0.4957            0.4884
Observations                       6174            51252             57426

Note: The regression reported in Column I includes observations of
union members only; the regression reported in Column II includes
observations of non‐union members only; and the regression reported
in Column III includes observations of all individuals and allows
individual characteristics to vary by union status. The interaction of the
labor‐to‐capital ratio, union dummy and corporate tax rate is replaced
by the interaction of the labor‐to‐capital ratio and the corporate tax rate
in column II. The dependent variable is the log of hourly wages. The
corporate tax rate is defined as the marginal state corporate tax rate for
the highest income bracket adjusted to allow for the deductibility of
federal corporate taxes. The labor‐to‐capital ratio is defined as salaries
and wages divided by total assets as reported on federal corporate tax
returns. The individual income tax rate is the marginal state individual
income tax rate for the highest income tax bracket. The sales tax rate is
the tax rate imposed on general sales. The union member dummy
equals one if an individual is a union member or is covered by a union
contract. The non‐profit dummy equals one if an individual works for a
nonprofit organization. The metro‐area dummy equals one if an
individual lives in a metropolitan area. The columns report estimated
OLS coefficients; standard errors are bootstrapped (1,000 replications)
and clustered at the state level. All regressions include dummy
variables for 22 occupations and 46 industries.




                                                                              56
Table A5: The Effect of Corporate Income Taxes on the Union Wage Premium in
          High and Low Tax States (Adding Industry Dummy Variables)
                     Dependent Variable: Ln(Hourly Wage)

            Whole Sample                  Only High‐Tax and Low‐Tax States
Variable                          I      Variable                     II
Low‐tax dummy                   0.0043
                              (0.0347)
High‐tax dummy                  0.0642   High‐tax dummy                  0.0727
                              (0.0257)                                 (0.0631)
Low‐tax * union                 0.0264
                              (0.0227)
High‐tax * union               ‐0.0779   High‐tax * union               ‐0.0985
                              (0.0198)                                 (0.0260)
LK ratio * union               ‐0.1413   LK ratio * union               ‐0.3526
                              (0.0418)                                 (0.0657)
LK ratio * union * low‐tax     ‐0.2392
                              (0.0687)
LK ratio * union * high‐tax     0.0230   LK ratio * union * high‐tax     0.2355
                              (0.0726)                                 (0.0836)
Pers income tax rate            0.1667   Pers income tax rate           ‐0.1159
                              (0.5103)                                 (0.8039)
Sales tax rate                 ‐0.0020   Sales tax rate                 ‐0.2258
                              (0.7651)                                 (1.6530)
Union member                    0.2119   Union member                    0.2326
                              (0.0126)                                 (0.0182)
Age                             0.0384   Age                             0.0382
                              (0.0016)                                 (0.0018)
Age‐squared / 1000             ‐0.3889   Age‐squared / 1000             ‐0.3830
                              (0.0179)                                 (0.0205)
Male                            0.1162   Male                            0.1224
                              (0.0061)                                 (0.0086)
Married                         0.0025   Married                         0.0092
                              (0.0066)                                 (0.0105)
Male * married                  0.1148   Male * married                  0.1007
                              (0.0074)                                 (0.0110)
White                           0.0474   White                           0.0219
                              (0.0157)                                 (0.0313)
Black                          ‐0.0639   Black                          ‐0.0851
                              (0.0187)                                 (0.0342)
Asian                           0.0002   Asian                          ‐0.0391
                              (0.0188)                                 (0.0367)
Years of education              0.0581   Years of education              0.0589
                              (0.0013)                                 (0.0015)
Non‐profit                      0.0080   Non‐profit                     ‐0.0033
                              (0.0107)                                 (0.0151)
Metro‐area                      0.1462   Metro‐area                      0.1457
                              (0.0109)                                 (0.0171)

Industry dummies                  Yes    Industry dummies                  Yes
Occupation dummies                Yes    Occupation dummies                Yes

 2
R                              0.4882    R‐Squared                      0.4921
Observations                    57426    Observations                    22647




                                                                                  57
Note: Column I reports estimated coefficients from a regression that includes
all individuals and uses a low‐tax dummy and a high‐tax dummy instead of
using corporate tax rates. The low‐tax dummy equals one if the highest
marginal corporate tax rate is less than 4 percent, whereas the high‐tax dummy
equals one if the corporate tax rate is greater than or equal to 9 percent.
Column II reports estimated coefficients from a regression that includes
observations of only those individuals living in either low‐tax or high‐tax
states. The dependent variable is the log of hourly wages. The corporate tax
rate is defined as the marginal state corporate tax rate for the highest income
bracket adjusted to allow for the deductibility of federal corporate taxes. The
labor‐to‐capital ratio is defined as salaries and wages divided by total assets as
reported on federal corporate tax returns. The individual income tax rate is the
marginal state individual income tax rate for the highest income tax bracket.
The sales tax rate is the tax rate imposed on general sales. The union member
dummy equals one if an individual is a union member or is covered by a union
contract. The non‐profit dummy equals one if an individual works for a
nonprofit organization. The metro‐area dummy equals one if an individual lives
in a metropolitan area. The columns report estimated OLS coefficients;
standard errors are bootstrapped (1,000 replications) and clustered at the state
level. All regressions include dummy variables for 22 occupations and 46
industries.




                                                                                     58
 Table A6: Summary Statistics for Individuals Working in Low‐ and High‐Tax States with and without Right‐to‐Work
                                                       Laws

                               I       II            III     IV             V       VI             VII      VIII
                            Low‐Tax & RTW         High‐Tax & RTW        Low‐Tax & Not RTW       High‐Tax & Not RTW
                            Mean Median            Mean Median            Mean Median             Mean     Median
Hourly wage                  15.696 12.000          14.810 12.500          17.671 14.550           18.607    15.000
Union hourly wage            15.384 13.840          17.153 16.150          18.648 17.640           17.734    15.789
Nonunion hourly wage         15.719 12.000          14.467 12.000          17.469 14.000           18.755    14.956
Corporate tax rate            0.005   0.000          0.101 0.101            0.020    0.022          0.094     0.090
Labor to capital ratio        0.188   0.131          0.190 0.115            0.170    0.108          0.205     0.132
Pers income tax rate          0.007   0.000          0.090 0.090            0.029    0.034          0.059     0.064
Sales tax rate                0.058   0.063          0.050 0.050            0.058    0.060          0.053     0.060
Age                          37.607 37.000          38.491 38.000          39.018 39.000           39.162    39.000
Male dummy                    0.618   1.000          0.573 1.000            0.623    1.000          0.577     1.000
Married dummy                 0.623   1.000          0.651 1.000            0.622    1.000          0.599     1.000
White dummy                   0.850   1.000          0.965 1.000            0.890    1.000          0.864     1.000
Black dummy                   0.106   0.000          0.017 0.000            0.066    0.000          0.081     0.000
Asian dummy                   0.036   0.000          0.016 0.000            0.033    0.000          0.051     0.000
Native American dummy         0.008   0.000          0.002 0.000            0.011    0.000          0.004     0.000
Years of education           12.965 12.000          13.304 13.000          13.581 13.000           13.748   13.000
Union member dummy            0.069   0.000          0.135 0.000            0.170    0.000          0.145     0.000
Non‐profit dummy              0.048   0.000          0.106 0.000            0.072    0.000          0.085     0.000
Metro‐area dummy              0.835   1.000          0.540 1.000            0.798    1.000          0.874     1.000

Observations                  6608      6608           841     841           3724      3724          11548     11548

Note: Columns I and II display variable means and medians for individuals working in low‐tax states with right‐to‐
work laws; columns III and IV display variable means and medians for individuals working in high‐tax states with
right‐to‐work laws. Columns V and VI display variable means and medians for individuals working in low‐tax states
without right‐to‐work laws; columns VII and VIII display variable means and medians for individuals working in high‐
tax states without right‐to‐work laws. Low‐tax states are defined as states with marginal corporate tax rates less
than 4 percent; high‐tax states are defined as states with marginal corporate tax rates greater than or equal to 9
percent. The hourly wage is weekly earnings divided by the usual number of hours worked per week. The corporate
tax rate is the marginal state corporate tax rate for the highest income bracket adjusted for the deductibility of
federal corporate income taxes. The labor‐to‐capital ratio is defined as salaries and wages divided by total assets as
reported on federal corporate tax returns, and varies by industry. The individual income tax rate is the marginal
state individual income tax rate for the highest income tax bracket. The sales tax rate is the tax rate imposed on
general sales. The union member dummy equals one if the individual is a union member or is covered by a union
contract. The non‐profit dummy equals one if the individual works at a non‐profit firm. The metro‐area dummy
equals one if the individual lives in a metropolitan area. All statistics are weighted using the earnings weight
provided by the CPS.




                                                                                                                         59
   Table A7: The Effect of Corporate Income Taxes on the Union Wage
Premium in States with and without Right‐to‐Work Laws (Adding Industry
                            Dummy Variables)
                   Dependent Variable: Ln(Hourly Wage)

                                      I            II           III
                               Right‐to‐Work   Not RTW     Whole Sample
Variable                           States       States
Corporate tax rate                  ‐0.5425       0.6116        0.2649
                                   (0.7473)     (0.6601)      (0.4449)
Corp tax rate * union                0.0250      ‐0.8673       ‐0.8574
                                   (0.5805)     (0.4375)      (0.4093)
Corp tax rate * union * rtw                                     0.9089
                                                              (0.7691)
LK ratio * union                     ‐0.3605    ‐0.3500        ‐0.3570
                                    (0.1695)   (0.1322)       (0.1371)
LK ratio * union * rtw                                         ‐0.0100
                                                              (0.2121)
LK ratio * union * corp tax           2.4737     2.4223         2.6667
                                    (2.6280)   (1.7115)       (1.7253)
LK ratio * union * corp tax * rtw                              ‐0.5819
                                                              (3.1804)
Pers income tax rate                  0.5787    ‐0.8432        ‐0.3379
                                    (0.6031)   (0.6812)       (0.4558)
Sales tax rate                       ‐0.0102     0.4319         0.2033
                                    (2.0881)   (0.6209)       (0.6019)
Union member                          0.2109     0.2417         0.2385
                                    (0.0411)   (0.0349)       (0.0301)
Union * right‐to‐work                                          ‐0.0181
                                                              (0.0545)
Right‐to‐work dummy                                            ‐0.0821
                                                              (0.0196)
Age                                   0.0368     0.0392         0.0380
                                    (0.0014)   (0.0024)       (0.0016)
Age‐squared / 1000                   ‐0.3746    ‐0.3959        ‐0.3850
                                    (0.0157)   (0.0265)       (0.0175)
Male                                  0.1178     0.1158         0.1162
                                    (0.0110)   (0.0066)       (0.0057)
Married                               0.0067     0.0028         0.0051
                                    (0.0088)   (0.0078)       (0.0059)
Male * married                        0.1168     0.1126         0.1145
                                    (0.0142)   (0.0070)       (0.0073)
White                                 0.0537     0.0508         0.0547
                                    (0.0213)   (0.0218)       (0.0174)
Black                                ‐0.0713    ‐0.0433        ‐0.0486
                                    (0.0231)   (0.0230)       (0.0186)
Asian                                ‐0.0237     0.0074         0.0004
                                    (0.0320)   (0.0234)       (0.0185)
Years of education                    0.0536     0.0599         0.0580
                                    (0.0015)   (0.0016)       (0.0014)
Non‐profit                            0.0172    ‐0.0054         0.0057
                                    (0.0188)   (0.0113)       (0.0105)
Metro‐area                            0.1389     0.1358         0.1340
                                    (0.0139)   (0.0130)       (0.0094)

Industry dummies                        Yes         Yes            Yes
Occupation dummies                      Yes         Yes            Yes
Right‐to‐work dummy                     No          No             Yes

 2
R                                    0.4699      0.4945         0.4910
Observations                          22328       35098          57426




                                                                          60
Note: The regression reported in Column I includes observations of only
those individuals living in states with right‐to‐work laws. The regression
reported in Column II includes observations of only those individuals
living in states without right‐to‐work laws. The regression reported in
Column III includes the whole sample and adds a right‐to‐work dummy
and interaction terms with the right‐to‐work dummy. The right‐to‐work
dummy equals one if an individual lives in a state with a right‐to‐work
law. The dependent variable is the log of hourly wages. The corporate tax
rate is defined as the marginal state corporate tax rate for the highest
income bracket adjusted to allow for the deductibility of federal
corporate taxes. The labor‐to‐capital ratio is defined as salaries and wages
divided by total assets as reported on federal corporate tax returns. The
individual income tax rate is the marginal state individual income tax rate
for the highest income tax bracket. The sales tax rate is the tax rate
imposed on general sales. The union member dummy equals one if an
individual is a union member or is covered by a union contract. The non‐
profit dummy equals one if an individual works for a nonprofit
organization. The metro‐area dummy equals one if an individual lives in a
metropolitan area. The columns report estimated OLS coefficients;
standard errors are bootstrapped (1,000 replications) and clustered at the
state level. All regressions include dummy variables for 22 occupations
and 46 industries.




                                                                               61
