NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE BOOMS, TRADE BUSTS, AND TRADE COSTS
David S. Jacks
Christopher M. Meissner
Dennis Novy
Working Paper 15267
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15267

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2009

We thank Alan M. Taylor for comments and Vicente Pinilla and Javier Silvestre for help with our
data. We also appreciate the feedback from seminars at Calgary, Essex, Michigan, the New York Federal
Reserve, Oxford, Stanford, Stockholm, UCLA, Valencia, and Zaragoza as well as from presentations
at the 2008 Canadian Network for Economic History meetings, 2008 Western Economics Association
meetings, the 2008 World Congress of Cliometrics meetings, and the 2009 Nottingham GEP Trade
Costs Conference. Finally, Jacks gratefully acknowledges the Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council of Canada for research support. Novy gratefully acknowledges research support from the
Economic and Social Research Council, grant RES-000-22-3112. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by David S. Jacks, Christopher M. Meissner, and Dennis Novy. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Trade Booms, Trade Busts, and Trade Costs
David S. Jacks, Christopher M. Meissner, and Dennis Novy
NBER Working Paper No. 15267
August 2009
JEL No. F15,N70
ABSTRACT
What has driven trade booms and trade busts in the past and present? We derive a micro-founded measure
of trade frictions from leading trade theories and use it to gauge the importance of bilateral trade costs
in determining international trade flows. We construct a new balanced sample of bilateral trade flows
for 130 country pairs across the Americas, Asia, Europe, and Oceania for the period from 1870 to
2000 and demonstrate an overriding role for declining trade costs in the pre-World War I trade boom.
In contrast, for the post-World War II trade boom we identify changes in output as the dominant force.
Finally, the entirety of the interwar trade bust is explained by increases in trade costs.

David S. Jacks
Department of Economics
Simon Fraser University
8888 University Drive
Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6
CANADA
and NBER
dsjacks@gmail.com
Christopher M. Meissner
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
cmmeissner@ucdavis.edu

Dennis Novy
Department of Economics
University of Warwick
Coventry CV4 7AL
United Kingdom
d.novy@warwick.ac.uk

I. Introduction
Over the past two centuries, the world has witnessed two major trade booms and one
trade bust. Global trade increased at a remarkable pace in the decades prior to World War I as
well as in decades following World War II. In contrast, global trade came to a grinding halt
during the interwar period. What are the underlying driving forces of these trade booms and
busts? The goal of this paper is to address this question head-on by examining new data on
bilateral trade flows for a consistent set of 130 country pairs over the period from 1870 to 2000,
covering on average around 70 percent of global trade and output. We explore three eras of
globalization: the pre-World War I Belle Époque (1870-1913), the fractious interwar period
(1921-1939), and the post-World War II resurgence of global trade (1950-2000). Thus, the paper
is the first to offer a complete quantitative assessment of developments in global trade from 1870
all the way to 2000.1
Inevitably, any long-run view of international trade faces the notion that trade patterns
can be driven by different reasons. For example, international trade during the nineteenth century
is often viewed as being determined by relative resource endowments (Kevin H. O’Rourke and
Jeffrey G. Williamson, 1999) or differences in Ricardian comparative advantage (Peter Temin,
1997).2 More recently, international trade has been related to not only Ricardian factors
(Jonathan Eaton and Samuel S. Kortum, 2002) but also to the activities of heterogeneous firms
(Marc J. Melitz, 2003). The challenge for a long-run view is therefore to find a unifying
framework that accommodates a variety of divergent explanations for international trade. We
invoke the gravity equation to help us resolve this issue by exploiting the fact that gravity is
consistent with a wide range of leading trade theories. While technical details might differ across
models, all micro-founded trade models produce a gravity equation of bilateral trade. In turn, all
gravity equations have in common that they relate bilateral trade to factors within particular
countries such as size and productivity, and factors specific to country pairs such as bilateral
trade costs. The intuition is that gravity is simply an expenditure equation that arises in any
general equilibrium trade model. It describes how consumers allocate spending across
1

We do, however, follow in the footsteps of other researchers that have looked at different periods in isolation. For
instance, Antoni Estevadeordal, Brian Frantz, and Alan M. Taylor (2003) examine the period from 1870 to 1939.
The work of Scott L. Baier and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand (2001) is the closest predecessor to our own. However, they
only consider the period from 1958 to 1988. We also track changes in trade due to all trade costs while their data
contained only rough proxies for freight costs and tariffs.
2
In addition, John C. Brown (1995) has found evidence of international trade prior to World War I being driven by
product differentiation and imperfect competition.

2

countries—regardless of the motivation behind international trade, be it international product
differentiation or differences in comparative advantage. In Section II below, we run standard
gravity regressions and demonstrate that gravity exerts its inexorable pull in all three subperiods.
As a departure from previous work, we investigate the long-run evolution of trade costs.
These are all the costs of transaction and transport associated with the exchange of goods across
national borders. We define trade costs in a broad sense, including obvious barriers such as
tariffs and transport costs but also many other barriers that are more difficult to observe such as
the costs of overcoming language barriers and exchange rate risk. Even though trade costs are
currently of great interest (James E. Anderson and Eric van Wincoop, 2004; Maurice Obstfeld
and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2000; David L. Hummels, 2007), little is known about the magnitude,
determinants, and consequences of trade costs. In particular, there has been very little work on
consistently measuring all of the trade barriers over the last two waves of globalization and the
one intervening spell of de-globalization. This paper is the first step in filling the gap on both
counts of comprehensiveness and consistency.
Specifically, we derive a micro-founded measure of aggregate bilateral trade costs that is
consistent with leading theories of international trade. We are able to obtain this measure by
backing out the trade cost wedge that is implied by the gravity equation. This wedge gauges the
difference between observed trade flows and a hypothetical benchmark of frictionless trade. We,
therefore, infer trade costs from trade flows. This approach allows us to capture the combined
magnitude of tariffs, transport costs, and all other macroeconomic frictions that impede
international market integration but which are inherently difficult to observe. In Section III
below, we show that an isomorphic trade cost measure can be derived from a wide range of
leading trade theories—including the consumption-based trade model by Anderson and van
Wincoop (2003), the Ricardian model by Eaton and Kortum (2003), the heterogeneous firms
model by Thomas Chaney (2008) and the heterogeneous firms model with non-CES preferences
by Melitz and Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano (2008). We emphasize that this approach of inferring
trade costs from readily available trade data holds clear advantages for applied research: the
constraints on enumerating—let alone, collecting data on—every individual trade cost element
even over short periods of time makes a direct accounting approach impossible.

3

In Section IV, we take the trade cost measure to the data. We find that in the forty years
prior to World War I, the average level of trade costs (expressed in tariff equivalent terms) fell
by thirty-three percent. From 1921 to the beginning of World War II, the average level of trade
costs increased by thirteen percent. Finally, average trade costs have fallen by sixteen percent in
the years from 1950. After describing the trends in trade costs, in Section V we examine whether
the trade cost measure is reliable. Our evidence suggests that standard trade cost proxies are
sensibly related to our measure. Factors like geographic proximity, adherence to fixed exchange
rate regimes, common languages, membership in a European empire, and shared borders all
matter for explaining trade costs. These factors alone account for roughly 30 to 50 percent of the
variation in trade costs. However, the three sub-periods exhibit significant differences, allowing
us to document important changes in the global economy over time such as the growing
importance of distance in determining the level of trade costs over time and the diminishing
effects of fixed exchange rate regimes and membership in European empires.
In Section VI we return to the question of what drives trade booms and busts. We use our
micro-founded gravity equation to attribute changes in global trade to two fundamental forces:
changes in global output and changes in trade costs. For the pre-World War I period, we find that
trade cost declines explain roughly sixty percent of the growth in global trade. Conversely, we
find that only thirty-one percent of the present-day global trade boom can be explained by the
decline in trade costs. This latter finding is consistent with previous studies for the post-World
War II period (see Baier and Bergstrand, 2001; John Whalley and Xian Xin, 2009). The
comparison of the two trade booms suggests that major technological breakthroughs in the
nineteenth century such as the steamship, the telegraph, and refrigeration may have been
relatively more important than technological innovations in the second half of the twentieth
century such as containerization and enhanced handling facilities. Finally, we find that the entire
interwar trade bust can be explained by the precipitous rise in trade costs associated with the
Great Depression, highlighting the critical role of commercial policy, the collapse of the gold
standard, and the evaporation of trade credit at the time.

II. Gravity in Three Eras of Globalization
An ever expanding literature documents the applicability of gravity over the long run. In
chronological order, we can point to the recent work of Olivier Accominotti and Marc Flandreau

4

(2006) which considers bilateral trade flows in the period from 1850 to 1870, finding little role
for bilateralism in promoting aggregate trade flows. J. Ernesto López-Córdova and Christopher
M. Meissner (2003), David S. Jacks and Krishna Pendakur (2009), and Kris J. Mitchener and
Marc D. Weidenmier (2008) all employ extensive datasets in the period from 1870 to 1913 to
discern the effects, respectively, of the classical gold standard, the maritime transport revolution,
and the spread of European overseas empires on bilateral trade flows. For the interwar period,
Barry J. Eichengreen and Doug A. Irwin (1995) are able to document the formation of currency
and trade blocs by using an early variant of gravity, while Estevadeordal, Frantz and Taylor
(2003) trace the rise and fall of world trade over the longer period from 1870 to 1939, offering a
revisionist history where the collapse of the resurrected gold standard and the increase in
maritime freight costs all play a role in explaining the interwar trade bust. Finally, for the postWorld War II period, a non-exhaustive list of nearly 100 gravity oriented papers is cataloged by
Anne-Celia Disdier and Keith Head (2008).
It is clear that the validity of the gravity model of international trade has been firmly
established theoretically and empirically, both now and in the past. But what has been lacking is
a unified attempt to exploit gravity to explain the three eras of globalization. In what follows, we
present the results of just such an attempt. A typical estimating equation for gravity models of
trade often takes the form of:
(1) ln( xijt ) = α i + α j + γ ln( y it y jt ) + zijt β + ε ijt

where xijt represents real bilateral exports from country i to j in time t; the αi and αj terms
represent country fixed effects intended to capture differences in resource endowments,
differences in productivity, and any other time-invariant country attributes which might
determine a country’s propensity for export or import activity; the yit and yjt terms represent gross
domestic products in countries i and j; and zijt is a row vector of variables representing the
various bilateral frictions that limit the flow of goods between countries i and j and includes
familiar standbys in the literature such as the physical distance separating countries.
We use expression (1) along with the trade and output data detailed in Appendix I to
chart the course of gravity in three eras of globalization: the pre-World War I Belle Époque
(1870-1913), the fractious interwar period (1921-1939), and the post-World War II resurgence of
global trade (1950-2000). The 27 countries in our sample include Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan,

5

Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, the Philippines, Portugal, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, the United States, and Uruguay. Figure 1
summarizes the sample graphically.3 Finally, we incorporate measures for distance, the
establishment of fixed exchange rate regimes, the existence of a common language, historical
membership in a European overseas empire,4 and the existence of a shared border.5 Summary
statistics and the results of this exercise of estimating gravity in the three sub-periods separately
are reported in Tables 1 and 2, respectively.
In Panel A of Table 2, we estimate equation (1) by OLS, using GDP, the five variables
proxying for trade costs mentioned above, and country fixed effects. The results are reassuring.
The coefficients on GDP—although different across the three eras of globalization—are
precisely estimated and fall within the bounds established by previous researchers. Likewise,
distance is found to be negatively and significantly related to bilateral trade flows. Fixed
exchange rate regimes, common languages, and shared borders are all found to be positively and
significantly associated with bilateral trade flows. We also note that these regressions confirm
the emerging story on the pro-trade effects of empires, specifically the very strong stimulus to
trade afforded by European empires in the pre-World War I period (Mitchener and Weidenmier,
2008) which slowly faded in light of the disruptions of the interwar period and the
decolonization movement of the 1950s and 1960s (Head, Thierry Mayer, and John Ries, 2008).
In addition, this simple specification explains a high percentage of the variation in bilateral trade
flows for each of the separate periods as the adjusted R-squared ranges from a low of 0.64 in the
Belle Époque period to a high of 0.84 in the period from 1950 to 2000.
A more exacting specification consistent with the recent gravity literature (Anderson and
van Wincoop, 2003 and Richard E. Baldwin and Daria Taglioni, 2007) would be that in Panel B.
Along with the proxies for trade costs, this specification includes year fixed effects, allows the
3

This sample constitutes, on average, 72% of world exports and 68% of world GDP over the entire period. We also
note that the various sub-samples are highly balanced. Given the 130 country pairs in our sample, there are 14,820
possible bilateral trade observations (130 times 114 years) of which we are able to capture fully 99.9%.
4
For all intents and purposes, this may be thought of as an indicator variable for the British Empire. The sole
exception in our sample is the case of Indonesia and the Netherlands.
5
Another obvious candidate is commercial policy, and especially tariffs. Only one consistent measure of tariffs is
available for the period from 1870 to 2000 in the form of the customs duties to declared imports ratio as in Michael
A. Clemens and Williamson (2001). This measure seems to be a reasonably good proxy for tariffs in the pre-World
War I and interwar periods. However, after 1950 and the well-known rise of non-tariff barriers to trade, this measure
becomes unreliable, sometimes registering unbelievably low levels of protection. The measure also—somewhat
paradoxically—becomes less readily available after World War II; the United Kingdom, for instance, stops reporting
the level of customs duties in 1965.

6

country fixed effects to change over time, and omits the GDP terms due to collinearity.6 The sign
and significance of the remaining variables is remarkably consistent across the panels.
To conclude, the fundamental result of this section has been the consistency of gravity in
determining international trade flows, both in the past and the present. This is a key result which
we argue motivates a common gravity framework for the three eras of globalization. We develop
such a framework in the following section.

III. Gravity Redux

Our goal in the remainder of the paper is to study two fundamental drivers of trade—
output and trade costs. To undertake such an analysis, we now introduce a theoretical gravity
framework that incorporates trade costs and that is consistent with many classes of trade models.
As we demonstrate above, the standard gravity equation (1) holds up well in explaining
trade flows over different periods. However, recent advances in theory have provided more solid
foundations for empirical gravity equations. As a first step, we show that a gravity equation
similar to equation (1) can be derived from a wide range of leading trade models developed in
the last decade: (i) the Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) trade model that focuses on
multilateral resistance, (ii) the Ricardian trade model by Eaton and Kortum (2002), (iii) the trade
model with heterogeneous firms by Chaney (2008), based on Melitz (2003), and (iv) the
heterogeneous firms model by Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) with a linear, non-CES demand
structure.7 This confirms the appeal of gravity: although the driving forces behind international
trade differ across these models—say, Ricardian comparative advantage versus love of variety—
they all predict a gravity equation for international expenditure patterns.8 Most important for our
analysis, the different models treat bilateral trade costs in a similar way.

6

For the period from 1870 to 1913, there are 44 years and 27 countries, yielding 1188 country-specific annual fixed
effects. Likewise, there are 513 (=19*27) country-specific annual fixed effects for the period from 1921 to 1939 and
1377 (=51*27) country-specific annual fixed effects for the period from 1950 to 2000.
7
Earlier gravity contributions include the contribution of Anderson (1979) who explained the multiplicative form of
the equation and allowed for disaggregation. Bergstrand (1985, 1989, 1990) established the applicability of the
gravity equation to a number of preference and substitution structures and to alternate models of international trade:
the Heckscher-Ohlin factor endowments approach, trade based on monopolistic competition, and a hybrid model of
different factor proportions among monopolistically competitive sectors.
8
Gene M. Grossman (1998, p. 29-30) neatly summarizes this situation: “Specialization lies behind the explanatory
power [of the gravity equation], and of course some degree of specialization is at the heart of any model of
trade…This is true no matter what supply-side considerations give rise to specialization, be they increasing returns
to scale in a world of differentiated products, technology differences in a world of Ricardian trade, large factor

7

As a second step, we exploit the fact that these trade models predict similar gravity
equations which suggest that trade booms and busts are driven by changes in output and changes
in trade costs. In particular, we formally show that all the gravity equations can be solved for a
common expression of implied trade costs.9 These implied trade costs can be interpreted as the
wedge between a hypothetical frictionless world as predicted by each model and the actual trade
patterns observed in the data. We argue that these implied trade costs are an informative
summary statistic to describe international trade frictions. In Section V, we also demonstrate this
empirically.

(i) Gravity in Anderson and van Wincoop (2003)

Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) derive the following gravity equation:
yi y j ⎛ tij
(2) xij = W ⎜
y ⎜⎝ Π i Pj

1−σ

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

,

where y W is world output and Π i and Pj are outward and inward ‘multilateral resistance’
variables. The latter can be interpreted as average trade barriers. t ij ≥ 1 is the bilateral trade cost
factor (one plus the tariff equivalent), and σ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution. In empirical
applications, trade costs are typically proxied by variables such as bilateral distance and a border
dummy. But it is difficult to find empirical proxies for the multilateral resistance variables.
Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) caution against the use of price indices since they might not
capture non-pecuniary trade barriers. Instead, the procedure that has been adopted most
frequently in recent gravity applications is to include country fixed effects.
As an alternative, we follow Novy (2009) in eliminating the multilateral resistance
variables from the gravity equation. The counterpart of equation (2) for domestic trade xii is

yy
(3) xii = i W i
y

1−σ

⎛ tii ⎞
⎜
⎟
⎝ Π i Pi ⎠

.

When equation (2) is multiplied by its counterpart for bilateral trade from j to i, x ji , we obtain
the product of all multilateral resistance variables on the right-hand side, Π i Π j Pi Pj . These
endowment differences in a world of Heckscher-Ohlin trade, or (small) transport costs in a world of any type of
endowment-based trade.” [Emphasis in original]
9
Also see Dennis Novy (2009).

8

multilateral resistance indices can be eliminated by dividing by the product of domestic trade
flows, xii x jj :
⎛ tij t ji
(4)
=⎜
xii x jj ⎜⎝ tii t jj
xij x ji

1−σ

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

.

We solve for the trade costs as the key parameters of interest. The parentheses on the right-hand
side of equation (4) contain the product of two trade cost ratios. These ratios represent the extent
to which bilateral trade costs t ij and t ji exceed domestic trade costs t ii and t jj . Finally, we take
the square root to form their geometric average and subtract by one to get an expression for the
tariff equivalent. The resulting expression is
⎛ tij t ji
(5) τ ij ≡ ⎜
⎜t t
⎝ ii jj

1

⎞2
⎛ xii x jj
⎟⎟ − 1 = ⎜⎜
⎠
⎝ xij x ji

1

⎞ 2(σ −1)
− 1,
⎟⎟
⎠

where τ ij is the trade cost wedge that captures bilateral relative to domestic trade costs.10
To grasp the intuition behind this trade cost measure, imagine the two extremes of a
frictionless world and a closed economy. In a frictionless world, all trade cost factors t ij , t ji , t ii
and t jj are equal to 1. It follows that τ ij = 0 . In contrast, a closed economy is characterized by
bilateral trade flows, xij x ji , that are zero. In that case, τ ij approaches infinity. τ ij can therefore
be interpreted as a trade cost wedge that measures just how far bilateral trade integration is away
from a hypothetical frictionless world. Note that this trade cost measure does not impose bilateral
trade cost symmetry. Bilateral trade costs, t ij and t ji , may differ under this framework but here,
we can only identify their geometric average but not the extent to which they diverge. In
addition, we do not impose zero domestic trade costs. Finally, we note that non-unitary income
elasticities, as found by João M.C. Santos Silva and Silvana Tenreyro (2006), do not pose a
problem for our methodology. It is easy to show that if the income elasticity in gravity equation
(2) differed from unity, the trade cost measure in equation (5) would not be affected.

10

Head and Ries (2001), Anderson and van Wincoop (2004), and Head and Mayer (2009) derive a similar
expression but assume trade costs are symmetric. We do not make that assumption. In addition, we derive the
expression from a number of different theories, not only from the CES monopolistic competition model. They
estimate the ratio of trade flows, whereas we solve for the implied trade cost wedge according to equation (5). We
refer to the robustness check in Appendix II where we allow for stochastic measurement error in the trade data and
where we also estimate a version of equation (4).

9

We have derived the trade cost measure in equation (5) from the well-known Anderson
and van Wincoop (2003) gravity model. An Armington assumption is imposed in their model so
that countries are endowed with differentiated goods, and trade is driven by consumers’ love of
variety. To show that our trade cost measure τ ij is not dependent on one specific trade model, we
now derive this measure from other leading trade models.

(ii) Gravity in Eaton and Kortum (2002)

In the Ricardian model by Eaton and Kortum (2002), productivity in each country is
drawn from a Fréchet distribution that has two parameters, Ti and ζ . Ti determines the location
of the productivity distribution for country i, with a high Ti denoting high overall productivity.

ζ > 1 denotes the variation within the distribution and is treated as common across countries,
with a high ζ denoting little variation. The model yields a gravity equation for an aggregate of
homogeneous goods whose structure is related to equation (2). It is given by
(6)

xij

=

xj

Ti ( ci tij )

−ζ

∑ Ti ( citij )

−ζ

,

i

where x j denotes country j’s total expenditure and ci denotes the input cost in country i.
As in the context of the Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) model, we are interested in
the trade cost parameters. Ti and ci are unobservable but cancel out once the ratio of domestic
over bilateral trade flows is formed as in equation (5). This yields
(7) τ ijEK

⎛ tij t ji
=⎜
⎜t t
⎝ ii jj

1

⎞2
⎛ xii x jj
⎟⎟ − 1 = ⎜⎜
⎠
⎝ xij x ji

1

⎞ 2ζ
⎟⎟ − 1.
⎠

Comparing equations (5) and (7), it is obvious that τ ijEK = τ ij if ζ = σ − 1 .11

(iii) Gravity in Chaney (2008)

Chaney (2008) builds on the seminal paper by Melitz (2003) and derives a gravity
equation based on a model with heterogeneous productivities across firms and fixed costs of
11

For more details on the comparison of Armington-type and Ricardian models, see Eaton and Kortum (2002,
footnote 20) and Anderson and van Wincoop (2004, pp. 709-710).

10

exporting. In contrast to previous trade models, the two assumptions of heterogeneous firms and
fixed costs of exporting introduce an extensive margin of trade. Not only do exporters vary the
size of shipments (the intensive margin) in response to changes in trade costs, but also the set of
exporters changes (the extensive margin). Chaney derives the following industry-level gravity
equation
yi y j ⎛ wi tij
(8) xij = W ⎜
y ⎜⎝ λ j

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

−γ

(f )
ij

⎛ γ
⎞
−⎜
−1⎟
⎝ σ −1 ⎠

,

where wi is workers’ productivity in country i, λ j is a remoteness variable akin to multilateral
resistance, and f ij are the fixed costs of exporting from country i to j.12 γ is the shape parameter
of the Pareto distribution from which productivities are drawn, with a high γ denoting a low
degree of heterogeneity and γ > σ − 1 . Forming the ratio of domestic over bilateral trade flows
yields
(9) τ ijCh

⎛t t
= ⎜ ij ji
⎜t t
⎝ ii jj

1

1⎛ 1 1 ⎞
− ⎟
⎜
γ⎠

⎞ 2 ⎛ fij f ji ⎞ 2 ⎝ σ −1
⎟⎟ ⎜⎜
⎟⎟
⎠ ⎝ fii f jj ⎠

⎛x x
− 1 = ⎜ ii jj
⎜x x
⎝ ij ji

1

⎞ 2γ
⎟⎟ − 1.
⎠

τ ijCh is a now function of both variable and fixed trade costs. Thus, under the assumptions of
Chaney’s (2008) model the interpretation of the trade cost wedge extends to fixed costs of
exporting.
We note that for non-zero trade flows (as is generally the case in our sample), the
heterogeneous firms model by Elhanan Helpman, Marc J. Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein (2008) is
consistent with the same trade cost measure as in equation (9), that is, τ ijHMR = τ ijCh .13

(iv) Gravity in Melitz and Ottaviano (2008)

Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) also model heterogeneous firms. Firms face sunk costs of
market entry, f E , that can be interpreted as product development and production start-up costs.
In contrast to Melitz (2003) and Chaney (2008), exporting firms only face variable trade costs
12
13

The economy is modeled as one industry.
In the notation of Helpman, Melitz and Rubinstein (2008), non-zero trade flows imply Vij>0 ∀ i,j. To obtain

τ ijHMR = τ ijCh

we also assume positive fixed costs for domestic sale, fii>0. We also need to allow for positive

domestic variable trade costs, tii≥1 ∀ i, and, as in Appendix II of their paper, assume there is no upper bound in the
support of the productivity distribution, aL=0.

11

and no fixed costs of exporting. The model is based on non-CES preferences that give rise to
endogenous markups. More specifically, markups tend to be low in large markets with many
competitors.
The multiple-country version of their model leads to the following gravity equation:
(10) xij =

1

N Ei ψ i Lj ( cdj )

γ +2

2δ ( γ + 2 )

(t )
ij

−γ

,

where δ is a parameter from the utility function that indicates the degree of product
differentiation, with a higher δ meaning a higher degree of differentiation. N Ei is the number of
entrants in country i. An index of comparative advantage in technology is given by ψ i with a
high value meaning that entrants in country i have a high chance of obtaining favorable
productivity draws. L j denotes the number of consumers in country j, and c dj is the marginal
cost cut-off above which domestic firms in country j do not produce. The intuition is that tougher
competition in country j, reflected by a lower c dj , makes it harder for exporters from i to break
into that market. Forming the ratio of domestic over bilateral trade flows yields
(11) τ ijMO

⎛ tij t ji
=⎜
⎜t t
⎝ ii jj

1

⎞2
⎛ xii x jj
⎟⎟ − 1 = ⎜⎜
⎠
⎝ xij x ji

1

⎞ 2γ
⎟⎟ − 1.
⎠

In contrast to τ ijCh in equation (9), neither sunk nor fixed costs enter τ ijMO because all firms face
identical entry costs, f E , and no fixed costs of exporting. Variable trade costs are sufficient to
induce selection into export markets because of bounded non-CES marginal utility

(v) Gravity in Deardorff (1998)

Finally, Alan V. Deardorff (1998) argues that in a Heckscher-Ohlin world with bilateral
trade barriers, a model similar to the one by Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) applies. The
intuition is that bilateral trade barriers prevent factor price equalization between two countries
that trade with each other. If factor prices were equalized, final goods prices would also be
equalized and neither country could overcome the trade barriers. In a world with a large number
of goods and few factors it is, therefore, likely that one country will be the lowest-cost producer.
Trade in a Heckscher-Ohlin world would, thus, resemble trade in an Armington world and could
be characterized by a standard gravity equation.

12

In summary, our trade integration measure τ ij is consistent with a broad range of trade
models since they all lead to gravity equations that have a similar structure as equation (2). In a
similar vein, Robert C. Feenstra, James R. Markusen, and Andrew K. Rose (2001) and Simon J.
Evenett and Wolfgang Keller (2002) also show that earlier gravity equations are consistent with
various competing trade models. Intuitively, the gravity equation simply indicates how
consumers allocate their expenditure across countries subject to trade frictions (Baldwin and
Taglioni, 2007). Gravity equations arise regardless of why consumers want to buy goods from
foreign countries. In an Armington world, consumers buy foreign goods because those goods are
inherently different and consumers prefer variety. In a Ricardian world, countries produce goods
according to comparative advantage and consumers buy foreign goods because they are cheaper.
It turns out that the particular motivation behind foreign trade is not crucial to understand the role
of bilateral trade frictions.

IV. Trade Costs over Time

We use equation (5) along with the trade and output data detailed in Appendix I to
construct bilateral trade costs for the 130 country pairs in our sample. Lacking consistent data on
domestic trade, we use GDP less aggregate exports instead. A potential problem arises: the GDP
data are value-added whereas trade data typically reported as gross values. For the post-World
War II period, it becomes possible to track how well this proxy performs by comparing it to
domestic trade constructed as total manufacturing production less total exports. The results are
favorable in that although the level of bilateral trade costs is affected by the way domestic trade
is measured, the change over time is remarkably similar (Novy, 2009). For example, in the case
of U.S.-Canadian trade costs over the period from 1970 to 2000, the correlation between the
measure based on GDP data and the one based on production data is 0.96. 14
The elasticity of substitution, σ, typically falls in the range (5,10) as surveyed by
Anderson and van Wincoop (2004). As (σ-1) in equation (5) corresponds to the Fréchet
parameter ζ in equation (7) and the Pareto parameter γ in equations (9) and (11), it is instructive
to also consider estimates for those parameters. Eaton and Kortum (2002) report a baseline
estimate of 8.3 for ζ. Chaney (2008) estimates the ratio γ/(σ-1) to be near two, which suggests a
14

The intuition for the high correlation is that the increase in the (gross) production data is approximately matched
by the increase in the (value-added) GDP data because the latter includes the growth of the services sector. See
Novy (2009).

13

value of γ above σ. We set the value of σ to eight, which roughly corresponds to the midpoint of
the range (5,10). But we show in Appendix III that although the level of inferred trade costs is
sensitive to the assumed parameter value, the change of trade costs over time is hardly affected.
We generate average trade cost series for each of the three eras of globalization by
regressing the constructed bilateral trade costs on a set of year fixed effects. We repeat this
exercise for both global trade and six sub-regions: within the Americas, within Asia/Oceania,
within Europe, between the Americas and Asia/Oceania, between the Americas and Europe, and
between Asia/Oceania and Europe. Figures 2 through 4 track these averages over time. There,
the averages have all been normalized to 100 for the initial observation in each period, i.e. 1870,
1921, and 1950, so that they are not strictly comparable in terms of levels across periods. Our
goal instead is to highlight the changes within a given period. We are also trying to avoid
pressing too hard on the assumption that the substitution elasticity (or alternatively, the Fréchet
or Pareto parameters) have remained constant over the entire 130 years under consideration.15
We weight these averages by GDP to reduce the influence of country pairs which trade
infrequently or inconsistently.16
Thus, for the first wave of globalization from 1870 to 1913, we document an average
decline in international trade costs relative to domestic trade costs of thirty-three percent.17 This
was led by a fifty percent decline for trade between Asia/Oceania and Europe, probably
generated from a combination of Japanese reforms that increased engagement with the rest of the
world, the consolidation of European overseas empires, and radical improvements in
communication and transportation technologies which linked Eurasia. These gains were
apparently not limited to the linkages between the countries of Asia/Oceania and the rest of the
world as intra-Asian/Oceanic trade costs declined on the order of thirty-seven percent. Thus, the
late nineteenth century was a time of unprecedented changes in the relative commodity and
factor prices of the region as has been documented by Jeffrey G. Williamson (2006).

15

See Appendix III for a robustness check.
The obvious candidate for weights, the level of bilateral trade, is inappropriate in this instance. A quick look at
equation (5) verifies that bilateral trade and trade costs are not independent. That is, a low trade cost measure is
generated for a country pair with high bilateral trade, suggesting that the use of bilateral trade would impart
systematic downward bias in the weighted average.
17
The distribution of spikes in 1874 and 1881 in the Asia and Americas-Asia series may seem odd. However, these
are explained by the small number of underlying observations (n=7 and n=6, respectively) and can be attributed to
sporadic trade volumes for Japan as it integrated—sometimes by fits and starts—into the global economy.
16

14

Bringing up the rear was intra-American trade, albeit with a still respectable average
decline of nineteen percent. This performance masks significant heterogeneity across North and
South America: trade costs within North America declined twenty-nine percent, while trade costs
between North and South America fell by only fifteen percent. Most likely, this reflects South
America’s continued orientation towards European markets and the fleeting connections uniting
South America and North America—save the United States—at the time. Likewise, intraEuropean trade costs only declined twenty-one percent. This performance reflects the maturity as
well as the proximity of these markets. We should also note that a substantial portion of the
decline is concentrated in the 1870s. This was, of course, a time of simultaneously declining
freight rates and tariffs as well as increasing adherence to the gold standard. In subsequent
periods, the decline in freight rates was substantially moderated, while tariffs climbed in most
countries, dating from the beginning of German protectionist policy in 1879.
Turning to the interwar period from 1921 to 1939, we can see that the various attempts to
restore the pre-war international order were somewhat successful at reining in international trade
costs. A fitful return to the gold standard was launched in 1925 when the United Kingdom
returned to gold convertibility at the pre-war parity. By 1928, most countries had followed its
lead and stabilized their currencies. At the same time, the international community witnessed a
number of attempts to normalize trading relations, primarily through the dismantling of the
quantitative restrictions erected in the wake of World War I (Ronald Findlay and Kevin H.
O’Rourke, 2007). As a result, trade costs fell on average by seven percent up to 1929. Although
much less dramatic than the fall for the entire period from 1870 to 1913, this average decline was
actually twice as large as that for the equivalent period from 1905 to 1913, pointing to a
surprising resilience in the global economy of the time. The leaders in this process were again
trade between Asia/Oceania and Europe with a respectable fifteen percent decline and intraEuropean trade with a ten percent decline. On the other end of the spectrum, trade costs within
the Americas and between the Americas and Europe barely budged, both registering a three
percent decline. And again, these aggregate figures for the Americas mask important differences
across North and South America: trade costs within North America ballooned by eight percent—
reflecting the adversarial commercial policy of Canada and the United States in the 1920s—
while trade costs between North and South America declined by seven percent.

15

The Great Depression marks an obvious turning point for all the series. It generated the
most dramatic increase in average trade costs in our sample as they jump by twenty-one
percentage points in the space of the three years between 1929 and 1932. This, of course, exactly
corresponds with the well-documented implosion of international trade in the face of declining
global output (Angus Maddison, 2003), highly protectionist trade policy (Jakob B. Madsen,
2001), tight commercial credit (William Hynes, David S. Jacks, and Kevin H. O’Rourke, 2009),
and a generally uneasy trading environment. Trade costs within Asia/Oceania, within Europe,
and between Asia/Oceania and Europe experienced the most moderate increases at eighteen
percentage points each. Trade costs within the Americas rose very strongly by thirty-five
percentage points, driven more by the trade disruptions between North and South America (+38
percentage points) than within North America (+28 percentage points). Over time though, trade
costs declined from these heights just as the Depression slowly eased from 1933 and nations
made halting attempts to liberalize trade, even if only on a bilateral or regional basis (Findlay
and O’Rourke, 2007). Yet these were not enough to recover the lost ground: average trade costs
stood thirteen percent higher at the outbreak of World War II than in 1921.
Finally, the second wave of globalization from 1950 to 2000 registered declines in
average trade costs on the order of sixteen percent. The most dramatic decline was that for intraEuropean trade costs at thirty-seven percent, a decline that is related to the formation of the
European Economic Community and subsequently the European Union. The most recalcitrant
performance was that for the Americas and Asia/Oceania, both of which registered small
increases in bilateral relative to domestic trade costs over this period. In the former case, this
peculiar result is solely generated by trade costs between North and South America which rose
by twenty-two percent. This most likely reflects Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay’s adherence to
import-substituting industrialization up to the debt crisis of the 1980s and the reorientation of
South American trade away from its heavy reliance on the United States as a trading partner
which had emerged in the interwar period. In contrast, trade costs within North America fell by a
remarkable sixty percent, at least partly reflecting the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement and
the North American Free Trade Agreement. In the case of Asia/Oceania, the rise in trade costs is
primarily generated by India which in its post-independence period simultaneously erected
formidable barriers to imports and retreated from participation in world export markets. This

16

India effect is most pronounced for former fellow members in the British Empire, that is,
Australia, New Zealand, and Sri Lanka.
Most surprisingly, the decline in international relative to domestic trade costs in the
second wave of globalization is mainly concentrated in the period before the late 1970s. Indeed,
in the global and all sub-regional averages—save the Americas—trade costs were lower in 1980
than in 2000. In explaining the dramatic declines prior to 1973, one could point to the various
rounds of the GATT up to the ambitious Kennedy Round which concluded in 1967 and slashed
tariff rates by 50% and which more than doubled the number of participating nations. Or
perhaps, it could be located in the substantial drops—but subsequent flatlining—in both air and
maritime transport charges up to the first oil shock documented in Hummels (2007). This
phenomenon demands further attention but remains outside the scope of this paper.

V. The Determinants of Trade Costs

Having traced the course of trade costs, we now consider some of their likely
determinants. This exercise serves two purposes. First, it addresses—albeit imperfectly—the
natural question of what factors have been driving the evolution of trade costs over time. Second
and more importantly, it helps further establish the reliability of our measure of trade costs—that
is, are trade costs as constructed in this paper reasonably correlated with other variables
commonly used as proxies in the literature? Below, we demonstrate that this is the case. We also
refer the reader to Appendix II where we provide robustness checks confirming their reliability.
Trade costs in our model are derived from a gravity equation rather than estimated as is
typically the case in the literature. Commonly, log-linear versions of equation (1) are estimated
by substituting an arbitrary trade cost function for zijt and using fixed effects for the multilateral
resistance variables. Such gravity specifications, to the extent that the trade cost function and the
econometric model are well specified, could be used to provide estimated values of trade costs.
In fact, as demonstrated above, such specifications are highly successful in explaining a
significant proportion of the variance in bilateral trade flows. Nevertheless, there is likely a
substantial amount of unexplained variation due to unobservable trade costs and, thus, potential
omitted variable bias.
We consider a function for trade costs that is widely used in the gravity literature
ρ

(12) τ ijt = α dist ij exp( xijt β + ε ijt ),

17

where dist is a measure of distance between two countries, x is a row vector of observable
determinants of trade costs, and ε is an error term composed of unobservables. We log-linearize
equation (12). The determinants we consider are the same as those in Section II and include the
distance between two countries, the establishment of fixed exchange rate regimes, the existence
of a common language, membership in a European overseas empire, and the existence of a
shared border. In all regressions, we include time-invariant country fixed effects as well as year
fixed effects.18 The reported regressions pool across all periods and then separate the data for the
130 dyads between 1870 and 1913, 1921 and 1939, and 1950 and 2000. The results are reported
in Table 3.
Considering the pooled results first, we find that a one standard deviation rise in distance
raises trade costs by 0.38 standard deviations. Fixed exchange rates, a common language, joint
membership in a European empire, and sharing a border all decrease trade costs with the latter
two coefficients being roughly double the estimated effect of fixed exchange rate or sharing a
common language. This pooled approach demonstrates that standard factors that are known to be
frictions in international trade are sensibly related to the trade cost measure. The results also
show that the trade cost measure determines trade patterns in ways largely consistent with the
gravity literature covering more geographically comprehensive samples.
At the same time, the pooled approach masks significant heterogeneity across the periods.
Here, we highlight a few of these differences. First, fixed exchange rate regimes appear
noticeably stronger in the pre-World War I and post-World War II environments—a result
consistent with the tenuous resurrection of the classical gold standard in the interwar period
(Natalia Chernyshoff, Jacks, and Taylor, 2009). Second, a common language seems to have
exerted a slightly stronger force (roughly 75%) on trade costs in the period from 1870 to 1913
than subsequently. Third, we document a strongly diminished role for European empires in
reducing trade costs: a coefficient of -0.46 from 1870 to 1913 is reduced to -0.15 in the period
from 1950 to 2000—a result which is consistent with the recent work of Head, Mayer, and Ries
(2008).19 Finally, distance seems to have become more important in the post-1950 world
economy, with the coefficient increasing by 50 percent as compared to 1870-1913 or almost
18

By construction τij nets out the multilateral resistance terms so that time-varying country fixed effects are not
required.
19
Interestingly, much of this decline had already happened prior to 1950 as the coefficient registers a value of -0.20
during the interwar period.

18

tripling when compared to 1921-1939. This result is in line with Disdier and Head (2008) who
find that the estimated distance coefficient has been on the rise from 1950 in their meta-analysis
of the gravity literature. Whether this reflects upward pressures in transport costs (Hummels,
2007), the regionalization of trade or changes in the composition of traded goods remains an
open question, but it does accord with the empirical evidence on the decreasing distance-of-trade
from the 1950s (Matias Berthelon and Caroline Freund, 2008; Celine Carrère and Maurice
Schiff, 2005).
One way to get a sense of the relative contribution of the five variables to the variation in
trade costs is to compare the R-squareds from a battery of regressions as in the work of Kalina
Manova (2008). Specifically, one can generate an upper bound for the contribution of, say,
distance by re-estimating (12) with only that variable but no other controls. Thus, the upper
bound loads as much variation as possible onto distance. One can also generate a lower bound
for the contribution of distance by using the difference between the R-squareds from the fixed
effects specification with all variables of interest including distance—as in the corresponding
panel of Table 3—and a fixed effects specification with all variables of interest excluding
distance. Thus, the lower bound represents the marginal contribution of distance to an otherwise
full specification.
In Table 4, we report the results of running such regressions and tabulating the Rsquareds for each variable in each sub-period. Thus, we find that distance can explain between 2
and 14 percent of the variation in trade costs in the period from 1870 to 1913. What is apparent
from Table 4 is that the relative contribution of the five variables remains highly consistent
across the three sub-periods, with distance potentially explaining the most variation and
historical membership in European overseas empires the least variation. The results in Table 4
also confirm the increasing explanatory power of distance over time—and especially in the post1950 period—and the decreasing explanatory power of fixed exchange rate regimes and the
historical membership in European overseas empires hinted at above.

VI. A Long-Run View of Trade Booms and Trade Busts

In order to determine what drives trade booms and busts, we now turn to a decomposition
of the growth of trade flows in the three periods. We are interested in whether trade booms are
mainly related to secular increases in output or falling trade costs. Similarly, we are interested in

19

whether trade busts are mainly related to output slumps or increasing trade costs. The gravity
framework laid out above easily lends itself to answering these questions. Below, we outline our
approach based on the Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) gravity model but we note that
identical results can be obtained based on the models by Eaton and Kortum (2002), Chaney
(2008), and Melitz and Ottaviano (2008).
We rewrite equation (4) as20
⎛ tij t ji
(13) xij x ji = yi y j ⎜
⎜t t
⎝ ii jj

1−ο

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

xii x jj
yi y j

= yi y j (1 + τ ij )

2(1−ο )

xii x jj
yi y j

.

As we are interested in the growth of bilateral trade, we log-linearize equation (13) and take the
first difference between years (denoted by Δ). This yields
⎛x x
(14) Δ ln ( xij x ji ) = Δ ln ( yi y j ) + 2 (1 − σ ) Δ ln (1 + τ ij ) + Δ ln ⎜ ii jj
⎜ yi y j
⎝

⎞
⎟⎟ .
⎠

Following Helpman (1987) and Baier and Bergstrand (2001), we split the product of outputs into

(

)

2

(

)

the sum of outputs and output shares, y i y j = yi + y j si s j with si = y i / y i + y j , such that we
obtain our final decomposition,
⎛x x
(15) Δ ln ( xij x ji ) = 2Δ ln ( yi + y j ) + Δ ln ( si s j ) + 2 (1 − σ ) Δ ln (1 + τ ij ) + Δ ln ⎜ ii jj
⎜ yi y j
⎝

⎞
⎟⎟ .
⎠

Equation (15) decomposes the growth of bilateral trade into four components. The first term on
the right-hand side represents the contribution of output growth to bilateral trade growth. The
second term is the contribution of increasing income similarity, as first stated by Helpman
(1987). All else being equal, two countries of the same size are expected to generate more
international trade than two countries of unequal size. The third term reflects the contribution of
changes in trade costs as measured by τij.21 The fourth term represents changes in multilateral
factors. Its precise interpretation depends on the underlying trade model. For example, as
equation (3) shows, if multilateral trade barriers fall over time, the ratio of domestic trade to
output xii / y i goes down so that the contribution of the fourth term to bilateral trade growth

20

Also see Appendix II where we estimate a version of equation (4) and confirm the unit elasticity of domestic trade
flows.
21
Since (1-σ) is negative, a decline in τij implies a positive third term on the right-hand side of equation (19).

20

becomes negative. This can be interpreted as a trade diversion effect that is consistent with the
models by Anderson and van Wincoop (2003), Eaton and Kortum (2002), and Chaney (2008).22
We consider the growth of bilateral trade between the initial years (1870, 1921 and 1950)
and the end years (1913, 1939 and 2000) of our three sub-periods. We compute GDP-weighted
averages across dyads and report the results in Table 5 below. To be clear about our approach,
we do not estimate equation (19). Instead, we decompose the growth of bilateral trade
conditional on our theoretical gravity framework. The purpose of the decomposition is to
uncover whether bilateral trade growth is mainly associated with output growth or changes in
bilateral trade costs. We are also interested in how the relative contribution of changes in output
and trade costs differs across the three sub-periods. We note that our results do not depend on the
value of σ—even if it changes over time. The reason is that the first, second and fourth terms on
the right-hand side of equation (19) are given by the data. As predicted by the models outlined in
Section III, the trade cost term follows as the residual.23
As can be seen from the final column in Table 5, the percentage growth in trade volumes
is highly comparable in the two global trade booms of the late 19th and 20th centuries at 486 and
484 percent, respectively. But the main insight is that the principal driving forces are reversed. In
the period from 1870 to 1913, trade cost declines account for a majority (290 percentage points)
of the growth in international trade, while in the period from 1950 to 2000 trade cost declines
account for a distinct minority (148 percentage points) of trade growth. This is congruent with
traditional narratives of the late nineteenth century as a period of radical declines in international
transport costs and payments frictions as well as studies on the growth of world trade in the
contemporary world which suggest that such changes may have been more muted (cf. Baier and
Bergstrand, 2001; Hummels, 2007). The contributions of increasing income similarity and
changes in multilateral factors are negligible throughout the entire period.

22

In the Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) model, the fourth term would also capture changes in the degree of
competition in a country as indicated by the number of entrants and the marginal cost cut-offs above which domestic
firms decide not to produce.
23
As in all of the standard gravity literature, an implicit assumption in our paper is that aggregate trade costs are
exogenous to economic expansion and the growth of trade. If trade cost declines cause additional income growth,
then the role of trade costs in explaining trade growth could, of course, be higher. This is an open question in the
literature and remains outside the scope of this paper. However, the causal effect from lower trade costs to increased
trade flows and, then, to economic growth would have to be fairly large at each step to have a large bearing on our
results. At the same time, the exploration of endogenous trade costs is certainly a fruitful avenue for future research.

21

At the same time, both periods encompass a wide variety of experiences across regional
subgroups. For 1870 to 1913, the average trade growth of 486 percent masks a relatively anemic
growth of 324 percent within Europe versus an explosive growth of trade between Asia/Oceania
and Europe of 647 percent. European trade growth is evenly associated with output growth and
trade cost declines, while the overwhelming majority of trade growth between Asia/Oceania and
Europe is related to trade cost declines. The former result is consistent with the fact that the
majority of European communication and transport infrastructure was in place well before 1870
and that a “tariff backlash” in Europe increased trade costs (Jacks, Meissner, and Novy, 2009).
The latter result is consistent with the idea that core-periphery trade between 1870 and 1913 was
subject to much more radical changes: the expansion of trading networks through pro-active
marketing strategies in new markets, the development of new shipping lines, and better internal
communications.
For 1950 to 2000, the results for trade within Europe are reversed: intra-European trade is
now in the lead at 633 percent, while intra-American growth lags at 363 percent. European trade
growth is again equally associated with output growth and trade cost declines, whereas in all
other regions changes in output clearly dominate. The results for the Americas are consistent
with the evidence on trade costs documented above in light of South America’s drive to selfsufficiency under import-substituting industrialization.
Finally, the role of trade costs is dominant in the interwar period. Based on output growth
alone, one would have expected world trade volumes to increase by 88 percent. The fact that
they failed to budge underlines the critical role of commercial policy, the collapse of the gold
standard, and the lack of commercial credit in determining trade costs at the time. Yet again, the
interwar trade bust was anything but uniform: there was impressive trade growth between the
Americas and Asia/Oceania of 48 percent set against an actual contraction of trade between the
Americas and Europe of 45 percent. Output growth dominates trade costs in the case of the
Americas and Asia/Oceania. The opposite is true in the case of the Americas and Europe. Indeed,
the increase in trade costs implies that barring output growth trade between the two would have
ground to an absolute halt.
Figure 5 concentrates on the full sample and further disaggregates the sub-periods to the
decadal level. It helps to more clearly illustrate the forces at work in the interwar period: whereas
the 1920s witnessed significant and mainly output-related expansion in trade volumes, the 1930s

22

gave rise to a demonstrable trade bust in the context of positive, albeit meager output growth. In
this sense, the 1930s share with the 1980s and 1990s the distinction of being the only periods in
which output growth outstrips trade growth. In contrast, the 1870s and the 1970s are the periods
in which the relative contribution of trade cost declines to world trade growth was at its greatest.

VII. Conclusion

In this paper, we have attempted to answer the question of what has driven trade booms
and trade busts in the past 130 years. Our results assign an overarching role for trade costs in the
nineteenth century trade boom and the interwar trade bust. In contrast, when explaining the postWorld War II trade boom, we identify a more muted role for trade costs.
Thus, the role of trade costs in explaining trade has, if anything, diminished over the long
run. Prior to World War II, eliminating the physical costs of distance and improving information
seem to have mattered more than economic growth. Over the past fifty years, trade has
increasingly sustained its growth due to economic expansion, and this process seems to have had
a bigger impact than the transportation and communications revolutions of the last several
decades. Unlocking the sources of this reversal remains for future work.
Another contribution of this paper has been—both in terms of theory and data—to
consistently and comprehensively track changes in bilateral trade costs by using a newly
compiled dataset on aggregate bilateral trade. The gravity model has been successful in the past,
especially in providing estimates of the marginal impact of a range of trade costs. We build on
this success to show how a large variety of general equilibrium models of international trade can
be used to calculate a trade cost wedge akin to the Solow residual in growth models or the ‘labor
wedge’ used in structural macro-labor models (e.g., Robert Shimer, 2009).
We have also been able to relate this trade cost measure to proxies suggested by the
literature such as geographical distance and tariffs, confirming its reliability. Further work might
investigate more closely other properties of the trade cost measure. Promising avenues for
research include augmenting the list of trade cost proxies and studying their impact on trade
costs, detailed case studies for particular countries to better illuminate the nature of trade costs,
addressing the model uncertainty that surrounds the trade cost function, and studying the
implications of vertical specialization for the relationship between trade costs and aggregate
trade volumes. This is obviously not an exhaustive list but it should highlight one aspect: the

23

determinants of bilateral trade frictions are still poorly understood. This is problematic since
trade costs may be as important as the traditional determinants of trade, if not more important.
Further work on international trade—no matter the period—can no longer ignore these
fundamental factors.

24

Appendix I: Data Sources
Bilateral trade: Converted into real 1990 U.S. dollars using the U.S. CPI deflator in Officer,
Lawrence H. 2008, “The Annual Consumer Price Index for the United States, 1774-2007” and
the following sources:

Annuaire Statistique de la Belgique. Brussels: Ministère de l'intérieur.
Annuaire Statistique de la Belgique et du Congo belge. Brussels: Ministère de l'intérieur.
Annual Abstract of Statistics. London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
Barbieri, Katherine. 2002. The Liberal Illusion: Does Trade Promote Peace? Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Bloomfield, Gerald T. 1984. New Zealand, A Handbook of Historical Statistics. Boston: G.K.
Hall.
Canada Yearbook. Ottawa: Census and Statistics Office.
Confederación Española de Cajas de Ahorros. 1975. Estadisticas Basicas de España 1900-1970.
Madrid: Maribel.
Direction of Trade Statistics. Washington: International Monetary Fund.
Historisk Statistik för Sverige. 1969. Stockholm: Allmänna förl.
Johansen, Hans Christian. 1985. Dansk Historisk Statistik 1814-1980. Copenhagen: Gylendal.
Ludwig, Armin K. 1985. Brazil: A Handbook of Historical Statistics. Boston: G.K. Hall.
Mitchell, Brian R. 2003a. International Historical Statistics: Africa, Asia, and Oceania 17502000. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Mitchell, Brian R. 2003b. International Historical Statistics: Europe 1750-2000. New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Mitchell, Brian R. 2003c. International Historical Statistics: The Americas 1750-2000. New
York: Palgrave Macmillan.
National Bureau of Economic Research-United Nations World Trade Data.
Ruiz, Elena Martínez. 2006. “Las relaciones economicas internacionales: guerra, politica, y
negocios.” In La Economía de la Guerra Civil. Madrid: Marcial Pons, pp. 273-328.
Statistical Abstract for British India. Calcutta: Superintendent Government Printing.
Statistical Abstract for the British Empire. London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
Statistical Abstract for the Colonies. London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
Statistical Abstract for the Principal and Other Foreign Countries. London: Her Majesty’s
Stationery Office.
Statistical Abstract for the Several Colonial and Other Possessions of the United Kingdom.
London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
Statistical Abstract for the United Kingdom. London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
Statistical Abstract of the United States. Washington: Government Printing Office.
Statistical Abstract Relating to British India. London: Eyre and Spottiswoode.
Statistical Yearbook of Canada. Ottawa: Department of Agriculture.
Statistics Bureau Management and Coordination Agency. 1987. Historical Statistics of Japan,
vol. 3. Tokyo: Japan Statistical Association.
Statistisches Reichsamt. 1936. Statistisches Handbuch der Weltwirtschaft. Berlin.
Statistisk Sentralbyrå. 1978. Historisk statistikk. Oslo.
Tableau général du commerce de la France. Paris: Imprimerie royale.
Tableau général du commerce et de la navigation. Paris: Imprimerie nationale.
Tableau général du commerce extérieur. Paris: Imprimerie nationale.
25

Year Book and Almanac of British North America. Montreal: John Lowe.
Year Book and Almanac of Canada. Montreal: John Lowe.
Fixed exchange rate regimes: Meissner and Nienke Oomes. 2009. “Why Do Countries Peg the
Way They Peg?” Journal of International Money and Finance 28(3), 522-547.
GDP: Maddison, Angus. 2003. The World Economy: Historical Statistics. Paris: Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Distance: Measured as kilometers between capital cities. Taken from indo.com

26

Appendix II: The Reliability of the Trade Cost Measure
Trade costs versus gravity residuals: In a further attempt to establish the reliability of our trade
cost measure, we present the results of comparing it to the residuals of a very general gravity
equation. Bilateral trade can be attributed to factors in the global trading environment that affect
all countries proportionately—for instance, global transportation and technology shocks;
characteristics of individual countries—for instance, domestic productivity; and factors at the
bilateral level including bilateral trade costs. To this end, we estimate the following regression
equation:

(A.1) ln( xijt x jit ) = δ t + α it + α jt + ε ijt ,
The first term captures factors in the global trading environment which affect all countries
proportionately, while the second and third terms capture characteristics of individual countries
over time. The residual term absorbs all country-pair specific factors including trade costs.
The correlation between the logged values of our trade cost measure and these residuals
is consistently high: -0.64 for the period from 1870 to 1913; -0.62 for the period from 1921 to
1939; and -0.53 for the period from 1950 to 2000. The correlation has the expected (negative)
sign. For example, if Germany and the Netherlands experience a particularly large volume of
trade in a given year relative to past values or contemporaneous values for a similar country
pair—say, Germany and Belgium—then the residual should be positive as the linear projection
from the coefficients will underpredict the volume of trade between Germany and the
Netherlands for this particular year. The primary means by which trade is stimulated in our
model, holding all else constant, would be a lowering of bilateral trade costs. Thus, relatively
higher trade volumes should be associated with lower trade costs.
Figures A.1 through A.3 plot the trade costs measure against the residuals from
regression (A.1). Naturally, the magnitudes are different, but with appropriate adjustment of the
scale it is clear that the correspondence between the two series is high, albeit not perfect.
Figure A.1: Residuals versus trade costs, 1870-1913

10.0

7.5

5.0

Residuals

2.5

0.0

-2.5

-5.0

-7.5

-10.0
-2.0

-1.5

-1.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

Trade costs (logged)

27

Figure A.2: Residuals versus trade costs, 1921-1939

10.0

7.5

5.0

Residuals

2.5

0.0

-2.5

-5.0

-7.5

-10.0
-2.0

-1.5

-1.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

1.0

1.5

2.0

Trade costs (logged)

Figure A.3: Residuals versus trade costs, 1950-2000

10.0

7.5

5.0

Residuals

2.5

0.0

-2.5

-5.0

-7.5

-10.0
-2.0

-1.5

-1.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

Trade costs (logged)

Measurement error: The trade cost measure in equation (6) is computed on the basis of
historical trade data. It might be a concern that these trade data are subject to measurement error,
especially in the earlier period. Suppose that measurement error u enters the trade data as
follows: ln xij = ln xij* + uij for all i,j where xij* is the true trade flow value for pair i, j.

( )

( )

Based on equation (4) we allow for a stochastic element that can reflect measurement
error by running the following regression:
⎛ xijt x jit ⎞
⎟ = δ t + α ijs + ε ijt .
(A.2) ln⎜⎜
⎟
x
x
⎝ iit jjt ⎠
It follows from the measurement error specification that ε ijt = uijt + u jit − uiit − u jjt . The first term
on the right-hand side of equation (A.2) represents annual time dummies. The second term
denotes a set of country-pair fixed effects. Equation (4) implies that these country-pair fixed
effects correspond to the trade cost parameters, (tijtji)/(tiitjj), multiplied by (1-σ). As trade costs are
likely to change over time, we allow the fixed effects to be time-varying. As annual fixed effects

28

would leave no degrees of freedom, we choose quinquennial variation instead (denoted by the s
subscript). Other subperiod lengths, say, biennial or decadal, would also be possible but would
lead to similar results. As the final step, we generate predicted values for the dependent variable
of regression (A.2) based on the estimated coefficients, and then we construct a predicted trade
∧

cost measure, τ ijt , based on equation (6). By construction the predicted measure strips out
measurement error as it does not include the regression residual that corresponds to εijt.
We run regression (A.2) for all available observations that involve the U.S. and Canada,
including those during the world wars (4137 observations). Standard errors are robust and
clustered around country pairs. The resulting regression has a high R-squared in excess of 95
percent. In Figure A.4 we plot the actual trade cost measure, τijt, based on σ=8 for the U.S.Canadian case against its predicted counterpart. We also plot the 99 percent confidence intervals
around the predicted measure (computed with the delta method). The actual and predicted trade
cost measures are generally not significantly different. We therefore deem it unlikely that
measurement error severely distorts our trade cost measure. The confidence intervals are
somewhat wider for the first half of the sample with clear spikes in the vicinity of World War II,
suggesting more measurement error in the early period, but they are very tight after 1950.

Figure A.4: Actual and predicted trade cost measures

0

.25

.5

.75

1

1.25

U.S.-Canada, 1870-2000

1870

1890
Actual

1910

1930
Predicted

1950

1970

1990

99 percent confidence intervals

Gravity based on equation (4): In this robustness test we present estimates by sub-period for
the underlying gravity model used in our decomposition exercise. Equation (4) can be rewritten
as:
⎛t t ⎞
(A.3) ln( xij x ji ) = ln( xii ) + ln( x jj ) + (1 − σ ) ln ⎜ ij ji ⎟
⎜ tii t jj ⎟
⎝
⎠

29

To estimate this equation, we substitute for the trade cost function from equation (12), add year
fixed effects and a white noise error term at the country-pair year level. Results are provided in
Table A.1. The R-squareds are excellent, never explaining less than 99 percent of the variance.
The signs of the coefficients on the trade cost proxies are as expected from Table 2. In the postWorld War II period, and the interwar period, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the
coefficients on the size terms are equal to one. In the pre-World War I period, we cannot reject
the hypothesis that the size term for country j is one but we do so for country i. This result could
easily be due to the weakness in the GDP data in that period. In any case, when we form the log
of product of the size terms in this period, the estimated coefficient is 1.167 and we cannot reject
the hypothesis that this coefficient is one (p-value = 0.23). The main message is that the gravity
equation above, which is consistent with all the models explored earlier, is reliable and provides
a good basis for the decomposition exercise.

Table A.1: Gravity Based on Equation (4)
Dependent variable: ln(xijxji)

ln (xii)
ln (xjj)
ln (Distance)
Fixed exchange rate regime
Common language
Imperial membership
Shared border
Observations
R-squared
Test ln (xii) = 1 (p-value)
Test ln (xjj) = 1 (p-value)

1870-1913
Std.
Coefficient
Err.
1.59
0.19
0.69
0.20
-1.16
0.23
1.73
0.37
0.14
0.75
2.61
1.33
1.92
0.69

1921-1939
Std.
Coefficient
Err.
1.02
0.12
1.08
0.15
-0.65
0.18
1.47
0.29
1.18
0.54
0.47
1.11
0.88
0.51

1950-2000
Std.
Coefficient
Err.
1.11
0.10
1.20
0.12
-1.67
0.13
1.75
0.43
0.96
0.43
0.17
0.83
0.68
0.53

5709
0.99
0.00
0.17

2470
0.99
0.87
0.62

6628
0.99
0.27
0.11

NB: Year fixed effects not reported; robust standard errors; bold values significant at the 1% level.

30

Appendix III: Sensitivity to Parameter Assumptions

This appendix is intended to demonstrate that our results are not highly sensitive to the
assumed value of the elasticity of substitution in our model—or alternatively, the Fréchet and
Pareto parameters in the Eaton and Kortum (2002) and Chaney (2008) models. The relative
ordering of trade costs is stable across all dyads with respect to uniform changes of the elasticity
of substitution. Our reported regression and decomposition results are also strongly robust to
shifts in this parameter.
To demonstrate this property, we recalculate our trade cost measure using three distinct
values of the elasticity of substitution which roughly span the range suggested by Anderson and
van Wincoop (2004), namely six, eight (our preferred value), and ten. In Figure A.5, bilateral
trade costs between Canada and the United States are plotted for the years from 1870 to 2000
with all values normalized to 1870=100. The three series are highly correlated. What is more, the
proportional changes in the series are very similar: the cumulative drop from 1870 to 2000 is
calculated at 53% when sigma equals six versus 48% when sigma equals ten.
Figure A.5: Bilateral Trade Costs,
Canada and the United States, 1870-2000 (1870=100)
110

100

90

80

70

60

50

Sigma=6

Sigma=8

2 00 0

1 99 5

1 99 0

1 98 5

1 98 0

1 97 5

1 97 0

1 96 5

1 96 0

1 95 5

1 95 0

1 94 5

1 94 0

1 93 5

1 93 0

1 92 5

1 92 0

1 91 5

1 91 0

1 90 5

1 90 0

1 89 5

1 89 0

1 88 5

1 88 0

1 87 5

1 87 0

40

Sigma=10

Another concern may be that sigma is changing over time. To explore that possibility, we
consider two scenarios, one where sigma is smoothly trending upwards over time and one where
sigma is smoothly trending downwards over time. Although differences in the level of trade
costs naturally emerge, the proportionate changes over time are once again very similar. Figure
A.6 demonstrates this graphically by considering the annual change in logged bilateral trade
costs for Canada and the United States for the years from 1870 to 2000.

31

Figure A.6: Annual Change in Logged Bilateral Trade Costs,
Canada and the United States, 1870-2000
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
-0.02
-0.04
-0.06
-0.08

Constant sigma (8)

Sigma trending upwards from 6 to 10

1 99 5

1 99 0

1 98 5

1 98 0

1 97 5

1 97 0

1 96 5

1 96 0

1 95 5

1 95 0

1 94 5

1 94 0

1 93 5

1 93 0

1 92 5

1 92 0

1 91 5

1 91 0

1 90 5

1 90 0

1 89 5

1 89 0

1 88 5

1 88 0

1 87 5

1 87 0

-0.10

Sigma trending downwards from 10 to 6

32

References
Accominotti, Olivier and Marc Flandreau. 2006. “Does Bilateralism Promote Trade? Nineteenth
Century Liberalization Revisited.” Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion
Paper 5423.
Anderson, James E. 1979. “A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation.” American
Economic Review 69(1): 106-116.
Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop. 2003. “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the
Border Puzzle.” American Economic Review 93(1): 170-192.
Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop. 2004. “Trade Costs.” Journal of Economic
Literature 42(3): 691-751.
Baier, Scott L. and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand. 2001. “The Growth of World Trade: Tariffs,
Transport Costs and Income Similarity.” Journal of International Economics 53(1): 1-27.
Baldwin, Richard E. and Daria Taglioni. 2007. “Trade Effects of the Euro: A Comparison of
Estimators.” Journal of Economic Integration 22(4): 780-818.
Bergstrand, Jeffrey H. 1985. “The Gravity Equation in International Trade: Some
Microeconomic Foundations and Empirical Evidence.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 67(4): 474-481.
Bergstrand, Jeffrey H. 1989. “The Generalized Gravity Equation, Monopolistic Competition, and
the Factor-Proportions Theory in International Trade.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 71(1): 143-153.
Bergstrand, Jeffrey H. 1990. “The Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson Model, the Linder Hypothesis
and the Determinants of Bilateral Intra-industry Trade.” Economic Journal 100(6): 12161229.
Berthelon, Matias and Caroline Freund. 2008. “On the Conservation of Distance in International
Trade.” Journal of International Economics 75(2): 310-310.
Brown, John C. 1995. “Imperfect Competition and Anglo-German Trade Rivalry: Markets for
Cotton Textiles before 1914.” Journal of Economic History 55(3): 494-527.
Carrère, Celine and Maurice Schiff. 2005. “On the Geography of Trade: Distance is Alive and
Well.”
Revue Economique 56(6): 1249-1274.
Chaney, Thomas. 2008. “Distorted Gravity.” American Economic Review 98(4): 1707-1721.
Chernyshoff, Natalia, David S. Jacks, and Alan M. Taylor. 2009. “Stuck on Gold: Real
Exchange Rate Volatility and the Rise and Fall of the Gold Standard, 1875-1939.”
Journal of International Economics 77(2): 195-205.
Clemens, Michael A. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2001. “A Tariff-Growth Paradox? Protection’s
Impact the World Around 1875-1997.” NBER Working Paper 8459.
Deardorff, Alan V. 1998. “Determinants of Bilateral Trade: Does Gravity Work in a Neoclassical
World?” In Jeffrey A. Frankel (Ed.), The Regionalization of the World Economy.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Disdier, Anne-Célia and Keith Head. 2008. “The Puzzling Persistence of the Distance Effect on
Bilateral Trade.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90(1): 37-48.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel S. Kortum. 2002. “Technology, Geography, and Trade.”
Econometrica 70(4): 1741-1780.
Eichengreen, Barry and Douglas A. Irwin. 1995. “Trade Blocs, Currency Blocs, and the
Reorientation of World Trade in the 1930s.” Journal of International Economics 38(1):
1-24.

33

Estevadeordal, Antoni, Brian Frantz, and Alan M. Taylor. 2003. “The Rise and Fall of World
Trade, 1870-1939.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(2): 359-407.
Evenett, Simon J. and Wolfgang Keller. 2002. “On Theories Explaining the Success of the
Gravity Equation.” Journal of Political Economy 110(2): 281-316.
Feenstra, Robert C., James R. Markusen, and Andrew K. Rose. 2001. “Using the Gravity
Equation to Differentiate Among Alternative Theories of Trade.” Canadian Journal of
Economics 34(2): 430-447.
Findlay, Ronald and Kevin H. O’Rourke. 2007. Power and Plenty. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Grossman, Gene M. 1998. Comment. In: The Regionalization of the World Economy. Jeffrey
Frankel (Ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 29-31.
Head, Keith and Thierry Mayer. 2009. “Illusory Border Effects: Distance Mismeasurement
Inflates Estimates of Home Bias in Trade.” In Peter van Bergeijk and Steven Brakman
(Eds.), The Gravity Model in International Trade: Advances and Applications.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Head, Keith, Thierry Mayer, and John Ries. 2008. “The Erosion of Colonial Trade Linkages
After Independence.” Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper 6951.
Head, Keith and John Ries. 2001. “Increasing Returns Versus National Product Differentiation
as an Explanation for the Pattern of US-Canada Trade.” American Economic Review
91(4): 858-876.
Helpman, Elhanan. 1987. “Imperfect Competition and International Trade: Evidence from
Fourteen Industrial Countries.” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies
1(1): 62-81.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein. 2008. “Estimating Trade Flows:
Trading Partners and Trading Volumes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(2): 441487.
Hummels, David L. 2007. “Transportation Costs and International Trade in the Second Era of
Globalization.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(3): 131-154.
Hynes, William, David S. Jacks, and Kevin H. O’Rourke. 2009. “Commodity Market
Disintegration in the Interwar Period.” NBER Working Paper 12602.
Jacks, David S., Christopher M. Meissner, and Dennis Novy. 2009. “Trade Costs in the First
Wave of Globalization.” Explorations in Economic History, forthcoming.
Jacks, David S. and Krishna Pendakur. 2009. “Global Trade and the Maritime Transport
Revolution.” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
López-Córdova, J. Ernesto and Christopher M. Meissner. 2003. “Exchange-Rate Regimes and
International Trade: Evidence from the Classical Gold Standard Era.” American
Economic Review 93(1): 344-353.
Maddison, Angus. 2003. The World Economy: Historical Statistics. Paris: Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development.
Madsen, Jakob B. 2001. “Trade Barriers and the Collapse of World Trade during the Great
Depression.” Southern Economic Journal 67(4): 848-868.
Manova, Kalina. 2008. “Credit Constraints, Equity Market Liberalizations and International
Trade.” Journal of International Economics 76(1): 33-47.
Melitz, Marc J. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity.” Econometrica 71(6): 1695-1725.

34

Melitz, Marc J. and Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano. 2008. “Market Size, Trade, and Productivity.”
Review of Economic Studies 75(1): 295-316.
Mitchener, Kris James and Marc D. Weidenmier. 2008. “Trade and Empire.” Economic Journal
118(533): 1805-1834.
Novy, Dennis. 2009. “Gravity Redux: Measuring International Trade Costs with Panel Data.”
Unpublished working paper, University of Warwick.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2000. “The Six Major Puzzles in International
Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?” In Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth S.
Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual. Cambridge: MIT Press.
O’Rourke, Kevin H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1999. Globalization and History. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Shimer, Robert. 2009. “Convergence in Macroeconomics: The Labor Wedge.” American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(1): 280-297.
Silva, João M.C. and Silvana Tenreyro. 2006. “The Log of Gravity.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 88(4): 641-658.
Temin, Peter. 1997. “Two Views of the British Industrial Revolution.” Journal of Economic
History 57(1): 63–82.
Whalley, John and Xian Xin. 2009. “Regionalization, Changes in Home Bias, and the Growth of
World Trade.” Journal of Policy Modeling, forthcoming.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. 2006. Globalization and the Poor Periphery before 1950. Cambridge:
MIT Press.

35

Table 1: Summary Statistics

Bilateral trade
GDP
Distance
Exchange rate volatility
Common language
Imperial membership
Shared border

N
11429
11429
11429
11429
11429
11429
11429

1870-1913
Mean
Std. Dev.
18.06
2.23
20.85
1.74
8.04
1.19
0.50
0.50
0.16
0.37
0.10
0.30
0.12
0.32

N
4940
4940
4940
4940
4940
4940
4940

1921-1939
Mean
Std. Dev.
18.81
1.59
22.38
1.61
8.04
1.19
0.22
0.41
0.16
0.37
0.09
0.29
0.12
0.32

N
13256
13256
13256
13256
13256
13256
13256

1950-2000
Mean
Std. Dev.
20.45
1.80
25.13
1.93
8.04
1.19
0.08
0.28
0.16
0.37
0.09
0.29
0.12
0.32

36

Table 2: Gravity in Three Eras of Globalization
Dependent variable: log of bilateral exports from i to j
Panel A: With country fixed effects

GDP
Distance
Fixed exchange rate regime
Common language
Imperial membership
Shared border
Observations
R-squared

1870-1913
Coefficient
Std .Err.
0.70
0.02
-0.31
0.02
0.45
0.04
0.48
0.04
1.66
0.07
1.01
0.04
11429
0.6418

Panel B: With country-specific annual fixed effects
1870-1913
Coefficient
Std .Err.
GDP
Distance
-0.38
0.02
Fixed exchange rate regime
0.79
0.06
Common language
0.38
0.05
Imperial membership
1.46
0.08
Shared border
1.09
0.05
Observations
R-squared

***
***
***
***
***
***

11429
0.6445

***
***
***
***
***

1921-1939
Coefficient
Std .Err.
0.82
0.02
-0.15
0.02
0.17
0.03
0.32
0.05
0.65
0.08
1.00
0.04

***
***
***
***
***
***

1950-2000
Coefficient
Std .Err.
0.80
0.01
-0.65
0.01
0.33
0.03
0.19
0.03
0.59
0.05
0.65
0.02

4940
0.6806

13256
0.8380

1921-1939
Coefficient
Std .Err.
-0.20
0.03
0.36
0.07
0.21
0.06
0.35
0.10
1.09
0.06

1950-2000
Coefficient
Std .Err.
-0.69
0.01
0.64
0.04
0.19
0.04
0.33
0.05
0.72
0.03

***
***
***
***
***

4940
0.6243

***
***
***
***
***
***

***
***
***
***
***

13256
0.7939

NB: Country and year fixed effects not reported; robust standard errors; *** significant at the 1% level.

37

Table 3: Determinants of Trade Costs in Three Eras of Globalization
Dependent variable: log of bilateral trade costs separating i and j

Distance
Fixed exchange rate regime
Common language
Imperial membership
Shared border
Observations
R-squared

Pooled
Coefficient
Std .Err.
0.13
0.00
-0.03
0.01
-0.11
0.01
-0.28
0.01
-0.26
0.01
14807
0.6502

***
***
***
***
***

1870-1913
Coefficient
Std .Err.
0.11
0.01
-0.08
0.01
-0.14
0.01
-0.46
0.02
-0.29
0.01

***
***
***
***
***

5709
0.7251

1921-1939
Coefficient
Std .Err.
0.06
0.01
-0.04
0.01
-0.08
0.01
-0.20
0.02
-0.26
0.01
2470
0.6989

***
***
***
***
***

1950-2000
Coefficient
Std .Err.
0.17
0.00
-0.09
0.01
-0.08
0.01
-0.15
0.01
-0.22
0.01

***
***
***
***
***

6628
0.8242

NB: Country and year fixed effects not reported; robust standard errors; *** significant at the 1% level.

38

Table 4: Upper and Lower Bound Estimates of Percentage of Explained Variation in Trade Costs

Distance
Fixed exchange rate regime
Common language
Imperial membership
Shared border

1870-1913
Upper bound
Lower bound
0.1362
0.0191
0.0968
0.0033
0.0411
0.0044
0.0366
0.0276
0.1139
0.0224

1921-1939
Upper bound
Lower bound
0.1238
0.0143
0.0619
0.0012
0.0581
0.0026
0.0118
0.0063
0.0984
0.0367

1950-2000
Upper bound
Lower bound
0.4513
0.0668
0.0028
0.0024
0.0230
0.0017
0.0103
0.0043
0.2213
0.0178

39

Table 5: Decomposition of Trade Booms and Busts, 1870-2000

1870-2000

1870-1913

1921-1939

1950-2000

Full sample

(n = 130)

Contribution of growth
in output
(GDP weighted)
744%

+

Contribution of growth
in income similarity
(GDP weighted)
-16%

+

Contribution of change
in trade costs
(GDP weighted)
326%

+

Contribution of change
in multilateral factors
(GDP weighted)
-25%

=

Average growth of
international trade
(GDP weighted)
1029%

Americas
Asia/Oceania
Europe
Americas-Asia/Oceania
Americas-Europe
Asia/Oceania-Europe

(n = 6)
(n = 7)
(n = 56)
(n = 6)
(n = 35)
(n = 20)

886
610
590
832
808
601

+
+
+
+
+
+

14
51
23
-47
-56
28

+
+
+
+
+
+

162
436
330
511
281
386

+
+
+
+
+
+

-1
-24
-38
-28
-22
-30

=
=
=
=
=
=

1061
1074
904
1268
1011
985

Full sample

(n = 130)

225%

+

-11%

+

290%

+

-18%

=

486%

Americas
Asia/Oceania
Europe
Americas-Asia/Oceania
Americas-Europe
Asia/Oceania-Europe

(n = 6)
(n = 7)
(n = 56)
(n = 6)
(n = 35)
(n = 20)

331
105
177
281
273
146

+
+
+
+
+
+

0
29
-6
-48
-26
20

+
+
+
+
+
+

151
434
176
339
297
497

+
+
+
+
+
+

-19
-11
-23
-9
-18
-16

=
=
=
=
=
=

463
557
324
564
524
647

Full sample

(n = 130)

88%

+

4%

+

-87%

+

-6%

=

0%

Americas
Asia/Oceania
Europe
Americas-Asia/Oceania
Americas-Europe
Asia/Oceania-Europe

(n = 6)
(n = 7)
(n = 56)
(n = 6)
(n = 35)
(n = 20)

82
58
103
78
86
85

+
+
+
+
+
+

14
12
-2
6
7
1

+
+
+
+
+
+

-115
-36
-65
-37
-132
-50

+
+
+
+
+
+

9
0
-16
2
-6
-6

=
=
=
=
=
=

-10
34
20
48
-45
30

Full sample

(n = 130)

353%

+

8%

+

148%

+

-25%

=

484%

Americas
Asia
Europe
Americas-Asia
Americas-Europe
Asia-Europe

(n = 6)
(n = 7)
(n = 56)
(n = 6)
(n = 35)
(n = 20)

347
448
332
356
343
386

+
+
+
+
+
+

7
-14
7
29
5
2

+
+
+
+
+
+

16
-27
331
84
125
185

+
+
+
+
+
+

-7
-15
-38
-25
-23
-28

=
=
=
=
=
=

363
391
633
444
450
544

40

Figure 1: Sample Countries (in white)

41

Figure 2: Trade Cost Indices, 1870-1913 (1870=100)

145
135
125
115
105
95
85
75
65
55
45
1870
Americas

1880
Asia

Europe

1890
Americas-Asia

1900
Americas-Europe

1910
Asia-Europe

Average

42

Figure 3: Trade Cost Indices, 1921-1939 (1921=100)

145
135
125
115
105
95
85
75
65
55
45
1921
Americas

1925
Asia

Europe

1929
Americas-Asia

1933
Americas-Europe

1937
Asia-Europe

Average

43

Figure 4: Trade Cost Indices, 1950-2000 (1950=100)

145
135
125
115
105
95
85
75
65
55
45
1950
Americas

1960
Asia

1970
Europe

Americas-Asia

1980
Americas-Europe

1990
Asia-Europe

2000
Average

44

Figure 5: Trade Growth versus Output Growth (in %)

180

Trade growth
Output growth

120

60

0

-60
1870s

1880s

1890s

1900s

1910s

1920s

1930s

1940s

1950s

1960s

1970s

1980s

1990s

45

