NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COGNITION AND ECONOMIC OUTCOMES IN THE HEALTH AND RETIREMENT
SURVEY
John J. McArdle
James P. Smith
Robert Willis
Working Paper 15266
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15266

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2009

We would like to thank Iva MacLennan and David Rumpel for excellent programming assistance and
Finis Welch and Ian Walker for their insightful comments on earlier drafts. This research was supported
by grants (AG025529 and AG 008291) from the National Institute of Aging to the Rand Corporation,
to the University of Southern California (AG#07137) and to the University of Michigan (AG026571).
This paper was presented at the NBER conference on Economics of Aging in Carefree Arizona. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by John J. McArdle, James P. Smith, and Robert Willis. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Cognition and Economic Outcomes in the Health and Retirement Survey
John J. McArdle, James P. Smith, and Robert Willis
NBER Working Paper No. 15266
August 2009
JEL No. J0
ABSTRACT
Dimensions of cognitive skills are potentially important but often neglected determinants of the central
economic outcomes that shape overall well-being over the life course. There exists enormous variation
among households in their rates of wealth accumulation, their holdings of financial assets, and the
relative risk in their chosen asset portfolios that have proven difficult to explain by conventional demographic
factors, the amount of bequests they receive or anticipating giving, and the level of economic resources
of the household. These may be cognitively demanding decisions at any age but especially so at older
ages. This research examines the association of cognitive skills with wealth, wealth growth, and wealth
composition for people in their pre and post-retirement years.

John J. McArdle
USC College of Letters, Arts and Sciences
3551 Trousdale Pkwy.
Los Angeles, CA 90089-4012
mcardlej@verizon.net
James P. Smith
Labor and Pop Studies Program
The RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90406
smith@rand.org

Robert Willis
Health and Retirement Study
426 Thompson St., 3048 ISR
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
rjwillis@umich.edu

Dimensions of cognitive skills are potentially important but often neglected determinants
of the central economic outcomes that shape overall well-being over the life course. There exists
enormous variation among households in their rates of wealth accumulation, their holdings of
financial assets, and the relative risk in their chosen asset portfolios that have proven difficult to
explain by conventional demographic factors, the amount of bequests they receive or anticipating
giving (Smith, 1999), and the level of economic resources of the household (Smith, 1995). The
premium on cognitive skills in economic decision making may also be increasing as individuals
are increasingly asked to take greater control of or to adjust prior decisions relating to their
household wealth, their pensions, and their health care. These may be cognitively demanding
decisions at any age but especially so at older ages.
This research will examine the association of cognitive skills with wealth, wealth growth,
and wealth composition for people in their pre and post-retirement years. Our analysis will rely
on selective waves of the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS), a nationally representative panel
survey of Americans who are at least fifty years. This analysis will be supplemented by a
cognitive economics survey (Cog Econ) that measured several dimensions of cognition in more
depth.
HRS is well-known for its high quality measurement of many key SES outcomes;
including income and wealth (see Juster and Smith, 1997 and Juster, Smith, and Stafford, 1999).
In addition, HRS includes in some waves several salient dimensions of cognitive skills. These
cognition constructs start with immediate and delayed memory recall and the TICS battery as
these have been established psychometrically to capture cognitive constructs of episodic memory
and intact mental status (see McArdle, Fisher & Kadlec, 2007). Another key aspect of cognition
included in recent HRS waves is numeracy, a simple summary measure of respondents’

1

numerical ability. We also present data on two additional measures of numerical reasoning and
retrieval fluency, both recently introduced into the HRS as experimental modules, to examine if
these dimensions of cognition are associated with significant improvements in the ability of
cognition to predict economic outcomes.
The paper is organized into six sections. The next section presents the main conceptual
components of cognition that may potentially influence economic outcomes. The following
section describes the main data that we will use and the cognition variables available in the HRS.
The third section highlights results that are obtained relating individual attributes, including their
cognitive ability, to their total wealth, total financial wealth, and the fraction of wealth held in
stock. The next section contains complementary results obtained from the cognitive economics
survey (CogEcon), which has a more expansive list of cognitive variables. Section five widens
our focus by summarizing results obtained for joint spousal cognitive variables on the financial
outcomes of the household. This section includes models of who within the family becomes the
main financial decision-maker. The final section highlights our main conclusions.
1. Cognition and Economics
The mechanisms responsible for cognitive development over the life course that are
related to economic outcomes may be the long term result of many individual and group factors.
It is established that children exposed to very serious environmental deprivation show markedly
reduced cognitive abilities (Rutter, 1985), but detectable effects of normal-range environments
on cognitive ability are typically smaller. This is not surprising, given the large number of
environmental risk factors and the small effect expected for any particular factor, and that the
genetic contributions vary as well (Harden et al, 2007). Specific factors associated with lower
cognitive performance include low socioeconomic status, birth complications, poor early

2

nutrition, family conflict, and many others (Conger et al., 1994; Ramey et al. 2000).
In a classic analysis of data from the Berkeley Studies, Elder (1974) found that effects of
economic deprivation on adult functioning varied with gender and birth cohort. For males in the
older cohort (OGS, born 1920-22), being reared in a family with low SES during the Great
Depression was associated with higher resilience in adulthood compared to males reared in more
favorable circumstances. In contrast, for boys in the younger cohorts (BGS and GS, born 192830) being reared in economic adversity was associated with lower psychological functioning in
adulthood. These processes applied equally well to behavior of mothers and fathers, as well as
sons and daughters. Lee et al. (2003) investigated the relation of educational attainment,
husband's education, household income, and childhood socioeconomic status to cognitive
function and decline among community-dwelling women aged 70-79 years. Among welleducated women, educational attainment predicted cognitive function and decline, although other
measures of socioeconomic status had little relation.
Whatever the origin of adult cognitive skills, financial matters are often not
straightforward for most individuals and may depend in part on their ability to invoke several
dimensions of cognitive skills. One needs to be interested in economic problems and feel
comfortable in understanding the choices that are available amidst a wide array of options and
feel confident about the computations involved in contrasting alterative rates of return of
different assets often calculated over different time dimensions (Banks and Oldfield, 2007). This
may involve aspects of (a) retrieving relevant prior financial information from memory, (b) using
one’s accumulated knowledge and skills (Crystallized intelligence (Gc)), and (c) the ability to
draw inferences about what is the best solution to a novel problem (Fluid intelligence (Gf)); for
details, see Cattell, 1987; Horn & McArdle, 2007; McArdle & Woodcock, 1998).

3

A useful shorthand division of the principal dimensions of intelligence is to separate them
into fluid intelligence (Gf) and crystallized intelligence (Gc). Fluid intelligence is the thinking
part- memory, abstract reasoning, and executive function. In contrast, crystallized intelligence is
the knowing part- the main accumulation of influence from education and lifetime experience
(for more details, see McArdle, et al., 2002).
A parallel has been drawn between the psychological theory of fluid and crystallized
intelligence and economic theories of investment in human capital. In the formulation of Willis
(2007), based on the Ben-Porath human capital production function, fluid intelligence can be
thought of as the ability parameter and crystallized intelligence as the accumulated stock of
human capital. To be more concrete, the conceptual relationship between these aspects of
cognition and human capital knowledge might be summarized as
(1) Qt = B0 (st Kt) B1 Dt B2
In this model a production function relates the amount of learning or increments in
human capital (Qt) to ability (B0), investments from existing stock of human capital (Kt), and
purchased market inputs (Dt). Given its emphasis on ability to think and execute, fluid
intelligence (Gf) most closely corresponds to the ability parameter B0., In this production function
crystallized intelligence (Gc) role as a surrogate for accumulated knowledge is a close parallel to
the existing stock of human capital or knowledge (Kt). If we think of the output in equation (1) as
increments in knowledge about financial matters, elements of cognition that mimic Gf and Gc
will both affect this accumulation and affect financial outcomes. Of course, most everyday
cognitive tasks have elements of both fluid and crystallized intelligence so there is not yet an
established tight connection between cognitive measures and underlying parameters of the
production process.

4

In an insightful application, Delevande et al. (2008) consider an individual’s knowledge
of finance to be a component of human capital—or crystallized intelligence—that allows people
to achieve a higher expected return on their assets, holding risk constant. They assume that an
individual produces additional financial knowledge by combining his or her fluid intelligence or
ability, crystallized intelligence and effort according to a human capital production function (Ben
Porath, 1967; Cunha and Heckman, 2007). The motivation to acquire financial knowledge
depends on an important scale economy in this investment process. While increased knowledge
raises the feasible expected return per dollar, the total value of the investment depends on the
number of dollars to which the improved return is applied.
Thus, other things equal, the value of acquiring financial knowledge is higher for persons
who desire higher levels of retirement wealth because of a higher lifetime income, a lower rate of
time preference or lower defined benefit pension wealth. Similarly, investment will be greater
among persons who have lower costs or greater efficiency in acquiring additional knowledge
because of greater fluid intelligence or because they have more financial knowledge obtained in
their formal education or on-the-job.
Moreover, these issues may become increasingly salient as the population ages because
many aspects of these basic cognitive skills are known to begin to deteriorate from different
levels and at varying rates for individuals starting in middle age and often at even earlier ages.
Figure 1 plots a simple summary of these age patterns separating out life cycle paths of over
intelligence, as well as its fluid and crystallized intelligence components. As in other forms of
human capital, crystallized intelligence is believed by cognitive psychologists to grow rapidly
with age but at a decreasing rate plateauing somewhere in the age fifty age range. In contrast,

5

elements of fluid intelligence are believed to peak relatively early in life (during adolescence)
and then steadily decline with age thereafter.
Problems associated with declines in fluid intelligence with age may be compounded if
older individuals are asked to take more personal control of their accounts and the financial
decisions about their wealth holdings and its future trajectory (Hershey et al., 2007). It is possible
that the recent financial collapse may place even greater demands on the ability of individuals to
make good financial decisions about their wealth holdings in order to maintain income security
during their retirement years. For many of these individuals there was little reason to acquire
financial knowledge beforehand and they may now be left in a situation of relatively low levels
of Gc coupled with rapidly declining levels of Gf.
2. Data and Measures of Cognition in the Health and Retirement Survey
This research will rely on a sub-set of surveys from the Health and Retirement Study
(HRS), a nationally representative longitudinal survey of the population of the United States who
are over fifty years old. The overall objective of the HRS is to monitor economic transitions in
work, income, and wealth, as well as changes in many dimensions of health status among those
over 50 years old. The current version of HRS is representative of all birth cohorts born in 1947
or earlier. Follow-ups of all surveys have taken place at approximately two-year intervals.
In HRS, questions were included in each core interview on demographics, income and
wealth, family structure, health, and employment. An important advantage of these surveys is
that they all contain high-quality wealth modules. In HRS, a very comprehensive and detailed set
of questions was asked to measure household wealth. In addition to housing equity, assets were
separated into the following eleven categories; other real estate; vehicles; business equity; IRA

6

or Keogh; stocks or mutual funds; checking savings or money market funds; CD's, government
savings bonds or treasury bills; other bonds; other assets; and other debt.
The subsets of HRS that we used are dictated by the types and availability of cognition
measures in HRS (see Herzog & Wallace, 1997; Herzog & Rodgers, 1999; and Ofstedal et al.
2005). HRS cognition variables were intended to measure episodic memory, intactness of
mental status, numerical reasoning, broad numeracy, and vocabulary. More recent work indicates
that measures of cognitive speed can be obtained directly from the HRS, but these measures are
relatively new and not yet available for this research.
We rely on two memory measures- immediate and delayed word recall available in HRS
in every wave in the same form since 1995. Respondents are read a list of ten simple nouns and
are then asked to immediately repeat as many of these words as they can in any order. After a
five minute measurement of self-rated depression, they are then asked to recall as many of the
original words as possible.1 Following the analysis of McArdle et al. (2007), we form an episodic
memory measure as the average of immediate and delayed recalled results. Episodic memory
may be a necessary component of reasoning (both fluid and crystallized intelligence).
Our second cognitive measure is the mental status questions of the Telephone Interview
of Cognitive Status (TICS) battery established to capture intactness or mental status of
individuals. TICS questions consist of the following items-serial 7 subtraction from 100 (up to
five times), backwards counting (from 20 to 1), naming today’s date (month, day, year), and
naming the President and Vice-President of the United States. Answers to these questions are
aggregated into a single mental status score that ranges from 0 to 10. The same form of mental
status scores have been available since AHEAD 95 and HRS 96 (Herzog & Rodgers, 1999)

1

In HRS 92 and 94, the original set consisted of twenty words. The same word list is not repeated in the next three
subsequent rounds and husbands and wives were given a different list (see Ofstedal et al. 2005).

7

The third cognition measure available is a number series test adapted from the
Woodcock-Johnson (WJ-R) battery of tests for fluid reasoning (McArdle et al, 2007). This test
was administered in a 2004 experimental module to a random sample of over 1200 respondents.
This represented an attempt to achieve test scores from a subset of items from the number series
test of WJ III using an adaptive testing methodology. Each respondent was asked no more than
six items where the subsequent sequence of items at each point was determined by correctness of
each answer. This test was administered again in a 2006 experimental module where roughly
half of respondents who were tested in 2004 were tested again. Fifty percent of those given the
test in the 2006 experimental module had not been tested previously. For each respondent, a
score was created on the W-scale (logit metric) where higher scores indicate better performance.
Because this numerical reasoning test has not yet been placed in the HRS core, sample size is
smaller and statistical power may be fairly low. To mitigate these problems, we maximized
number of observations with a score by taking an available score from either the 2004 or 2006
experimental module if available. If respondents were tested twice, scores were averaged.
The forth measure deals with a WJ form of retrieval fluency, which was administered in
an experimental module in HRS 2006. Respondents were given a category and asked to mention
as many items as they could within a forty-five second time frame (shorter than the typical WJ
format). The number of correct and incorrect answers was counted by the interviewer.
Starting with HRS 2002 and then asked in alternative waves for repeat interviews, three
questions were added to the core interview to measure numeracy (respondents’ numerical
ability). These questions involve the computation of three mathematical computations and one is

8

scored as either correct or incorrect on each of them.2 Four scores are possible running from zero
to three depending on the number of correct answers.
Thus there are five different measures of cognition available in the HRS that we use in
this analysis. While the episodic memory, mental status, and numeracy are available in multiple
core waves in the same form, the other two measures are in an experimental module in a specific
wave (number series and retrieval fluency). This form of availability determines the types of
analysis that are possible with the full cognition measures.
A very simple schematic of the translation of these HRS cognition measures into the Gf
and Gc components of intelligence is provided below. Episodic memory is a very general
measure of an important aspect of fluid intelligence since access to memory is basic to any type
of cognitive ability. Most of the HRS variation in this measure is picking out the low end- people
with bad memory. Similarly, fluid reasoning, as captured by the number series, is perhaps our
best measure of Gf for numerical ability skills most relevant for financial decision-making.
Numeracy, the actual ability to perform numerical skills mostly learned in schools, represents our
preferred measure of Gc for numbers. Retrieval fluency is possibly another proxy for Gc since it
measures our retrieval of elements of accumulated knowledge although in this application it
captures the retrieval of verbal knowledge (eg. the number of animals one can name in forty-five
seconds) and not financial knowledge. We will deal with the ability to retrieve financial
knowledge, a broader measure of math achievement, and general intelligence when we discuss
the cognitive economics survey (CogEcon) survey below. Finally, the TICS score contains

2

Another cognition measure is only available for the original cohort of HRS (those 51-61 years old in 1992) and
was a one time measure. In HRS 92, a modified version of the Similarities subscale of the Wechsler Adult
Intelligence Scale revised (WAIS-R). This was used to access higher level abstract reasoning by comparing a list of
seven pairs of words and then describing how they were alike.

9

elements of both Gf and Gc- cognitive skills needed for everything but specific to nothing. The
types of questions asked are not specific to the financial domains of life
Types of Cognition Measures Available in the Expanded HRS
•

Episodic Memory short term memory

•

Telephone Interview of Intact Cognitive Status (TICS) – Gf and Gc – needed for everything
but specific to nothing

•

Number Series- Fluid Reasoning close to Gf for numerical ability

•

Retrieval Fluency – Gc – ability to retrieve long term storage

•

Numeracy – Gc for numbers or quantitative ability – Gq

Additional Measures in CogEcon
•

Calculation- Gc- math achievement or general quantitative ability Gq

•

Matrix Reasoning- Gf – non verbal reasoning and general intelligence

•

Financial Literacy-Gc – knowledge of financial matters especially at the high end

The cognitive measures listed above are intended to indicate different aspects of the adult
cognitive profile (see McArdle et al., 2002). Prior research has suggested strong normative age
declines in most of these cognitive functions, but a hierarchy of cognitive strengths and
weakness of any individual are indicated in many aspects of adult daily functioning. At a most
basic level, the need for an intact neuro-cognitive system is thought to be necessary to deal with
everyday issues in communication and learning in the simple judgments needed for survival
(e.g., gathering food and water). At another step up in everyday complexity, the ability to
remember to complete tasks, to be able to react to simple stimuli, and the ability to deal with
simple numerical problems, are important skills in the consideration in successfully dealing with
everyday challenges (see Farias et al, 2008) Higher order aspects of cognitive skills, such as
having expertise in a specific area (i.e., Crystallized Intelligence), or in reasoning in novel

10

situations (i.e., Fluid Intelligence), will be necessary fundaments in the ability to deal with more
complex economic challenges (Hershey et al, 2007; McArdle et al, 2007).
As pointed out by Banks and Oldfield (2007), there are several credible reasons why
numeracy, a score representing knowledge about numerical problems, may be related to financial
outcomes. More numerate individuals may be more adept at complex decision-making including
those involved in financial decisions (Peters et al. 2006). More numerate individuals also appear
to be more patient and thus are more likely to have saved and invested in the past (Parker and
Fischhoff, 2005) and perhaps less risk averse (Benjamin et al, 2006).3
The use of more abstract reasoning with numbers, as in the simple number series puzzles,
is intended to represent a different form of cognition (i.e., fluid intelligence), and it is not clear
how these abilities are useful in the accumulation of wealth). Examining results from a 25-item
test of financial knowledge on the Cognitive Economics Survey, Delevande, Willis and
Rohwedder (2008) find that the number series score has a strong and significant effect on the test
score as does educational attainment and number of economics courses the respondent has had.4
In addition, they find that women, especially older women, have considerably lower test scores
than men, probably reflecting a household division of labor about household financial decisions
that was especially sharp in earlier cohorts. These ideas about the independent impact of
different forms of cognition are directly examined in this research.
3. Individual level Analysis in the HRS
In this section, we report our main empirical results describing the relation of these
dimensions of cognition to wealth accumulation among middle aged and older adults. Table 1
3

Reverse causality is possible where greater involvement in complex financial decisions improves numerical ability.
The Cognitive Economics Survey, designed by a team of economists led by Willis, was administered during 2008
to a national sample of 1,222 persons, age 51 and older and their spouses regardless of age who are participants in
the National Change and Growth Survey, a cognition survey designed by McArdle and colleagues (2002).
4

11

lists means, medians, and standard deviations of variables that enter into the statistical analysis.
Mean household wealth in this sample is about five hundred thousand dollars, but wealth has its
well-known features of high variability and skewness as the median is just under two hundred
thousand. Similarly, total financial wealth is around $313,000 and is even more highly skewed as
the median financial household wealth is only $56,000. On average, nine percent of all financial
wealth is held in stock. Mean household income is about sixty-two thousand dollars, but income
is also very unequal across these individuals but not as much as wealth is.
Two-thirds of these individuals live as couples, fifty-nine percent are female, and the
average age is 68 years old. In these birth cohorts, the typical sample member is a high school
graduate. Nine percent of the sample is Latino and 16 percent are African-American reflecting
over-samples of both groups in the HRS.
On average, HRS respondents remembered half of the ten words spoken to them in
immediate and delayed recall with two-thirds of the sample being able to recall between 3 and 7
words. HRS respondents were able to correctly compute only a bit more than one answer
correctly in the three question numeracy sequence. The experimental HRS measures of number
series and retrieval fluency are both calculated as W scores (McArdle & Woodcock, 1997). Each
W score is artificially centered at 500 based on the 10 year olds in the norming sample. The W
scoring metric is used so that the change in the probability of getting an item right increases by
twenty-five percent for every ten point change in the W score. In this W score metric, the
resulting average of number series and retrieval fluency are slightly below 500 and distribution
in scores are approximately normal.
We estimate models for three financial outcomes at the individual level: total household
wealth, total financial wealth, and the fraction of financial wealth held in stocks. These models

12

are estimated both in level form (in 2006) in Table 2.A and as changes from a year 2000 base in
Table 2.B. The estimated coefficients and associated ‘t’ statistics based on robust standard errors
are also listed in these Tables. Non-cognition variables included in these models are standard:
gender of the respondent (1= female), race (1= African-American), Hispanic (1=Latino), a
quadratic in age, marital status (married=1), a quadratic in household income, and years of
schooling. The only non-standard demographic variable is an indicator variable for whether the
respondent was the financial respondent- the partner who was most knowledgeable about
financial matters and who answered all household level financial questions in the HRS survey.
The full set of available cognition variables is included in all models. As described above,
some cognition variables such as number series and retrieval fluency are only present in
experimental modules and administered to about one thousand respondents in each wave. Other
cognition variables such as memory recall, mental status (TICS items), and numeracy were given
to all HRS respondents. Missing value indicators are included in all models for people who either
did not answer or who were not asked specific questions involved in the construction of the right
hand side variables. By design, the large proportion of missing values for the number series and
retrieval fluency measures in the experimental modules are missing at random.
Results obtained in the 2006 level analysis for non-cognitive variables, presented in
Table 2.A, are consistent with those widely reported in the literature (Smith, 1995). Wealth
levels, both total and financial, are higher for couples than for single person households, are
lower for minorities, increases at a decreasing rate with age, rises steeply with education and
with family income but with the latter at a decreasing rate. Individuals with higher education,
income, and wealth hold more of their financial wealth in stock while minorities hold less in this
more risky asset even at the same age, income, and wealth.

13

Our main interest in this paper centers on estimated impacts of cognitive variables. The
strongest and most consistent results obtained were for the numeracy and memory recall
cognition measures. Answering each question correctly in the three question numeracy sequence
is associated with a $20,000 increase in total household wealth and about a seven thousand dollar
increase in total financial wealth. Enhanced numeracy is also associated with a larger fraction on
the financial portfolio held in stocks. All these results are strongly statistically significant.
Similarly, improved episodic memory is associated with higher levels of household and
financial wealth but not with how risky (stock intensive) the financial asset portfolio is. While it
is difficult to compare units across cognitive measures, these results imply that remembering
three additional words in the word recall is associated with total household wealth equivalent to
answering one additional question correctly in the numeracy sequence. Our three other cognitive
measures- number series, TICS mental status, and retrieval fluency are not consistently related to
these financial outcomes. Part of the lack of statistical significance for number series and
retrieval fluency may well be due to the lower effective sample size for those measures.
The extreme degree of heterogeneity and right skewness in financial outcomes implies
that estimated mean effects may not characterize many individuals in the sample. With that
caution in mind, Table 3.A (for total household wealth) and Table 4.A (for total financial wealth)
lists estimates from quantile regressions, estimated for the first and third quartile, the median and
the 90th percentile. As expected, estimated effects of most of the non-cognitive variables increase
as we move up towards higher quantiles in the total wealth and non-financial wealth distribution.
Numeracy, the key cognitive variable identified in Table 2.A, behaves precisely this wayestimated impacts of numeracy increase as we move up the total wealth quantiles- from an
estimated impact of $2.6 K at the first quartile, to almost $12K for the median household, and

14

$52K at the 90th percentile. A similar pattern is found in Table 4.A when the outcome is total
financial wealth. The other key variable, episodic memory, does the same but at a far less
dramatic rate. Especially for total financial wealth, the estimated impacts of episodic memory are
fairly uniform across these percentiles. Compared to Numeracy, episodic memory may be
relatively more important at lower values in the wealth distribution.
The results summarized thus far pertain to wealth levels and composition in calendar year
2006. The panel nature of HRS allows us to examine the association of these cognition measures
with changes in wealth observed for individuals in the panel. Tables 2.B, 3.B, and 4.B list results
obtained from models where the outcome is the change between years 2006 and 2000 in total
wealth, total financial wealth, and the fraction of financial wealth held as stocks. All right hand
side variables are the same as in the level analysis, but a control is added for year 2000 total
household wealth or financial wealth depending upon the financial outcome under investigation.
Not surprisingly, estimated effects of all non-cognitive variables are similar to those
obtained from the 2006 level analysis but are much smaller in magnitude since now we are
predicting changes between the 2006 and 2000 HRS waves. In particular, numeracy and word
recall are consistency related to wealth increases over this six year period while the estimated
impacts of the other cognitive variables are quite weak. Answering each numeracy question
correctly is associated with an $8,000 increase in total household wealth.
4. Individual level Analysis in CogEcon
The data used in this section are the result of collaboration between the NCGS+HRS
Cognition Study and the Cognitive Economics Survey (CogEcon).5 A goal of NCGS+HRS is to
conduct detailed measurement, through telephone and personal interviewing, of cognitive
5

NCGS+HRS was led by McArdle and CogEcon was led by Willis The design, contents, and field
outcomes of CogEcon and NCGS+HRS surveys are described in detail in Fisher and Helppie (2009).

15

abilities of a sample of older Americans in the same 50-plus age range of the HRS by developing
data to help understand the cognitive bases of economic decision making. To do so, a detailed
questionnaire containing measures of wealth and portfolio allocation, self-rated and objective
measures of financial knowledge, measures of risk tolerance, use of financial advice and other
variables were administered by mail and internet survey to participants in the NCGS+HRS.
The combined NCGS+HRS/CogEcon data set provides a combination of psychological
and economic measurements on the same people with greater detail than any other data set.
The CogEcon survey invited 1,222 individuals members of the NCGS+HRS sample whose
cognitive ability were assessed in face-to-face interviews to participate in the CogEcon
mail/internet survey. Of these, 985 returned surveys implying a final response rate of 80.6%,
including age ineligible spouses. The Cog Econ sample consists of individuals who range in age
from 38 to 96 years, with a mean age of 64.0 years.
The telephone component of NCGS+HRS repeats HRS cognition measures (episodic
memory, mental status, numeracy and adaptive number series measure) used above. The
personal interview is an intensive three hour cognitive measurement of a large number of ability
components. These include number series, retrieval fluency, verbal analogies, spatial relations,
picture vocabulary, auditory working memory, visual matching, incomplete words, concept
formation, calculation, word attack from WJ-III (Woodcock & Mather, 2001), Vocabulary,
Block Design, Similarities, and Matrix Reasoning from the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale
(WAIS) plus a switching task) and a vigilance task (McArdle & Woodcock, 1998).
There are advantages and disadvantages of the CogEcon survey. The principal
disadvantage is that sample sizes are much lower than in the core HRS, and with outcomes as
heterogeneous as wealth that may lead to results that are less robust. The principal advantage is

16

that CogEcon is able to measure in far greater depth dimensions of cognition that may be
relevant to economic decision making including wealth accumulation. We view the HRS and
CogEcon as complimentary sources of relevant information.
Table 5 presents results for three regression prediction models of ln current wealth based
on data from the CogEcon survey (n=942). In all models, the same demographics- age
(quadratic), education, couple status, and income (quadratic)- as in the core HRS analysis are
included. These results uniformly show significant positive differences in wealth for persons
with increased income (up to a point; t>8), and for persons in intact couples, but no statistically
significant independent increments based on age or education. Education does increase wealth in
models where we delete all cognition variables.
In the first model in Table 5, these predictions are estimated in tandem with five
cognitive variables derived from the telephone testing alone, which also correspond to cognition
variables available in the core HRS. In these data, the five cognitive variables improved the
prediction with significant positive independent contributions of Episodic Memory (t>2),
Numeracy (t>2), and Mental Status (t>2), but neither Retrieval Fluency nor Number Series.
These results parallel reasonably well those found for the same set of cognitive constructs using
the HRS in Table 2.A.
The Number Series WJ-III test (WJ-III) used to measure Numerical Reasoning was
administered in two different forms. The face-to-face test is the standard WJ-III 47 item version
presented using standard WJ rules, with an expected internal consistency reliability of ric >.95
(Woodcock, et al., 2003). The telephone version is a much shorter adaptive form of the same
test, where up to six items are presented in 3-5 minutes (McArdle et al., 2009). The items chosen
are selected based on prior performances on earlier items (i.e., harder items are selected if the

17

participant has given correct answers earlier), with an expected internal consistency reliability of
ric >.85. In the CogEcon study (NGCS+HRS) the participants were administered the telephone
test first and then administered the face-to-face test in standard testing conditions from one to 14
days later. After taking into account some expect differences due to time-lags, the average testretest correlation was rtr>0.72 (McArdle et al., 2009).
The second model in Table 5.A substitutes the longer (and more reliable) face-to-face
Number Series test for the telephone version used in the first model. The face to face version of
the number series score now offers a strong incremental prediction (t>3), and reduces- but does
not eliminate- the estimated effects of numeracy and episodic memory..
In the third model of Table 5.A three new cognitive tests are added-calculation- matrix
reasoning, and mean financial literacy score. These tests are not currently available in the HRS.
WJ-III Calculation is a test of math achievement measuring the ability to perform mathematical
computations from Woodcock-Johnson Scales (Woodcock, et al., 2002) with an expected
internal consistency reliability of ric >.95. Initial items in Calculation require an individual to
write single numbers. The remaining items require a person to perform addition, subtraction,
multiplication, division, and combinations of these basic operations, as well as some geometric,
trigonometric, logarithmic, and calculus operations. The calculations involve negative numbers,
percents, decimals, fractions, and whole numbers. Because calculations are presented in a
traditional problem format in the Test Record form, the person is not required to make any
decisions about what operations to use or what data to include. Calculation is similar to
numeracy in intent in that they both attempt to measure aspects of Gc applied to numbers.
WASI Matrix Reasoning measures nonverbal fluid reasoning and general intellectual
ability from the abbreviated form of the Weschler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS-III, Wechsler,

18

1999). These 20 items require participants to looks at each set of symbols (arrayed in a vector or
matrix) with one missing location, and then they are asked to fill in “the best option for the
missing piece.” The person is not asked or required to make any decisions about reasons why
this choice is best. Given its use of abstract and spatial symbols, matrix reasoning can be thought
of as a dimension of Gf.
CogECON Financial Literacy/Financial Sophistication are 24 items (true/false and
confidence). These measures signify the belief that these questions have more sensitivity at the
“high” end of the scale (when compared to measures in HRS and many other surveys). These
questions have two versions each, one which is “true” and one which is “false,” but ask a very
similar question. True/false measures of financial sophistication are on a scale ranging from
100% to 50% confidence that the statement is “false,” and 50% to 100% confidence that the
statement is “true.” For example, the “true” version (Q17) is: “An investment advisor tells a 30year-old couple that $1,000 in an investment that pays a certain, constant interest rate would
double in value to $2,000 after 20 years. If so, that investment would be worth $4,000 in less
than 45 years.” The “false” version reads: “An investment advisor tells a 30-year-old couple that
$1,000 in an investment that pays a certain, constant interest rate would double in value to
$2,000 after 20 years. If so, that investment would not be worth $4,000 for at least 45 years.”
The italics are added to indicate parts of questions that differ. The respondent is instructed to
decide whether the statement is “true” or “false,” and to indicate their confidence in this answer.
In the third model in Table 5.A when these additional cognitive tests are added as
predictions, Matrix Reasoning is the strongest independent predictor (t>3), Financial Literacy is
next (t>2), but the Calculation test is not a statistically significant predictor. All statements about
tests of significance must contain the caveat of relatively small sample sizes in CogEcon.

19

Including measures of financial literacy in models of wealth accumulation is a bit odd.
Financial literacy is not manna from heaven enabling one to successfully navigate the
complicated and dangerous waters of financial success. Those with more an interest or
opportunity to invest in financial markets have more of an incentive to invest in acquiring the
knowledge of how to successfully operate in these markets or to become financially literate.
This view argues that models in Table 5.A have it all wrong and that financial literacy is an
outcome that should be studied. Table 5.B does just that by predicting levels of financial literacy
with the same set of personal attributes and set of cognitive variables discussed earlier.
Financial literacy increases with age and with income but at a decreasing rate and
increases with years of schooling. All these predictive effects are statistically significant. Once
again, intact mental status (the TICS score) and retrieval fluency appear to be aspects of
cognition that are not related to financial decision making. In contrast, all aspects of cognition
related to numerical ability-number series, numeracy, and calculation- are all strongly predictive
of better financial literacy. These results point to one possible pathway through which cognitive
ability related to numbers may promote wealth accumulation- making it easier to acquire
relevant financial knowledge. It also suggests that we may be over-controlling by including
financial literacy in the models in Table 5.A as this may suppress the effects of cognition. The
final model in Table 5.A removes the financial literacy variable. Estimated effects of both the
number series and calculation are increased by its removal.
These new results broadly highlight the fact that the individual cognition tests can add to
the individual level descriptive predictions of our basic understanding of differences in wealth.
There appear to be independent benefits of having both higher Financial Literacy (i.e., Gc) and
higher ability to reason in a non-quantitative fashion (i.e., Gf).

20

5. Spousal level Analysis in the HRS
One analytical advantage of HRS is that interviews are conducted with both spouses
and/or partners in the household. Thus, information is provided separately by both parties on
dimensions of their own cognition (the same ones measured in the core interview) alongside the
common household data on their wealth holdings and income and their own personal attributes.
This allows an examination of the extent to which cogitative attributes of both spouses predict
household wealth holdings and whether cognition of one spouse is more important than the other
at least for financial outcomes. To do so, a sample of married couples is used in this analysis.
Figure 2 plots total household wealth against numeracy scores of the husband and wife.
Household wealth increases sharply as either score rises with large differences between those
couples who achieve a perfect score compared to those who collectively get the lowest score of
zero correct answers. When both spouses answer all questions correctly, wealth is 1.7 million
dollars- when neither answer any question correctly household wealth is about two hundred
thousand dollars. Wealth tends to increase with a higher numeracy score of either spouse.
Table 6 examines the relationship of numeracy scores of both spouses with total
household and financial wealth, and the fraction of financial wealth held in stock. In this table,
for reasons that will be apparent below, data are arrayed by financial and non-financial
respondents. All three wealth outcomes increase sharply with numerical scores of both financial
and non-financial respondents. If both scores are zero (about ten percent of cases), total wealth is
two hundred thousand dollars. For families where both spouses get all numeracy questions
correct, total household wealth is more than eight times higher- 1.7 million dollars. Wealth is
higher when the numeracy scores of both financial and non-financial respondents are higher.

21

A similar but even more dramatic pattern exists for total financial wealth. For families
where both spouses score three on the numeracy question, financial wealth is ten times larger
than if both got all numeracy questions incorrect. There is a tendency for numeracy of the
financial respondent to matter more since in four of the six off-diagonal pairs, financial wealth is
larger if the higher numeracy score is that of the financial respondent. We will return to this issue
below when discussing model estimates.
Our final measure is the fraction of financial assets held in stocks where one may think a
priori that financial numeracy may matter more. Once again there is evidence of sharp increases
in the percent of the financial portfolio held in stocks as the numeracy score of each spouse rises.
One important issue is whether finances are related symmetrically to cognitive ability of
each spouse. In many households especially older ones in the HRS age range, there is almost
complete specialization in financial decision making with one spouse in charge of most of the
calls. In such a situation, one would think or hope that the cognitive ability of the financial
decision maker may matter more for household wealth outcomes. To investigate this possibility,
we arrayed the data for our all cognitive measures in two different ways in Table 7- by gender
and by the financially knowledgeable person in the household.
Consider the stratification by male and female or equivalently husband and wife. With
the exception of memory recall (higher for women), numeracy (higher for men) and to a lesser
extent number series (higher for men), average differences between the other cognitive measures
are all small. When we shift instead to comparison between financial and non-financial
respondents, there is a more pronounced shift in favor of the financial respondent with the sole
exception of retrieval fluency which is the same for both financial and non-financial respondents.

22

The bottom panel of Table 7 stratifies by gender and whether one is a financial
respondent. For women, there is little difference in cognitive scores between those who are and
are not financial respondents. In contrast, for men, and again with the exception of retrieval
fluency, male financial respondents appear to have higher cognitive ability than male nonfinancial respondents. One interpretation consistent with these data is that men are the default
option for financial decision-making in the family unless poor cognitive abilities get in the way.
Table 8 presents the correlation matrix of full set of cognitive variables for husbands and
wives. This table illustrates one current problem with cognitive variables available in HRS for
spousal level analysis. Cognitive variables in experimental modules only- number series and
retrieval fluency- are randomly assigned to only 1200 respondents. The probability that both
partners are assigned these cognitive modules is low, and relatively few HRS couples have them
for both partners. This spousal analysis is limited to the three cognitive measures in the core.
There are two salient patterns. First, when available, correlation in scores within gender
across cognitive measures is low and the correlation across husbands and wives within a
cognitive measure is also low. The only noticeable exception to that across spouses are mental
status (0.50) and to a lesser extent numeracy (0.23). Within person, episodic memory and
numeracy are correlated (0.57 for husbands and 0.43 for wives).
Table 9.A presents results for estimates of relationship between cognitive attributes of
both spouses and the three financial outcomes for the household. These models are estimated
over a sample of married couples. The other covariates include the same attributes included in
the individual model discussed above with the addition of an age quadratic for the spouse and
spousal education. Coefficients on the non-cognitive variables are similar to those discussed
above in the individual model and no new issues are raised in this couples sample.

23

Once again, there is scant evidence of any systematic relation for the TICS mental status
measure for either spouse. With the exception of total wealth measure (where estimate effects are
higher for non-financial respondents), word recall has similarly estimated impacts for both
financial and non-financial respondents. The critical distinction relates to our numeracy measure
where estimated effects for financial respondents are three times larger than numeracy of nonfinancial respondents. Consistent with the relative magnitude of these estimated impacts, the
evidence above indicated that families selected the spouse with the higher cognitive measure of
numeracy as the financial respondent.
Table 9.B contains the couple analysis when the outcome is the change in wealth between
2006 and 2000. For the two cognitive measures that matter-word recall and numeracy- estimated
impacts are once again much larger when it is a trait of the financial respondent. For total wealth,
the impact of numeracy of the financial respondent is seven times larger than numeracy of the
non-financial respondent.
Similar to the corresponding individual level models, Tables 10 and 11 presents quantile
models for total household wealth and total financial wealth for the couples’s sample. As before,
we find increasing impacts of numeracy as we move to higher percentiles in the wealth
distribution. This increase is even steeper for numeracy of the financial respondent implying that
the much lower estimated impact of numeracy for the non-financial respondent is particularly the
case at higher levels of wealth. This is even more so when we examine total household financial
wealth as the economic outcome.
Who is the Financial Respondent?
These results indicating a strong association of education and dimensions of cognition
with financial outcomes of the family and the dominance of male attributes raise an issue of how

24

the family decides who shall be the financial respondent. HRS asks the family to reveal who is
the most knowledgeable financial person- the husband or the wife- and that person answers all
financial questions about family income and wealth holdings. It seems reasonable that the
selected person had the major role in financial decision making for the family. What are the traits
of both partners that influence this choice?
Table 12.A lists the percent of cases for married couples where the husband is selected as
the financial respondent, stratified by age of both husbands and wives. In sixty-two percent of
households, men are the financial respondent indicating a strong tilt towards men at least in these
birth cohorts. This male preference is particularly pronounced when the husband is much older
than his wife. To illustrate, in marriages with husbands in their seventies with wives who are at
least ten years younger, in 82% of the cases men are financial respondents. Especially when
wives are young, the selection of males as financial respondents increases sharply as men are
older. Conditional, on husbands’ age, the probability of selecting women as the financial
respondent increases with wives’ age but the age gradients are not as dramatic.
Table 12.B arrays the same data but now stratified by education of both spouses.
Increases in education of either spouse raise the probability of being selected as the financial
respondent. Education is more sharply graded than age and husbands’ education has a larger
impact than that of his spouse. If the husband is a college graduate, the odds are more than three
to one that he will be the financial respondent no matter what the education of the wife is.
Table 13 presents a multivariate model where the outcome is one if men are the financial
respondent and zero otherwise. The only variable measured at the household level is a quadratic
in household income. All other variables are individual attributes of husbands and wives and
include age dummies, education, and the three cognition variables. Since the complement of men

25

being the financial respondent is that women perform those duties, the effects of all variables for
women being the financial respondent are exactly the same with a reversal of sign. The final
column in Table 13 provides a statistical test (F) for whether the absolute value of the
coefficients of wives and husbands attributes are the same for all individual level variables.
Total family income is not a strong predictor of whom the financial respondent is
suggesting that this choice rests more on cognitively related attributes and societal norms. Age
coefficients (with 80+ as the omitted class) suggest even more strongly than the cross-tabs in
Table 12.A did the presence of emerging cohort effects loosening male preference in these
decisions. This may be more so for younger cohorts than those represented in the HRS. Effects
of education and all three cognitive variables are statistically significant for both spouses, but are
always quantitatively larger for husbands than for wives. While all cognition and education
variables and the differences in size of impact between wives and husbands are statistically
significant, impacts of numeracy are particularly strong for both marriage partners. In general,
the estimated impact of wives’ cognition variables are at least half that of their husbands.
6. Conclusions
Inclusion of individual cognitive measures in prediction of economic outcomes has
turned out to be useful. While the importance and the pattern of effects needs to consider the
specific sources of information (i.e., the entire HRS, individual modules, or CogEcon), these
cognitive measures appear to meet minimal standards of being descriptively informative.
Numeracy, as measured by answers to three simple mathematical questions, is by far the
most predictive of wealth among all cognitive variables in the HRS sample. This is thought by
cognitive psychologists to be a direct measure of a specific and practical form of numerical
knowledge (i.e., a form of Crystallized Intelligence). We found independent impacts which were

26

statistically significant for all three financial outcomes and for financial and non-financial
respondents alike. Perhaps more importantly, the estimated impact of answering a question
correctly is much higher for the financial respondent compared to non-financial respondents in
all three outcomes. To illustrate, the estimated effect of answering a question correctly is thirty
thousand dollars greater household wealth for the financial respondent and only ten thousand
dollars if one is the non-financial respondent. Numeracy had more of a problem maintaining
statistical significance in the CogEcon sample when tested against other more complex and time
intensive measures (number series and calculation) that in part attempt to measure similar things.
Still, one has to be impressed with the ability of the three simple questions in the numeracy
sequence to capture the core elements in predicting wealth accumulation.
The independent impact of number series has similar characteristics in its relationship to
the financial outcomes, but these relationships are not as important with the strong qualification
that there currently exists more limited data on this measure in the HRS. The number series is not
simply a measure of numerical knowledge, but is a broader measure of numerical reasoning (i.e.,
an indicator of Fluid Intelligence), and this is not a pure indicator of the acquisition of wealth.
The more complicated and time intensive measurement of number series in the face to face
component of the CogEcon sample does considerably better in predicting wealth.
Episodic memory (or word recall) also appears to be related to the total and financial
wealth holdings of the family and in this case it applies to both the financial and non-financial
respondent. The remaining two cognitive measures- mental status and retrieval fluency- have
very weak and erratic relationships with these financial outcomes. Mental status is statistically
significant in only two of six cases and retrieval fluency in only one of six cases.6

6

Remember that retrieval fluency is only available in an experimental module in the 2006 wave so that statistical
significance is a more difficult hurdle for this variable.

27

Although these specific cognitive measures were useful in predictions of measures of
accumulated wealth, it is certainly possible that other financial outcomes will be better predicted
by different indicators of cognitive functions. Additional analyses of HRS data and other data
can be conducted using this basic approach, including cognitive speed measures and all available
cognitive measures for different outcomes.
The type of unabashedly exploratory and descriptive analysis in this paper cannot
establish causal pathways for these associations. There is no randomization in the cognitive
ability of HRS respondents and one can easily think of correlates of these cognitive measures
that may offer plausible reasons for these associations. Nor can it be easily dismissed that a
history of lifetime interests and investments in the stock market for example could lead to
improved numerical ability. Yet, the presence of these estimated effects of numeracy on total and
financial wealth at lower wealth quartiles where levels of commitment of investors is relatively
modest should caution at least against a purely reverse pathway from investments to cognitive
ability. For some cognitive functions, such as numerical ability, the cognitive training of these
skills seem to be readily attainable by most persons, and the returns seem high. At a minimum,
the type of strong associations in descriptive analysis in this paper is a signal that one may want
to pursue studies that may offer more discriminating tests of whether these associations can be
thought of as plausibly causal.

28

References
Banks, James and Zoë Oldfield. (2007). Understanding Pensions: Cognitive Function,
Numerical Ability and Retirement Saving. FISCAL STUDIES, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 143–
170. 0143-5671
Benjamin, D. J., Brown, S. A. and Shapiro, J. M. (2006), ‘Who is “behavioural”? Cognitive
ability and anomalous preferences’, http://ssrn.com/.
Ben-Porath, Yoram. (1967) The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earnings.
The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 75, No. 4, Part 1, pp. 352-365
Cattell, R. B. (1987). Intelligence: Its structure, growth, and action. New York: Elsevier Science
Pub. Co.
Cunha, F. and Heckman, James. , (2007) “The Technology of Skill Formation," American
Economic Review, 97(2):31-47.
Delevande, Adeline, Susann Rohwedder and Robert J. Willis (2008) “Preparation for
Retirement, Financial Literacy and Cognitive Resources.” Michigan Retirement Research
Center Working Paper 2008-190
Eichorn, D. H., Clausen, J. A., Haan, N., Honzik, M. P., & Mussen, P. (Eds.). (1981). Present
and past in middle life. New York: Academic Press.
Elder, G. H., Jr. (1974). Children of the Great Depression. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Farias, S.T., Mungas, D. Reed, B.R., Cahn-Weiner, D., Jagust, W., Baynes, K., & DeCarli, C. (2008). The
measurement of everyday cognition (ECog): Scale development and psychometric properties.
Neuropsychology, 22 (4), 531-544.
Fisher and Helppie, (2009) “Cognitive Economics Survey Study and Data Documentation.”
Survey Research Center, University of Michigan (January 9, 2009)
Harden, K.P., Turkheimer, E., & Loehlin, J.C. (2007). Genotype by environment interaction in
adolescents’ cognitive aptitude. Behavior Genetics, 37, 273-283.
Hershey. D.A., Jacobs-Lawson, J.M., McArdle, J.J., & Hamagami, F. (2007). Psychological
foundations of financial planning. Journal of Adult Development, 14, 26-36.
Herzog, A. R., & Rodgers, W. L. (1999). Cognitive performance measures in survey research on
older adults. In N. Schwarz, D. Park, B. Knauper, & S. Sudman (Eds.), Aging, cognition,
and self-reports (pp. 327-340). Philadelphia, PA: Psychology Press.

29

Herzog, A. R., & Wallace, R. B. (1997). Measures of cognitive functioning in the AHEAD study
[Special Issue]. Journal of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social
Sciences, 52B, 37-48.
Horn, J. L. and McArdle, J.J. (2007). Understanding human intelligence since Spearman. In R.
Cudeck & R. MacCallum, (Eds.). Factor Analysis at 100 years (pp. 205-247). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Juster, F. Thomas and James P. Smith. “Improving the Quality of Economic Data: Lessons from
HRS and AHEAD,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 92(440):1268-1278,
December 1997
Juster, F. Thomas, James P. Smith, and Frank Stafford. “The Measurement and Structure of
Household Wealth,” Labour Economics 6(2):253-275, June 1999.
Klebanov, P.K., Brooks-Gunn, J. McCarton, C. & McCormick, M.C. (1998) Child Development,
69, 1420-1436.
Lee, S., Kawachi, I., Berkman, L. F., & Grodstein, F, (2003). Education, Other Socioeconomic
Indicators, and Cognitive Function. American Journal of Epidemiology. 157(8):712720.
McArdle, J. J., Ferrer-Caja, E., Hamagami, F., & Woodcock, R. W. (2002). Comparative
longitudinal structural analyses of the growth and decline of multiple intellectual abilities
over the life span. Developmental Psychology, 38(1), 115-142.
McArdle, J.J., Fisher, G.G. & Kadlec, K.M. (2007). Latent Variable Analysis of Age Trends in
Tests of Cognitive Ability in the Health and Retirement Survey, 1992-2004. Psychology
and Aging, 22 (3), 525-545.
McArdle, J.J. & Woodcock, R.W. (Eds., 1998). Human Abilities in Theory and Practice.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ofstedal, Mary Beth, Fisher, Gwenith G. and Herzog, A. Regula. “Documentation of Cognitive
Functioning Measures in the Health and Retirement Study.” HRS Documentation Report
DR-006 March 2005.
Parker, A. M. and Fischhoff, B. (2005), ‘Decision-making competence: external validation
through an individual-differences approach’, Journal of Behavioral Decision Making,
vol. 18, pp. 1–27.
Peters, E., Västfjäll, D., Slovic, P., Mertz, C. K., Mazzocco, K. and Dickert, S. (2006),
‘Numeracy and decision making’, Psychological Science, vol. 17, pp. 407–13.
Ramey, S.L., Sackett, G.P., Sameroff, A.J., Lewis, M., Miller, S.M. (2000). The early

30

caregiving environment; Expanding views on nonparental care and cumulative
life experiences. Handbook of Developmental Psychopathology (2nd ed.). Dordrecht,
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 365-380.
Rutter, M. (1985). Family and school influences on cognitive development. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 26, 683-704.
Smith, James P. “Racial and Ethnic Differences in Wealth in the Health and Retirement Study,”
Journal of Human Resources 30:S158-S183, December 1995
Smith, James P. “Inheritances and Bequests,” in James P. Smith and Robert Willis (eds.),
Wealth, Work, and Health: Innovations in Measurement in the Social Sciences, University
of Michigan Press, 1999, pp. 121-149.
Turkheimer, E., Haley, A., Waldron, M., D’Onofrio, B., & Gottesman, I.I. (2003). Socioeconomic status
modifies heritability of IQ in young children. Psychological Science, 6, 623-628.
Willis, Robert J. (2007) “Cognitive Economics and Human Capital,” Presidential Address to
Society of Labor Economists, Chicago, May 4-5, 2007.

31

Table 1
Means and Standard Deviations
Variable

Mean

Total household wealtha
Total financial wealtha
% of financial wealth in stocks
% Couples
Total incomea
Female
Hispanic
Non-white
Education
Age

498.9
312.7
8.96
0.65
62.18
0.589
0.093
0.163
12.31
68.0

198.0
55.9
0.0
NA
37.00
NA
NA
NA
12.00
68.0

1,228.83
1,039.9
20.86
0.487
173.22
0.492
0.290
0.369
3.40
11.1

Cognition Variablesb
Number Series (W-scale)
TICS Mental Status (0-10)
Word Recall (0-10)
Numeracy
Retrieval Fluency (W-scale)

498.8
8.85
4.85
1.19
496.0

507.5
10.00
5.00
1.00
499.6

40.2
2.16
1.73
0.90
12.05

a
b

thousands of dollars
- defined over cases asked the cognition questions

32

Median Standard Dev

Table 2.A
Relationship of Household Wealth Holdings to Cognition
2006 Individual Sample—Robust Regression
(wealth in thousands of dollars)
Total Wealth
Coef.
t
Female
Hispanic
Non-white
Age
Age squared
Couple
Education
Fin resp
Total income
Income squared
Cognition Variables
Number Series W
TICS Mental Status
Word Recall
Numeracy
Retrieval Fluency W
Total wealth
Cons
N

Total Financial Wealth
Coef.
t

Percent in Stock
Coef.
t

5.04
-7.44
-60.23
18.13
-0.10
52.01
10.94
-20.74
2.20
-0.000

1.39
1.21
12.86
11.21
9.16
11.96
18.08
5.02
109.0
66.63

-0.69
-16.48
-24.71
6.13
-0.03
14.38
3.86
-7.96
0.76
-0.000

0.46
6.46
12.71
9.13
7.22
7.97
15.35
4.64
90.06
58.55

0.63
-1.61
-3.36
-0.59
0.01
-0.16
1.00
-1.24
0.01
-1.02e-06

1.72
2.43
6.68
3.47
5.54
0.36
15.71
3.01
5.47
5.83

0.14
2.41
7.63
20.09
0.59

1.19
2.26
6.67
8.92
1.18

0.03
0.34
3.77
7.38
0.42

0.67
0.77
7.92
7.89
1.99

-1206.59
18,382

4.62

-512.56
18,382

4.73

0.02
-0.02
0.17
1.65
-0.07
0.002
28.83
16,220

1.26
0.14
1.47
7.23
1.33
15.39
1.09

33

Table 2.B
Relationship of Change in Household Wealth Holdings (2006-2000) to Cognition
2006 Individual Sample—Robust Regression
(wealth in thousands of dollars)

Female
Hispanic
Non-white
Age
Age squared
Couple
Education
Fin resp
Total income
Income squared
Cognition Variables
Number Series W
TICS Mental Status
Word Recall
Numeracy
Retrieval Fluency W
Total wealth- 2000
Total Fin Wealth- 2000
Cons
N

Total Wealth
Coef.
t

Total Financial Wealth
Coef.
t

-5.80
24.67
-3.26
3.74
-0.27
20.75
3.10
-7.21
0.72
-0.00

1.93
4.62
0.83
2.34
2.34
25.16
6.24
2.12
25.16
9.96

-2.09
-5.02
-10.34
2.44
-0.17
8.78
1.34
-4.28
0.15
0.00

1.45
1.96
5.47
3.21
3.00
5.03
1.59
2.62
10.87
53.62

0.27
1.57
0.32
-0.32
0.00
-1.04
-0.65
-0.12
-0.01
-6.48e-06

0.52
1.53
0.42
1.10
1.15
1.63
0.72
0.20
2.39
1.61

0.16
-0.68
4.84
8.26
0.21
-0.24
NA
-275.93
14,270

0.17
0.74
5.17
4.46
0.52
147.2

-0.02
-1.19
3.05
6.05
0.49
NA
-0.53
-326.63
14,270

0.44
2.69
6.80
6.80
2.48

-0.02
-0.00
-0.41
0.49
-0.05
-0.00

0.89
0.02
0.25
1.55
0.79
1.65

28.83
12,058

1.09

4.62

NA- not applicable

34

558.51
3.17

Percent in Stock
Coef.
t

Table 3.A
Relationship of Total Household Wealth Holdings to Cognition
2006 Individual Sample—Quantile Models
(wealth in thousands of dollars)
25th Quantile
Coef.
t
Female
Hispanic
Non-white
Age
Age squared
Married
Education
Financial respondent
Income
Income squared
Number Series W
TICS Mental Status
Word Recall
Numeracy
Retrieval fluency W
Cons
N

6.130
-2.244
-23.415
13.050
-0.075
31.281
4.530
-10.263
1.914
-0.000
0.093
0.497
4.758
12.078
0.571
-951.354
18,382

2.65
0.56
7.62
13.53
11.11
11.16
12.30
3.87
127.99
87.63
1.27
0.75
6.64
8.49
1.84
5.90

Median
Coef.
6.794
-3.970
-50.352
20.016
-0.113
44.719
9.621
-22.722
3.542
-0.000
0.211
0.686
5.956
27.235
0.572
-1319.679
18,382

90th Quantile
Coef.
t
Female
14.393
0.92
Hispanic
-40.208
1.66
Non-white
-182.266
9.81
Age
32.186
4.08
Age squared
-0.173
3.18
Married
59.891
3.17
Education
23.883
8.00
Financial respondent
-58.543
3.30
Income
12.093 148.76
Income squared
-0.001 136.52
Number Series W
0.453
0.82
TICS Mental Status
4.614
0.93
Word Recall
6.892
1.36
Numeracy
76.988
7.72
Retrieval Fluency W
1.935
0.89
Cons
-2613.225
2.28
N
18,382
35

t
1.79
0.62
10.25
11.81
9.54
9.81
15.15
5.24
167.89
127.14
1.70
0.61
4.96
11.52
1.09
4.83

75th Quantile
Coef.
t
12.043
5.199
-92.724
30.426
-0.171
40.073
16.019
-41.095
7.107
-0.000
0.233
0.475
8.243
48.547
2.541
-2720.457
18,382

1.52
0.40
9.37
7.88
6.40
4.19
11.22
4.57
160.26
140.75
0.89
0.19
3.21
9.62
2.23
4.55

Table 3.B
Relationship of Changes in Total Household Wealth Holdings (2006-2000) to Cognition
2006 Individual Sample—Quantile Models
(wealth in thousands of dollars)

Female
Hispanic
Non-white
Age
Age squared
Married
Education
Financial respondent
Income
Income squared
Number Series W
TICS Mental Status
Word Recall
Numeracy
Retrieval fluency W
Wealth 2000
Cons
N

25th Quantile
Coef.
t
0.183
0.09
3.803
1.01
-4.677
1.66
6.472
6.05
-0.046
5.86
17.408
6.67
1.210
3.57
-4.9940
2.07
0.881
43.44
-0.000
14.76
0.024
0.37
-0.905
1.43
3.257
4.99
7.968
6.15
0.342
1.29
-0.573 414.48
-439.476
3.14
14,272

Median
Coef.
t
-1.247
0.59
13.139
3.49
-0.840
0.30
3.763
3.38
-0.025
3.06
7.999
3.12
1.216
3.47
-5.494
2.29
1.515
76.45
-0.001
28.93
-0.000
0.01
-0.901
1.39
3.221
4.88
8.770
6.71
0.281
0.98
-0.285
301.56
-302.051
2.00
14,272

90th Quantile
Coef.
t
Female
-4.452
0.54
Hispanic
66.162
4.50
Non-white
7.984
0.75
Age
-7.326
1.60
Age squared
-0.057
1.72
Married
29.766
2.97
Education
6.974
4.54
Financial respondent
-3.660
0.38
Income
3.404
45.14
Income squared
-0.002
27.38
Number Series W
0.102
0.40
TICS Mental Status
-5.912
2.36
Word Recall
2.149
0.84
Numeracy
24.624
4.71
Retrieval Fluency W
3.352
2.69
Wealth 2000
0.401 139.79
Cons
-1447.415
2.23
N
14,272
36

75th Quantile
Coef.
t
-2.272
0.60
21.113
3.09
2.445
0.49
-1.466
0.72
0.010
0.71
11.760
2.56
2.466
3.70
-2.105
0.49
2.394
69.93
-0.001
32.14
-0.050
0.42
-1.370
1.19
2.218
1.86
12.939
5.41
1.020
1.87
0.031
23.24
-450.567
1.58
14,272

Table 4.A
Relationship of Total Financial Wealth Holdings to Cognition
2006 Individual Sample—Quantile Models
(wealth in thousands of dollars)

Female
Hispanic
Non-white
Age
Age squared
Married
Education
Financial respondent
Income
Income squared
Number Series W
TICS Mental Status
Word Recall
Numeracy
Retrieval Fluency W
Cons
N

25th Quantile
Coef.
t
0.894
1.27
-3.196
2.58
-7.863
8.39
4.422
15.15
-0.026
12.88
-0.213
0.25
0.739
6.48
-2.649
3.28
0.825 207.93
-0.000 160.79
0.005
0.21
-0.179
0.89
0.906
4.15
2.605
6.00
0.179
1.95
-285.730
5.95
18,382

Median
Coef.
t
2.208
1.28
-6.898
2.35
-19.616
8.76
8.884
11.48
-0.051
9.43
0.508
0.24
2.762
9.54
-7.915
4.00
2.234
232.18
-0.000
195.68
0.102
1.81
-0.668
1.31
2.069
3.78
11.847
10.99
0.696
2.91
-798.977
6.41
18,382

90th Quantile
Coef.
t
Female
5.737
0.57
Hispanic
-47.886
3.14
Non-white
-114.563
9.65
Age
19.143
3.85
Age squared
-0.099
2.87
Married
6.725
0.55
Education
13.375
7.05
Financial respondent
-39.262
3.44
Income
9.898 173.15
Income squared
-0.001 165.84
Number Series W
0.173
0.50
TICS Mental Status
0.015
0.00
Word Recall
2.350
0.73
Numeracy
52.309
8.13
Retrieval Fluency W
2.356
1.63
Cons
-2105.232
2.77
N
18,382

37

75th Quantile
Coef.
t
4.510
1.02
-18.900
2.67
-53.412
9.86
14.514
6.88
-0.081
5.58
-0.566
0.11
5.803
7.45
-18.973
3.82
5.432
217.38
-0.000
202.25
0.222
1.50
-0.127
0.09
1.399
0.99
27.192
9.78
1.630
2.60
-1558.952
4.76
18,382

Table 4.B
Relationship of Changes (2006-2000) in Total Financial Wealth Holdings to Cognition
2006 Individual Sample—Quantile Models
(wealth in thousands of dollars)
25th Quantile
Coef.
t
Female
-0.186
0.307
Hispanic
0.348
0.31
Non-white
-4.119
4.99
Age
1.361
4.29
Age squared
-0.010
4.26
Married
1.484
1.95
Education
0.214
2.13
Financial respondent
-0.835
1.19
Income
0.249
38.60
Income squared
0.000
17.81
Number Series W
0.007
0.35
TICS Mental Status
-0.531
2.87
Word Recall
0.741
3.88
Numeracy
1.743
4.60
Retrieval Fluency W
0.162
2.08
Financial Wealth-2000 -0.708 1530.60
Cons
-134.091
3.25
N
14,272

Median
Coef.
t
0.525
0.66
0.678
0.485
-2.935
2.81
1.343
3.20
-0.009
3.00
0.151
0.16
0.281
2.14
-0.851
0.94
0.652
87.16
-0.000
23.76
0.030
1.18
-0.977
4.01
0.755
3.04
2.879
5.85
0.226
2.09
-0.385
867.41
-176.743
3.12
14,272

90th Quantile
Coef.
t
Female
2.887
0.55
Hispanic
1.092
0.12
Non-white
-14.561
2.29
Age
-3.735
1.37
Age squared
0.033
1.65
Married
14.807
2.39
Education
3.354
3.55
Financial respondent
-2.229
0.38
Income
2.771
59.78
Income squared
-0.001
30.78
Number Series W
0.105
0.62
TICS Mental Status
-2.018
1.30
Word Recall
0.610
0.37
Numeracy
10.426
3.16
Retrieval Fluency W
2.243
2.98
Financial Wealth 2000
0.359 142.31
Cons
-1046.97
2.67
N
14,272
38

75th Quantile
Coef.
t
-0.810
0.64
1.972
0.89
-2.652
1.64
0.200
0.30
-0.001
0.24
-1.023
0.68
0.738
3.42
-2.094
1.46
1.459
126.89
-0.000
18.28
-0.014
0.35
-1.078
2.85
0.446
1.13
4.484
5.71
0.841
4.66
-0.040
67.39
-419.487
4.47
14,272

Table 5.A
Total Wealth Model in the CogEcon Sample
Coef

t

Coef

t

Coef

t

A. Log Wealth
Age
Age squared
Couple
Education
Income
Income squared
Cognition Variables
Telephone Number series W
Face to Face Num series
Episodic memory
TICS Mental status
Numeracy
Retrieval fluency

.052
.000
.979
.053
.000
-1.93e-11

0.45
0.22
4.14
1.02
8.43
7.32

.004

1.02

.017
.023
.315
-.037

2.49
2.00
2.20
1.46

Calculation
Matrix reasoning
Mean financial literacy score
Cons
17.980

1.40

.047
.000
.949
.017
.000
-1.87e-11

0.41
0.31
4.01
0.32
8.26
7.08

.062
.000
.758
-.083
.000
-1.80e-11

0.50
0.22
3.07
1.41
7.78
6.82

.019
.017
.018
.199
-.036

3.00
2.53
1.48
1.34
1.44

-.007
.012
.008
.207
-.036

0.81
1.59
0.59
1.33
1.36

.015
.082
.280
14.399

1.62
3.43
2.83
0.98

10.860

0.82

Table 5.B
Predicting Financial Literacy
Age
Age squared
Couple
Education
Incomea
Income squareda

Coef
.1067
-0007
.1493
.0640
.0033
-0330e-07

.
.

t
2.32
2.05
1.64
2.98
3.78
3.42

.
.
.
.

Cognition Variables
Face to Face Num series
.0082
2.72
Episodic memory
.
.0048
1.75
.
TICS Mental status
.0024
0.51
.
Numeracy
.1318
2.31
Retrieval fluency
.0058
0.59
Calculation
.0065
1.91
Matrix reasoning
.0067
0.77
Cons
-8.048
1.49
___________________________________________________________________________________

a- income measured in thousands of dollars

39

Table 6
Total Wealth by Numeracy of Spouse
(wealth in thousands of dollars)
Total Wealth
Numeracy Score of Non-Financial Respondent
Numeracy Score of
Financial Respondent
0
1
2
3

0
202.3
431.5
684.5
971.5

1
339.8
505.1
685.8
818.3

2
548.5
682.9
852.6
949.6

3
1,762.1
564.9
1,357.5
1,679.4

Total Financial Wealth
Numeracy Score of Spouse of Non-Financial Respondent
Numeracy Score of
Financial Respondent
0
1
2
3

0
94.7
272.6
466.7
620.0

1
184.1
331.8
445.7
536.8

2
283.0
461.0
545.3
648.6

3
1450.9
317.6
888.5
1,066.0

Fraction of Financial Wealth in Stocks
Numeracy Score of Spouse of Non-Financial Respondent
Numeracy Score of
Financial Respondent
0
1
2
3

0
3.0
6.1
9.8
11.4

1
6.3
9.0
11.7
18.1

40

2
9.4
11.0
13.5
17.0

3
16.8
11.6
15.9
17.5

Table 7
Means of Cognition Variables by Gender and Whether Financial Respondent
(sample of married families)

Number Series
(W-scale)
TICS Mental Status
(0-10)
Word Recall
(0-10)
Retrieval Fluency
(W scale)
Numeracy
(0-3)

Male

Female

Financial
Respondent

505.4

500.3

504.7

NonFinancial
Respondent
500.6

8.958

8.924

9.125

8.735

4.704

5.377

5.086

5.016

495.7

498.4

497.4

496.8

1.464

1.169

1.450

1.165

Female
Financial
Respondent

Female
NonFinancial
Respondent
500.5

Male
Financial
Respondent

Male
NonFinancial
Respondent
500.8

Number Series
508.2
500.1
(W-scale)
TICS Mental
9.203
8.505
8.974
Status
(0-10)
Word Recall
4.883
4.378
5.399
(0-10)
Retrieval
496.4
494.4
498.8
Fluency
(W scale)
Numeracy
1.606
1.205
1.209
(0-3)
Note. HRS 2006—62% of financial respondents are men.

41

8.893
5.362
498.1
1.143

Husband
Number
Series
Husband
Number
Series W
Husband
TICS
Mental
Status
Husband
Word
Recall
Husband
Numeracy
Husband
Retrieval
Fluency W
Wife
Number
Series W
Wife TICS
Mental
Status
Wife Word
Recall
Wife
Numeracy
Wife
Retrieval
Fluency W

Table 8
Correlations of Cognition Scores of Husbands and Wives
Husband Husband
Husband
Wife
Wife
Mental
Word
Husband Retrieval Number
Mental
Status
Recall
Numeracy Fluency
Series
Status

Wife
Word
Recall

Wife
Numeracy

Wife
Retrieval
Fluency

1.000

0.058

1.000

0.085

0.101

1.000

0.078

0.111

0.570

1.000

0.143

0.063

0.070

0.064

1.000

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

1.000

-0.000

0.504

-0.178

-0.090

0.028

0.021

1.000

0.010

-0.137

0.177

0.167

0.014

0.059

-0.078

1.000

0.010

-0.079

0.153

0.229

0.038

0.057

-0.049

0.430

1.000

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

0.121

0.045

0.031

0.004

42

1.000

Table 9.A
Relationship of Household Wealth Holdings to Cognition of Both
Financial and Non-Financial Respondents
2006 sample of married couples
Robust Regression
(wealth in thousands of dollars)
Total Wealth
Coef.
t
Female
Hispanic
Non-white
Age
Age squared
Education
Financial respondent
Total income
Income squared
Spouse age
Spouse age squared
Spouse education

Total Financial Wealth
Coef.
t

Percent in Stocka
Coef.
t

-0.273
27.357
-65.522
13.453
-0.077
10.069
-0.147
2.192
-0.000
13.622
-0.079
10.157

0.04
2.70
7.77
4.50
3.38
9.24
0.03
69.26
45.17
4.56
3.44
9.37

-0.483
-13.558
-33.583
6.225
-0.032
3.516
-0.151
1.030
-0.000
6.293
-0.035
3.611

0.15
2.61
7.76
4.06
2.99
6.29
0.05
63.46
47.59
4.11
3.00
6.49

0.004
0.279
-1.940
-0.312
0.004
0.617
-0.002
0.010
-8.87e-07
-0.306
0.004
0.619

0.01
0.36
3.03
1.38
2.08
7.55
0.00
4.11
4.61
1.35
2.06
7.60

0.277
4.704
31.107

0.14
2.57
8.93

-1.093
4.426
14.163

1.10
4.71
7.92

-0.310
-0.122
1.675

2.11
0.90
6.52

Non-Financial Respondent
TICS Mental Status
4.078
Word Recall
10.403
Numeracy
9.802

2.47
5.67
2.72

0.611
4.521
4.269

0.72
4.80
2.31

0.091
0.189
1.010

0.73
1.40
3.82

Total wealth
Cons
-1298.292
11.02
N
11,688
a
Percent in stocks estimated with OLS.

-590.162
11,688

9.76

0.002
-0.199
10,876

12.88
0.02

Financial Respondent
TICS Mental Status
Word Recall
Numeracy

43

Table 9.B
Relationship of Change in Household Wealth Holdings (2006-2000) to Cognition
2006 Couple Sample—Robust Regression
(wealth in thousands of dollars)
Total Wealth
Coef.
t

Total Financial Wealth
Coef.
t

Percent in Stocka
Coef.
t

Female
Hispanic
Non-white
Age
Age squared
Education
Financial respondent
Total income
Income squared
Spouse age
Spouse age squared
Spouse education

0.758
46.061
-5.590
3.449
-0.023
3.330
0.010
0.808
-0.000
3.325
-0.023
3.303

0.15
5.20
0.78
1.26
1.04
3.75
0.00
19.36
8.32
1.21
1.03
3.73

0.177
0.389
-13.713
3.322
-0.024
1.212
-0.019
0.280
-0.000
3.430
-0.025
1.244

0.06
0.08
3.36
2.12
1.91
2.39
0.01
11.69
4.66
2.19
1.98
2.46

-0.009
1.826
0.240
-0.075
0.000
-0.028
-0.002
-0.012
7.46e-06
-0.087
0.000
-0.031

0.01
1.53
0.25
0.21
0.11
0.24
0.00
2.37
1.78
0.24
0.14
0.27

Financial Respondent
TICS Mental Status
Word Recall
Numeracy

-3.783
6.888
11.443

2.21
4.62
4.00

-2.588
4.811
5.694

2.65
5.66
3.49

0.136
0.021
0.832

0.61
0.11
2.28

0.759
2.741
1.594

0.54
1.83
0.54

-0.808
1.692
1.749

1.00
1.98
1.05

-0.011
-0.175
-0.118

0.06
0.92
0.32

Total wealth
-0.259
112.96
Cons
-311.440
2.69
N
9,000
a
Percent in stocks estimated with OLS.

-0.421
-246.251
9,000

262.47
3.72

-0.000
5.834
8,162

1.51
0.38

Non-Financial Respondent
TICS Mental Status
Word Recall
Numeracy

44

Table 10
Relationship of Household Wealth Holdings to Cognition of Both
Financial and Non-Financial Respondents
2006 sample of married couples
Quantile Models
(wealth in thousands of dollars)
25th Quantile
Coef.
t
Female
Hispanic
Non-white
Age
Age squared
Education
Fin respondent
Total income
Income squared
Spouse age
Spouse age squared
Spouse education
Financial Respondent
TICS Mental Status
Word Recall
Numeracy

Coef.

t

75th Quantile
Coef.
t

-0.397
12.922
-27.584
8.732
-0.049
5.017
0.194
1.917
-0.000
8.968
-0.051
4.932

0.09
1.72
4.52
4.26
3.06
6.69
0.05
83.24
56.82
4.36
3.17
6.60

-0.450
50.321
-51.208
10.886
-0.056
9.593
0.553
3.368
-0.000
11.353
-0.058
9.855

0.08
5.68
6.95
4.18
2.80
10.07
0.11
121.65
94.75
4.35
2.90
10.40

-1.129
87.513
-92.610
22.667
-0.126
14.400
-0.753
6.539
-0.000
21.472
-0.119
14.355

0.09
4.40
5.50
3.48
2.57
6.14
0.07
94.54
85.24
3.32
2.43
6.16

-0.168
4.417
16.841

0.12
3.36
6.81

0.098
3.843
37.857

0.06
2.40
12.42

-6.286
6.532
71.464

1.53
1.70
9.74

1.47
3.595
4.23
3.383
5.41
22.547
5.99 -2,049.343
11,688

1.04
0.88
2.98
7.88

Non-Financial Respondent
TICS Mental Status
1.297
Word Recall
7.760
Numeracy
6.628
Cons
-895.353
N
11,688

1.11
2.122
6.00
6.949
2.28
20.285
11.13 -1193.727
11,688

90th Quantile
Coef.
t
Female
Hispanic
Non-white
Age
Age squared
Education
Financial respondent

Median

0.599
215.708
-108.479
23.861
-0.121
22.218
0.422

0.02
5.84
3.33
1.73
1.18
4.57
0.02
45

Total income
Income squared
Spouse age
Spouse age squared
Spouse education

11.315
-0.001
23.299
-0.118
23.326

84.41
79.92
1.72
1.17
4.89

-2.947
16.193
102.421

0.37
2.16
7.19

Non-Financial Respondent
TICS Mental Status
-3.716
Word Recall
9.898
Numeracy
71.034
Cons
-2363.323
N
11,688

0.54
1.29
4.55
4.26

Financial Respondent
TICS Mental Status
Word Recall
Numeracy

46

Table 11
Relationship of Total Financial Wealth to Cognition of Both
Financial and Non-Financial Respondents
2006 sample of married couples
Quantile Models
(wealth in thousands of dollars)
25th Quantile
Coef.
t
Female
Hispanic
Non-white
Age
Age squared
Education
Financial respondent
Total income
Income squared
Spouse age
Spouse age squared
Spouse education

Median
Coef.

t

75th Quantile
Coef.
t

-0.023
-2.296
-12.359
4.1000
-0.025
1.244
-0.011
0.922
-0.000
4.107
-0.025
1.235

0.01
0.84
5.55
5.62
4.40
4.49
0.01
121.81
98.89
5.63
4.41
4.49

0.0308
5.685
-26.533
5.336
-0.028
3.343
-0.071
2.226
-0.000
5.203
-0.027
3.334

0.01
0.99
5.55
3.15
2.11
5.41
0.02
123.97
108.58
3.07
2.05
5.42

-0.611
5.950
-66.479
9.881
-0.052
5.671
-0.302
5.226
-0.000
10.180
-0.0551
5.940

0.08
0.50
6.48
2.53
1.77
4.03
0.04
121.42
116.71
2.59
1.85
4.25

-0.780
1.214
5.439

1.60
2.58
6.14

-1.613
2.984
17.171

1.48
2.88
8.69

-2.571
1.015
42.099

1.02
0.44
9.46

Non-Financial Respondent
TICS Mental Status
-0.562
Word Recall
1.979
Numeracy
1.591

1.35
4.31
1.76

0.044
2.497
9.961

0.05
2.40
4.88

0.204
2.263
9.703

0.10
0.99
2.11

12.72

-556.740
11,688

8.33 -4380.231
11,688

5.12

Financial Respondent
TICS Mental Status
Word Recall
Numeracy

Cons
N

-364.185
11,688

90th Quantile
Coef.
t
Female
Hispanic
Non-white
Age
Age squared
Education

-3.880
100.347
-102.394
10.633
-0.041
15.086

0.22
3.78
4.34
1.01
0.53
4.30
47

Financial respondent
Total income
Income squared
Spouse age
Spouse age squared
Spouse education

-2.998
8.600
-0.001
11.626
-0.049
16.241

0.18
89.74
87.93
1.12
0.63
4.68

Financial Respondent
TICS Mental Status
Word Recall
Numeracy

-5.602
11.405
68.350

0.94
2.14
6.58

Non-Financial Respondent
TICS Mental Status
-3.206
Word Recall
-0.600
Numeracy
28.724

0.63
0.10
2.56

Cons
N

-1240.893
11,688

2.98

48

Table 12.A
Percent of Men Who Are Financial Respondents, by Age of Both Spouses
(Sample of Married Couples)

Age of Wife
____________________________________________________
≤ 59
60-69
70-79
≥ 80
All
Age of Husband
≤ 59
60-69
70-79
≥ 80
All

59.1
69.6
82.8
NA
63.5

40.9
62.0
61.8
56.9
60.7

NA
56.1
60.1
57.9
59.1

NA
NA
57.7
67.1
65.3

57.4
64.1
61.8
62.9
61.6

NA. Sample size less than 20.

Table 12.B
Percent of Men Who Are Financial Respondents, by Education of Both Spouses
Education of Wife
________________________________________________
< HSG
HSG
College or More
All
Education of Husband
< High School
High School
College Grad
All

55.4
68.5
88.2
61.1

44.7
58.3
75.6
59.5

49

38.5
55.6
75.4
67.6

49.9
59.6
75.9
61.6

Table 13
OLS Predicting If Male Is Financial Respondent
(Sample of Married Couples)

Coef.

t

0.0001
-5.79e-09

1.48
0.98

Husband
Age < 59
Age 60-69
Age 70-79
Education
TICS mental status
Word recall
Numeracy

-0.2077
-0.0763
-0.0451
0.0212
0.0157
0.0249
0.0800

5.81
2.57
1.79
9.00
3.79
5.46
9.72

Wife
Spouse age < 59
Spouse age 60-69
Spouse age 70-79
Spouse education
Spouse TICS mental status
Spouse word recall
Spouse numeracy

0.1580
0.0240
-0.0341
-0.0115
-0.0006
-0.0124
-0.0568

4.12
0.72
1.13
4.35
0.15
3.00
6.95

0.3305

5.81

Total income
Income squared

Cons

50

“F test” for Difference
Between
Male and Female
Coefficient

1.96
3.30
8.01
13.37
7.07
4.44
4.42

51

Life Cycle Pattern of Fluid and Crystallized
Intelligence

52

Figure 2. Wealth by Numeracy Score of Husband and Wife

1,800

1,600

Wealth (thousands of dollars)

1,400

1,200

1,000

800

600

400
3
200

2
1

0
0
0

1
2
Numeracy score of husband

3

Total Wealth

53

Numeracy score of
spouse

