                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               CAPITAL FLOWS, THE CURRENT ACCOUNT,
                   AND THE REAL EXCHANGE RATE:
                  CONSEQUENCES OF LIBERALIZATION
                        AND STABILIZATION


                        Maurice Obstfeld



                     Working Paper No. 1526




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                         December 19814




The research reported here is part of the NBERTs research program
in International Studies and project in Productivity (World
Econoriv). Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper fl526
                                       December 1984




  Capital Flows, the Current Account, and the Real Exchange Rate:
          Consequences of Liberalization and Stabilization


                               ABSTRACT

     This paper develops a dynamic framework in which macroeconomic

liberalization and stabilization measures of the type recently seen in

Latin America can be studied. The model is sufficiently general to cover

both polar cases of a closed capital account and free private capital

mobility, so the effects of liberalizing external asset trade can be

studied, Capital—account liberalization leads to an initial period of

real appreciation, but a long—run real depreciation; and the economy

passes through alternating phases of boom and slump in the process.

Devaluation is found to be nonneutral even in the long run and possibly

contractionary in the short run. In contrast, a change in the rate of

exchange depreciation is neutral, even with sticky prices, when capital is

fully mobile. When capital is immobile, a disinflationary reduction in

the rate of exchange—rate crawl has effects that are the opposite of

those arising from capital—account opening. The model suggests that

capital—account liberalization, rather than disinflation, played a part

in causing the massive real exchange—rate appreciation that accompanied

recent Latin American programs of economic reform.


                                             Maurice Obstfeld
                                             Department of Economics
                                             Columbia University
                                             New York, NY 10027

                                             (212) 280—5489
      CAPITAL FLOWS, THE CURRENT ACCOUtU, AND THE REAL EXCHANGE RATE:
              CONSEQUENCES OF LIBERALIZATION AND STABILIZATION

                             Maurice Obstfeld*
        Columbia University and National Bureau of Economic Research
                    October 1904; revised December 1924


Introduction



      This paper develops a dynamic model incorporating some key macro-

economic features of more advanced industrializing economies. While the

model is quite general, it is motivated by recent events in the Southern

Cone of Latin America1 where wide—ranging economic reform programs

initiated in the 1970s produced dramatic——and ultimately unsustainable——

movements in external accaunts and real exchange rates. As observed by

Din Aleiandro (1981), the measures undertaken in Argentina, Chile, and

Uruguay coincided with steep increases in the prices of nontraded goods

relative to tradables, with weak current—account balances, and with

massive foreign reserve accumulation. A goal of the present work is to

analyze channels through which policy initiatives of the type seen in

the Southern Cone influence the economy's long—run position and its

transitional behavior.t

     On the price side, the economy studied is characterized Dy a

crawling—peq exchange—rate regime and sluggish nominal wages that adjust

to labor—market disequilibrium and inflation expectations. Nontradable

goods use imports as intermediate production inputs, so there is an

ismediate pass—throuqh of exchange—rate changes to domestic goods'

prices. On the asset side there may be restrictions on private capital—

account transactions, but the model encompasses both polar cases of free

ca;ta1 mobiJity and complete capital immobility within a sinqle
lramework.S This +aciiitates study of the macroeconomic effects of

capital—account iberali:ation. Under capital nobility the model traces

out   the dynamic oath of the real exchange rate (the price of tradable;
in terms of    nontradables) and the economy's net external assets. Similar
paths are traced out when capital is immobile, but the econo5flyS exter—
nal assets are then owned entirely by the public sactor.'

         The plan of the paper is as follows. Section I sets out the basic

structure of the model. The real exchanae rate occupies a central posi-

tion, for its level affects both production and consumption decisions

while its time path influences the real domestic interest rate.

         Section 2 works out the modeUs dynamics under perfect

AtJmptoticai1v the economy approaches a long—run equilibrium charac-

terized by simultaneous internal and external balance. However, the

nature of the path leading there depend; on whether a rise in the rela-

tive price of tradables improves or worsens the current account. The

economy; dynamics will not generally display the monotonic relation

between external assets and the real exchange rate characterizing the

transition paths of most flexible—price portfolio—balance models. In

particular, the approach to long—run equilibrium nay be oscillatory.

         Lierali:ation of the capital account is taken up in section 3.

The    key result of this section concerns the short—term effect of
liberalization     on the real exchanqe rate. When the pre—reform domestic

interest rate exceeds the depreciation—adjusted world rate, the removal

o impedirents to capital movement causes an initial period of real

sopreciation, A current—account de+ictt emerqes         on impact, but boom
turns into slump a; the economy converges to a steady state in which the
      ci cH er. ternai ci airs   I c'wer than mef ore liberal i z an on, In th.e
Ionq run there a real deoreciation1 an examule of a more general
principle that is also established in section 3: any disturbance that

leads to a long—run decline in external assets must also depreciate the

long—run real exchanue rate (assuming that the domestic capital stock is

held    constant).   A similar result is not-ed in alternative contexts by

Bruno (1976) and Ubstfeld (1954a).

       Section 4 studies the effects of devaluation and disinflation, where

the    latter is defined as a permanent, credible       lowering of the rate c-f


currency    depreciation. Devaluation is    nonneutral    iii   the   long   run, lead—

ing to    an eventual rise in external claims     and   a long—run real apprecia-

tion.    In the short run devaluation nay occasion a current—account
deficit or a domestic contraction, however. When capital is immobile
disinflation has efFects that are the opposite of capital—account
liberalization: an initial real depreciation and slump followed by a
long—run real appreciation and increase in net foreign assets. But in
the model set out below, a change in the crawl rate is neutral when
capital is fully mobile, even though the price of home goods is tem-
porarily fixed. The section concludes by considering possible sources of
nonneutrality suggested in the literature.
        Section 5 once again summarizes the main results. An appendix
contains some technical details concerning the models dynamics.




 I. A General Model


          This section -describes a small open economy characterized y             a


crawiinq— peg exchange—rate regime and short—run inflexibility of
flOffi)flCi wages. Twr3c c'ods   are produced a composite tr.sdaule priced
 exogenously in the world market, and a nontradable good whose price
                                                   —4—


reflects the cost ot domestic labor and imported intermediates. The

response of the reel wage to labor—market pressure provides a first

component of the economy's intrinsic dynamics. A second source of in-

trinsic dynamics           is provided by private saving,           which drives    the stock
of       net   foreign   assets to its long—run level. Detailed discussion of the

economvs dynamic behavior is deferred until section 2. Here I merely

set out the economy's structure.

               Under a crawling peg the exchange rate follows a path                determined

by the central bank. To maintain               the   announced exchange rate when there

is #ree capital mobility, the bank must accommodate any shift in domes-

tic money demand through foreign—exchange intervention. When capital

controls are in Qiace, however; residents may not purchase foreign—

currency          assets and exporters must sell to the             monetary authority any

foreign          exchange earned. To peg the exchange rate under private capital

immobility,          therefore,    it   suffices   fir the   central    bank to intervene

only when          there is   a trade imbalance.

               No stand on the degree of capital mobility need be taken in the

present section. The models                generality     in this    respect will    prove

useful          when the liberalization of the capital account is studied in

section 2 below.



     1    Goods Prices and Production


               n the productlon side the country is a variant of the dependent
economy          stud ed by Salter (1959) and many subsequent writers. Let E
denote the e change            rate the     domestic—money     price of foreign money) and
F         the toreign—currency c.rtce of tne comooslte tradable qoo. Under tfle
small—country assumotion P is parametric arbitrage guarantees trat in
the absence of trade impediments and transport costs the corresponding

domestic—money price of tradablas is niven by

                        1*
(1)    P =         EP



               ener.slization of                   the present framework would differentiate

betreen imports and exports and allow for commercial restrictions that

separate domestic from world prices. That generalization is forgone here
in order to focus on the effects of financial policies. The normaliza—

tioru P = I is adopted, so that T =                           E   according to (I).

           Tradable commodities are produced using capital and labor. Capital

operates only in the tradable sector but labor is free to move betieen

both sectors of the economy. If W denotes the resulting economy—wide

nominal wage, then the supply function for tradables is


           T
               = y 1,
                   kPT 1W;.               T,   -

(ZJ    y                              y        'J.




The derived demand for labor, also increasing in its argument, is

denoted


           T           T.
k-s)   n       =   n    cP /W).


           Cutput in the nontradables sector is produced using labor (nH) and

mocrted intermediate materials                           mH:i according to a fixed—coefficients

technology. The production function for these home goods is


           H                 H    H
       V       = mlnLn ,am ),

where intermediate imports are indistinguishable from final tradable;.

 he parameter i/a is the amount of intermediate that must be combined

with   a unit of labor to produce a unit of tne home good. Constant
return; to scale prevail in the nontradables sector according to 4) so
output              is demand determined. Factor demands are given by


        p
            H        H
                    y,m H
                             y!a.

In equilibrium the price of home goads is given by the zero—profit

coniton

            H
(a)     P       =   L4 + (P/a) = W ÷ (E/a).



1.2 Asset Markets



            R:2sidents hold in their portfolios domestic hifl—powered money H,

domestic bonds paying an interest rate R, and (when private capital

mobility is permitted) foreign bonds Ba having a face value fixed in

foreign—currency            terms and paying the world interest rate R*. The domes—
tic banking system is not explicitly modelled. In addition to base money

end bonds, there is an exogenous nonmarketable component of domestic

iea1th which can include! for example, titles to capital operating in

the tradables sector. This exogenous component of wealth has a fixed

value kin terms of tradable; (that is, in terms of foreign currency);

the determination of k is outside the models scope. Under a regime of

capital controls Ba is taken to be identically zero.

            Forelaners do not participate in the domestic bond market. Under

+ree capital motility R = F:* + DE/E, where D is the time—derivative

operator arid          perfect foresight   is assumed. In words, domestic and for—

eiqn    bones are assumed to        be   perfect   substitutes, so that   interest
parity holds           hen capital is mobile. when financial      controls are in

ciace       the donesti: credit mar:et s essentially a run ffiarket and R
generally differs fron the depreciation—adjusted world rate (see Bruno
1979; McKirinon and Mathieson 1981; and van Wtinberqen 198Th)

          ForeiQners do not hold domestic money. As it is assumed that there

is no outside domestic government debt aggreqate nominal assets A are

given by


(7)   A =       + Efl + Ek.



The money—market equilibrium condition is


(8)   M    =   L(R)A, L'   0.

          Undor capital immobility 1 is a predetermined variable that

chanoes only as a result of currant—account imbalances and domestic

credit creation by the central bank. (The current account of course

equals the balance c-f payments when there is no private international

borrowing or lending.) As (B) shows, continuous asset—market equilibrium

is in this case maintained through adjustments in the domestic nominal

interest rate R.

          Under capital mobility, however, the domestic interest rate is the

sum of the axoqenous world interest rate R* and th2     policy—determined
devaluation rate DUE. The money stock is now the jumpinq varIable that

adjusts instantaneously to preserve asset—market equilibrium: for a

qiven rate of currency denreciation, the central bank can peg the e<—

chanqe rates level only if it automatically supplies to the public the

money stock dictated by the right—hand side of (B).



1 £3 Consumers




          Lot z denc-te the level of private domestic expenditure measured in

nontraded or hone qoods. Define the real -exchange rate q by
7)     p = E/PH.


     (o)        the real exchange rate must be smaller than the technological

coefficient a in equilibrium if W and                are always positive:


       p        a.



A fracticn (q) of expenditure z falls on tradables, where r is a

decreasing function of p.. Final consumption of tradables may therefore

be written


  -.
       C              = q)z/q,         -   -
                                           0.



and the demand for nontradabias takes the form


 11 cqiz = Cl-(q)Jz.

           Let v be the average share of tradables in the overall consumer

price index. (i can be thought of as a long—run average value of r(q).)

The expected local inflatin rate under perfect foresight is then

 DE/D + (i—i)
            (DPH/PH).              (The derivatives are riqht-hand derivatives, as

aisays.)         Private   absorption z is a function of real domestic wealth anG

the real interest rats:


c12)        =



As usual, ar increase in real assets stirnulates absorption, while an

increase in the real interest rate depresses it. In symbols, z1 >0 and

                 f. denotes the partial derivati       + ( ,.,.,x       i
                  I                              -         1        a       1




1.4 The Labor Market and Price Adjustment



           The nominal waQe is taken to be a predetermined or non—jumping
                                                                   —9—



variable that can                   adjust         only gradually. The det2rminants of nominaL

wage inflation are excess labor                                demand and expected consumerprice

inflation, as in Obstfeld (1982).
             Let n0 denote the 'natural" level at aqoregate employment, assumed

to be constant. 4ith perfect                              foresight the waqe evolves according to

(13) DW/ = 4 nT+nd_ny + r (OE/E)                                   + (l-)
From         (6) the wage and home—goods price are related by W =                           — (Eta).

Equation (13) may therefore be manipulated to yield

(i4 ElFHIF'
         4 = ir(q) cc)
                    1  '-
                        nn, + DEtE

vi h e r a



 (15) 1T(q) = 4/Ea!(a—q) — (1—i)) > 0.

Equations (14) and (15) show how currency depreciation and excess labor
demand qovern price inflation in the nontradables sector.


 1.5 The Monetary and Fiscal Authorities


                 It       is   convenient to consolidate the budget constraints of the
 monetary and fiscal authorities. All domestic liabilities of the central
 bank take the form of high—powered money. On the asset side the bank

 holds domestic credit C and foreinn bonds whose foreign—currency value

 is denoted F*. The central—bank balance sheet identity is

                                     a                     *
 (14)        N
                 t
                      =    C,
                            t + ft tF't   —   5
                                                  —m
                                                       DESFS ds.


 Ins last tern on tne ront—hand side at lô s r,ne sum at past capital
 qains an official reserves1 wriich inflate the domestic—money value of
                                         -10-


bank assets witnout increasing domestic liabilities. As will be seen

below in section 4, equation (16, which corrects for smooth movements

in E, is easily modified to take account of capital gains due to dis-

crete maxi—devaluations,

      itse fiscal authority levies personal taxes to help finance its

consumption of tradables (gT) and nontradables (gHJ, An additional

source of revenue is the interest earned on the central bank's reserves,

equal to €R*F* in terms of domestic money. Any fiscal deficit is

financed through domestic credit creation (the government issues no

interest—bearino debt). Let I denote nominal personal taxes and S

nominal government consumption (equaL to EqT +        Then the monetized

deficit is given by


(17) DC =    S —   ER*F* — 1.


The rate of domestic—credit creation implied by (17) may exceed or fall

short of the rate at which domestic money demand increases (the time

derivative of the right—hand side of (8)). Let Md denote nominal money

demand. Then according to (1&), continuous money—market equilibrium

reQuires that


(18) EDF' = Dud — DC.


Domestic—credit growth in excess of money—demand growth leads to a

balance—of—payments deficit,' so that part of the fiscal deficit is

effectively 4inanced through central—bank borrowing abroad. After sub-

stituting (18) into (17), integrating forward, and applying the ap-

propriate transversality condition, one obtains the public sector's

interteaporal budget constraint

     .   I
(19) $I9(/)].
               H         —R*(s—t)
                                    ds
                                                  -1!--



             F* +
              t
                       S[(T
                        t   S
                              /E
                                   S
                                       )+(DMd/E
                                           S S )IER*(5t)dS

Constraint         (19) limits the present foreign—exchange value of government

consumption to that of government revenue from personal taxes and seig—

nioraqe, plus initial foreign reserves. Beigniorage revenue is in turn

limited by the publics willingness to add to it; nominal balances.

            it is assumed that the central bank follows the domestic—credit

r iii   e



(20) DC = (DE/E)tl


in order to avoid protracted payments imbalances. To ensure that credit

creation       covers the government'; cash—flow needs when (20; is followed.

taxes T adjust endogenously according to


(21) T =       G   —   ER*F*   —       (DE/E)M.


it can be shown that under the foregoing assumptions, constraint (19)

will necessarily hold as an equality provided the economy is dynamically

stable (see Obstfeld 1984a).




2. Dynamics



            lt is now time to pursue the dynamic implications of the structure

dascribed in section 1. To do so, I reduce the model to a system of two

differential equations in the real exchange rate q and the net external

 asset stock of the economy a; a whole, K* = F*              +   8*. Because the

 nations foreign assets are given by the past history of the current

 account, K* is a predetermined variable. Because the nominal wage is

 :redeternined and the exchange rate is pegged, the zero—profit condition
                                                —12—


(6) implies that q is predetermined as well.

           Equation (14 gives the time derivative of q,


(22) Dqiq =             -ir(q) (nT+nH_n)

Equation; (3), (6)4 and (9) imply that

           I
(23)   5           = 5 T.(q) n 1.        -




The equilibrium condition far the home goods market is


u4 y H = CH.tq,:)               +
                                     H




8y   (5)   • labor        demand in the nontradables sector, H, is equal to c1 +
 H



           To complete the derivation of the dynamic law for q, it remains to

shovi that absorption z can be expressed in terms of q and K*. The

definition of the real exchange rate q allows one to express the real

interest rate a;


       S — (DE/E) + (1—r) (Dq/q)



A rise in the expected rate of real depreciation, all else equal, is a

rise in th real interest rate. Use (7) to write (12) as


(25)   z       =
                    z<q1E(M/E)+S*+kJ,R-(DE/E)+(1-r)(Oq/q)).

Next, note that D(MIE) = DM/E — (DUE) (tilE) = DF* (by (16) and (20)), so

cMiE) =            F* + :z,   where :x is a constant which can be calculated from

(16). Finally1 salve (3) for the equilibrium domestic interest rate!


(25)   R = R(K*+).)             5'



Under perfect capital mobility R(K*+fl =               R   +   (DE/E) and so A' = 0. But
when private capital is immobile K*      F* and R'   0. In the latter case

a rise in K* is just a rise in international reserves that increases

domestic liquidity, depressing the local rate of interest.

         The foregoing observations lead to the equation


(27) z              (K*+:÷k) ,R(K*+)-(DEJE(li) (Oq/q)].


With the aid of equations (11), (23), and (27), (22) may now be written


(22)   Dqtq   =




From (28) one obtain; the reduced—form law of motion


(29) Dq/q =rq,K*).


it   is assumed that


(30) F       K 0, I', K 0.
         1



Thus, a rise in q raises the demand for labor in both the tradable and

home—goods sectors, occasioning a rising real wage and, through (6). a

falling (that is, appreciating) real exchange rate. Similarly, a rise in

K*. by stimulating the demand for nontradables. leads to excess labor

demand in the home—goods sector and again, an appreciating real exchange

rate.         mathematical appendix spells out the conditions under which the

inequalities in (3tP hold. One condition worth mentioning here is that

overall wealth K*+'.+k be positive. This is assumed froiii now on, although

t is not necessary for 30)

         Turn next to the dynamic equation for K.*. The growth of nominal

or1v.st: sosets quais .orivate say lnn out of nsposaole incoma so by
                                                          —S




(31.) Dc =          DN +     DE(B*+k)      + EOB*

                    I
           = Ey          +           + ER*B*    +   DE(B*+k)    — T

                                              — Ec I   - P HH
                                                            c —   Em
                                                                       H



Equation         (23) implies that yT can be written as an increasing function

ot   the       real exchange rate q. Mter use a-f (5), (10), (11)                       (is),   (20),
 2i), 24 , and (29), (31) therefore becomes

                                                T
(:32) DK* =             y1(q)   -f   R*K4 —

               - u(q)z[q'            (K*+flk) ,R(K*+x)-(DE/E)+(1-v)r(q,K*)]/q
           -
                (1:;J{[ir(q)lz(q'               (K*Cx+k),R(K*+X)-(DE/E)+(l-r)F(q,K*)) qN}
           =



           Equation t32) displays the current—account balance as the dif—
ference between national production of tradables (including services)

and national absorption of tradables. The relative—price effect of a

real depreciation tends to improve the current account by increasing

output of traded goods and discouraging their consumption. But by shift—

ir1g demand toward nontradables, a rise in q leads directly to increased

imports of intermediate materials. The overall relative—price effect is

summarized by the 'Marshal1—Lerner condition for the model, which

states that with abaorption held constant, a real depreciation has a

positive effect on the current account, given by


(3:3. y'        -            - q/a      '      - r/qU     z/q          0.



Inequality (33) must hold in equilibrium because q can never exceed a

.see the dscusson +ollowinq equation (5)). But wnile tne expenditure—

swtch.nq effect of a real deoreciation is always positive, it is

weakenec by             the home—qooas sectors need                   tar imported intermediates.

           Th absorotion effect; of a                    rise in o -o tend to worsen the cur—
r                     4—i




    L                       '0

               'too         I



        u-vt     1
                                             —15—


rent account; a real depreciation raises the real value of private

wealth and lowers the expected real interest rate, trereby raising

expenditure z. It follows that the sign of              is indeterminate. The same

is true of the sign of Q2, but there are sound theoretical reasons for

assuming that a rise in net foreign assets K* causes the current account

to deteriorate. Accordingly,


(34)         .   0, Q2 <


The mathematical appendix again discusses the precise conditions under—

lying the inequalities in (34)

        Figures 1 and 2 show the two possible stable configurations of the

dynamic system consisting of equations (29) and (32). The lonq—run or

steady—state          levels of the   real exchange rate and net foreign asset

stock are denoted q and K               respectively. (Existence and uniqueness are

assumed. : In the first of these diagrams (corresponding to the case                >


ii)   the    economy cycles dun nq its approach to long—run equilibrium. In

the    second (corresponding          to the case     0) the economy's transition

path is either inonotunic or a half—cycle. An interesting feature of the
dynamics is the possibility that a depreciating (appreciating)

exchange rate will accompany a current—account surplus (deficit) along

portions of the transition path. This conjuncture is not typical of

flexible—price portfolio—balance models (for example. Calvo and

Rodriguez 1977).

            Because         0 and Q._ < 0, the stability condition for the

systems linear approximation near (q,K*) j_


c35)             —
                     '2l
where all functions are henceforth evaluated at long—run equilibrium.
From expressions derived in the appendix, stability condition (35)                      is
equivalent to


(3) 0        -R*Cr'-z+(l-) (1-r)q z1(K*+X+k)]                +


(qil: 1+zRe) ((nT'-'z)            E (cfq)(l-) /aJ+(1—) tyTt_<t (1-(q/a) ]c'-(/q) } (z/q) 1).


The     systems     stability does not require that Q5 be negative as             is   as—

suited in    c34. Wnen iL, > 0, (35) holds, and the trace condition qi +
                                                                     1


    0 is satisfied,       the    model has a   stable   configuration   in   which the Dq/q

=   U   and DK* =   U   loci have negative slopes but (contrary to figure 2)                 the

slope     0+ the    latter is     the qraater in absolute value. In the         interest of

con-serving space,        this    possibility is pursued no furtherS

          4jl the dynamic behavior of the economy appears qualitatively

uria+fected by the deqree ot           capital    mobility, the model :      interpretation
                                                                 7
and     predictions     hinge on the reqime one assumes. When there are no

private capital movements B* = 0 and K* coincides with the central—bank

reserve stock F*. In this case all net -external lending takes the form

of reserve movements, so that current—account equation (32) can be

interpreted as describing either the balance of payments or the evolu-

tion     0+ domastc money holdings measured in tradables. tinder capital

    bility, however1 K* = 8* +          Ft,    the consolidated external assets of the

private and public sectors. Equation (32) again describes the current

account, but it no longer applies to the balance of payments. Even

though K* is oredetermined, its components B* and F-* are not when capi-

tal is -obile. Private portfolio shifts will force central—bank foreign—

e;tcflane intervention that is           recorded in the balance of payments.
intervention        redistributes the ownership of K* between the private

aector     and tre central        bank, but it   cannot cause an instantaneous jump
in the economys overall external claims.
L




    Fre. cZ
                      7   DK4O

                  7
              7
          V
7 /   7


                            ci




              S
3. Liberalization of the Capital Account



      The first policy action considered is the liberalization of the

capital ;tcount.3 initially there is no private external asset trade ano

the domestic interest rate is a function of the predetermined money

supply. Liberalization takes the form of a complete removal of barriers

to financial capital movements. The economy is assumed to be at its

long—run equilibrium when liberalization takes place.

      The effect of liberalization depends on the relation between the

interest rate prevailing before liberalization and the depreciation—

adjusted world rate. It is most natural to assume that the domestic rate

exceeds R* + (PE/E) prior to the reform, so that there is a fall in the

cost of credit on impact.9 The initial and long-run effects of the

policy change can be visualized with the aid of figures 3 and 4.

      The fall in the domestic interest rate raises absorption for every

level of q and K*. Accordingly, the Oq = 0 and OK* = 0 schedule; shift

downward: for a given real exchange rate, a lower level of wealth is now

required for both internal balance (labor—market equilibrium) and exter-

nal balance (current—account equilibrium)    The real exchange rate

begins to appreciate in the face of excess domestic demand, and a

current—account deficit emerges. As wealth and expenditure subsequently

fall the real appreciation ceases and is reversed. The underemployment

that emerges at this point is gradually eliminated (perhaps with oscil-

lations) as the economy converges. What is most noteworthy is that in

spite of it; eventually deflationary effects, liberalization of the

capital account may cause the economy to undergo a protracted initial

uhasa of r:lrrpnrv overvaivation

      On the asset side the fall in the home interest rate raises money
ieiflarr. The orivata sector         reaches oortfolio equilibrium by borrowing

foreign    exchange from abroad and ;ellinq it for domestic money. Because

tha central bank must purchase this foreign exchange                 to   hold   the   cx—

change rate fixed, private borrowing leads to an instantaneous rise in
the aggre'ate money supply. The financial capital inflow results in a

transfer of     e:.ternal   claims from the private sector (which becomes

indebted to foreigners) to the central bank (which enjoys an offsetting

increase   in   reserves). K, however, cannot jump on impact. As                  external
assets begin to fall        in    the wake   of   liberalization, the balance—of—

pavgents   sxi nqa into     deficit.

        The model   suggests that       the removal of     capital   controls may have

contributad to the real appreciations,               external   deficits, and capital

in-flows that accompanied the economic reform programs in Argentina,

Chile, and Uruguay. Capital—account liberalization is likely to provide

only part of the explanation, however. In Chile, for example, the begin-

ning of real appreciation certainly pre—dates the removal of external

financial restrictions (Edwards i9B5a).

        Figures 3 and 4 suggest two results that have not yet been

demonstrated. First, the figures suggest that the long—run external debt

nacessari j     increases,       a result that is obvious oniy in the case                   >0
shown in figure 3. Second, they suggest that liberalization necessarily

entails a long—run real depreciation (in contrast to the real apprecia-

tion that clearly ierges            in the   short run). It is an implication of the

systems    stability (as will be         shown later; that the long—run external

asset   stock decltnes. On the assumption that it does. I will                   now argue

that    the reel exchange rate must rise in the long run. The argument made
   ct indeusnhjant lt5rest ifl that it estabitsfles . r;tfler .2neral
ornpns ta nra! royi ded the        domestic capi tal    stock: does not change, any
Kt




          *

              'I



     4-
2.




     I               7'

         S




                          1




         Fivrt   5
                                         —19—


disturbance that causes a decline in steady—state external claims must

also cause a rise in the steady state real exchange rate.

         For a given long—run foreiqn asset stock, figure 5 shows the

determination of long run absorption z and the lang—run relative price

q. The II or internal—balance schedule shows combirpations of q and

that clear the labor market (that is, satisfy (28) with Dq =             0).   The

schedules slope is given by


(.7) (dz/dqJ111 =_nTt_rmn/cl_T


Points    above II are associated with excess demand for labor. The XX or
external—balance schedule shows q—z combinations consistent with a zero

current account for a fixed value of K*. Its slope is


(38) (dzId)i =         (yT'-{Cl-(qfa)]w'-(w/q))(z/q))/[(/q)+(1-r)/a]           >0.


Points above XX are characterized by external deficits, and XX shifts

upward along an unchanging II schedule as K* rises. Point A, at the

schedules' intersection, is the unique paint consistent with both inter-

nal and external balance.

         On the maintained assumption that K*     falls    in the long run as a

result of liberalization, imagine that long—run absorption returns to

its pre—refort level. Then internal balance would require that long—run

q also be at its pre—ref arm level, q. But with K* (and hence, hational

income) lower, such a position, shown as point B in figure 5, would not

be consistent with external balance; in fact! there would be a deficit.

To   restore    full equilibrium with a lower steady      state   external   asset

stock, z must fail and q must rise from q. This downward movement along

II brings the economy to      point A.   It fall ows that I + the external debt

rises    in   the long run, the real exchange rate, after falling in the
K




             '11.




    P• art
short run4 must ultimately rise above its initial level.

       It remains to establish that the stock of foreign claims does

jndeed fall in the long run. Direct calculation shows that long—run

foreign assets nave in the same direction as the sign of the expression


(5)



Because         0, stability condition (3) inplies that 39) is negative.
            L




4. Devaluation and Disinflation



       In this section 1 discuss the effects of abrupt changes in both

the level and the rate of change of the exchange rate. An unanticipated

discrete devaluation may or may not occasion an initial contraction, but

in the long run it appreciates the real exchange rate and increases tue

foreign asset stack. Disinflation, defined hare as a permanent, unan-

ticipated reduction in the rate of currency depreciation, is neutral

under perfect capital mobility and rational expectations, price

rigidities notwithstanding. But when capital movements are prohibited, a

fail   in DE/E causes an   initial slump followed by a cumulative balance—

of—payments     surplus and an eventual real appreciation.


4. t Devaluation


          The effects of a sharp rise in E may be visualized witfl the aid of

 fIqures .5 and 7.   The !Tonetdrv authority is assumed to deviate from rule
  20) 4hen it dcv alues, failing to matcfl   che exchange—rate increase .ith

   :ooensatino     increase in domestic credit. Devaluation therefore af—
                                                       —21--



f-acts the ecbr,omy in part by decreasing the foreign—exchange value of

assets denominated in domestic currency——here the high—powered money

stock.          This   private—sector capital loss! in turn, reduces absorption. In

the model this effect takes the form of a change in the relation linking

-foreign reserves and the exchange—rate deflated money stock M/E.

            Prior to devaluation we have M/E = F* + 'A, where, by (16),


(40) 'A = (lIE,t (Ct — S—DES FS*ds).
                                       4-




Devaluation—induced capital gains on foreign reserves are not auto-

matically reflected in the monetary base but instead lead to the crea-

tion of artificial offsetting accounting liabilities on the central

banks balance sheet. Let the exchange rate rise at time t from                          to

       let a =                              denote the percentage devaluation, and let Mt be
                       (E—Et)IE
the level of the nominal money supply just before the devaluation takes

place. For all v                 t, the central—bank balance sheet becomes


(41) M /E =
            V    V
                        F*
                         V
                           + (l!E)IC
                                 t t
                                                -         F*d
                                                    — DE 33     - (E+_E)F*]
                                                                    t t   t


or



(42)    M
            V
                IE =
                 V       v
                              + 'A —   £(M/E)
                                         t  t


in the absence of further unanticipated devaluations (cf. (40)). Equa-

tion (42) implies that for any level of external assets, devaluation

lowers the foreign—exchange value of private wealth by the amount of the

concomitant capital loss on domestic money holdings. (Sea Obstfeld l984b

for further discussion.)

            Because devaluation lowers private wealth -for any K*4 the two mci

in +lqur?s             5 an    7 shift upward oiver q, a higher level of oreiun

claims ii1 be necessary for internal as well as external balance. As in
C




        ct




    7
section 3 dynamic stabili.ty implies that the long—run level of foreign

claims must increase. (This is obvious in the case associated with

figure 6.) The argument; made in the previous section therefore imply

that the real exchange rate falls in the long run. This real apprecia-

tion is coupled with a rise in steady—state absorption relative to the

economy's initial equilibrium.

        What can be said about the economy's transitional behavior? In

addition to shifting the economy 's steady state, devaluation also causes

an instantaneous initial rise in the real exchange rate. Since the wage

is predetermined, (6) yields    the   impact   relative—price effect

(43) dq/dE =   El - (q/a)i/PR

It is   clear from (43) that the elasticity of q with respect to devalua-

tion is smaller   the greater the import content of nontradables (that is,
the smaller is a): to the extent that devaluation raises costs in the

home—goods sector, its effect on relative final—goods prices is reduced.

        In figure 6, devaluation shifts the real exchange rate to the

right of the new Oq/q = 0 locus, so that initially there is an expansion

of employment and a current—account surplus. Over time foreign assets

rise and the real exchange rate appreciates, with the economy approach-

ing its new rest point in a cyclical fashion. There is no reason in

general why the initial postdevaluation position of the economy cannot

be to the left of the new Dq/q = 0 schedule. This is the case of a

cor,tractionary devaluation, the impact effect of which is a slump in

emp1oys!ent and a depreciating real Exchange rate. Even in this case,

increasing   wealth eventually reverses these impact effects. The prod—
sb ilit': tflat uevaluaton is contractionarv is irectiv related to the
importance of intermediates in the production of nontradables (K.ruqman
arid Taylor 1978: Buffie 1784). It is worth reiterating that if                a is low.
a larqe nominal devaluation may achieve only a minor real devaluation

because of the substantial and immediate pass—through of import—price

changes      to domeetic costs. In      this case, the short—run expansionary

effects      of the   associated    rise in q   will be small relative   to   the con—

tractionary      wealth   effects that    shift the two schedules   in   figure 6

up war U

           Under capital immobility there is an initial liquidity squeeze and

a rise in the domestic interest rate. But if the capital account has

alread'.     been lioeraiizod there is a sharp capital inflow that im—
medatetyepands central—bank reserves and the monetary base so as to
maintain the domestic interest rate at the depreciation—adjusted world
level

           Similar   dynamics arise in the case shown in figure 7, although the

econooiys approach to its lung—run position is direct when

Because the impact rise in q now worsens the current account it is

possible that devaluation occasions a temporary external deficit that

shrinks and is reversed as foreign assets fall and the real exchange

rate appreciates. Contractionary devaluation is possible here, too, but

only an expansionary devaluation can cause an initial deficit.

           The long—run   nonneutrality   of devaluation   contrasts sharply with
the asymptotic neutrality result! stressed in the monetary approach to

the balance of payments Frenkel and Johnson 1976), The result is in

part a consequence of the assumption that central—bank reserves earn

interest. L!noer capital ir'inobiiity individuals rebuild their real

balances •after the sharp initial rise in prices. Steady—state oreiqn

                          result,   and because these earn   interest    nat i onal
income     and qrj vate absorc,ti on rISE in the i ona run as well . When capital
                                        L—



is   mobile the liquidity   effect   of devaluation is counteracted by capital

inflows, but the wealth effect induces an initial fall in consumption

and a long—run effect on national income similar to that arising when

there are capital controls

         It is noteworthy that in models incorporating the Ricardian equiv—

aler.ce of government borrowing and taxation, the wealth effect of

devaluation disappears in the mobile—capital case1 This is because the

fall in private wealth associated with the initial capital inflow is

exactly offset by a rise in the present discounted value of expected

future    transfer payments from the government. These additonai transfer
payments are just the increased interest earnings on the higher stock of
central—bank foreign reserves. It is therifore possible for the private
sector to rebuild its real balances instantaneously through foreign

borrowing without changing its lifetime consumption possibilities. For
an analysis of these questions in models based on individual intertem—

poral maximization, see Dbstfeld (1981, 1984b) and Stockman (1933).



4.2 Exchange—Rate Oriented Disinflation



         Consider next the consequences of a credible, permanent reduction

in the rate of devaluatinn DE/E. In light of the Southern Cone ex-

periences surveyed by Dia: Alejandra (191) it is of particular inter-

est to ask under what circumstances an exchange—rate oriented disiiifla—

tion   scheme causes a real appreciation of the currency. The two cases of
internationally immobile and mobile capital are considered in turn.
         Under capital mnobiItty     the domestic nominal interest rate is

oredeterinred.      +ali in DE/E increases the real interest rate .eli else
equal),    leadino to underemployment and a current surplus at the initial
                                              C




levels        ot q and K*. s (28) and (3) show, both the DqIq =              I)   and DK* = ii

schedules therefore shift upward (see figure 8)                   Model stability re—

quires        that when cli   °, as is   the case in figure 8, K* rises           in the

long run. This is clearly so when                  0, so   that   the OK*   = 0 locus
slop-2s upward. By        the results of section 3, the steady—state real Ex-

change rate appreciates. Indeed, an increase in the devaluation rate has

dynamic effects which are qualitatively identical to those of capital—

account liberal i:ati on.

          In figure 8 there is an     initial     period of real depreciation as an

ncras           in the real jnterst rate leads       to   undoremployment. An external

surplus emerges on impact, and spending rises over time while real money

holdings are Outit up and the domestic nominal and real interest rates

-fall. Excess demand for labor arises as the economy crosses the new Dq/q

=    0 schedule. The real exchange rate appreciates and external assets

continue rising during the subsequent approach to the steady state. In

the models alternative configuration (not pictured), the medium—term

ynan1cs are sinilar but the approach to long—run equilibrium is oscil—

    a tory.


          When capital is mobile the nominal interest rate is given by R* +

(DEIEJ and tre domestic real rate is just R* + (1—i) (Dqiq). A                    fall   in

DE/E leaves this real interest rate unchanged and, as (28) and (32)

show, does not effect either of the schedules defining the systems

dram' cs.       With rati onal expectations, therefore, a permanent and
credible reduction in the rate of devaluation is neutral in spite of the
ri:idity of domestic prices.
          It is instructive to ask why a change in the depreciation rate is
nE-utt-ai with caoatal aobiiti. There are t                reasons for this. First.
the central banks         commitment to pea   the exchange rate forces it to
 fully accommodate the private portfolio shift caused by the change. A

-fail in   DEJE lowers the nominal interest rate and raises money demand.

But the public can increase its nominal money               holdings   immediately by

borrowing foreign exchange abroad and selling it to the central bank.

This transaction raises offical r-eserves but causes no change in the

economy's overall income, wealth, or spending. The second factor ensur-

ing neutrality is related to the assumptions regarding expectations and

wage Dehavlor. Because the rate of wage inflation can adjust instan-

taneously, the fall in GE/F is matched by an equal fall in DW/W, so that

no chanoc n employment need occur. The overall result                  is a sharp,
permanent fall     in the domestic inflation rate with no transitional

variation in spending        or employment.

         Neutralxty would not hold if the exchange rate were floating and

disinflation took the form of a reduction in trend monetary growth.

sset market aquiiibrium would then require a currency appreciation that

would raise real balances and expenditure. For                 discussion of this

effect see Calvo and Rodriguez (1977).

         Regardless of the degree of capital mobility, the model as +ormu—

lated gives little support to the notion that a reduction in the rate of

upward crawl is itself S        cause of real      appreciation.   Brie-f consideration
of some mechanisms not included in the present model is therefore

worthwhile. (The following list is of course not exhaustive.)

        Disinflation say lead to real appreciation i-f expectations of

in+iatlon   n the nontrabables            sector are adaptive, This view is set

forth   by Rodriquz (1982). When uncovered inter2st parity holds! a

        vanderetnod   fall   in DEtE lowers the domestic nominal          Interest   rate
                                H     H
            V   hUt leaves   DFH:F un on anoed      in   she short run. The as;ocateo

fall in the     real interest       rate oncouraqes expenditure and      so lowers   the
Kt




             D KO

         N

                ct




     F
                                     —27—


relative price of   tradable;.   This fall in the real interest rate is to

be cntrasted with the increase that occurs in the present model when

expectations re rational but capital is internattonally immobile.

       Dornbusch (1982) suggests that the rate of domestic price infla-

tion, like the level of domestic prices, is sluggish. If this is so, a

fall in the depreciation rate tautologically forces an initial period of

real   appreciation. The rate of home price inflation, must   eventually fall
to match that in the tradable; sector, but the dynamics of this process

are likely to be complex.

        Buffie (1983) constructs a model in which banks hold nontradabie

claims to capital which are imperfectly substitutable for foreign bond;

and hence. endogenously priced.      reduction in DE/E raises banks demand

for this asset, driving up its price (Tobins q) and hence investment

demand. The result is again a short—run real appreciation.

        The present model has assumed for simplicitly that disposable

income does not influence absorption. In a similar setting, van Wijnber—

gen (1983a) shows that this neglected channel may lead to real apprecia-

tion if disposable income is defined properly so as to reflect the

inflation tax on real balances. Because a lowering of the devaluation

rate also lowers domestic—price inflation, the inflation tax falls and

disposable income rises. The resulting increase in consumption fall;

partially on nontradables. driving their relatiye price upward. Calvo

(1983) also discusses this mechanism.

        Yet another channel of nonneutrality is suggested in the optimi:—

ing frameworx of Obstfeld (1981), which incorporates Ricardian equiv-

alence and letlerian target—wealth savinu behavior. Disinflation causes

•a rise in desired nominal balances rnatced by a capital in+lo and an

increase in interest—bearing official reserves. Because individuals
 capitalize epected government transfers, there is an increase in the

publics perceived consumption possibilities and a rise in expenditure.

Although the model does not explicitly encompass nontradables1 this rise

in expenditure is consistent with real appreciation.

      The foregoing models all consider a permanent unanticipated fall

in DE1E rather than the preannounced! phased decline in the devaluation

rate that was a hallmark of the Southern Cone plans. In Obstfeld (1984a)

I employ an intertemporal maximizing !TtOdel to study such schemes. An-

ticipated disinflation affects the economy by raising the path of an

expenditure—based real interest rate reflecting expected changes in the

prices of nontradables and liquidity services. If intertemporal sub—

sttution iS     sufficiently   low, the immediate result is a rise in spend—

irig, -an external deficit, and a real appreciation. The temporary real

appreciation gives way to a long—run decline in the relative price of

nontradables.

      A final observation relates to the question of credibility. As

Calvo (1933) and others have emphasized, much depends on the public's

belief in official promises to avoid roaxi—devaluations. If the public

views a discontinuous exchange—rate jump as a possiblity, this will be

built xnto inflation Expectations and subsequent wage settlements. A

persistent belie in a maxi—devaluation that does not materialize will

therefore lead to an extended period over which domestic prices rise

more quickly than the exchange rate. Even if the initial fear of

devaluation was in some sense unjustified, the resulting real apprecia—

ti'n is likely to foce the                   hand.L
                                  —0


5. Conclusion


      This paper has constructed a dynamic framework in which

liberalization and stabilization measures of the type rec2ntly seen in

Latin nericas Southern Cone can be studied. The model attempts to

capture some salient features of advanced industrializing economies by

postulating a crawling—peg exchange—rate system, slow labor—market

adjustment, and an important role for imported production inputs. Be-

cause the model encompasses economies with closed and open capital

accounts as special cases, the impact of capital-account restrictIons on

policy effects is highlighted. A further advantage of this enera1

framework is its ability capture the macroeconomic consequences of

opening the capital account.

      Liberalization of the capital account leads to an initial period

of real exchange—rate appreciation, but a long—run real depraciaton and

incrEase in foreign debt. The economy passes through alternating phases

of boom and slumo in the transition process. Devaluation is nonneutral

ever' in the long run, and may be contractionary in the snort run. Even

though this measure entails an impact real depreciation, it drives the

economy to a new stationary position in which the relative price of

 nontradables is higher than initially. Finally, attempts to disinfiate

 through manipulation of the rate of currency devaluation may have mini—

 sal eects under capital mobility. When capital is immobile, however,

 disinflation has effects qualitatively similar to those of closing the

 cacital account,

       n important omitted variable of the mooel is imper+ect

 rredibjljtv', public disbelief tn the nermanence of reform inItiatives

 •an in official promises not to inflict capital losses througn devaiua—
                                                     -3U-

tion or other measures. There can be little doubt that incredulity

played a central role in both                  the tinE olning and the unraveling of the
Southern Cane stabilization program;. Understanding of this phenomenon

is currently incomplete, but it is at the top of the aqenda for future

research.




      The purpose of this appendix is to supply a detailed discussion of

the assumptions underlying the moders dynamics. Let (o,K*) denote the

steady state of the system described by (29) and (32). The linear ap-

proximation to the system near its steady state is


      Dq =                  — qi       + q   r2(K* —



      OK'    =
                 Q1(q
                        —
                            q)     +
                                       02(K'
                                                —
                                                    K:),

where all functions are evaluated at Cq,K*). Since the two dynamic

variables are predetermined, the linearized system is stable if its two

characteristic roots are negative. Necessary and sufficient conditions

for this are the trace condition q 1'                      + (1       < 0 and the determinant
                                                    .1            2
condition (35).

      Direct calculation using (28) and (32) shows that in a neighbor-

hood of the steady state,


         =
                                         .7 —
                                        —o




        = _n(i_)(zjql         t+z E


        =    yT'-{Ei-(q/a) ]T'-(c!q)>   (zig)

                      - (1-i) [(iq)+(1-)ia]     (z1q (K*+flk)+z2r1)

         =   R*   -
                      [(u/q)t(1-T)/a]Cz1q'+Z2[R'+(1Vr23}.

      The inequalities in 30) and (34) are predicated on the assumption

that the economy is near its long—run equilibrium. Those in c30) rely

also on the assumption that 1 + ir(1—) (i—r)z2 .         0. For a discussion of

this condition, and a theoretical rationale, see Obstfeld and Roqoff

(1984). Once it is assumed that 1+n(1—r) (i—Y)z2           0, the additional

assumption K*++k >0 (which is clearly stronger than necessary)

delivers (30). The inequality c,         0    in (34) is just the standard re-

quirement that an increase in wealth raise absorption by more than

income at a constant real exchanqe rate. As was mentioned in the text4

the assumption Q2 < 0 is needed for brevity rather than stability.

      Inequality (36) follows immediately from the partial derivatives

listed above and the assumption that l+ir(l—) (I—iz7 > 0.



Footnotes



his paper was prepared for the NBER/World Bank conference on Struc—

tural Adjustment and the Real Exchange Rate in Developing Countries,h

November 29—December 1, 1984, Washington, D.C. I am grateful for the

comments of conference participants. Financial support from the Pational

Science Foundation and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation is acknowledged

with thanks.



1. For discussion of individual countries see Foxley (1982i, Harberper
 (1982)4 Buffie (1983). Calvo (1983)   ,    Dornbuszh   (1985)   ¶ and Edwards
 (i925e)   See also the oapers and discussion collected in Ardito Bar—

 lena, Blejer, and Landau (1983).          full account of the collapse of the

Southern Cone   reform programs i beyond this paper's scope. Dia:
Alelandro (1984), Dornbusch (1985), and Edwards (1985a) address that

topic. Edward-s (1985b) survey; some of the relevant analytical ques—

t ion;.




2. A single exchange—rate regime, the pegged rate, is assumed

throuqrout. 2.runo ;1983 discusses interactions between the degree of

capital mobility and the exchanqe—rate regime.



3, Relatea models have been developed by Blejer and Mathieson (1981),

Calvo 19S2 , and van Wijnbergen (1983a). Blejer and Mathiason (1981)

stress the role of the domestic banking system. The setup in Caivo

9B2 is similar to that of the present paper. But while a simple

Phillips curve governs the wage dynamic; described below, Calvo assumes

that the home price level is an inde< of firms' predetermined output

prices, set at staggered intervals. nather related model is due to

8ufie (993), and incorporates a banking system and a richer menu of

assets. The intrinsic dynamic; arising froffi asset accumulation are not

pursued in that model however. l(han and Knight (1981) estimate and

smuiate a -fairly detailed developina—countrv inacromodel.



4.   By assuming perfect foresight I am pushing aside undoubtedly impor-

tant   cuestions about the credibility of government policies and the
speed with wbi:h expectations aoiust to ew policy requnes. See sectlon
4,2 below for further discussion.
5. See equation (40) below. The coefficient X can be altered by certain

government   policies,     for example a discrete devaluation AE of the cur-

rency not matched by a "helicopter" domestic—credit increase              AC satisfy—

ing equation (20)   • or    by an increase in domestic credit not matched by

the appropriate devaluation. long this model's perfect foresight paths,

however, official transfer payments always compensate the private sector

for the depreciation of its money holdings against foreign currency. (0+

course, any individual takes these transfers to be parametric, and so

does not view them as a function of her own portfolio decisions.) The

effect   of an "uncompensated devaluation on the relation between M/E and
F*   is discussed in section 4.


6. It should be kept in mind that under rule (20) , the experiment of
raising q corresponds to a rise in E (a devaluation) coupled with a
compensating increase in domestic credit. (See footnote 5.) More simply1
q can be viewed as rising through a fall in the predetermined nominal




7. 1ote that both loci are flatter v4hen there is          no capital mobility.


S. than and Zabler (1983) use a detailed simulation nodei to evaluate

the ettects ot opening the capital account. The dynamic aojustment

prcduced by their model is quite similar to that found below. Dorihtac

 i984 studies the effect of financial opening c'n the real exchange rate

in ar    xntsrteffporai naxieizing model. Calvo      t.1982i   also   studies capital—

account    liberalization.    identifvinc    its effects   ith those of an in—

crease     n CufflestI c "eai ft. He jbtans dvnin cs       nil a r totrose Obtained

here, but the l ong—run results are         di +4 erent because the service account
                                       —34-


Is ignored. See Calvo (1933) for a less formal discussion of liberaliza—
ti on.


9. Strictly speaking, the use of the diagrams for this experiment i

valid    only for small changes. This implies that the difference between

the pre— and post—retorm nominal interest rates can not be too great.



ID.   The broken lines in figures 3 and 4 are of course the pre—reform
internal— and external—balance loci. The assumption              U is what
         ts the asserti on that a fall in K*. all eisa eQual     i mproves the
currant account.


11. Under capital mobility, the nominal interest rate will fully and

lrmedlatsly reflect the possibility of devaluation. This may explain why

in Argentina. for example, the difference between the local and world

noninai    rates generally   exceeded the preannounced rate of devaluation in

tre   ocriod after January 1979. 4; Calvo (1983) observes1 however! ex—
parted uevaluation should not affect the real      interest    rate, for it
raises the nominal rate and expectedinflation by the same amount.




 of er Bfl ccc



      to Barietta, N EOi55 Maro i. Si eer and Lui s Landau, ads. 1923.
Ec-onointc Liberalization and Stabilization Policies in Argentina. Chile,
and jrucoa:e: kcoiicatons of the Monetary Acroac to the Balance of
Payments. casnnqtc.n. D.C.: The World Bank.
                                           —35—




Dicier,           Mario l. and Donald Mathieson. 1981. "The Preannouncement of

Exchange Rate Changes as a Stabilization Instrument." International

Monetary Fund Staff Papers 2B (December); 760—792.



Bruno, Michael. 1976. "The Two—Sector Open Economy and the Real Exchange

Rate." American Economic Review 66 (September): 566—577.



          ,       1979. "Stabilization and Stagflation in a Semi—Industrialized

Economy." In International Economic Policy: Theory and Evidence, ed.

Rudiqer Dornbusch and Jacob A. Frenkel. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univer-

sity Press.



          .       1983. "Real versus Financial Openness under Alternative Exchange
                                                           Market: The
Rate Regimes." In Financial Policies and the World Capital
Problem of LatinAmerican Countries, ed. Pedro Aspe Armella, Rudiger

 Dornbusch, and Maurice Dbstfeld. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.



 Buffie Edward F. 1983. "Price—Output Dynamics, Capital Inflows and Real

 Appreciation." imeo. Department of Economics, University of Pennsyl-

 vania, Philadelphia.



              .    1984. "Devaluation and Imported Inputs: The Large Country Case."

 Mmcc. Department of Economics. University of Pennsylvania, Philadel

 pflia.




 Calvo. Gull lermu A. 1992. Reai Exchange Rate Dynamics with Fixed

 Noniai            ParitIes: On the Economics of Dvrshooting and lnterest—Rate

 1.anace'T,ent        with ;ticnai Price ett:na." Discuscion Faper no. 12.
 Department of Economics, Columbia University, New York.



           .    1983.    'Trying to Stabilize; Some Theoretical Reflections Based

 on the Case of trgentina." In Financial Policies and the World Capital

 Market; The Problem of Latin inerjcan Countries,
                                                            ed. Pedro 4spe AmelIa,
 Rudiqer Dorribusch, and Maurice Dbstfeid. Chicago: L'niversity of Chicago

 Pr ess.




 Calvo,        Guillerrno ., and   Carlos Mfredo Rodriquez. 1977. UA Model of
   change        Rate Determination under Currency Substjtuti on   and Rational
 Expectations."          Journal of Political Economy B5 (June); 6t7—25.


Diaz   Aleandro, Carlos F. 1981. "Southern Cone Stabilization Plans." In
Economic Stabilization in Developing Countries, ed. William R. Cline and
Sidney Weintraub. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.


           . 1584. "Goodbye Financial Repression, Hello Financial Crash.'
ilimeo. Department of Economics, Columbia University, New York.


Dorlhiac, Jorge. 1984. Financial Integration and the Real            Exchange
Rate." llimeo. Department of Economics, Columbia University. New York.


Eornbusch, Rudicer. 1982. "Stailization Policies in Developing
c:our,tries; ira.t Have e Learned?" World Development i) cSeptember) : 141—




       .17:35.          External Debt, Budqet De+icite, and Diseq:ai librium Ex—
cflanpe Rates." In International Debt and the Deveicoing Countries,          e.
john 1, Cuddinoton and Gordon 4. Smith. Washington, D.C.: The or1d

Bank.




Edwards, Sebastian. 1985a. "Stabilization with Liberalization: An

Evaluation of Ten Years of Chiles Experiment with Free Market Policies,

1973—1983." Economic Development and Cultural Change 33 (January;: in

press.




        —.   1985b. The Order of Liberalization of the External Sector in

Developing Countries, Princeton Essays in International Finance, in

press. Princeton: International Finance Section, Department of

Economics1 Princeton University.



Foi.1ey, Alelandro. 1982. 'Towards a Free Market Economy: Chile 1974—

1979." Journal of Development Economics 10 (Februaryi 3—29.



Frenkel Jacob A, and Harry S. Johnson. eas. 1976. The Monetary AD—

proach to the Balance of Payments. London: Allen and Unwin.



Harberqer4 Arnold C. 1982. "The Chilean Economy in the 197 Os: Crisis.

Stabilization. Liberalization, Reform." In Economic Policy in a World of

Chanqe. 2d. Karl Brunner and Allan H. .Meltzer. Carnegie—Rochester Con—

+ersnce Series on Public Policy vol. 17. Amsterdam: 4orth—Holland.



 Rhan, Nohsin S.. and Malcolm D. Kniht. 1981. Stabili:ati'Dn Proarams in

 Jove!   opi no Countrx as:     t-ormel Fr 3r,2wor:   International   ionetary Fund

 3-La:f+__Psoara 26' (M;rcM :
 Khan, Mohin S., and Roberto Zahler. 19B3. The Macroeconomic Effects            of

 Changes n Barriers to Trade and Capital Flows; A Simulation Analysis."

 International Monetary Find Staff Papers 30 (June): 223—282.



 Kruqman, Paul, and Lance Taylor. 1978. "Contractionary Effects of

 Devaluation." Journal of International Economics B (August): 445—456.



Mciinnon, Ronald         1.1   rd Donald 3. Mathieson. t9Si. How to Manage a

Repressed Economy. Esays in International Finance no. 14-5. Princeton:

 international Finance Section, Departaent of Economics, Princeton

University.




Obst-feld, Maurice. 1981. 'Capital 1obility and Devaluation in an Op—

timizing Model with Rational Expectations." American Economic Review 71

     •       LI,


              19E2.   'Relative Prices, Employment, and the Exchange Rate in an

Economy with Foresight." Econometrica 50 (September): 1219—1242.



         .    1984a. "The Capital Inflows Frobies Revisited: 4 Stylized Model

of Southern—Cone Disinflation.' Work.in Paper no. 1456, National Bureau

of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.



             1°84h.    Capital Controls, the Dual Excnange Rate, and
Devaluation." 4orkiro Paper no', 1324, National Bureau of Economic Re—
saarch Cacnbri doe, rlassachucetts,


Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Roqoff. 1984. "Exchanqe Rate Dynamics
                                   —39—


with Sluggish Prices under Alternative PriceAdiutment Rules.

tional Economic Review 25 (February?: 159—174.



Rodrigue2, Carlo; Alfredo. 1982. "TWe Argentine Stabilization Plan of

December 20th." World Development 10 (September): 801—811.



Salter1 W.E.G. 1959. "Internal and External Balance: The Role of Price

and Expenditure Effects." Economic Record 35 August) : 226—238.



Btockman, Alan C. 1983. aReal Exchange Rate; under Alternative Nominal

Exchange—Rate Systems." Journal of International Money and Finance 2

(August): 147—ib.



van Wijnbergen, Sweder. 1983a. "The Crawling Peg, Capital Flows and the

Real Exchange Rate in LDCs." MineD. The World Bank, Washington, D.C.



       .   1783b. "Credit Policy, Inflation and Growth in a Financially

Repressed Economy." Journal of Development Economics 13 (           ): 45—


 QU.
