                                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    TAXES AND TRADING VERSUS INTENSITY STANDARDS:
ECOND-BEST ENVIRONMENTAL POLICIES WITH INCOMPLETE REGULATION (LEAKAGE) OR MARKET POWER

                                                   Stephen P. Holland

                                                  Working Paper 15262
                                          http://www.nber.org/papers/w15262


                                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                               August 2009




          Thanks to seminar participants at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro (UNCG) and the
          University of California Energy Institute (UCEI) and to Severin Borenstein, Don Fullerton, Garth
          Heutel, Jonathan Hughes, Mark Jacobsen and Chris Knittel. The views expressed herein are those
          of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

          NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
          reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
          NBER publications.

          © 2009 by Stephen P. Holland. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
          may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
          the source.
Taxes and Trading versus Intensity Standards: Second-Best Environmental Policies with Incomplete
Regulation (Leakage) or Market Power
Stephen P. Holland
NBER Working Paper No. 15262
August 2009
JEL No. H23,Q40,Q50

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper investigates whether an emissions tax (equivalent to an emissions cap) maximizes social
welfare (defined as the sum of consumer and producer surplus) in the presence of incomplete regulation
(leakage) or market power by analyzing an intensity standard regulating emissions per unit of output.
With no other market failures, an intensity standard indeed yields lower welfare, although combining
it with a consumption tax eliminates this discrepancy. For incomplete regulation, I show that under
certain conditions an intensity standard can yield higher welfare than any emissions tax (including
the optimal emissions tax). This result persists even with the addition of a consumption tax, which
ameliorates output distortions and can sometimes help the intensity standard attain the first best (when
an emissions tax/consumption tax combination cannot). Comparing intensity standards to output-based
updating shows that the latter yields higher welfare because of its additional flexibility. Finally, I show
that with market power an intensity standard can yield higher welfare than the optimal emissions tax.

The intuition of these results is relatively straightforward. The weakness of an intensity standard is
that it relies more on substitution effects than output effects to reduce emissions. With incomplete
regulation or market power, this disadvantage may be helpful since leakage may offset gains from
reducing output and since market power already inefficiently reduces output.


Stephen P. Holland
Bryan School of Business and Economics
University of North Carolina, Greensboro
P.O. Box 26165
Greensboro, NC 27402-6165
and NBER
sphollan@uncg.edu
1     Introduction

Emissions taxes and emissions markets are widely regarded as the preferred policy instruments for

regulation of environmental externalities. Since these instruments can impose the correct price on

a missing market, the instruments can mimic the ﬁrst-best market environment and implement

the eﬃcient control of the externality. This paper investigates whether these instruments indeed

maximize social welfare (deﬁned as the sum of consumer and producer surplus) in the presence

of other market failures. Surprisingly, I show that these two instruments may yield lower welfare

than a third instrument, an intensity standard regulating emissions per unit of output, in the

presence of incomplete regulation (leakage) or market power.1 In fact, since the analysis compares

the second-best policies, the stronger result holds that under certain conditions any tax or any

emissions cap yields lower welfare than an intensity standard.

        Incomplete regulation or leakage can occur for two reasons.2 First, a political jurisdiction

may not be geographically consistent with the region that suﬀers environmental damages or with

the product market. For example, since carbon is a global pollutant, regulating carbon emissions

within any single country or set of countries may cause production and emissions to “leak” to

countries which do not regulate carbon emissions. International leakage is especially troublesome

since attempts to tax foreign-produced goods based on carbon content would likely violate inter-

national trade law. Second, within a political jurisdiction some sectors may use political clout to

avoid regulation, and there may be costs to expanding the regulated base to cover 100% of the

emissions.3 For example, biofuels are largely exempt from proposed carbon legislation.4 Once

the scope of the regulation is set, production (and emissions) will tend to leak to the unregulated

ﬁrms.

        Market power’s eﬀect on environmental regulation was ﬁrst discussed by Buchanan (1969),
   1
     The analysis of intensity standards is parallel to some analyses of performance standards. Since performance
standards are generally considered a command and control policy, I use “intensity standard” to reﬂect the market-
based nature of recent policies such as the low carbon fuel standard.
   2
     Fowlie (2007) investigates leakage with market power. See also Bushnell et al. (2007).
   3
     Metcalf (2008) argues for a carbon tax base that covers 90% of the U.S.’s carbon emissions. Stavins (2008)
states that “nearly all” U.S. CO2 emissions could be captured by regulating 2,000 upstream entities. Bluestein
(2005) estimates that “about 1,250 entities [are] required for 95%+ capture of domestic [CO2 ] production.” Proposed
legislation is much less comprehensive.
   4
     In particular, indirect land use eﬀects are exempt from the Waxman-Markey bill.
and Barnett (1980) showed that the optimal emissions tax for a monopoly should generally be

less than the marginal damages.5 These theoretical concerns are important as many polluting

industries are likely subject to market power.6

        The ineﬃciency of intensity standards was established by Helfand (1991) and Fischer

(2001).7 More recently Holland et al. (2009) argued that California’s Low Carbon Fuel Stan-

dard (LCFS), an intensity standard regulating carbon emissions per unit of transportation fuel,

cannot attain the ﬁrst best, could increase carbon emissions, and has much higher abatement costs

than an eﬃcient policy.8 However, optimal intensity standards and optimal emissions taxes (or

trading) have not been compared under leakage or market power.9

        While the main result of this paper, that an intensity standard can yield higher welfare than

the second-best tax or emissions cap, is surprising in the light of the prior literature, the intuition

is relatively straightforward. Environmental market mechanisms reduce emissions through both

substitution and output eﬀects. Substitution eﬀects reduce emissions by employing additional

capital (e.g., emissions control technology) or more costly fuel inputs (e.g., switching to a cleaner

fuel source). Output eﬀects reduce emissions by reducing consumption of the polluting good (e.g.,

through car-pooling or investments in energy eﬃciency). Intensity standards fail because they

mainly induce substitution eﬀects and not output eﬀects. For example, Holland et al. argue that

the LCFS does not directly encourage carpooling, reduced driving, or vehicular fuel eﬃciency.

Alternatively, a tax or emissions cap eﬃciently reduces emissions through both substitution and

output eﬀects.

        With leakage or market power, an intensity standard can yield higher welfare because

output eﬀects may not eﬃciently reduce emissions. With leakage, higher marginal costs of the
   5
     Mansur (2007) compares taxes and emissions trading in concentrated industries. Optimal policy design is even
more complicated with multiple heterogeneous ﬁrms with market power.
   6
     For example, electricity is usually provided by regulated monopolies, world oil markets are aﬀected by the OPEC
cartel, and petroleum reﬁning, coal mines, railroad transport of coal and ethanol, and cement and steel production
are highly concentrated.
   7
     Fullerton and Heutel (2007) analyze the incidence of intensity standards. Fischer (2003) characterizes the
imperfect competition equilibrium with intensity standards.
   8
     Newell and Pizer (2008) show that adjusting a regulation to an exogenous index (such as GDP) can decrease
abatement costs. An exogenous index avoids the additional distortions of an intensity standard.
   9
     The cost-eﬀectiveness of a variety of policy instruments, including intensity standards, has been analyzed in
the presence of pre-existing distortionary taxes (Goulder et al. 1999) and in the presence of industry compensation
requirements (Bovenberg et al. 2008).



                                                         2
regulated sector are not translated directly into reduced consumption (and reduced emissions)

since production can increase from the unregulated sector. If the supply of the unregulated sector

is elastic enough and dirty enough, leakage may even increase total emissions. Similarly, with

market power, ﬁrms ineﬃciently restrict output. Thus a policy that additionally restricts output

may increase abatement costs unnecessarily. An intensity standard can yield higher welfare since

it distorts output decisions less than a tax or emissions cap.

        This paper is closely related to work on output-based updating (also called output-based

allocations) of emissions permits.10 Recent cap-and-trade legislation addressing climate change

includes output-based updating for sectors susceptible to leakage.11,12 Both intensity standards

and output-based updating pursue two objectives (penalizing emissions and encouraging output)

with one instrument. Clearly two instruments would be superior, and I show that an optimal

combined emissions tax and production subsidy (for the covered sector) attain higher welfare than

the optimal intensity standard. Whether output-based updating can attain higher welfare than

the optimal intensity standard depends on the degree to which the updating can mimic the optimal

combined emissions tax and output subsidy.

        The advantage/disadvantage of intensity standards is that they subsidize output, which can

lead to too much consumption. However, excess consumption can be remedied with a consumption

tax.13 With leakage, the advantage of a consumption tax is that it can apply equally to domestic

and foreign production and thus complies with trade laws. This advantage is important since I

derive conditions under which an intensity standard combined with a consumption tax can attain

the ﬁrst best whereas an emissions tax combined with a consumption tax cannot.14

        Section 2 presents the basic model with pollution as the only market failure and illustrates

the solution techniques. I show that in the absence of additional market failures an emissions tax

(emissions cap) attains the ﬁrst best, but an intensity standard does not. However, I show that
  10
     See Fischer and Fox (2007, 2009) and Bushnell and Chen (2009).
  11
     Output-based updating is included in the House version of the American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009
(ACES Act), H.R. 2454, also known as Waxman-Markey.
  12
     Stavins (2007) argues instead for requiring that imports of carbon-intensive products—such as iron and steel,
aluminum, cement, bulk glass, and paper, and possibly a very limited set of other particularly CO2 emissions-
intensive goods—carry with them CO2 allowances. This scheme may conﬂict with trade law.
  13
     This consumption tax is not meant as a broad-based tax on all consumption, but rather on consumption of this
good.
  14
     See also Fullerton (1997) and Fullerton and Mohr (2003) on similar combined instruments.


                                                        3
this deﬁciency can be corrected with the addition of a consumption tax.

             Section 3 extends the model to analyze leakage from a covered (domestic) sector to an

uncovered (foreign) sector. I characterize the second-best emissions tax and intensity standard

and show that neither policy can attain eﬃciency unless uncovered emissions are also taxed at

marginal damages. The second proposition shows that an intensity standard can attain higher

welfare than the second-best emissions tax and derives a suﬃcient condition for this result. I then

address combining the policies with a consumption tax applied to both covered and uncovered

production. This additional instrument is useful since it can allow the intensity standard to attain

the ﬁrst-best even though an emissions tax/consumption tax combination cannot.

             Section 4 extends the basic model to analyze market power and shows that an intensity

standard can attain higher welfare than an emissions tax. Section 5 concludes.


2         First-best regulation

To introduce the model and solution methods, I ﬁrst analyze regulation where the sole market

failure arises from the externality. After describing the market equilibrium subject to an emissions

tax or intensity standard, the optimal policy is characterized.

             Emissions reductions are generally modeled as abatement from counterfactual emissions,

which depend on output and are endogenous. To disentangle the relationship between output and

emissions, I model emissions as an input (or “netput”) in the production process, i.e., emissions

are modeled the same as labor or capital.15 The ﬁrm may demand more or less of the emissions

input depending on prices. Modeling emissions as an input allows for rich substitution possibilities

and places at our disposal all of the usual tools of production theory.

             Assume a (representative) ﬁrm produces output, q, with a concave production function

f (k, e) with non-negative marginal products (fk ≥ 0 and fe ≥ 0) where k is a vector of market

inputs (e.g., labor, capital, fuel, etc.) with price vector w and e is an unpriced input (e.g.,

emissions).16 Let U be the beneﬁt function, where U  > 0 and U  < 0, and let damages from
    15
         Although not common, a similar approach is used for example in Fullerton and Heutel (2007).
    16
         The ith market input, market input price, and marginal product are represented by ki , wi , and fki .




                                                              4
pollution be τ e.17

         Suppose the ﬁrm is subject to an emissions tax. The ﬁrm’s cost function depends on the

emissions tax, t, and is given by c(q; w, t) = mink,e wk + te + λ[q − f (k, e)] where λ is the Lagrange

multiplier. Cost minimization implies that w = λfk (k, e) and t = λfe (k, e), and the envelope

theorem implies that marginal cost is the shadow value, i.e., cq (q; w, t) = λ. The four endogenous

variables in the equilibrium—q, λ, k, and e—are completely determined by the two ﬁrst-order

conditions from cost minimization; the production function: q = f (k, e); and the market clearing

condition: U  (q) = λ.

         The regulator chooses the tax to maximize net social beneﬁts


                                       max U (q) − c(q; w, t) − τ e + te.                                          (1)
                                         t


Note that the tax revenue is counted as a cost for the ﬁrm and thus must be added to the

objective.18 The ﬁrst order condition (FOC) is then

                                                    ∂q ∂c                 ∂e
                                  [U  (q) − cq ]      −    + e − (τ − t)    =0                                    (2)
                                                    ∂t   ∂t               ∂t

Since the ﬁrst term is zero by the market clearing condition and the second and third terms are

additive inverses by applying the envelope theorem to the regulated ﬁrm’s cost function, the FOC

implies the well-known result that t = τ , i.e., the optimal tax is simply marginal damages. This

tax attains the eﬃcient allocation, which is characterized by U  (q) = wi/fki = τ /fe . Similarly, the

optimal emissions cap can reduce emissions eﬃciently as shown in the appendix. Note that the

tax reduces pollution through both substitution and output eﬀects.19

         Now suppose the ﬁrm is subject to an intensity standard σ such that e/q must be less

than σ. The ﬁrm’s cost function depends on the intensity standard and is given by c(q; w, σ) =

mink,e wk + λ[q − f (k, e)] + γ[e − σq] where λ and γ are Lagrange multipliers. Cost minimization

implies that w = λfk (k, e) and γ = λfe (k, e). Note that the envelope theorem implies that the
  17
     Marginal damages are assumed constant, but the results are easily extended to increasing marginal damages.
  18
     The regulator does not receive any beneﬁt from the tax revenue. To see this, note that the objective is equivalent
to U (q) − wk − τ e. To model a beneﬁt (cost) from tax revenue (for example, from oﬀ-setting other distortionary
taxes) a multiplier could be included on the te term.
  19
     Substitution and output eﬀects can be made precise by analyzing Slutsky-like equations from the input demands.




                                                           5
marginal cost is cq (q; w, σ) = λ − γσ = wi /fki · (1 − fe σ).20 The ﬁve endogenous variables in

the equilibrium—q, λ, k, e, and γ—are completely determined by the two ﬁrst-order conditions

from cost minimization; the production function, q = f (k, e); the market clearing condition,

U  (q) = λ − γσ; and the binding intensity standard, e = σq.

         The regulator chooses the intensity standard to maximize net social beneﬁts

                                                 max U (q) − c(q; w, σ) − τ e.                                         (3)
                                                  σ


The ﬁrst order condition is then

                                                             ∂q   ∂c    ∂e
                                           [U  (q) − cq ]      −    −τ    = 0.                                        (4)
                                                             ∂σ ∂σ      ∂σ
                                                                                        −∂c
Since the ﬁrst term is zero by the market clearing condition and since                  ∂σ    = γq = qwi fe (k, e)/fki (k, e),

this FOC implies that τ ∂σ
                        ∂e
                           = qwife (k, e)/fki (k, e) which can be written:

                                      fe (k, e)    τ ∂e σ    τ       ∂q σ
                                                 =   (  · )=    (1 +      )                                            (5)
                                      fki (k, e)   wi ∂σ e   wi      ∂σ q

where the last equation follows since ∂e/∂σ = q + σ∂q/∂σ.

         Unlike the emissions tax, the intensity standard cannot attain the ﬁrst-best regulation of

the externality. First note that the best intensity standard has the wrong combination of inputs
                                     fe (k,e)
since [5] implies that     τ
                           wi   =   fki (k,e)   unless the elasticity of output with respect to the standard is

zero. Even if this elasticity were zero, so that the input combination were correct, the output

level would still be wrong since cq (q; w, σ) =               wi
                                                              fki [1   − fe σ] which is less than the eﬃcient level    wi
                                                                                                                       fki .

Intuitively, the intensity standard acts as a subsidy to output since additional output relaxes the

constraint on emissions; hence, marginal cost is too low.

         An intensity standard does not distort the relative prices faced by market inputs. With

market inputs i and j, the marginal rate of technical substitution (MRTS) between e & ki and

between e and kj is in [5]. Dividing the results shows that the MRTS between the two market

inputs, ki and kj , equals the market input price ratio, i.e., fki /fkj = wi /wj . Thus the intensity
  20
    The intuition of this condition describes the output subsidy eﬀect. With an emissions tax, the cost of increasing
output by one (marginal) unit is the cost of the additional input required, 1/fki , times it price, wi. Cost minimization
insures that the ﬁrm equates this cost across all market inputs. With an intensity standard, the cost of increasing
output by one (marginal) unit is reduced. Increasing output by one unit relaxes the standard which allows σ
additional units of the unpriced input and fe σ additional units of free output. Thus increasing output requires
additional market inputs for only the proportion 1 − fe σ of additional output.


                                                                 6
standard does not distort the relative prices faced by market inputs, but distorts the price faced

by emissions relative to market inputs and distorts the marginal cost.

          Since the ineﬃciency of the intensity standard arises primarily from its failure to price

output correctly, the ineﬃciency might be reduced by combining the intensity standard with a

consumption tax. In fact, the result is much stronger: the ineﬃciency can be eliminated. Since

the analysis of the consumption tax is quite similar to that above, it is relegated to the appendix

(as are proofs of all results). To summarize:

Proposition 1 i) An emissions tax or emissions cap can attain the eﬃcient level of emissions,
input usage, and production. ii) An intensity standard cannot attain eﬃciency. iii) An intensity
standard coupled with a consumption tax can attain the eﬃcient level of emissions, input usage,
and production.

The ineﬃciency of an intensity standard in (ii) is analogous to results in Fischer (2001), Holland et

al. and in Helfand. As in Holland et al. the result depends on the diﬀerentiability of U . Intuitively,

if demand is perfectly inelastic, an intensity standard can attain the ﬁrst best since there is no

output distortion and the standard corrects the relative input prices.21

          The eﬃciency of the combined consumption tax and intensity standard in (iii) is analogous

to, but more general than, a result in Holland et al. which showed that an LCFS combined with

a gasoline tax could be eﬃcient.22 As shown in the appendix, the optimal intensity standard sets

fe /fki = τ /wi and the optimal consumption tax is τ σ. This result suggests that the combined con-

sumption tax and intensity standard may hold promise for correcting the ineﬃciencies of intensity

standards.


3        Second-best regulation with leakage

To extend the model to analyze leakage, consider a covered (regulated or domestic) ﬁrm, which

produces q C , and an uncovered (unregulated or foreign) ﬁrm, which produces q U .23 Each ﬁrm has

access to the same production technology described by the concave production function f (ki , ei)

for i ∈ {C, U } where ki is a vector of market inputs (e.g., labor, capital, fuel, etc.) with prices
    21
     This can be seen since the elasticity in [5] is zero, i.e., perfectly inelastic demand implies ∂q/∂σ = 0. Moreover,
although marginal cost is too low, consumption is not too great since demand is perfectly inelastic.
  22
     See also Fullerton and Mohr (2003).
  23
     Hopefully there is no confusion between the utility function U and the superscript U for “uncovered.”


                                                           7
w, and ei is an unpriced input (e.g., emissions). Let U (Q) be the beneﬁt from consumption of

the two perfect substitutes, i.e., Q = q C + q U , where U  > 0 and U  < 0.24 Let damages from

pollution be τ (eC + eU ).25 Assume emissions of the uncovered ﬁrm are subject to an uncovered

emissions charge, tU , (possibly zero), so its cost function is given by cU (q U ; w, tU ) = mink,e wkU +

tU eU + λU [q U − f (kU , eU )] where λU is the Lagrange multiplier.26 Cost minimization implies the

two ﬁrst order conditions: w = λU fk (kU , eU ) and tU = λU fe (kU , eU ). As above, the envelope

                                           q (q ; w) = λ .
theorem implies that the marginal cost is cU   U        U



3.1    Second-best emissions tax with leakage

If the covered ﬁrm is subject to an emissions tax, t, its cost function is cC (q C ; w, t); cost minimiza-

tion implies that w = λC fk (kC , eC ) and t = λC fe (kC , eC ) where λC is the Lagrange multiplier;

                                       q (q ; w, t) = λ . The eight endogenous variables in
and the envelope theorem implies that cC   C           C


the equilibrium—q i , λi, ki , and ei —are completely determined by the four ﬁrst-order conditions

from cost minimization; the two production functions; and the two market clearing conditions:

U  (Q) = λC = λU .

        The regulator chooses the tax to maximize net social beneﬁts27

                max U (Q) − cC (q C ; w, t) − cU (q U ; w, tU ) − τ (eC + eU ) + teC + tU eU .
                  t


Again the tax revenue is counted as a cost for the ﬁrms and thus must be added to the objective.

The FOC is then

                         ∂q C                  ∂q U   ∂cC                ∂eC             ∂eU
        [U  (Q) − cC
                    q]        + [U  (Q) − cU
                                            q]      −     + eC − (τ − t)     − (τ − tU )     = 0.
                          ∂t                    ∂t     ∂t                 ∂t              ∂t

Since the ﬁrst two terms are zero by the market clearing conditions and the third and fourth terms

are additive inverses by applying the envelope theorem to the covered ﬁrm’s cost function, the
  24
     The model is readily extended to imperfect substitutes. If the goods are not substitutable (i.e., are additive
separable), then there is no leakage, and the emissions tax dominates. As goods become closer substitutes, leakage
increases, and the emissions tax may be dominated.
  25
     Marginal damages are assumed constant and independent of the source, but the results are easily extended to
increasing marginal damages and diﬀerent transfer coeﬃcients.
  26
     If tU = 0 and fe > 0, demand for emissions is inﬁnite. If tU > 0, emissions are ﬁnite. Note that tU could model
an implicit or implied tax on emissions.
  27
     This objective is quite general and can model leakage within and across political jurisdictions depending on
who “the regulator” is and on what beneﬁts/costs enter the objective. An appendix explicitly models international
leakage where the regulator is concerned solely with domestic beneﬁts. As above, the revenue from the emissions
tax or the uncovered emissions charge provides no beneﬁt as explained in footnote 18.


                                                         8
FOC implies that
                                                                ∂eU /∂t
                                            t = τ + (τ − tU )           .                                          (6)
                                                                ∂eC /∂t

         To interpret this optimal emissions tax, consider two extremes.28 If the uncovered emissions

charge is equal to marginal damages, i.e., if tU = τ , then the optimal emissions tax is equal to

marginal damages and the ﬁrst-best is attained. At the other extreme, if tU = 0, the best tax is

less than social damages if the tax decreases covered emissions and increases uncovered emissions.

Here the MRTS of the covered ﬁrm is less than the input price ratio τ /wi, and covered emissions

are too high relative to control technology.29

3.2    Second-best intensity standard with leakage

If the covered ﬁrm is subject to an intensity standard σ, the ﬁrm’s cost function is cC (q C ; w, σ);

cost minimization implies w = λC fk (kC , eC ) and γ = λC fe (kC , eC ) where λC and γ are Lagrange

                                                    q (q ; w, σ) = λ − γσ. The nine endogenous
multipliers; and the envelope theorem implies that cC   C           C


variables in the equilibrium—q i, λi , ki , ei , and γ—are completely determined by the four ﬁrst-

order conditions from cost minimization; the two production functions; the two market clearing

conditions: U  (Q) = λC − γσ = λU ; and the binding intensity standard: eC = σq C .

         The regulator chooses the intensity standard to maximize net social beneﬁts


                    max U (Q) − cC (q C ; w, σ) − cU (q U ; w, tU ) − τ (eC + eU ) + tU eU .
                      σ


The ﬁrst order condition is then

                                ∂q C                   ∂q U   ∂cC     ∂eC             ∂eU
               [U  (Q) − cC
                           q]        + [U  (Q) − cU ]      −     − τ     + (τ − tU )     = 0.
                                ∂σ                 q
                                                       ∂σ     ∂σ      ∂σ              ∂σ

                                                                                                    −∂cC
Since the ﬁrst two terms are zero by the market clearing conditions and since                        ∂σ    = γq C =

wi q C fe (kC , eC )/fki (kC , eC ), this FOC implies that

                             fe (kC , eC )    τ       ∂q C σ     τ − tU ∂eU σ
                                            =    (1 +        ) +       (       ).                                  (7)
                             fki (kC , eC )   wi      ∂σ q C       wi    ∂σ eC
  28
      Another interesting extreme is when the goods are not substitutable (i.e., additive separable). In this case, [6]
is unchanged but ∂eU /∂t = 0, so the optimal emissions tax is τ .
   29
      Due to the equivalence of emissions caps and taxes, the second-best emissions cap attains the same allocation
as the second-best tax.




                                                          9
Note that the optimal intensity standard does not equate the MRTS with the social input price

ratio τ /wi and the deviation is greater i) for a larger magnitude elasticity of output with respect to

the standard; ii) for a greater responsiveness of uncovered emissions with respect to the standard;

and iii) for greater deviation of the uncovered emissions charge from marginal damages. Also, note

that even if the uncovered emissions charge is equal to marginal damages, the optimal standard

does not attain the ﬁrst best.

3.3     Comparison of emissions taxes and intensity standards with leakage

With leakage, neither an emissions tax nor an intensity standard will generally attain the ﬁrst best.

Thus either may attain higher welfare. Although the second-best net social beneﬁts are diﬃcult

to compare analytically, the main result simply compares the possibilities and is easy to state and

prove.30

Proposition 2 Under incomplete regulation, the following hold: i) if the uncovered emissions
charge equals marginal damages, i.e., if tU = τ , then the optimal emissions tax attains the ﬁrst best,
but the optimal intensity standard does not; ii) if tU < τ , an intensity standard can attain higher
welfare than the second-best emissions tax; and iii) additionally assuming Cobb-Douglas technology
                                                               
and constant returns to scale, i.e., f (k, e) = K i kiαi eβ and i αi = 1 − β, the optimal intensity
standard attains higher welfare than the second-best emissions tax if the uncovered emissions charge
is low, i.e., if tU /τ ≤ 1 − (1 − β)(1−β)/β .

The result in (i) is a corollary to Proposition 1. If tU = τ , the optimal emissions tax simply mimics

the uncovered emissions charge and emissions are correctly priced. The earlier analysis in Section 2

showed that the intensity standard does not generally attain the ﬁrst best.31 The result in (ii) is

a possibility result. If tU < τ , the analysis in section 3.1 showed that the optimal emissions tax

is less than τ and thus does not attain the ﬁrst best. Although the intensity standard does not

attain the ﬁrst best either, the proof shows a number of examples where an intensity standard

attains higher welfare than the best emissions tax. The result in (iii) derives a suﬃcient condition

for an intensity standard to attain higher welfare than the best emissions tax with Cobb-Douglas

technologies and constant returns to scale. Intuitively, the intensity standard attains higher welfare
  30
     The diﬃculty lies in deriving the optimal second-best policy, since it generally depends on how emissions change
with the policy, i.e., ∂e/∂t in [6] and ∂e/∂σ in [7]. On the other hand, it is quite easy to solve for the equilibrium for
a given tax or intensity standard. Rather than using [6] or [7] directly, the numerical examples derive equilibrium
net social beneﬁts for a given policy and then choose the policy to optimize net social beneﬁts.
  31
     Under constant returns to scale where tU = τ , an intensity standard can attain the ﬁrst best by setting σ = 0,
so all production leaks to uncovered ﬁrms where emissions are correctly priced.


                                                           10
if the uncovered emissions charge is suﬃciently below marginal damages.32 The appendix on

international leakage derives an analogous condition showing that an intensity standard attains

higher welfare if the second-best emissions tax is suﬃciently below marginal damages, i.e., if the

import price is suﬃciently below the price that would result from a domestic emissions tax τ .

         The intuition of Proposition 2 can be illustrated with the special case involving constant

returns to scale production functions. It is well known that with constant returns to scale, the

marginal cost function is constant. In this case, leakage is extreme: any attempt to tax emissions

leads to an increase in the marginal cost of covered ﬁrms and production shifts entirely to uncovered

ﬁrms. Thus the second-best emissions tax is tU , i.e., simply matches the uncovered emissions

charge, and has no eﬀect.

         Can an intensity standard do better? The appendix shows that the marginal cost function

with an intensity standard is also constant for constant returns to scale. Moreover, the marginal

cost function is decreasing in σ.33 Thus, the regulator can adjust the intensity standard such that

the marginal cost of the covered ﬁrm does not exceed the marginal cost of the uncovered ﬁrm,

thereby preventing leakage and mimicking the marginal cost (and output level) of an emissions

tax. This intensity standard will result in diﬀerent inputs for producing the same level of output

and may have lower social costs. The suﬃcient condition insures that this intensity standard has

lower social costs and hence attains higher welfare than the optimal emissions tax.

         The right hand side of the suﬃcient condition is decreasing in β. Thus it is more likely that

the intensity standard attains higher welfare than an emissions tax if β is smaller. For example,

if β = 0.1, the intensity standard attains higher welfare if tU < 0.6τ . However, if β = 0.9, the

intensity standard only attains higher welfare if the uncovered emissions charge is much more lax,

i.e., if tU < 0.2τ .34
  32
     The condition is not necessary since it only demonstrates that the intensity standard which mimics the second-
best emissions tax has lower social costs. Even if this intensity standard has higher social costs, the optimal intensity
standard can have lower deadweight loss.
  33
     Total costs are decreasing in σ, hence marginal cost (equal to average cost) is also decreasing.
  34
     Since Cobb-Douglas assumes that all inputs are substitutes, simply estimating β from the expenditure shares on
emissions would be misleading. A more accurate estimate of β might come from the expenditure share of all inputs
which are complements to emissions.




                                                           11
        Table 1 illustrates Proposition 2 for a simple numerical example.35 Panel A illustrates the

case where the uncovered emissions charge is lax. The assumption of constant returns to scale

implies that the best emissions tax matches the uncovered emissions charge. This tax is ineﬀective,

and it attains lower welfare than an intensity standard which leads to the same level of output

but at lower social costs. Panel B illustrates a more stringent uncovered emissions charge and

shows that the optimal emissions tax does not necessarily attain lower welfare. For β = 0.8, the

suﬃcient condition fails and the optimal intensity standard (σ = 1.21) yields lower welfare. For

β = 0.5, the suﬃcient condition holds with equality, so the intensity standard that mimics the best

emissions tax does not reduce deadweight loss. However, the optimal intensity standard, which

is slightly more lax, does yield higher welfare than the optimal emissions tax. For β = 0.2, the

optimal emissions tax yields lower welfare.36

        The intensity standard and consumption tax combination seems quite promising especially

given the result in Proposition 1. The following proposition shows that the intensity standard

can still yield higher welfare than an emissions tax even if both instruments are combined with a

consumption tax. Moreover, the proposition describes conditions under which a combined intensity

standard and consumption tax can attain the ﬁrst best.

Proposition 3 Under incomplete regulation, assume tU < τ . i) A combined intensity standard
and consumption tax can yield higher welfare than the second-best combination of an emissions
tax and a consumption tax. ii) With Cobb-Douglas technology and constant returns to scale, a
combined intensity standard and consumption tax attain the ﬁrst best iﬀ tU /τ ≥ (1 − β)1/β .

With complete regulation, the intensity standard corrects the relative price of inputs, the con-

sumption tax corrects the relative price of output, and the combined policy attains the ﬁrst best.

However, with incomplete regulation the stringency of the intensity standard may be constrained

by the marginal cost of the uncovered ﬁrm. If the uncovered emissions charge is lax, the regulator

would like to make the intensity standard more stringent but cannot since this would raise the

marginal cost of the covered ﬁrm above the marginal cost of the uncovered ﬁrm (causing leakage).37

However, if the uncovered emissions charge is not lax, e.g., if tU /τ ≥ (1−β)1/β , the constraint does
  35
     Appendix Table 2 shows similar results for a constant elasticity of substitution production function.
  36
     The intensity standard can still yield higher welfare with decreasing returns to scale. See Appendix Table 1.
  37
     In this case, the intensity standard would be too lax and the consumption tax, given by tc = τ σ would be too
high to attain the ﬁrst best.


                                                       12
not bind, so the regulator can set the intensity standard and consumption tax at their optimal

levels and can attain the ﬁrst best.38,39 Note that attainment of the ﬁrst best requires constant

returns to scale.40

        Table 2 illustrates Proposition 3. Notice that the addition of the consumption tax reduces

deadweight loss for all policies relative to Table 1 primarily by reducing output. Moreover, the

dominance of the intensity standard is maintained in Panel A with a lax uncovered emissions

charge although eﬃciency is not attained. In Panel B the advantage of the emissions tax from

Table 1 disappears, and the intensity standard/consumption tax combination attains the ﬁrst best,

even though the emissions tax/consumption tax combination does not.41

3.4    Comparison with output-based updating

The advantage of the intensity standard is that it implicitly taxes emissions while subsidizing

production. Similarly, output-based updating of emissions permits implicitly subsidizes production

while capping emissions. It is diﬃcult to compare these two instruments directly since the subsidy

eﬀects of the updating scheme depend on its details. For example, Fischer and Fox (2007) and

Fischer (2001) assume that each ﬁrm is allocated an exogenous proportion of the available permits

based on its output. The strength of the output subsidy depends on the proportion of the permits

that are updated in this way, and also on the discount factor and ﬁrms’ expectations.

        Since output-based updating can vary the strength of the output subsidy, a simpler com-

parison for the intensity standard is with a combined emissions tax and output subsidy to the

covered ﬁrm. Intuitively, the combination of two instruments is likely to yield higher welfare than

the single instrument. This intuition is correct, and the following result is proved in the appendix:
Proposition 4 Under incomplete regulation, the second-best combination of an emissions tax and
a output subsidy for covered ﬁrms yields higher welfare than the second-best intensity standard.

        This result suggests that output-based updating is superior to an intensity standard if the

subsidy inherent in the output-based updating is suﬃciently ﬂexible to mimic the optimal output
  38
      The right hand side of the necessary and suﬃcient condition is decreasing in β. Thus as β increases it is more
likely that the intensity standard/consumption tax combination attains the ﬁrst best.
   39
      The combined emissions tax and consumption tax cannot attain the ﬁrst best if tU < τ .
   40
      With increasing marginal costs, some uncovered production occurs. Since the uncovered production is under-
taxed, the ﬁrst best is not attained.
   41
      The necessary and suﬃcient condition does not hold in Panel A but holds in Panel B.


                                                        13
subsidy. On the other hand, the result also suggests that simply subsidizing output (combined with

an emissions tax) might be superior to output-based updating since it clearly yields higher welfare

than an intensity standard and does not suﬀer from some of the other problems of output-based

updating.42


4     Second-best regulation with market power

As noted above, the advantage of an intensity standard is that it simultaneously taxes emissions

and subsidizes output. This feature is also a potential advantage in markets subject to market

power. To analyze market power, return to the model and notation introduced in Section 2 with

no leakage. For simplicity, the model analyzes a monopoly producer.43

        First, suppose the monopoly ﬁrm is subject to an emissions tax. As above, the ﬁrm’s

cost function depends on the emissions tax, t, and is given by c(q; w, t) derived from the concave

production function f (k, e) with Lagrange multiplier, λ. The four endogenous variables in the

equilibrium—q, λ, k, and e—are completely determined by the two ﬁrst-order conditions from

cost minimization; the production function: q = f (k, e); and the market equilibrium condition

setting marginal revenue equal to marginal cost: U  (q) + qU  (q) = λ.

        The regulator chooses the tax to maximize net social beneﬁts. The objective is as in [1],

and the ﬁrst-order condition is as in [2]. The second-best emissions tax is then

                                                                ∂q/∂t
                                            t = τ + qU  (q)         .                                        (8)
                                                                ∂e/∂t

Since production and emissions are decreasing in the emissions tax and since U  < 0, the optimal

emissions tax is less than damages.44

        Now suppose the monopoly is subject to an intensity standard σ such that e/q ≤ σ, and

the ﬁrm’s cost function is c(q; w, σ). The ﬁve endogenous variables in the equilibrium—q; λ,

the shadow value on production; γ, the shadow value of the intensity standard; k; and e—are

completely determined by the two ﬁrst-order conditions from cost minimization; the production
  42
     Two problems that have been identiﬁed include permit price “inﬂation” and ﬁrms’ expectations about the linkage
between output and the subsidy.
  43
     The model easily extends to oligopoly. See Fischer (2003).
  44
     This result is also shown in Barnett (1980).



                                                        14
function, q = f (k, e); the market equilibrium condition, U  (q) + qU  (q) = λ − γσ; and the binding

intensity standard, e = σq.

       The regulator chooses the intensity standard to maximize the objective as in [3] and the

ﬁrst-order condition is as in [4]. The following condition holds under the second-best intensity

standard:
                                fe (k, e)  τ     ∂q σ    U  (q) ∂q
                                          = (1 +      )+
                                fk (k, e)  w     ∂σ q       w ∂σ

This condition is equivalent to the condition in [5] with the additional term capturing the slope

of the demand curve. Since U  < 0 and      ∂q
                                             ∂σ   is generally positive, comparing this equation with

[5] shows that (conditional on output) the monopoly leads to more emissions relative to control

technology under the intensity standard. The two instruments can now be compared:

Proposition 5 Under monopoly, the second-best intensity standard can yield higher welfare than
the second-best emissions tax.

Table 3 illustrates Proposition 5. For all the examples, the intensity standard yields higher welfare

than the optimal emissions tax through higher output produced with less emissions.


5    Conclusion

This paper demonstrates that emissions taxes (equivalently emissions trading) may not be the best

instruments for correcting environmental externalities in the presence of incomplete regulation

(leakage) or market power. In fact, since I analyze the second-best policies, my results show that

with leakage or market power any emissions tax may yield lower welfare than an intensity standard.

A suﬃcient condition shows that the dominance is more likely if the second-best emissions tax is

suﬃciently below marginal damages.

       With leakage, the optimal intensity standard leads to too much consumption. An addi-

tional consumption tax can lead to correct consumption and attain the ﬁrst best (even though an

emissions tax/consumption tax combination would not). The consumption tax is a particularly

useful instrument in this context since it does not violate trade law.

       The optimal intensity standard yields lower welfare than a combined emissions tax and

output subsidy for covered ﬁrms. If output-based updating can mimic a general output subsidy


                                                   15
then updating can yield higher welfare than an intensity standard. The analysis emphasizes the

importance of ﬂexibility in the subsidy portion of the updating scheme.

       With multiple market failures the policy choice is whether to use a potentially inferior

instrument hoping other market failures can be addressed with other instruments or to use a

superior instrument and accept the second-best world. This paper provides a framework for

analyzing these policy instruments and suggests that an intensity standard should not be neglected.




                                                16
References
 [1] Barnett, A. H. 1980. “The Pigouvian Tax Rule under Monopoly.” American Economic Review,
     70(5) pp. 1037-1041.

 [2] Bluestein, Joel. 2005. “Upstream Regulation of CO2 ,” Presentation to the National Commis-
     sion on Energy Policy Workshop, Washington, DC.

 [3] Bovenberg, A. Lans, Lawrence H. Goulder, and Mark R. Jacobsen. 2008. “Costs of Alternative
     Environmental Policy Instruments in the Presence of Industry Compensation Requirements,”
     Journal of Public Economics, 92: 1236-1253

 [4] Buchanan, J.M. 1969. “External Diseconomies, Corrective Taxes, and Market Structures.”
     American Economic Review, 59 pp. 174-77.

 [5] Bushnell, James and Yihsu Chen. 2009. “Regulation, Allocation, and Leakage in Cap-and-
     Trade Markets for CO2 .” CSEM WP-183.

 [6] Bushnell, James, Carla Peterman, and Catherine Wolfram. 2007. “California’s Greenhouse
     Gas Policies: Local Solutions to a Global Problem?” CSEM WP-166.

 [7] Fischer, Carolyn. 2001. “Rebating Environmental Policy Revenues: Output-Based Allocations
     and Tradable Performance Standards.” RFF Discussion Paper 01-22.

 [8] Fischer, Carolyn. 2003. “Output-Based Allocation of Environmental Policy Revenues and
     Imperfect Competition.” RFF Discussion Paper 02-60.

 [9] Fischer, Carolyn and Alan K. Fox. 2007. “Output-Based Allocation of Emissions Permits for
     Mitigating Tax and Trade Interactions.” Land Economics, 83(4) pp. 575-599.

[10] Fischer, Carolyn and Alan K. Fox. 2009. “Comparing Policies to Combat Emissions Leakage:
     Border Tax Adjustments versus Rebates.” RFF DP 09-02.

[11] Fowlie, Meredith. 2007. “Incomplete Environmental Regulation, Imperfect Competition, and
     Emissions Leakage.” CSEM WP-175.

[12] Fullerton, Don. 1997. “Environmental Levies and Distortionary Taxation: Comment.” Amer-
     ican Economic Review87(1): 245-251.

[13] Fullerton, Don and Garth Heutel. 2007. “The General Equilibrium Incidence of Environmental
     Mandates.” NBER Working Paper No. 13645.

[14] Fullerton, Don and Robert Mohr. 2003. “Suggested Subsidies are Sub-optimal Unless Com-
     bined with an Output Tax,” Contributions to Economic Analysis & Policy 2(1): 1-20.

[15] Goulder, Lawrence H., Ian W.H. Parry, Roberton C. Williams III, and Dallas Burtraw. 1999.
     “The Cost-Eﬀectiveness of Alternative Instruments for Environmental Protection in a Second-
     Best Setting.” Journal of Public Economics, 72 pp. 329-360.

[16] Goulder, Lawrence H. and Ian W.H. Parry. 2008. “Instrument Choice in Environmental Pol-
     icy.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 2(2) pp. 152-174.

[17] Helfand, Gloria E. 1991. “Standards versus Standards: The Eﬀects of Diﬀerent Pollution
     Restrictions” American Economic Review, 81(3) pp. 622-634.

                                              17
[18] Holland, Stephen P., Jonathan E. Hughes and Christopher Knittel. 2009. “Greenhouse Gas
     Reductions under Low Carbon Fuel Standards?” American Economic Journal: Economic
     Policy, 1(1) pp. 106-146.

[19] Mansur, Erin T. 2007. “Prices vs. Quantities: Environmental Regulation and Imperfect Com-
     petition.” NBER Working Paper 13510.

[20] Metcalf, Gilbert. 2008. “Designing A Carbon Tax to Reduce U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions”
     NBER Working Paper No. 14375.

[21] Newell, R.G. and W.A. Pizer. 2008. “Indexed Regulation.” Journal of Environmental Eco-
     nomics and Management, 56(3) pp. 221-233

[22] Stavins, Robert N. 2007. “A U.S. Cap-and-Trade System to Address Global Climate Change.”
     The Brookings Institution, Discussion Paper 2007-13.

[23] Stavins, Robert N. 2008. “Addressing Climate Change with a Comprehensive US Cap-and-
     Trade System.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 24(2) pp.298-321.




                                             18
 Appendices
Equivalence of emissions tax and emissions cap
Suppose the ﬁrm is subject to an emissions cap. The ﬁrm’s cost function depends on the emissions
cap, ē, and is given by c(q; w, ē) = mink wk +λ[q −f (k, ē)] where λ is the Lagrange multiplier. Cost
minimization implies that w = λfk (k, ē). Applying the envelope theorem implies that marginal
cost is the shadow value, i.e., cq (q; w, ē) = λ. The three endogenous variables in the equilibrium—
q, λ, and k—are completely determined by the ﬁrst-order condition from cost minimization; the
production function: q = f (k, e); and the market equilibrium condition: U  (q) = λ.
         The regulator chooses the emissions cap to maximize net social beneﬁts

                                     max U (q) − c(q; w, ē) − τ ē.
                                        ē

The ﬁrst order condition is then
                                                       ∂q ∂c
                                     [U  (q) − cq ]      −    −τ = 0
                                                       ∂ē ∂ē

Since the ﬁrst term is zero by the market clearing condition, the FOC implies that τ = − ∂∂cē =
wi fe /fki , and the eﬃcient allocation is attained, i.e., U  (q) = wi/fki = τ /fe .

Proof of Proposition 1
The results in (i) and (ii) are proved in the text. To demonstrate the result in (iii), suppose the ﬁrm
is subject to a consumption tax tc and to an intensity standard σ. As above, the ﬁrm’s cost function
depends on the intensity standard and is given by c(q; w, σ) = mink,e wk + λ[q − f (k, e)] + γ[e − σq]
where λ and γ are Lagrange multipliers. The ﬁve endogenous variables in the equilibrium—q, λ,
k, e, and γ—are completely determined by the two ﬁrst-order conditions from cost minimization;
the production function, q = f (k, e); the market equilibrium condition which incorporates the
consumption tax: U  (q) − tc = λ − γσ; and the binding intensity standard, e = σq.
        The regulator chooses tc and σ to maximize net social beneﬁts

                                     max U (q) − c(q; w, σ) − τ e.
                                      tc ,σ

The ﬁrst order conditions for tc and σ are
                                                        ∂q     ∂e
                                      [U  (q) − cq ]       −τ     =0                               (9)
                                                        ∂tc    ∂tc
and
                                               ∂q   ∂c      ∂e
                                   [U  (q) − cq ]−     −τ      =0
                                              ∂σ ∂σ         ∂σ
Since U  (q) − cq = tc by the market clearing condition, the ﬁrst condition implies that tc ∂q/∂tc =
τ ∂e/∂tc = τ σ∂q/∂tc which implies that tc = τ σ. Similarly the second condition implies that
tc ∂q/∂σ + qwife /fki = τ ∂e/∂σ = τ q + τ σ∂q/∂σ which implies that fe /fki = τ /wi , i.e., the
MRTSs are correct. By noting that τ = γ, the eﬃcient allocation is attained, i.e., U  (q) = λ =
wi /fki = τ /fe .




                                                        19
 Derivation of cost functions for Cobb-Douglas
Here I derive the costs functions c(q; w, t) and c(q; w, σ) for the case of the Cobb-Douglas production
function with three inputs f (k, e) = Kk1α1 k2α2 eβ .45 Since demand for any Cobb-Douglas input
approaches inﬁnity as its price approaches zero, any numerical computations assume a positive
price for emissions in the unregulated market.
        With a tax, the emissions input is priced by the tax, and the cost function is well known:46
                                                                              1
                                         c(q; w, t) = (α1 + α2 + β)M q α1 +α2 +β

where M is given by
                                              1 w     w2    t  α +α1 +β
                                                   1
                                     M=         ( )α1 ( )α2 ( )β 1 2 ,                                         (10)
                                               K α1    α2    β
                                                    1−α1 −α2 −β
so the marginal cost is cq (q; w, t) = M q α1 +α2 +β . Recall that with constant (decreasing, increas-
ing) returns to scale, the marginal cost is constant (increasing, decreasing).47
        With an intensity standard, the emissions input is unpriced but is subject to the standard.
The cost function is derived from the cost minimization c(q; w, σ) = mink,e wk + λ[q − f (k, e)] +
γ[e − σq]. For the market inputs, the FOC implies ki wi = αi λq which shows that the MRTS, which
is a function of the input ratio, equals the input price ratio. If the intensity standard is binding,
the production function can be written q = Kk1α1 +α2 (k2 /k1 )α2 (σq)β which implies
                                                            α w α2
                                                              2 1
                                     q 1−β = Kσ β k1α1 +α2           .                            (11)
                                                             α1 w2
This equation allows output to be expressed as a function of k1 , and the cost function is
                                                                        w1                     1−β
                 c(q; w, σ) = wk = (α1 + α2 )λq = (α1 + α2 )               k1 = (α1 + α2 )N q α1 +α2
                                                                        α1
where N is given by
                                                   1 w              1
                                                         1 α1 w2 α2 α1 +α2
                                             N=        (   ) (    )        .
                                                   Kσ β α1     α2
                                                          1−α1 −α2 −β
The marginal cost is cq (q; w, σ) = (1 − β)N q α1 +α2 . Note that this implies that with constant
(decreasing, increasing) returns to scale, both marginal cost functions cq (q; w, t) and cq (q; w, σ) are
constant (increasing, decreasing).48

Cost function with constant returns to scale
Appendix Lemma 1: If returns to scale are constant, marginal costs are constant under an
emissions tax or under an intensity standard.
Proof: If all inputs are priced, it is well known that marginal costs are constant under constant
returns to scale, i.e., c(q; w, t) = qc(1; w, t).
    45
       To simplify to two inputs, simply set α2 = 0. The analysis generalizes readily to many inputs.
    46
       See for example Nicholson’s text.
    47
       For the numerical analysis, it is useful to note that the conditional factor demand for e is given by e =
                                1
                             α1 +α2 +β
    q w1 α1 w2 α2 β α1 +α2
     ( ) ( α2 ) ( t )
    K α1
                                         .
    48
    For the numerical analysis, it is useful to note that the conditional factor demand for e is given by e = σq and
the conditional factor demand for k1 can be found from [11].



                                                             20
         Under a binding intensity standard, let k(1) and e(1) be the cheapest input combination
for producing one unit of output. To show that qk(1) and qe(1) are the cheapest input combination
for producing q, ﬁrst note that the intensity standard still binds, i.e., qe(1)/q = e(1) = σ, and
note that the cost minimization condition still holds: wi /fki (qk(1), qe(1)) · (1 − fe (qk(1), qe(1)) =
wi /fki (k(1), e(1)) · (1 − fe (k(1), e(1)) for each market input i since marginal products are homoge-
neous of degree zero. Thus c(q; w, σ) = wqk(1) = qc(1; w, σ).

Proof of Proposition 2
The result in (i) is proved in the text. The possibility result (ii) is proved by the example that
follows in (iii) as well as by the numerical examples that appear in the text and in the additional
appendices.
        To demonstrate (iii), note that with constant returns to scale, the marginal cost functions
under both an emissions tax and intensity standard are constant as shown in Appendix Lemma 1.
Since an emissions tax greater than tU would increase the covered ﬁrm’s marginal cost and cause
complete spillovers, the second-best emissions tax is tU .
        A binding intensity standard can mimic the second-best emissions tax. To prove the
suﬃcient condition, let the equilibrium with the second-best emissions tax be given by eC∗ , kC∗ ,
eU ∗ = 0, and kU ∗ = 0.49 Note that this equilibrium is characterized by U  (Q∗ ) = M ∗ where M ∗
                                                                                              
is deﬁned in [10] for t = tU . Thus eC∗ = M ∗ βQ∗ /tU and kiC∗ = M ∗ αi Q∗ /wi. Let eC , kC deﬁne
the binding intensity standard which mimics the second-best emissions tax. This equilibrium is
                                                                                            
characterized by M ∗ = wi /fki ·(1−σfe ) = wi kiC /(αi Q∗ )·(1−β) which implies that (1−β)kiC = kiC∗ .
                                   
Furthermore eC = eC∗ i (kiC∗ /kiC )αi /β = eC∗ (1 − β)(1−β)/β since output mustbe equal. Now
                                                      
compare the social costs. Note that wkC + τ eC ≤ wkC∗ + τ eC∗ iﬀ M ∗ Q∗ i αi /(1 − β) +
                                        
τ M ∗ βQ∗ /tU · (1 − β)(1−β)/β ≤ M ∗ Q∗ i αi + τ M ∗ βQ∗ /tU iﬀ tU /τ ≤ 1 − (1 − β)(1−β)/β . If this
suﬃcient condition holds, mimicking the second-best emissions tax with an intensity standard
reduces (does not increase) social costs, so the second-best emissions tax is dominated.50

Proof of Proposition 3
The possibility result in (i) is demonstrated by the example that follows in (ii) as well as by
numerical examples in the text.
         To demonstrate (ii), consider an intensity standard consumption tax combination which
would attain the ﬁrst best in the absence an uncovered ﬁrm. In particular, let σ = 1/K ·

    (βwi/τ αi )αi and let tc = τ σ. Since the production function implies that σ = e/q = 1/K ·
i
  i (e/ki) , equilibrium will have βwi /τ αi = e/ki for every i which implies fe /fki = τ /wi , i.e.,
          αi

MRTSs are equal to the social price ratios.51 Now note that the marginal cost is
                             wi               w i ki           τσ           1−β τ β                          wi αi
            cq (q; w, σ) =       (1 − σfe ) =        (1 − β) =    (1 − β) =    ( )                       (      )      (12)
                             fki              αi q              β            K β                             αi
                                                                                                     i

where the ﬁrst equality follows from cost minimization, the second equality from substitution of
the marginal products, the third since MRTSs are correct, and the fourth by substitution for σ.52
If this marginal cost is less than the marginal cost of the uncovered ﬁrm then there is no leakage,
  49
    Note “∗” and “ ” are deﬁned only for this proof.
  50
    A suﬃcient condition can be similarly derived for decreasing returns to scale by a slight modiﬁcation
                                                                                                               of the proof.
                                                                                                                       
The more general suﬃcient condition, which depends on the endogenous t∗ is t∗ /τ ≤ 1 − (1 − β) αi /β · (1 − β)/ αi.
 51
    For this σ, an equilibrium exists with eﬃcient MRTSs. If other equilibria exist, this may not hold.
 52
    Note that U  (q) − tc = cq = τ σ/β − τ σ so U  (q) = τ /fe , i.e., output is correct as in Proposition 1.


                                                             21
and this policy combination attains the ﬁrst best. The uncovered marginal cost is given by M ∗
which is deﬁned in [10] for t = tU . Comparing [10] and [12], shows that cq (q; w, σ) ≤ M ∗ iﬀ
(1 − β)τ β ≤ tβU iﬀ tU /τ ≥ (1 − β)1/β .

Proof of Proposition 4
Consider the second-best intensity standard, σ ∗ under incomplete regulation. Denote the result-
ing equilibrium values by eC∗ , kC∗ , eU ∗ , and kU ∗ .53 Note that this equilibrium is completely
characterized by eC∗ = σ ∗ q C∗ and the equations
                                 wi           wife (kC∗ , eC∗ )σ ∗         wi                  tU
             U  (Q∗ ) =                    −                      =                   =
                           fki (kC∗ , eC∗ )    fki (kC∗ , eC∗ )      fki (kU ∗ , eU ∗)   fe (kU ∗ , eU ∗ )
        Now consider the emissions tax t and output subsidy s to the covered ﬁrm where
t = wi fe (kC∗ , eC∗ )/fki (kC∗ , eC∗ ) and s = tσ ∗ .54 Note that this equilibrium is characterized by the
equations:
                                    wi                 t                 wi               tU
                U  (Q) =                     −s=               −s=                =                         (13)
                               fki (kC , eC )     fe (kC , eC )     fki (kU , eU )   fe (kU , eU )
It is straightforward to verify that eC∗ , kC∗ , eU ∗ , and kU ∗ are equilibrium values for this t and s, i.e.,
the equilibria are identical. First, the second equation of [13] implies that wi fe (kC , eC )/fki (kC , eC ) =
t = wi fe (kC∗ , eC∗ )/fki (kC∗ , eC∗ ), so the MRTSs of the covered ﬁrm are identical for all inputs.
Second, the ﬁrst equation of [13] shows that Q∗ is the equilibrium output level. Since output and
the uncovered and covered MRTSs are identical, the equilibria are identical.
         To complete the proof, note that the equilibrium with the second-best intensity standard
is mimicked by the equilibrium with this t and s. Since the second-best emissions tax and output
subsidy to the covered ﬁrm can do no worse, the second-best intensity standard is dominated.

Proof of Proposition 5
Proposition 5 is a possibility result and thus is proved by the examples in Table 3.55

Model of international leakage
To analyze international leakage, model the domestic (covered) sector as in Section 3, and assume
imports (which are a perfect substitute for domestic production) can be purchased at price pI .56
Foreign emissions eI are a function of import production q I . The domestic regulator then chooses
a policy to maximize domestic beneﬁts less domestic costs.
        Using the notation developed in the paper for the covered sector, the optimal emissions
tax maximizes
                   max U (q C + q I ) − cC (q C ; w, t) − pI q I − τ (eC + eI ) + teC .
                           t
The FOC then implies that the optimal (domestic) emissions tax is
                                                              ∂eI /∂t
                                                 t = τ (1 +           )
                                                              ∂eC /∂t
  53
     Note “∗” and “ ” are deﬁned only for this proof.
  54
     t is well-deﬁned since wi/fki · (1 − fe σ) = wj /fkj · (1 − fe σ) implies wi/fki = wj /fkj .
  55
     To date, I have neither been unable to ﬁnd a counter example to Proposition 5 nor to prove the result in more
generality.
  56
     The model is easily extended to model an import supply which is not perfectly elastic.


                                                          22
which is analogous to [6].
       Similarly, the optimal intensity standard maximizes

                         max U (q C + q I ) − cC (q C ; w, σ) − pI q I − τ (eC + eI ).
                           σ

The FOC then implies that the optimal (domestic) intensity standard is characterized by

                               fe (kC , eC )    τ       ∂q C σ     τ ∂eI σ
                                              =    (1 +        ) +   (      )
                               fki (kC , eC )   wi      ∂σ q C     wi ∂σ eC

which is analogous to [7].
        The results in Proposition 2 are readily extended for the international leakage model.
In particular with Cobb-Douglas and constant returns to scale as in Proposition 2(iii), there is
complete leakage if the domestic marginal
                                         cost   is driven above pI . Thus the optimal emissions tax
 ∗                               1 t∗ β      wi αi 57
t is implicitly deﬁned by pI = K ( β )   i ( αi ) .    The proof of Proposition 2(iii) is then easily
extended to derive the suﬃcient condition t /τ ≤ 1 − (1 − β)(1−β)/β which is analogous to the
                                              ∗

condition in the proposition.




  57
    If foreign production is cleaner than domestic production at t∗ , then the best emissions tax causes complete
leakage, and the best intensity standard can do no worse.


                                                       23
Additional Referee’s Appendices
Numerical examples of superiority of intensity standard under incomplete regulation
Two examples demonstrate the potential superiority of an intensity standard over an emissions
tax. To simplify computations, the Cobb-Douglas production technologies are assumed with one
market input where K = 1. To avoid inﬁnite demand for emissions from the uncovered ﬁrm,
the uncovered ﬁrm is assumed to face the uncovered emissions charge tU . Consumer surplus is
U (Q) = 100Q − Q2 /2, so that the marginal beneﬁt of consumption is U  (Q) = 100 − Q.
Example with constant returns to scale
         For constant returns to scale, assume α = 1/2 and β = 1/2. To complete the parame-
terization, assume factor prices w = 1/2 & tU = 1/20, 000 and damages τ = 1/2. In this case,
the parameters
         √        that deﬁne the marginal costs (written as a function
                                                                    √ of the relevant policy) are
M (t) = 2t and N (σ) = 1/σ, and marginal costs are cq (q; w, t) = 2t and cq (q; w, σ) = 1/2 · 1/σ.
         An emissions tax is completely ineﬀective with constant returns to scale since any positive
tax would increase the covered marginal cost above the uncovered marginal cost, and all produc-
tion would leak to the uncovered ﬁrms. Thus the optimal tax equilibrium is equivalent to the
unregulated equilibrium. In the unregulated equilibrium, the marginal cost is M (tU ) = 0.01. Pro-
duction is Q = 100 − 0.01 = 99.99 and consumer surplus is ∼$5,000.58 Inputs are found from the
factor demand: e = 100q = 9, 999 and k = q/100 = 0.9999. Net social beneﬁts are then consumer
surplus ($5,000) less production costs (∼$0), less damages from pollution ($5,000) for net social
surplus of zero.59 Note that the emissions intensity in the unregulated equilibrium is e/Q = 100.60
         The optimal intensity standard is set such that the marginal cost of the covered ﬁrm is
equal to (slightly below) the marginal cost of the uncovered ﬁrm. With σ = 50, the marginal cost
is 0.01, and production and consumer surplus are as in the unregulated equilibrium, but emissions
are cut in half (9,999/2) and k doubles.61 Net social beneﬁts are then consumer surplus (∼$5,000)
less production costs (∼$1), less damages from pollution ($2,500) for net social surplus of $2,499.
Thus the second-best intensity standard dominates the second-best emissions tax.
         For an emissions tax combined with a consumption tax tc , an emissions tax is again com-
pletely ineﬀective. The consumption tax, however, can reduce damages from emissions. Sub-
ject to a consumption
                 √        tax (and no emissions tax), equilibrium production is found by solving
100 − Q − tc = 2tU . By graphing welfare as a function of the consumption tax, the optimal con-
sumption tax is seen to be $49.995. Production is ∼50 with emissions of 5,000 and market inputs
of 0.5. Net social beneﬁts are then consumer surplus ($3,750) less production costs (∼$0.25), less
damages from pollution ($2,500) for net social surplus of $1250.62
         For an intensity standard combined with a consumption tax, the stringency of the intensity
standard is limited by the marginal cost of the unregulated ﬁrms. Thus the optimal standard is
σ = 50 as above. The optimal consumption tax is then tc = τ σ = 25.63 Equilibrium production
is then 75, emissions are 3,750 and market inputs are 1.5. Net social beneﬁts are then consumer
surplus ($4,687) less production costs (∼$0.75), less damages from pollution ($1,875) for net social
  58
     Since covered and uncovered ﬁrms are identical, production can be allocated between them arbitrarily without
aﬀecting welfare. Thus, only aggregate quantities are derived.
  59
     Zero net surplus is an artifact of the parameterization, e.g., higher damages would lead to negative net surplus.
  60
     The eﬃcient equilibrium has marginal cost determined by M (τ ) = 1, so Q = 99 and e = k = 99. The eﬃcient
net social surplus is consumer surplus (∼$5,000) less production costs ($49.50) less damages ($49.50) for net social
surplus of $4,901.
  61
     The intensity standard is binding since the unregulated emissions intensity is 100.
  62
     For this parameterization, an emissions tax combined with a consumption tax is dominated by an intensity
standard alone.
  63
     This optimal consumption tax conditional on σ is derived above from [9].


                                                         24
surplus of $2,812. Note that the intensity standard combined with a consumption tax does not
attain the ﬁrst best and that production is too low. However, this combination dominates an
emissions tax with a consumption tax.
Example with decreasing returns to scale
         For decreasing returns to scale, assume all parameters are as above, except: α = 1/3,
β = 1/3, w = 1/3, τ = 1/3, and tU = 1/30, 000. In this case, the parameters   √         that deﬁne the
marginal costs (written as a function of the relevant policy) are M (t) = 3t and N (σ) = 1/σ and
                                   √
marginal costs are cq (q; w, t) = 3tq and cq (q; w, σ) = 2/3 · 1/σ · q.
         In the emissions tax equilibrium, the uncovered and covered marginal costs are equal,
so qd = tU qf /t. The equilibrium uncovered production is found by solving 100 − qf (1 + tU /t) =
   3tU qf for qf . Unfortunately, this equation is non-linear even with this simple parameterization.64
However, the equation can be easily solved using numerical simulation software.65 I characterize
the equilibria for several emissions taxes. It is easy to verify that these are indeed equilibria.66
The second-best tax that maximizes net social beneﬁts is found by graphing.
         First, if t = 1/30, 000, the tax equilibrium is equivalent to the unregulated equilibrium.
For this tax, qd = qf = 49.96 so Q = 99.93 and the marginal cost is $0.07. Emissions are
ed = ef = 35, 318 and market inputs are kd = kf = 3.53. Welfare is consumer surplus (∼$5000),
less input costs ($2.35) less damages ($23,545) for net social surplus of -$18,548. Note that the
unregulated emissions intensity is 707.
         By numerically solving the tax equilibrium and graphing the net social beneﬁts as a function
of t, the second-best tax can be seen to be approximately, t = 0.000051 > tU . For this equilibrium,
production is Q = 99.92, and the marginal cost is $0.08. Production and emissions shift to the
uncovered ﬁrm: qf = 60.66 & qd = 39.26 and ef = 47, 244 and ed = 19, 792; however the covered
production uses more capital kf = 4.72 & kd = 7.29. Welfare is consumer surplus (∼$5000), less
input costs ($4.01) less damages ($22,346) for net social surplus of -$17,350. Note that this is a
slight improvement over the unregulated equilibrium.
         The intensity standard equilibrium can be found by equating marginal costs, which implies
that 2/3 · 1/σqd =        3tU qf . Solving for qd and substituting into the equation which equates
marginal utility and uncovered marginal costs implies that qf can be solved from 100 − qf =
   3tU qf (1 + 3σ/2). By graphing the equilibrium welfare as a function of σ, the second-best
intensity standard is approximately σ = 441. Note that this standard is binding. Marginal cost is
$0.07, and the production of 99.93 is more evenly split between covered and uncovered production:
qf = 52.16 and qd = 47.77. Emissions are also more evenly shared: ef = 37, 666 and ed = 21, 067
but covered market inputs are higher: kf = 3.77 & kd = 5.18. Welfare is consumer surplus
(∼$5000), less input costs ($2.98) less damages ($19,478) for net social surplus of -$14,581.
         Note that the eﬃcient equilibrium has market production of 93.17 which is equally divided
between the two ﬁrms, and marginal cost is $6.83. Emissions and market inputs are equal, i.e.,
ef = ed = kf = kd = 318 and the emissions intensity is 6.8. Eﬃcient social surplus is then
consumer surplus ($4976), less input costs ($212) less damages ($212) for net social surplus of
$4,553.
  64
      With constant elasticity of demand, the equation could be more easily solved analytically. However, the equi-
librium for the intensity standard would still require numerical techniques.
   65
      Code is available upon request.
   66
      The factor demand for emissions is e = q1/3 (1/3t)1/2 and for the market input is k = 3te.




                                                        25
Derivation of cost functions for constant elasticity of substitution
Assume the production function has the constant elasticity of substitution following form: q =
                   β
K(k1α + k2α + eα ) α where the elasticity of substitution is 1/(1 − α) > 0. The cost function for an
emissions tax is well known and is given by:

                                                 1     −1
                                                                 α          α              α    α−1
                                                                                                  α
                             c(q; w1, w2, t) = q β K   β        t α−1 + w1α−1 + w2α−1                   .

Note that the returns to scale depends on β, and the marginal cost is constant if β = 1.67
         To derive c(q; w1, w2 , σ), ﬁrst note that w2 /w1 = (k2 /k1 )α−1 , which implies that R ≡
                       α
(k2 /k1 ) = (w2 /w1 ) α−1 and that w2 k2 = w1 k1 R. The production function then implies that
         α

                                                α
                                         (q/K) β = k1α (1 + R) + σ αq α ,

so the contingent factor demand is
                                                       1         α−αβ       −α          1
                                     k1 = (1 + R)− α q[q          β     K    β   − σ α] α .

The cost function can then be written:
                                                                                         α−1          α−αβ       −α         1
           c(q; w1, w2 , σ) = w1 k1 + w2 k2 = w1 k1 (1 + R) = w1 (1 + R)                  α     q[q    β     K    β   − σ α] α

which can be written
                                            α         α  α−1    α−αβ −α       1
                                                            α
                         c(q; w1, w2 , σ) = w1α−1 + w2α−1      q[q β K β − σ α] α .

Note that if β = 1 (i.e., the production function has constant returns to scale), then this function
is linear in q and marginal cost is constant.




 67
      See for example Nicholson’s text. The cost functions for one market input have w2 = 0.


                                                            26
Tables
Table 1. Single policies under incomplete regulation: comparing optimal emissions taxes with
intensity standards under Cobb-Douglas and constant returns to scale.

Panel A. Lax uncovered emissions charge. tU = 0.01

               Emissions      Intensity                                                  Standard
     β         tax (t=tf)     Standard        DWL           Output       Emissions      dominates?
                 0.01             -           1.54           1.96          5.67
    0.8                                                                                     Yes
                   -            1.93          0.66           1.96          3.79
                  0.01             -           5.21          1.86          13.14
    0.5                                                                                     Yes
                    -            3.54          2.06          1.86          6.57
                  0.01             -           5.37          1.62          12.24
    0.2                                                                                     Yes
                    -            3.09          1.88          1.62          5.01

Panel B. Stringent uncovered emissions charge. tU = 0.25

               Emissions      Intensity                                                  Standard
     β         tax (t=tf)     Standard        DWL           Output       Emissions      dominates?
                 0.25             -           0.10           1.53          2.31
    0.8            -            1.01          0.30           1.53          1.55              No
                   -            1.21          0.20           1.77          2.15
                  0.25             -           0.12          1.29           1.83
    0.5             -            0.71          0.12          1.29           0.91            Yes
                    -            0.84          0.10          1.40           1.18
                  0.25             -           0.05          1.28           0.74
    0.2             -            0.24          0.02          1.28           0.30            Yes
                    -            0.30          0.01          1.32           0.40




Notes:    Parameterization: U′(q)=2-q; f(k,e)=k1-βeβ; τ=0.5; and w=0.5.
          Efficient social surplus (quantity, emissions) is 0.69 (1.18, 1.55); 0.5 (1, 1); and 0.69 (1.18, 0.39).




                                                            27
Table 2. Combined policies under incomplete regulation: comparing consumption taxes with
emissions taxes or intensity standards under Cobb-Douglas and constant returns to scale.

Panel A. Lax uncovered emissions charge. tU = 0.01

               Emissions      Intensity     Consumption                                                   Standard
     β         tax (t=tf)     Standard          tax             DWL          Output       Emissions      dominates?
                 0.01             -              1.41           0.54          0.55          1.59
    0.8                                                                                                      Yes
                   -            1.93             0.96           0.19          1.00          1.93
                  0.01             -             1.86            0.500         0.00          0.00
    0.5                                                                                                      Yes
                    -            3.54            1.77            0.496         0.09          0.32
                  0.01             -             1.62            0.691         0.00          0.00
    0.2                                                                                                      Yes
                    -            3.09            1.54            0.688         0.08          0.24

Panel B. Stringent uncovered emissions charge. tU = 0.25

               Emissions      Intensity     Consumption                                                   Standard
     β         tax (t=tf)     Standard          tax             DWL          Output       Emissions      dominates?
                 0.25             -              0.38           0.03          1.15          1.74          Yes/ First
    0.8
                   -            1.32             0.66           0.00          1.18          1.55            best

                  0.25             -             0.35            0.06          0.94          1.33         Yes/ First
    0.5
                    -            1.00            0.50            0.00          1.00          1.00           best

                  0.25             -             0.14            0.04          1.14          0.65         Yes/ First
    0.2
                    -            0.33            0.16            0.00          1.18          0.39           best

Notes:    Parameterization: U′(q)=2-q; f(k,e)=k1-βeβ; τ=0.5; and w=0.5.
          Efficient social surplus (quantity, emissions) is 0.69 (1.18, 1.55); 0.5 (1, 1); and 0.69 (1.18, 0.39).




                                                            28
Table 3. Monopoly: comparing emissions taxes with intensity standards under Cobb-Douglas
and constant returns to scale.

               Emissions      Intensity                                                  Standard
     β         tax (t=tf)     Standard        DWL           Output       Emissions      dominates?
                 0.14             -           0.12           0.85          1.43
    0.8                                                                                     Yes
                   -            1.43          0.04           0.94          1.34
                  0.25             -           0.10          0.65           0.91
    0.5                                                                                     Yes
                    -            1.22          0.04          0.80           0.97
                  0.31             -           0.16          0.63           0.30
    0.2                                                                                     Yes
                    -            0.46          0.12          0.70           0.32

Notes:    Parameterization: U′(q)=2-q; f(k,e)=k1-βeβ; τ=0.5; and w=0.5.
          Efficient social surplus (quantity, emissions) is 0.69 (1.18, 1.55); 0.5 (1, 1); and 0.69 (1.18, 0.39).




                                                            29
Appendix Tables
Appendix Table 1. Incomplete regulation with decreasing returns: comparing optimal emissions
taxes with intensity standards under Cobb-Douglas and decreasing returns to scale.

Panel A. Lax uncovered emissions charge. tU = 0.01
                 Emissions      Intensity                                             Standard
     α,β           tax          Standard       DWL          Output       Emissions   dominates?
                  0.011             -          1.62          1.95          5.58
 0.16, 0.64                                                                             Yes
                     -            2.38         1.31          1.96          4.93
                    0.013           -           4.88         1.82          12.14
   0.4, 0.4                                                                             Yes
                      -           4.48          3.87         1.83          10.06
                    0.023           -           4.05         1.53          9.33
 0.64, 0.16                                                                             Yes
                      -           2.76          3.46         1.55          8.12

Panel B. Stringent uncovered emissions charge. tU = 0.25
                 Emissions      Intensity                                             Standard
     α,β            tax         Standard       DWL          Output       Emissions   dominates?
                   0.28             -          0.10          1.43          1.99
 0.16, 0.64                                                                             No
                     -            1.07         0.11          1.45          1.81
                    0.31            -           0.09         1.19          1.42
   0.4, 0.4                                                                             Yes
                      -           0.77          0.08         1.22          1.22
                    0.37            -          0.032         1.18          0.53
 0.64, 0.16                                                                             Yes
                      -           0.28         0.026         1.22          0.47

Panel C. Lax uncovered emissions charge. tU = 0.01, plus consumption tax.
                 Emissions      Intensity    Consumption                                           Standard
     α,β           tax          Standard         tax            DWL         Output    Emissions   dominates?
                  0.011             -            1.32           0.43         0.64       1.39
 0.16, 0.64                                                                                          Yes
                     -            1.88           1.22           0.35         0.75       1.48
                    0.013           -            1.84           0.63         0.08        0.23
   0.4, 0.4                                                                                          Yes
                      -           2.40           1.77           0.60         0.14        0.40
                    0.022           -            1.71           0.78         0.07        0.19
 0.64, 0.16                                                                                          Yes
                      -           1.52           1.66           0.77         0.11        0.29

Panel D. Stringent uncovered emissions charge. tU = 0.25, plus consumption tax.
                 Emissions      Intensity    Consumption                                           Standard
     α,β            tax         Standard         tax            DWL         Output    Emissions   dominates?
                   0.26             -            0.40           0.03         1.09       1.41
 0.16, 0.64                                                                                          Yes
                     -            1.06           0.42           0.02         1.09       1.24
                    0.29            -            0.33           0.042        0.92        1.04
   0.4, 0.4                                                                                          Yes
                      -           1.00           0.42           0.041        0.95        0.95
                    0.35            -            0.12           0.03         1.09        0.48
 0.64, 0.16                                                                                          Yes
                      -           0.29           0.15           0.02         1.09        0.42

Notes:     Parameterization: U′(q)=2-q; f(k,e)=kαeβ; τ=0.5; and w=0.5.




                                                           30
Appendix Table 2. Incomplete regulation with constant elasticity of substitution: comparing
optimal emissions taxes with intensity standards under CES and constant returns to scale.

Panel A. Lax uncovered emissions charge. tU = 0.01
                   Emissions      Intensity                                                Standard
         α            tax         Standard       DWL          Output      Emissions       dominates?
                     0.01             -          0.14          2.00         0.40
     0.2                                                                                     Yes
                       -            0.11         0.06          2.00         0.22
                      0.01            -           0.49         1.99          1.91
     0.5                                                                                     Yes
                        -           0.74          0.29         1.99          1.47
                      0.01            -           0.24         1.99          1.99
     0.8                                                                                     Yes
                        -           0.95          0.21         1.99          1.88

Panel B. Stringent uncovered emissions charge. tU = 0.25
                   Emissions      Intensity                                                Standard
         α            tax         Standard      DWL           Output      Emissions       dominates?
                     0.25             -         0.0047         1.98         0.09
     0.2                                                                                     Yes
                       -            0.03        0.0001         1.98         0.06
                      0.25            -           0.05         1.83          0.81
     0.5                                                                                     Yes
                        -           0.23          0.01         1.87          0.44
                      0.25            -           0.12         1.75          1.63
     0.8                                                                                     Yes
                        -           0.35          0.02         1.75          0.62

Panel C. Lax uncovered emissions charge. tU = 0.01, plus consumption tax.
                   Emissions      Intensity    Consumption                                              Standard
         α            tax         Standard         tax            DWL            Output    Emissions   dominates?
                     0.01                          0.10           0.14            1.90       0.38
     0.2                                                                                                  Yes
                                    0.11           0.06           0.05            1.94       0.22
                      0.01                         0.47           0.38            1.52        1.46
     0.5                                                                                                  Yes
                                    0.74           0.37           0.22            1.62        1.20
                      0.01                         0.49           0.12            1.50        1.50
     0.8                                                                                                  Yes
                                    0.95           0.47           0.10            1.52        1.43

Panel D. Stringent uncovered emissions charge. tU = 0.25, plus consumption tax.
                   Emissions      Intensity    Consumption                                              Standard
         α            tax         Standard         tax            DWL            Output    Emissions   dominates?
                     0.25             -            0.01           0.005           1.97       0.09       Yes/First
     0.2
                       -            0.03           0.02           0.000           1.97       0.06         Best

                      0.25            -            0.11           0.05            1.72        0.77     Yes/First
     0.5
                        -           0.25           0.13           0.00            1.75        0.44       Best

                      0.25            -            0.23           0.09            1.52        1.41     Yes/First
     0.8
                        -           0.42           0.21           0.00            1.58        0.66       Best

Notes:       Parameterization: U′(q)=2-q; f(k,e)=(kα+eα)1/α; τ=0.5; and w=0.5.




                                                             31
