NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DETERMINANTS OF STOCK AND BOND RETURN COMOVEMENTS
Lieven Baele
Geert Bekaert
Koen Inghelbrecht
Working Paper 15260
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15260

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2009

The authors greatly benefited from discussions with Frank de Jong, Francis Diebold, Andrea Frazzini,
Eric Ghysels, Antonio Moreno, Theo Nijman, Paolo Pasquariello, Ralph Koijen, Peter Schotman,
Allan Timmermann, Bas Werker, Jeffrey Wurgler, Raf Wouters and seminar participants at the Bank
of England, the AFA 2009 Meetings in San Francisco, the EFMA 2008 meetings in Athens, the INQUIRE
2008 meeting in Zurich, the Bank of Norway, the Universities of Navarra, the University of Valencia,
the National Bank of Belgium, Ghent University, NETSPAR, Tilburg University, and the University
of the Basque Country. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of Inquire Europe. Koen
Inghelbrecht acknowledges financial support from the National Bank of Belgium. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Lieven Baele, Geert Bekaert, and Koen Inghelbrecht. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Determinants of Stock and Bond Return Comovements
Lieven Baele, Geert Bekaert, and Koen Inghelbrecht
NBER Working Paper No. 15260
August 2009
JEL No. E43,E44,G11,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
We study the economic sources of stock-bond return comovements and its time variation using a dynamic
factor model. We identify the economic factors employing a semi-structural regime-switching model
for state variables such as interest rates, inflation, the output gap, and cash flow growth. We also view
risk aversion, uncertainty about inflation and output, and liquidity proxies as additional potential factors.
We find that macro-economic fundamentals contribute little to explaining stock and bond return correlations,
but that other factors, especially liquidity proxies, play a more important role. The macro factors are
still important in fitting bond return volatility; whereas the "variance premium" is critical in explaining
stock return volatility. However, the factor model primarily fails in fitting covariances.

Lieven Baele
Tilburg University
5000 LE Tilburg
The Netherlands
Lieven.Baele@uvt.nl
Geert Bekaert
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, 411 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu

Koen Inghelbrecht
Department Finance
Faculty of Business Administration
and Public Administration
University College Ghent
Voskenslaan 270
B-9000 Gent
Belgium
Koen.Inghelbrecht@hogent.be

1

Introduction

Stock and bond returns in the US display an average correlation of about 19 percent during the
post–1968 period. A number of models have had some success in generating realistic average
correlations using economic state variables. Yet, Shiller and Beltratti (1992) under-estimate
the empirical correlation using a present value with constant discount rates, whereas Bekaert,
Engstrom, and Grenadier (2005) over-estimate it in a consumption-based asset pricing model
with stochastic risk aversion.
Figure 1 documents a more puzzling empirical phenomenon: the stock-bond return correlation
displays very substantial time variation. The figure graphs realized quarterly correlations measured using daily returns, and the data-implied conditional correlation based on the bivariate
DCC-MIDAS model of Colacito, Engle, and Ghysels (2009). We defer technical details about
this statistical model to the Appendix, but come back to it below as it will serve as an empirical benchmark for our study. Note that during the mid-1990s, the stock-bond correlation
was as high as 60 percent, to drop to levels as low as minus 60 percent by the early 2000s.
There is a growing literature documenting this time variation using sophisticated statistical
models (see also Guidolin and Timmermann (2006)), but much less work trying to disentangle
its economic sources. In particular, the negative stock–bond return correlations observed since
1998 are mostly ascribed to a “flight-to-safety” phenomenon (see e.g. Connolly, Stivers, and Sun
(2005)), where increased stock market uncertainty induces investors to flee stocks in favor of
bonds. Campbell, Sunderam, and Viceira (2009) recently propose a pricing model for stock and
bond returns, and assign a latent variable to capture the covariance between nominal variables
and the real economy, which, in turn, helps to produce negative comovements between bond
and stock returns.
This article asks whether a dynamic factor model in which stock and bond returns depend on a
number of economic state variables can explain the average stock-bond return correlation and its
variation over time. Our approach has a number of distinct features. First, we cast a wide net in
terms of state variables. Our economic state variables do not only include interest rates, inflation,
the output gap and cash flow growth, but also a “fundamental” risk aversion measure derived
from consumption growth data based on Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and macro-economic
uncertainty measures derived from survey data on inflation and GDP growth expectations.
The latter variables may reflect true economic uncertainty as in David and Veronesi (2008),
or heteroskedasticity as in Bansal and Yaron (2004) and Bekaert, Engstrom, and Xing (2009).
In addition, we consider liquidity proxies, and the variance premium, a risk premium proxy
representing the difference between the (square of the) VIX (the option-based “risk-neutral”
expected conditional variance) and the conditional variance of future stock prices (see e.g. Carr
and Wu (2009)).
Second, while we have estimated simple linear state variable models with various forms of
heteroskedasticity, we focus our discussion on a state variable model that imposes structural
1

restrictions inspired by recent standard New–Keynesian models, and that incorporates regime–
switching behavior. Both features improve the fit considerably. We use a regime-switching model
to accommodate changes in monetary policy and to model heteroskedasticity in the shocks. As
we will demonstrate, heteroskedasticity is a key driver of the time-variation in stock-bond return
correlations. Moreover, macro-variables have witnessed important volatility changes over the
sample period. For example, the lower variability of inflation and output growth observed since
the mid-1980s, the so-called Great Moderation, could conceivably lead to lower correlations
between stock and bond returns. Whether its timing actually helps matching the time variation
in the stock-bond return correlations, including negative correlations at the end of the nineties,
remains to be seen.
Third, given our model structure, we decompose the performance of the factor model in contributions of the various factors. This should provide useful input to future theoretical modelling
of stock-bond return comovements. Moreover, we examine how well the model does with respect
to each of the correlation components: covariances, and stock and bond return volatilities. In
so doing, we add to the literature that examines the economic sources of stock and bond return
volatility (see e.g. Schwert (1989), Campbell and Ammer (1993), and Engle, Ghysels, and Sohn
(2008)).
One final point is of note. Our analysis is mostly at the quarterly frequency. This is the frequency
at which data on the economic state variables used in the dynamic factor models are available.
It may also be the highest frequency at which a fundamentals based model is expected to have
explanatory power. While we do characterize the variation in stock-bond return correlations
using daily return data to calculate ex-post quarterly correlations1 , our main benchmark is the
long-run component of the Colacito, Engle, and Ghysels (2009) model. This flexible empirical
model exploits the richness of daily data to estimate quarterly conditional correlations, directly
comparable to the implied correlations from our factor model.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the factor model and
develops the state variable model used to identify the economic factors. Section 3 details the
estimation procedure and the model selection. Section 4 analyzes the fit of the factor model
for correlation dynamics, whereas Section 5 decomposes the correlations into covariances, and
stock and bond return volatilities. We find that macro-economic fundamentals contribute little
to explaining stock and bond return correlations, but that other factors, especially liquidity
proxies, play a more important role. The macro factors are still important in fitting bond
return volatility; whereas the “variance premium” is critical in explaining stock return volatility.
However, the factor model primarily fails in fitting covariances. A final section concludes.

2

Dynamic Stock and Bond Return Factor Model

In this section we present the general factor model linking stock and bond returns to structural
factors. Section 2.1 considers the general dynamic factor model. Section 2.2 discusses the selec2

tion of the state variables and the modelling of their dynamics, which leads to the identification
of the factors. Finally, section 2.3 discusses the modelling of the factor exposures.

2.1

The Dynamic Factor Model

Let re,t denote the excess equity return and rb,t the excess bond return. We assume the following
dynamics for rt = (re,t , rb,t )0 :
(1)
rt = Et−1 (rt ) + β 0t Ft + εt
where Et−1 (rt ) represents the expected excess return vector, β t = (β e,t , β b,t ) is a n × 2 matrix
of respectively stock and bond return factor loadings, and Ft is a n × 1 vector containing the
structural factors. The vector εt = (εe,t , εb,t )0 represents return shocks not explained by the
economic factors. For now, we model expected returns as constants but we investigate the
robustness of our results to this assumption in Section 4.3.
The time variation in the betas β e,t and β b,t is generally modelled as:
β t = β (It−1 , St )

(2)

where It is the information set generated by a set of information variables at time t, and St is
a discrete variable following a Markov chain, which we use to model sudden regime changes,
as discussed below. The factors Ft represent innovations to a set of state variables Xt , and are
distributed as:
Ft ∼ N (O,Σt )
(3)
where Σt is a n×n diagonal matrix containing the conditional variances of the structural factors,
which are potentially time-varying. In particular, Σt generally may also depend on St . The offdiagonal elements are zero as we enforce structural factors to be orthogonal. Under the null
of the model, the covariance matrix of the stock and bond return residuals εt is homoskedastic
and diagonal. We denote the residual variances by he and hb , respectively.
The factor model implies that the comovement between stock and bond returns follows directly
from their joint exposure to the same economic factors. Let R be the set of values St can take
on. Then, the conditional covariance can be written as:
covt−1 (re,t , rb,t ) =

X

β 0e (It−1 , st ) Σ ( st | It−1 ) β b (It−1 , st ) P [st | It−1 ] .

(4)

st ∈R

When the betas do not depend on the regime, it simplifies to:
covt−1 (re,t , rb,t ) = β 0e,t−1 Σt−1 β b,t−1

(5)

where Σt−1 is conditioned on
by the product of the stock and
qIt−1 . By dividing the covariance
q
0
0
bond return volatilities, i.e. β e,t−1 Σt−1 β e,t−1 + he and β b,t−1 Σt−1 β b,t−1 + hb , we can decompose the model-implied conditional correlation between stock and bond returns, ρt−1 (re,t , rb,t ) ,
3

as follows:
ρt−1 (re,t , rb,t ) = q

β 1e,t−1 β 1b,t−1 vart−1 (Ft1 )
q
+ ...
0
0
β e,t−1 Σt−1 β e,t−1 + he β b,t−1 Σt−1 β b,t−1 + hb

(6)

β ne,t−1 β nb,t−1 vart−1 (Ftn )
q
.
β 0e,t−1 Σt−1 β e,t−1 + he β 0b,t−1 Σt−1 β b,t−1 + hb

... + q

This decomposition clearly shows the standard effects of a linear factor model. First, factors with
higher variances have the largest effect on comovement. Second, when the variance of a factor
increases, its contribution to the comovement can become arbitrarily large. Third, if bond and
stock betas have the same sign, increased factor variances lead to increased comovement, and
vice versa. Consequently, to generate the substantial variation in comovements documented in
Figure 1 in the context of this model, the volatility of the fundamentals must display substantial
time variation. Moreover, to generate negative covariances, it must be true that there is at least
one factor to which bonds and stocks have opposite exposures, and this factor must at times
have substantial relative variance. When β’s vary through time, they can also generate sign
changes over time. When they are constant, however, the sole driver of time variation in the
covariance between stock and bond returns is the heteroskedasticity in the structural factors.
The betas determine the sign of the covariance. We now motivate which factors should be
included in the factor model from the perspective of rational pricing models.

2.2
2.2.1

State Variable Model
Selection of State Variables

In standard rational pricing models, the fundamental factors driving stock and bond returns
either affect cash flows or discount rates. We start out with describing a standard set of macrofactors, then describe how we measure potential risk premium variation. Finally, the literatures
on bond (see Amihud and Mendelson (1991) and Kamara (1994)) and equity pricing (see Amihud (2002)) have increasingly stressed the importance of liquidity effects; so we consider two
liquidity related state variables as well.
Standard Macro Factors Our macro factors include the standard variables featured in
macroeconomic models: the output gap2 , inflation and the short rate. All these variables may
have both cash flow and discount rate effects, so their effect on bond and stock returns is not
always easy to predict. Because bonds have fixed nominal cash flows, inflation is an obvious state
variable that may generate different exposures between bond and stock returns. Analogously, if
the output gap is highly correlated with the evolution of real dividends, it should affect stock
but not bond returns.
However, both inflation and the output gap can also affect the real term structure of interest
rates and therefore affect both bonds and equities. Because equities represent a claim on real
4

assets, the discount rate on stocks should not depend on nominal factors such as expected
inflation. Yet, a recurring finding is that stocks seem to be very poor hedges against inflation
and their returns correlate negatively with inflation shocks and expected inflation (see e.g. Fama
and Schwert (1977)). One interpretation of this finding is that it represents money illusion (see
Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004)), another that it represents the correlation of inflation with
rational risk premiums (see Bekaert and Engstrom (2009)). In this article, we leave the sign of
the exposures unconstrained, giving the model maximal power to explain the data. In standard
models, the (expected) output gap may reflect information about real rates as well and hence
may induce positive correlation between stock and bond returns.
As is well known, the level of interest rates drives most of the variation in bond returns, and we
include a short-term interest rate as a factor in our model. For long-term bonds, the relevant
state variable is the long-term interest rate, which can in turn be decomposed into a shortterm real rate, a term premium, expected inflation and an inflation risk premium. Increases in
all these 4 components unambiguously decrease bond returns. To span the term and inflation
premium components, we likely need more information than is present in our macro factors,
and we therefore also use a number of direct “economic” risk premium proxies.
Risk Premium Factors We use measures of economic uncertainty and risk aversion to capture stock and bond risk premia. For instance, Bekaert, Engstrom, and Grenadier (2005) show
that stochastic risk aversion plays an important role in explaining positive stock-bond return
correlations. The effects of risk aversion are, however, quite complex. In the models of Bekaert,
Engstrom, and Grenadier (2005) and Wachter (2006), increases in risk aversion unambiguously
increase equity and bond premiums, but their effect on interest rates is actually ambiguous. A
rise in risk aversion may increase the real interest rate through a consumption smoothing effect
or decrease it through a precautionary savings effect. Bansal and Yaron (2004) and Bekaert,
Engstrom, and Xing (2009) stress economic uncertainty as a channel that may affect risk premiums and equity valuation. The effect of increases in uncertainty on equity valuation, while
often thought to be negative, is actually ambiguous as increased uncertainty may lower real interest rates through precautionary savings effects. Hence, an increase in uncertainty may cause
bonds and stocks to move in opposite directions depending on the relative strenghts of the term
structure and risk premium effects.
An alternative motivation for the use of uncertainty measures follows from the learning models of
Veronesi (1999) and David and Veronesi (2008). They show that higher uncertainty about future
economic state variables makes investors’ expectations react more swiftly to news, affecting both
variances and covariances of asset returns.
To capture economic uncertainty, we use the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) to create
measures of inflation and output gap uncertainty. We use two measures of risk aversion. Our first
measure is from Bekaert and Engstrom (2009): They create an empirical proxy for risk aversion,
based on the external habit specification of Campbell and Cochrane (1999). This “fundamental”
5

risk aversion measure is generated solely by past consumption growth data, and behaves countercyclically. It is, however, unlikely that this measure fully captures equity risk premium variation.
Recent work by Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou (2009) shows that the variance premium, defined
earlier, predicts equity returns. Drechsler and Yaron (2009) extend the model by Bansal and
Yaron (2004) to allow for additional non-linearities in the consumption growth technology, and
show that this premium depends on risk aversion and the non-Gaussian components of the
model. We use an estimate of this risk premium as a factor, which helps us to interpret an often
cited non-fundamental explanation for the occasionally observed negative stock-bond return
correlations. Connolly, Stivers, and Sun (2005) use the VIX implied volatility measure as a
proxy for stock market uncertainty and show that stock and bond return comovements are
negatively and significantly related to stock market uncertainty. They interpret this finding as
reflecting “flight-to-safety”, where investors switch from the risky asset, stocks, to a safe haven,
bonds, in times of increased stock market uncertainty, inducing corresponding price changes,
and thus implying a negative correlation between stock and bond returns. Because the variance
premium depends positively on VIX movements but depends negatively on the actual expected
stock market volatility, we can determine whether this “flight-to-safety” effect is due to the
“risk premium component” of the VIX, or rather reflects general stock market uncertainty.
Liquidity factors We focus on transaction cost based measures of illiquidity. Liquidity can
then affect the pricing of bonds and stocks in two main ways. First, liquidity may affect the
betas, as economic shocks may not be transmitted quickly to observed returns in illiquid markets. This is a factor exposure effect. Second, liquidity may be a priced factor, and shocks
that improve liquidity should increase returns. The impact of liquidity on stock and bond return comovements then obviously depends on how liquidity shocks comove across markets.
For example, the monetary policy stance can affect liquidity in both markets by altering the
terms of margin borrowing and by alleviating the borrowing constraints of dealers, or by simply encouraging trading activity. Liquidity effects may also correlate with the “flight-to-safety”
phenomenon. Crisis periods may drive investors and traders from less liquid stocks into highly
liquid Treasury bonds, and the resulting price-pressure effects may induce negative stock-bond
return correlations. Some of these effects may persist at the quarterly frequency. Existing studies
of the commonality in stock and bond liquidity (Chordia, Sarkar, and Subrahmanyam (2005)
and Goyenko (2006)) are somewhat inconclusive as to which effect dominates. It is therefore
important to let illiquidity shocks enter the model relatively unconstrained.
Our measure of bond market illiquidity is a monthly average of quoted bid-ask spreads of
off-the-run bonds across all maturities, taken from Goyenko (2006). Our measure of equity
market illiquidity uses the “zero return” concept developed in Lesmond, Ogden, and Trzcinka
(1999), and is taken from Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2007). It is the capitalization-based
proportion of zero daily returns across all firms, aggregated over the month. This measure has a
positive and high correlation with more standard measures, such as Hasbrouck (2006)’s effective
costs and Amihud (2002)’s price impact measures. Because liquidity has improved over time,
6

both illiquidity measures show near non-stationary behavior. For stocks, we first correct for the
structural breaks induced by changes in tick size3 in 1997 and 2001 by using the residuals from
a regression on dummies for these break dates. Then, for both stock and bond illiquidity, we
subtract a moving average of the levels of the previous 4 months from the current measures.
Eventually, we retain the following economic state variables: the output gap (yt ), inflation (π t ),
risk aversion (qt ), nominal interest rate (it ), cash flow growth (cgt ), output uncertainty (ydt ),
inflation uncertainty (πdt ), stock market illiquidity (sliqt ), bond market illiquidity (bliqt ), and
the variance premium (vpt ) for a total of 10 state variables, which we collect in a vector Xt . The
data appendix provides full details about the measurement and construction of those variables.
2.2.2

General State Variable Dynamics

To identify the structural factors Ft , we must specify the dynamics of the state variables Xt .
The general model has the following form:
Xt = µ (St ) + Ω1 (St ) Et (Xt+1 ) + Ω2 (St ) Xt−1 + Γ (St ) Ft

(7)

where µ is a 10 × 1 vector of drifts, and Ω2 represents the usual feedback matrix. We also
allow the dynamics of the factors to depend on expectations of future values as is true in many
standard macro–models through Ω1 . Γ is a 10 × 10 matrix of structural parameters, capturing
the contemporaneous correlation between the fundamental state variables. Finally, all coefficient
matrices generally depend on St , which represents a set of latent regime variables, modelled in
the Hamilton (1989) tradition. The regime variables can capture structural changes in the
macro-economic relations, as induced, for example, by changes in monetary policy. Monetary
economists debate the effects of heteroskedasticity in the fundamental shocks versus shifts in
monetary policy on the identification of economic and monetary policy shocks. By letting the
conditional variance of Ft also depend on regime variables, we accommodate both interpretations
of the data (see also below).
Without further restrictions, the model in Equation (7) is surely overparametrized, but it nests
a large number of reasonable dynamic models. For example, assume Ω2 = 0, and eliminate the
regime dependence in µ, Ω1 and Γ, and we obtain a simple first-order VAR with heteroskedastic
shocks. We estimated several variants of such models, using a non-structural identification of
the shocks in (7) by imposing a Choleski decomposition. Such models were easily out-performed
by a semi-structural model, nested in Equation (7). For this model, we split the state variables
into two sets: “pure macro variables”, Xt,ma = [yt , π t , qt , it ]0 (recall that qt is computed from only
consumption data), and the other variables Xt,nma = [cgt , ydt , πdt , sliqt , bliqt , vpt ]0 . To model
Xt,ma , we make use of a New Keynesian model, which we describe in the next sub-section. To
identify the shocks to Xt,nma , we use a simple empirical model that recognizes that these factors
may depend on the macro variables themselves. For example, Goyenko, Subrahmanyam, and
Ukhov (2008) show that inflation and monetary policy affect bond liquidity, and that illiquidity
7

increases in recessions. Specifically, the model is:
Xt,nma = µnma (St ) + φnma Xt−1,nma + Γma
nma Xt,ma + Ft,nma

(8)

with φnma a diagonal matrix; Γma
nma a 6 × 4 matrix capturing the contemporaneous covariance
with the macro-economic state variables and Ft,nma the vector of (uncorrelated) ‘structural’
shocks. With this model structure, the non-macro factors may partially inherit autoregressive
dynamics from the pure macro-economic variables, and the Ft,nma shocks must be interpreted
as being purged from the pure macro-shocks. Finally, note that we allow the drifts to depend
on the regime variable St . Because inflation and output uncertainty are likely highly correlated
with macro-economic heteroskedasticity (see Giordani and Soderlind (2003); Evans and Wachtel (1993)), the assumption of heteroskedastic macro shocks makes this dependence logically
necessary. Regime-dependent drifts may also help model the structural changes (see Hasbrouck
(2006); Goyenko (2006)) affecting the liquidity in both stock and bond markets.
2.2.3

A Structural Model for Xt,ma

The structural model for Xt,ma extends a standard New-Keynesian three-equation model (see
e.g. Bekaert, Cho, and Moreno (2008)) comprising an IS or demand equation, an aggregate
supply (AS) equation, and a forward looking monetary policy rule, to accommodate timevarying risk aversion:
yt = aIS + µEt (yt+1 ) + (1 − µ) yt−1 + ηqt − φ (it − Et (π t+1 )) + Fty

(9)

π t = aAS + δEt (π t+1 ) + (1 − δ) π t−1 + λyt + Ftπ

(10)

qt = αq + ρq qt−1 + Ftq

(11)

it = aM P + ρit−1 + (1 − ρ) [β(Stmp )Et (π t+1 ) + γ(Stmp )yt ] + Fti .

(12)

The µ and δ parameters represent the degree of forward-looking behavior in the IS and AS
equations. If they are not equal to one, the model features endogenous persistence. The φ parameter measures the impact of changes in real interest rates on output and λ the effect of
output on inflation. They are critical parameters in the monetary transmission mechanism, and
high and positive values imply that monetary policy has significant effects on the real economy and inflation. Because all these parameters arise from micro-founded models, for example
representing preference parameters, we assume them to be time invariant.
The variable qt reflects time-varying risk aversion. We build on the model in Bekaert, Engstrom,
and Grenadier (2005) to append stochastic risk aversion to the New-Keynesian IS-curve (see
Appendix C for details). The model nests a variant of the Campbell and Cochrane (1999) external habit model, and qt represents the negative of their surplus ratio and thus the local curvature
of the utility function. While output shocks and risk aversion are negatively correlated in the
model, η in Equation (9) can nevertheless not be definitively signed. It reflects counteracting
consumption-smoothing and precautionary savings effects of risk aversion on interest rates.
8

The monetary policy rule is the typical forward-looking Taylor rule with smoothing parameter
ρ. However, as in Bikbov and Chernov (2008), we allow systematic monetary policy to vary with
a regime variable. There is substantive evidence that monetary policy has gone through activist
and more accommodating spells (see e.g. Cho and Moreno (2006), Boivin (2005)). We let Stmp
take on two values and it follows a standard Markov-chain process with constant transition
probabilities.
While it is theoretically possible to obtain the rational expectations solution of the model in
Equations (9)-(12), the model implies highly non-linear restrictions on the parameters, further
complicated by the presence of regime-switching in the structural shocks. Bikbov and Chernov
(2008) estimate a slightly simpler version of this model incorporating term structure data and
note that without these additional data the identification of the regimes is rather poor. Our
strategy is different. We replace the forward-looking rational expectations with survey forecast
measures for expectations of the output gap and inflation. Let Xt,sur be a vector containing the
median of the individual survey forecasts for the output gap and expected inflation plus two
zeros. Using these forecasts, we write the model in compact matrix notation as:
B11 (Stmp )Xt,ma = α + A11 (Stmp )Xt,sur + B12 Xt−1,ma + Ft,ma ,

Ft,ma ∼ N (0, Σt )

(13)

where A11 , B11 , and B12 follow straightforwardly from Equations (7) to (12), leading to the
following reduced form:
Xt,ma = c(Stmp ) + Ω1 (Stmp )Xt,sur + Ω2 (Stmp )Xt−1,ma + Γ(Stmp )Ft,ma

(14)

with Γ(Stmp ) = inv(B11 (Stmp )); c(Stmp ) = Γ(Stmp ) α; Ω1 (Stmp ) = Γ(Stmp )A11 (Stmp ); Ω2 (Stmp ) =
Γ(Stmp )B12 . The variable Stmp switches certain structural parameters in the A11 and B11 matrices.
This structural model provides an economic interpretation to the contemporaneous relations
between the state variables and a natural identification of the shocks Fty , Ftπ , Ftq , and Fti .
The model can be estimated using limited maximum likelihood (we do not specify the dynamics
of the survey forecasts). The use of the survey forecasts therefore both adds additional information and permits to identify the structural parameters with a relatively easy and straightforward
estimation procedure. The quality of the model identification depends to a large extent on the
quality of the survey forecasts. A recent paper by Ang, Bekaert, and Wei (2007) suggests that
the median survey forecast of inflation is the best inflation forecast out of sample, beating time
series, Philips curve and term structure models. Elliott, Komunjer, and Timmermann (2008)
document biases in output and inflation forecasts, but argue that this may be due to the common assumption that forecasters use a symmetric loss function. In an empirical exercise, they
find that only a modest degree of asymmetry is required to overturn rejections of rationality
and symmetric loss. The value of surveys is also increasingly recognized in state-of-the-art term
structure models (see e.g. D’Amico, Kim, and Wei (2009) and Chernov and Mueller (2009))
and monetary policy research.
9

2.2.4

Identification of Ft

In a simple VAR model, the Ft shocks can be computed from observations on the Xt variables.
However, in our model, the Ft shocks also depend on St . We follow the typical Hamilton (1989)
model, where agents in the economy observe the regime, but the econometrician does not. In
estimating the state variable model, we hence make inferences about the realizations of the
regime variable St as well. Once these are identified, we can simply retrieve Ft from the data
using Equations (8) and (14). The identification scheme works well, because our estimation
typically yields well-behaved smoothed regime probabilities close to one or zero.

2.2.5

Variance Dynamics of Factors

The factors Ft are assumed to be heteroskedastic with variance-covariance matrix Σt . Our
modelling of Σt is inspired by direct empirical evidence of changing fundamental variances.
Macroeconomists have noted a downward trend in the volatility of output growth and inflation
from 1985 onwards (see e.g. Stock, Watson, Gali, and Hall (2003) and Blanchard and Simon
(2001)), a phenomenon known as the Great Moderation. While some macroeconomists have attributed the Great Moderation to improved monetary policy (see Cogley and Sargent (2005)),
a possibility already accommodated in our structural model, Sims and Zha (2005) and Ang,
Bekaert, and Wei (2008) have identified important cyclical changes in the variance of fundamental shocks. We therefore model Σt as a function of a latent regime variable St . We allow
each shock to have its own regime variable: St = {Sty , Stπ , Stq , Sti , Stcg , Stsliq , Stbliq , Stvp }. Shocks to
output and inflation uncertainty share the same regime variable as output and inflation. To
retain tractability, we assume the regime variables to be independent Markov chain processes.
Each regime variable can take on two values with the transition probabilities between states
assumed constant. In particular, for each variable j, we have
¡
¢
var(Ftj |St ) = exp αj (Stj ) .
A regime-switching model does not accommodate permanent structural breaks: at each point in
time there is a probability that the variance may revert to a higher variability regime. We view
such potential re-occurrence of similar regimes, which may not have been observed for a long
time, as plausible. For example, the 2008-2009 crises will likely prove the Great Moderation
to be a temporary, rather than permanent phenomenon. The computational and estimation
complexities of state-of-the-art models accommodating both structural changes and regimeswitching behavior (see Pesaran, Pettenuzzo, and Timmermann (2006)) make them hard to
apply in our setting. We did entertain alternative models in which the factor variances depend on
j
the own lagged state variables Xt−1
. However, these models under-perform the regime switching
models.

2.3

Time Variation in Betas
10

The benchmark model forces the betas to be constant, i.e. β e,t = β e , β b,t = β b . Simple affine
pricing models imply that stock and bond return innovations are constant beta functions of
the innovations in the state variables. Linearized versions of many present value models for
equity pricing (see e.g. Campbell and Ammer (1993) and Bekaert, Engstrom, and Grenadier
(2005)) imply a similar constraint on the betas. While there are economic reasons for time
variation in betas, we deliberately limit the complexity of the models we consider, for two
reasons. First, time variation in the betas could spuriously pick up non-fundamental sources of
comovement. Second, with 10 state variables, allowing time variation in all betas very quickly
leads to parameter proliferation that the amount of data we have cannot bear. We therefore
consider a limited number of parsimonious models investigating the most likely economic sources
of time variation in the betas. In a first set of models, the betas depend on instruments measured
at time t − 1 (state dependent betas); in a second set of models, the betas depend on a subset
of the regime variables St identified in the state variable model (regime-switching betas).
2.3.1

State Dependent Betas

We consider two different state dependent models. In a first model, we select a different economic
source for beta variation for each factor. That is for state variable i, the beta is modelled as:
ij
β ij,t−1 = β ij,0 + β ij,1 zt−1

(15)

ij
where j = e, b and zt−1
is a particular instrument, which we now describe for each factor. First,
in the model of David and Veronesi (2008), widening the dispersion in beliefs increases the
effect of economic shocks on returns. Our measures of output and inflation uncertainty can be
viewed as proxies to belief dispersion (“uncertainty”) regarding economic growth and inflation
expectations. Hence, we let the sensitivity to output gap, inflation, and cash flow growth shocks
be a function of respectively output, inflation, and cash flow uncertainty. The latter is proxied
by the dispersion in cash flow predictions obtained from the Survey of Professional Forecasters.
Second, because we use a constant maturity bond portfolio, interest rate changes affect the
duration of the portfolio and consequently its interest rate sensitivity. As interest rates increase,
the bond portfolio’s lower duration should decrease its sensitivity to interest rate shocks. This
line of thought applies to stocks as well, as stocks are long-duration assets with stochastic cash
flows. The duration of stock returns actually depends on its dividend yield. We therefore allow
the betas of stocks with respect to interest rate shocks to be a function of the level of the (log)
dividend yield (corrected for repurchases), denoted by dyt . Unfortunately, it is conceivable that
behavioral factors may indirectly account for the resulting time variation in betas, if they are
correlated with valuation effects reflected in dividend yields. Third, we let the exposure to risk
aversion and variance premium shocks be a function of (lagged) risk aversion and the lagged
variance premium themselves. This permits non-linear effects in the relationship between risk
aversion changes and stock and bond returns. The effects of shocks to risk aversion may be
mitigated at very high risk aversion levels, or they may be amplified if the economy is in or
near a crisis. Finally, we also allow for level effects in the liquidity betas: a liquidity shock may

11

affect returns less rapidly in illiquid markets. Hence, we allow the stock (bond) liquidity beta
be a function of the lagged stock (bond) liquidity level.
In two alternative state dependent models, all betas depend on either the fundamental risk
aversion measure or the variance risk premium. Here, the variance risk premium is viewed as
a market-based indicator of risk aversion. In any pricing model, the price effects of economic
shocks may depend on the discount rate. For example, high discount rates may decrease the
magnitude of cash flow effects. Alternatively, Veronesi (1999) demonstrates how the degree of
risk aversion exacerbates the nonlinear effects of uncertainty on asset prices in the context of a
learning model. If risk aversion varies substantially through time, such effects may be important.
2.3.2

Regime-Switching Betas

An alternative dynamic model for betas is a regime-switching beta specification. While there
are many reasons to expect betas to show regime-switching behavior, we preserve the structural
interpretation of the implied stock-bond return correlation dynamics by using regime variables
exogenously extracted from the state variables, without using stock and bond returns. First,
with the Lucas critique in mind, one model considers betas to be a function of Stmp , the monetary
policy regime. Second, both theoretical work (David and Veronesi (2008)) and empirical work
(Boyd, Hu, and Jagannathan (2005); Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Vega (2007)) suggest
betas may depend on the business cycle. Because many of our state variables have strong
correlations with the business cycle, we let each factor’s beta depend on its own regime variable
to allow this possibility4 . Finally, as discussed before, when a market is very illiquid, shocks
may take time to filter through into prices. Consequently, we consider a model where all betas
depend on the two liquidity regime variables. While such liquidity effects may indeed reflect
trading costs, it is equally plausible that they reflect risk premium variation, given our quarterly
data frequency.

3
3.1

Estimation and Model Selection
Model Estimation

We follow a two-stage procedure to estimate the bivariate model presented in Equation (1). In a
first stage, we estimate the state variable model, then we estimate the factor model conditional
on the economic factor shocks identified in the first step. From an econometric point of view,
it would be more efficient to jointly estimate the factor and state variable models. However, an
important risk of a one-step estimation procedure is that the parameters of the state variable
model are estimated to help accommodate the conditional stock-bond return correlation, which
would make the economic interpretation of the factors problematic.
We estimate the structural model using limited-information maximum likelihood because we
replace unobservable conditional expected values by observable measures based on survey fore12

casts. We use quarterly data from 1968 till 2007, which we describe in detail in Appendix A.
The state variable model features 10 state variables and 9 regime variables (which must be
integrated out of the likelihood function), leading to a model with 82 parameters. Therefore,
we consider “pared-down” systems in addition to the full model. We retain all parameters with
t-statistics over 1, computed with White (1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors,
and re-estimate the constrained system5 . Fortunately, the retained parameters from the constrained estimation are remarkably similar to their unconstrained estimation counterparts. For
the regime-dependent intercepts in Xt,nma , we use a Wald test for equality across regimes instead. If we fail to reject at the 24 percent level (corresponding roughly to a t-stat = 1 criterion),
we continue to use a regime invariant drift. With the state variable model estimated, we identify
the regimes and thus the factors at each point in time; finally, we estimate the factor model in
Equation (1) using simple regression analysis.

3.2

State Variable Model Selection and Fit

An adequate state variable model must satisfy a number of requirements. First, the model should
accurately describe the dynamics of the state variables themselves. To this end, we perform a
battery of specification tests on the residuals of the state variable model. Appendix D describes
these tests in detail. For each equation, we test the hypotheses of a zero mean and zero serial
correlation (two lags) of the residuals; unit mean and zero serial correlation (two lags) for the
squared residuals; appropriate skewness and kurtosis. In performing these tests, we recognize
that the test statistics may be biased in small samples, especially if the data generating process
is as non-linear as we believe it to be. Therefore, we use critical values from a small Monte Carlo
analysis also described in Appendix D. For both the mean and the variance, we do the tests
on the expected value and the serial correlation both separately and jointly. Hence, there are a
total of 80 ([3 + 3 + 2] × 10) such tests. The model described above features only 5 rejections,
two at the five percent and three at the one percent level. Table 1, Panel A reports the Monte
Carlo p-values of the joint test across means, variances, and higher moments for each variable.
We reject the model only for inflation uncertainty, probably because of some remaining serial
correlation, at the 5% level. The second line reports Monte Carlo p-values for a covariance test.
We use the state variable model to uncover uncorrelated factor shocks, and here we test for
each shock whether its joint covariances with all other factor shocks are indeed zero. We reject
the hypothesis of zero covariances at the 5 percent level only for the output gap, and quite
marginally so. All in all, given the complexity of the model at hand, we view its performance
as a success.
Second, the model should also identify factor shocks that help explain the stock and bond return
covariance and volatility dynamics. We report two sets of results for the constant beta model.
In Panel B, we report a series of specification tests; in Panel C, we report a number of model
diagnostics. The specification tests are applied to the estimated cross-product of the stock and
bond residuals from Equation (1), ẑt = ε̂e,t ε̂b,t , and to the standardized stock and bond residuals
13

p
individually, ẑt = ε̂e(b),t / he(b) , where he(b) is the constant variance of the residuals of the factor
model for respectively stocks and bonds. Under the null hypothesis that the model is correctly
specified and captures stock-bond return dynamics, we have
E [ẑt ] = 0
E [ẑt ẑt−k ] = 0, for k ≥ 1.

(16)
(17)

We conduct the zero mean test and the serial correlation (4 lags) test both individually and
jointly within a GMM framework. The test statistics follow χ2 distributions with respectively
1, 4, and 5 degrees of freedom. For the cross-product of the residuals, the zero mean test only
rejects at the 10% level, and the serial correlation test does not reject at any level. A joint
test of (16) and (17) fails to reject as well. Hence, the model appears to fit both the average
covariance level between bond and stock returns and some first order covariance dynamics
reasonably well. The analogous tests for standardized bond and stock residuals do not reject
at any significance level. For the stock and bond residuals we perform two additional tests, a
test for serial correlation on squared standardized residuals (the variance test), using 4 lags
again, and Engle and Ng (1993) “sign bias” tests. The latter test whether the model captures
volatility asymmetry: negative shocks raise volatility more than positive shocks (see Campbell
and Hentschel (1992) and Bekaert and Wu (2000)). The actual tests check the validity of the
orthogonality conditions (a), (b), and (c) :
(a)
E [(ẑt2 − 1) 1 {ẑt−1 < 0}] = 0
(b) E [(ẑt2 − 1) 1 {ẑt−1 < 0} ẑt−1 ] = 0
(c) E [(ẑt2 − 1) 1 {ẑt−1 ≥ 0} ẑt−1 ] = 0
where 1 represents an indicator function. These conditions correspond to respectively the Sign
Bias, the Negative Sign Bias, and the Positive Sign Bias tests of Engle and Ng (1993). The
sign bias test examines whether or not the model captures the differential effect of negative
and positive return shocks on volatility. The negative (positive) sign bias test focuses on the
differential effect that large and small negative (positive) returns shocks have on volatility. The
joint test, denoted by “Asym”, is distributed as χ2 with 3 degrees of freedom. Columns 4 and 5
in Panel B of Table 1 report the test results. The model easily passes both the “Variance” and
“Asym” tests with the p-values being at least 20%.
The model selection statistics, reported in Panel C of Table 1, compare our model-implied
conditional correlations, calculated as in Equation (6), with two benchmarks, namely realized
correlations measured using daily returns of the following quarter, and the data-implied conditional correlations based on the MIDAS model referred to before. We expect the latter to give
us a good picture of how the actual conditional correlations at the quarterly frequency vary
through time, whereas the former essentially tests the predictive power of the models for future
correlations. We consider several measures of “closeness”. First, we compute the mean absolute deviation between the model-implied correlation and our proxy for the actual conditional
correlation and the next quarter’s realized correlation. For completeness, we also compute the
14

distance measure with respect to the unconditional correlation, which can help us interpret
poor fits. Second, we compute the correlation between the two benchmark correlations and the
model-implied correlations. It may be that the model cannot fit the correlation level, but performs well with respect to the time variation in correlations. Third, we also run a regression of
our two benchmark correlations onto our model-implied correlations, expecting a zero constant
and unitary slope. This measure provides information on, inter alia, the relative variability of
the various correlation measures.
To better compare different models, we also create a statistical yardstick for the magnitude of
the different diagnostics. We start with the benchmark factor model (see below), using constant
betas in Equation (1). We then collect the estimated betas for both stock and bond returns
and their corresponding covariance matrix, and draw 1000 different beta vectors from a normal
distribution with expected beta and variance-covariance matrix equal to the estimated beta
and variance-covariance matrix. With these simulated beta vectors, we create distributions for
all the model diagnostics, and we show the 90 percent confidence intervals in the table. The
first line of Panel C reports the diagnostic for our main model with constant betas. The model
produces correlations that are 18.6% different from the correlations produced by the MIDAS
model, 24.3% different from the realized correlations next quarter, and it deviates from the
unconditional correlation by 6.6%, on average being mostly lower. For the latter two, we can
compare the factor model’s performance with that of the MIDAS model (see last line). The
factor model fits the unconditional correlation actually better than the MIDAS model does
(which has a 19.5% average distance), but it does not perform as well with respect to fitting
the realized correlations. The MIDAS model’s fit is also outside the 90% confidence interval.
The correlation of the factor model-implied correlations with both MIDAS correlations and
realized correlations is relatively low at 0.394 and 0.389 respectively. The MIDAS model has
a 0.688 correlation with realized correlations. Finally, the regressions show no mean bias, but
the regression slope coefficients are larger than one, significantly so for the realized correlation
regression. However, the confidence intervals from the simulation experiment reveal that the
regression constants and slopes likely will constitute weak tests of model fit.
Overall, the fit is satisfactory, albeit not great. In an earlier version of the article, we considered
a large number of alternative models, in terms of numbers of factors (considering models with
fewer factors), the identification of the factors (considering non-structural VARs) and the heteroskedasticity structure of the factors (state dependent). The current semi-structural model
with regime-switching factors outperforms these models using the measures of fit just described.
Panel C illustrates this outperformance for a number of alternative models: three non-structural
VARS (a homoskedastic model, a model with state dependent heteroskedasticity, and a model
with regime switching volatility), and two structural models (a homoskedastic model, and a
model where the heteroskedasticity is state dependent rather than regime-switching). In the
state dependent models, the conditional variance of the shocks depends on the lagged level of
the variable itself; the output, inflation, and cash flow growth variances depend additionally on
the lagged level of their uncertainty measures. In terms of the distance measures, these models
15

all perform worse on all three diagnostics, significantly so for the non-structural homoskedastic
and state dependent models. Imposing structural restrictions and a regime-switching structure
clearly improves the fit. The correlation measures reveal a similar story. The alternative models
all generate lower regression slopes, which are in some cases very close to 1. However, the alphas
are always significantly different from zero. We discuss the fit of the benchmark model in more
detail in Section 4.

3.3

Estimation State Variable Model

To conserve space, we report parameter estimates for the state variable model in Appendix
E. We focus the discussion on the identification of regimes and the volatility dynamics of the
models as they determine the fundamental stock and bond return correlations. In the NewKeynesian model, the structural parameters are of independent interest but a detailed discussion
is beyond the scope of this article6 . Let us only comment on the regime variable for systematic
monetary policy in the interest rate equation. Our β estimates reveal an activist monetary policy
regime (with β = 2.09) and an accommodating monetary policy regime (with β smaller and
insignificantly different from 1). The coefficient on the output gap, γ, is significantly positive in
both regimes, but larger in the second regime.
Figure 2 plots the smoothed regime probabilities for all regime variables. All models show
significant regime-switching volatility both in statistical and economic terms Figure 3 then
plots the conditional volatilities of the various factors. We discuss the two figures in tandem.
We first focus on the regime variable affecting the volatility of the output gap and inflation
shocks. For both inflation and output volatility, there is a near permanent switch to the low
volatility regime, which is consistent with the idea of a Great Moderation. For output, this
switch occurs in 1988; for inflation only in 1992. Of course, in our regime-switching model,
there is a positive probability that the high volatility regime will re-occur. In terms of volatility
levels (Figure 3), inflation and output volatilities are often but not always higher in NBER
recessions.
A stronger counter-cyclicality is observed for interest rate shocks, which are also less variable
than inflation but more variable than output shocks. In Figure 2, Panel B, we see that the high
interest rate volatility regime mostly occurs during recessions, including the 1980-1982 Volcker
period. This is consistent with the results in Bikbov and Chernov (2008) who also categorize the
Volcker period as a period of discretionary monetary policy, with interest rate shocks becoming
more variable. Unlike Bikbov and Chernov (2008), our structural model identifies systematic
monetary policy to be activist during this period. The model also shows that the 1990 and 2001
recessions were accompanied by an accommodating monetary policy regime, but that activist
monetary policy spells became more frequent from 1980 onwards.
Panel C of Figure 2 shows the regimes for the fundamental risk aversion and variance premium
factors. Fundamental risk aversion is notably higher in the 1974-75, 1980-82 and early nineties
16

recessions, but not in 2001. The high volatility regime typically seems to outlast the recession
itself and is also relatively high around 1997. The variance premium regime is more clearly
counter-cyclical and also shows a peak towards the end of the sample. As Panel B of Figure 3
shows, the variance premium shock is multiple times more volatile than the fundamental risk
aversion factor.
The cash flow volatility regime (Panel D, Figure 2) shows frequent shifts, but also appears to
shift mostly into the lower volatility regime post 1990, with the exception of another switch
into the high volatility regime during the recession of 2001. Note that these are cash flow shocks
cleansed of the influence of the macro-economic state variables. The last Panel in Figure 2
shows the stock and bond market illiquidity regimes. For stock illiquidity, the regime is mostly
in the high variance state, only shifting occasionally to lower variances but most notably doing
so for a lengthy time period post 2001. For bond illiquidity, the picture is similar, but the
regime variable goes to the lower volatility state already around 1992, with only one spike up
afterwards. Figure 3 shows that bond illiquidity shocks were mostly more variable than stock
illiquidity shocks until the shift to the low variability regime in 1992, and mostly less variable
thereafter.

4
4.1

Correlation Dynamics
Model Fit

Table 2 repeats the fit of the constant beta benchmark model, including the 90% confidence
intervals. All the other lines reflect the performance of the candidate models for time variation
in betas we discussed before. Because these models have at least 20 parameters (10 factors with
at least one interaction term), we consider two versions of these models, an unrestricted version
and a version where sources of time variation leading to coefficients with t-stats less than one
in absolute value are removed, and the model re-estimated.
The most striking feature of the table is that the constant beta model proves a very difficult
to beat benchmark. Let’s first focus on the distance measures. No other model matches the
unconditional correlation as well as the constant beta model. With respect to the distance
relative to future realized correlations, seven of the 16 estimated models with time-varying betas
perform significantly better than the constant beta model, but barely so. In terms of distance
to the MIDAS model, the majority of the models perform worse than the constant beta model
and no model performs significantly better. The best models in terms of distance measures
are the models with either risk aversion or the variance premium as an instrument and the
regime-switching models with either the own regime variable or the illiquidity regime variables
as sources of beta variation. In terms of correlation with either the MIDAS benchmark or
future realized correlations, these same models also perform reasonably well, with the exception
of the illiquidity regime switching beta model. Instead, the model with the monetary policy
regime betas performs better on this score. However, the best model here clearly is the model
17

where the variance premium is an instrument. Both its restricted and unrestricted versions
lead to correlations that are significantly higher than the constant beta model. Another nice
feature of this model is that the regression slopes are very close to one (although the alphas are
significantly different from zero using MIDAS correlations). We therefore select this model as
an alternative benchmark, and note that the model with restrictions performs slightly better.
Figure 4, Panel A graphs the MIDAS conditional correlations together with the correlations
implied by the two benchmark models (constant betas and betas that vary with the variance
premium). Clearly, the benchmark models produce less variable correlation dynamics than the
MIDAS model does. The constant beta model never produces negative correlations, and while
correlations decrease around 2000, the model cannot match the steep decrease in correlations
the MIDAS model generates. The time-varying beta model does better in this regard, which
explains why it correlates more with the MIDAS model than the constant beta model does. We
now explore the economics behind the correlations in more detail, starting with examining the
beta exposures.

4.2

Factor Exposures

Table 3 presents the beta estimates for the three retained models. Let’s first focus on the
constant beta specification. For equity returns, many factors are either highly (fundamental
risk aversion, bond illiquidity and the variance risk premium) or borderline (the output gap,
inflation, output and inflation uncertainty and stock market illiquidity) statistically significant.
Only the interest rate and bond illiquidity shocks significantly affect bond returns however.
Nevertheless, more often than not the signs of the betas are consistent with expectations. The
risk aversion variables (fundamental and the variance risk premium) and the liquidity factors
produce negative coefficients with only one exception (the totally insignificant variance premium
shock for bond returns), consistent with them being discount rate factors. The interest shock
is negative for both bond and stock returns, but is much more important for bond returns
both in economic magnitude and statistical significance. However, inflation and the output gap
matter more for equity returns (with a positive sign for the output gap and a negative one
for inflation), whereas they are insignificant for bond returns. Output and inflation uncertainty
only show some explanatory power for stock returns, with a negative sign for output and a
positive sign for inflation uncertainty. The former could simply reflect a discount rate effect,
whereas the latter is potentially consistent with the learning models of Veronesi (1999), in which
uncertainty decreases the equity risk premium.
To better gauge the economic importance of the factors in driving variation in bond and stock
returns, Table 3 also reports the standard deviation of the factors. For the statistically important
factors in the stock return equation, the effect of a one standard deviation change is mostly
between 1 and 2 percent. The economically most important factor, by far, is the variance
premium, for which a one standard deviation move changes stock returns by over 3.5 percent.
18

For bond returns, a one standard deviation positive shock to interest rates (bond illiquidity)
decreases bond returns by 1.8 (1.4) percent.
The next 4 columns in the table report the betas for two time-varying beta specifications, one
unrestricted, one zero-ing out the coefficients with t-stats less than 1. For equity returns, about
half of the betas are significantly related to the variance risk premium. With one exception, the
coefficient on the variance risk premium is positive. Recall that the variance premium’s variance
and level have a strong cyclical pattern, being higher in recessions. Hence, the exposure of stocks
to a cash flow shock such as the output gap is increased in absolute magnitude in recessions,
but the exposure to discount rate shocks (including the variance premium itself) is mitigated.
The exception is the bond illiquidity beta, which is even more negative when the variance risk
premium is high. For bond return betas, we fail to find significant exposures to the variance
premium.
Note that the bond and stock exposures are mostly of the same sign, explaining why the constant
beta model cannot generate negative correlations. However, with time-varying betas, the equity
return exposures to inflation, the interest rate, and output uncertainty switch signs at the end
of the 1990s, contributing to negative model-implied correlations. Hence, the model likely uses
the variance premium dependence to partially capture a “flight-to-safety” effect. When risk
aversion is high in a recession or crisis, interest rates may be low, bond prices increase but
stocks are now positively correlated with interest rate shocks and stock prices fall.

4.3

Time-Varying Expected Returns

Our model produces unconditional correlations that are too low. In the data, this correlation
amounts to 19 percent, but the benchmark model produces an average correlation of 14 percent.
One potential channel to increase unconditional correlations not present in our current model
is time variation in expected returns. For instance, in the model of Bekaert, Engstrom, and
Xing (2009) risk premiums on stocks and bonds are highly correlated, thus increasing the
unconditional correlation between stock and bond returns. In addition, mis-measurement of
expected returns may affect the estimation of conditional covariance dynamics. An assumption
of constant risk premiums seems particularly strong in light of the important structural shifts
that we uncovered in the variances of fundamental variables such as inflation and the output gap.
Such important changes may lead to abrupt changes in risk premiums, which are unaccounted
for in our present model. In fact, Lettau, Ludvigson, and Wachter (2008) claim that the decline
in macroeconomic volatility may have led to a decline in the equity risk premium.
We consider two extensions to our models to accommodate time variation in expected stock and
bond excess returns. First, we model expected excess returns as a linear function of the lagged
level of the default spread, short rate, term spread, dividend yield, the consumption-wealth ratio
(CAY from Lettau and Ludvigson (2001)), and the VIX premium. Second, we use the regime
probabilities identified in the structural factor model estimation as instruments for expected
19

returns in univariate regressions. The results are disappointing. In the instrumental variables
regression, the short rate, CAY, and the default spread are significant predictors with the same
sign in the bond and stocks return regressions. Thus, they can possibly help generate positive
covariation between stock and bond premiums. However, the increase in the unconditional
correlation is small, and amounts to only 1.74 percent. Structural changes, as identified by the
regime variables, do not seem to affect expected stock and bond returns in a meaningful way.

4.4

Economic Factor Contributions

Our model counts 10 state variables, prompting the question to what extent different factors
contribute to the model’s fit. To determine this, we re-estimate the factor model, leaving out
various factors, and then report the deterioration in fit. The confidence intervals reported in
Table 2 can again tell us something about the statistical significance of the worsening in fit, at
least for the constant beta model. Table 4 reports the results. We first split our variables into
pure macro variables (the output gap, inflation, the interest rate and the risk aversion measure
computed from consumption data), and the rest of the variables (uncertainty, cash flow growth,
illiquidity, and the variance premium).
The main message is clear and consistent across the constant and time-varying beta models: the
fit worsens considerably more when dropping the non-macro variables as opposed to the macro
variables. The deterioration in fit by dropping the macro variables is only economically (albeit
not statistically) important for the unconditional correlation in the constant beta model. Within
the set of macro variables, fundamental risk aversion is relatively important for the distance
measures, but does not help in fitting the correlation with actual bond-stock return correlations.
Among the non-macro variables, the cash flow variable overall contributes the least, followed
closely by the variance premium. Of course, the variance premium also contributes indirectly
through its effect on betas.
The main result undoubtedly is that the illiquidity variables are the most important contributors
to the correlation dynamics. Recall that we actually find that bonds and stocks both load
negatively on stock and bond illiquidity, so that liquidity variation induces positive correlation
between stock and bond returns. This common exposure was particularly helpful in the early
part of the sample (where liquidity was still poor), although no super-clear subsample patterns
emerge. While more work in this area is surely needed, some recent research helps give credence
to our results. Li, Wang, Wu, and He (2009) show that systematic liquidity risk is priced in the
bond market, but they do not consider stock returns. Bansal, Connolly, and Stivers (2009) show
that the usual stock liquidity measures help predict stock and bond return correlations, and
have effects independent of the usual VIX - “flight-to-safety” effect. They focus on a relatively
short 1997-2005 period however. Finally, Goyenko and Sarkissian (2008) also document a strong
link between bond illiquidity and stock returns in 46 different markets.
20

5
5.1

Covariance and Volatility Dynamics
Correlation decomposition

The correlation is a scaled statistic involving covariances, and both stock and bond return
volatility. Using the MIDAS model as a “well-fitting” empirical benchmark allows us to decompose the performance of our main model. Table 5 repeats our standard diagnostic fit measures7 ,
but we now replace the three components of the correlation, one-by-one, with their MIDAS
counterparts. For example, the line “MIDAS covariance” replaces the covariance produced by
the model by that of the MIDAS model. Clearly, the model’s fit improves dramatically, nearly
matching the fit of the MIDAS model, which is repeated on the last line of the Table. The
exception is the constant in the regression which is now significantly positive, owing to the MIDAS model producing too high covariances on average. Not surprisingly, this must mean that
the use of MIDAS volatilities is correspondingly less important. While using MIDAS’s stock
volatility model leads to improvements in most cases, using MIDAS’s bond volatility worsens
the fit relative to using the model’s. What is particularly striking is that the slope coefficients in
the regressions become quite small once the MIDAS bond volatility replaces that of the factor
model. As we will see below, this owes to the MIDAS model producing quite volatile bond return volatility while the factor model really only captures a small part of the variation in bond
return volatility. Consequently, the results here need not necessarily mean that the factor model
fits bond return volatility better than the MIDAS model. In fact, the poor distance measures
here result from the MIDAS model producing relatively low bond return volatility in the 70s
at the time that the benchmark model already overshoots actual correlations.
The main conclusion to be drawn is that our factor model primarily suffers from a poor fit of
bond-stock return covariances. It appears that it does not fit stock return volatility significantly
worse than the MIDAS model does. Of course, it remains possible that the MIDAS model also
represents a poorly fitting benchmark model for stock return volatility. We now investigate the
performance of the model with respect to the three components of correlation in more detail.

5.2

Covariances

Table 6 reports our diagnostic measures but applied to covariances, rather than correlations.
We leave out the regression evidence because it proved not powerful in distinguishing models.
The overall fit of the covariances matches the patterns we observed for correlations. Relative to
the unconditional covariance, the model performs reasonably well, outperforming the MIDAS
model. The time-varying beta model is worse than the constant beta model in terms of distance
measures, but produces higher correlations with realized and MIDAS covariances.
In terms of the contributions of the various factors, the non-macro variables, particularly the
liquidity variables, are most important. However, no single factor contributes in a meaningful
way to lower the distance measure with respect to the realized covariances. Yet, the model as
a whole does perform better than the unconditional mean.
21

5.3

Stock Volatility

Table 7 reports the same diagnostics for the conditional stock market volatility. The model
produces a stock market volatility that is on average 6.3% different from the unconditional
volatility. The MIDAS benchmark does better with an average distance measure of 2.8%. However, the model does about as well as the MIDAS model predicting future realized stock return
volatilities. Not surprisingly the distance between the MIDAS and factor models is rather small
at less than 3%. While time-varying betas lower the distance with respect to the unconditional standard deviation of stock returns, they increase it with respect to predicting realized
volatilities. The correlation between MIDAS conditional volatilities and the ones produced by
the economic factor model are relatively high; yet the MIDAS model produces stock return
volatilities that are much more highly correlated with realized volatilities.
As a final diagnostic, we compute the R2 of the factor model for stock returns. This is not
only important to understand the fit with stock market volatility: If the factors fit only a
small fraction of the return variance then it is unrealistic to hope for a satisfactory fit for the
covariance of stock and bond returns. The literature on stock returns in particular has a long
but controversial exponent arguing that stock returns are excessively volatile (see for instance
the old debate between Shiller (1981) and Kleidon (1986)).
We report the adjusted regression R2 , adjusted for 10 regressors in the constant beta model and
20 in the time-varying beta model. The adjusted R2 ’s are respectively 27% for the constant and
35% for the time-varying beta model. This may appear low, especially when compared to the
MIDAS model, which explains 65% of total stock market variance. However, the comparison is
somewhat unfair. First, for the MIDAS model, our R2 counterpart takes the ratio of the average
conditional variance produced by the MIDAS model divided by the unconditional stock market
variance. We could compute a similar “model-based” R2 for the factor model, which would be
close to the regression R2 if the conditional variances of the factors are relatively close to their
empirical counterparts. Fortunately, they are, with the biggest deviation (the model variance
being 10% larger than the empirical variance) occurring for the variance premium. Moreover,
we cannot easily adjust the MIDAS model for “the number of regressors”, so a fairer comparison
would be with an “unadjusted model R2 ”. For the constant beta model, this R2 is 38.4% and
for the time-varying beta model it is even over 70%, better than the MIDAS model.
The contribution analysis generally shows again that the non-macro variables are relatively more
important than the macro variables. However, the macro variables do contribute something to
the fit, especially with respect to the distance measures. Among the non-macro variables, the
illiquidity factors remain very important but the variance premium is now the dominant factor.
There is a flurry of recent research on the properties of the variance premium, mostly on its
predictive properties with respect to stock returns (Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou (2009)). Our
article shows that it is one of the main drivers of stock market volatility. Its important role
also explains the somewhat strange decomposition analysis for the distance measures relative
22

to realized variances in the time-varying beta model. There, leaving out the non-macro variables
worsens the fit considerably, but seemingly no single economic variable is responsible for the
good fit, as leaving them out univariately or in pairs always leads to improvements in fit. Because
the variance premium enters the betas, and the factor model is re-estimated when factors are
dropped, the model retains the flexibility to match the data reasonably well through the beta
exposures.

5.4

Bond Return Volatility

Table 8 reports diagnostics on the fit of bond return volatility. The MIDAS benchmark performs
slightly better with respect to the distance measures relative to realized volatilities. Because the
average bond volatility is only 8.98% (compared to 17.38% for stocks), the average distances
are relatively worse than for stock returns. In terms of correlations, the factor model’s bond
volatility correlates only 18.3% with realized correlations, and only 20.8% with the MIDAS
model’s bond volatility. The MIDAS model’s bond volatility also correlates much more highly
with realized volatilities. We conclude that the economic model has actually a harder time
fitting bond volatility than it does stock market volatility. This is an interesting finding, as the
academic literature has primarily looked for links between macro-economic fundamentals and
stock market volatility. While some of the seminal articles have been skeptical (see especially
Schwert (1989)), some more recent articles did find a link: Flannery and Protopapadakis (2002)
show links between stock market volatility and inflation and money growth; Hamilton and
Lin (1996) establish a business cycle link for stock market volatility, and Diebold and Yilmaz
(2009) and Engle and Rangel (2008) find a link between volatile fundamentals and volatile stock
markets in a cross-section of countries. On the contrary, the work on bond returns appears
surprisingly limited.

We find that the factor model explains about the same amount of variation in bond returns as
in stock returns (the adjusted R2 is 30%). However, the factors contributing to this fit are very
different than the factors explaining stock returns. Here, the fundamental variables contribute
the most to the fit; the non-macro variables contribute relatively little. Of the fundamental
variables, the short rate, not surprisingly, is the dominant factor. All in all, this “discrepancy”
between the factors explaining bond and stock returns is intriguing and deserves further scrutiny.
Baker and Wurgler (2008) recently find interesting links between bonds and “bond-like” stocks,
which they attribute to changes in investor sentiment. Their main focus is on co-predictability
rather than comovement, but it would be interesting to test whether fundamentals have a
different effect on bonds than on “bond-like” stocks. Also, their sentiment index may capture
value-relevant behavioral factors not captured by our risk aversion indicators. In fact, none of
our variables capturing discount rate factors (fundamental risk aversion, the variance premium,
bond and equity market liquidity) correlates more than 20% with the Baker-Wurgler index.
23

6

Conclusions

The substantial time variation in stock-bond return correlations has long been viewed as puzzling. Without assessing what time variation in correlations a formal model of fundamentals
can generate, this may be a premature judgment. For instance, much has been made of the
negative correlation between bond and stock returns in recent times. However, the real economy and the inflation process have undergone some remarkable changes recently. In particular,
it is well known that output and inflation volatility have decreased substantially since 1985. If
bonds and stocks have similar exposures to these economic factors, their correlation should have
decreased. It is also conceivable that these fundamental changes have affected risk aversion, a
factor on which bonds and stocks may load with a different sign. While it remains difficult to
think of economic factors that would cause a sudden and steep decrease of stock-bond return
correlations into negative territory, it remains useful to quantify how much of the correlation
dynamics can be attributed to fundamentals. This is what this paper sets out to do using a
dynamic factor model with fundamental factors.
Importantly, we consider a large number of factors, both pure economic factors, and factors measuring risk aversion and illiquidity. We also consider a large number of model specifications, some
with scant structural restrictions. Interestingly, the performance of our fundamental models improves when factor shocks are partially ‘structurally’ identified by means of a New-Keynesian
model, and we focus the article mostly on this model. Overall, we fail to find a fully satisfactory
fit with stock-bond return correlations. Our model fails to forecast realized correlations as well
as a benchmark empirical model, using the MIDAS framework of Colacito, Engle, and Ghysels
(2009). While this model is a backward-looking empirical model, it uses daily return data efficiently and generally fits the data very well. Our model does fit the unconditional correlations
between stocks and bond returns better than the MIDAS model does. Not unlike the pattern
observed in the data, our fundamental-based model generates positive correlation until the end
of the 1980s, and decreasing correlations afterwards. However, a model with constant factor
exposures fails to generate negative correlations. We do obtain negative correlations when we
allow the factor exposures to depend on a risk premium proxy extracted from options data, the
so-called variance premium. This model also produces time-varying correlations that correlate
substantially with correlation movements in the data, although the timing and magnitude is
far from perfect.
We then analyze our results along several dimensions, producing a variety of useful directions
for future research. First, given the long tradition of viewing stocks as excessively volatile,
the poor fit of our factor model may simply be due to its failure to account for actual stock
return volatility. However, we show that the model primarily fails in fitting covariances and
that its fit with respect to stock volatility is actually relatively better than its fit with respect
to bond volatility. Second, the factors most useful in explaining correlations and covariances
are the non-macro variables, especially stock and bond market illiquidity factors. Much more
research must be directed towards analyzing the dynamic effects of liquidity. Third, there is an
24

interesting dichotomy between the fit of stock and bond market volatility dynamics. For bonds,
fundamental factors do play a relatively large role, but for stocks, the liquidity factors, and the
variance premium are hugely important factors. These empirical results for sure complicate the
creation of general equilibrium models that can jointly rationalize bond and stock pricing (see
Bekaert, Engstrom, and Grenadier (2005) for a recent effort).
Of course, we have focused our analysis on standard macro factors, and more intricate models
would likely yield variables that we have not considered. In models with incomplete markets
for example, the distribution of income and wealth may matter. Yet, our economic factors
include uncertainty measures (for both inflation and output forecasts) which may be motivated
using models involving heterogeneity and learning. However, we find that these variables are
not nearly as important in driving second moment return dynamics as are liquidity variables.
These liquidity factors may be correlated with the “flight-to-safety” effects that have been
documented in the literature (see especially Connolly, Stivers, and Sun (2005)). In the end
our fundamental model does not seem to produce an entirely satisfactory fit of the “flight-tosafety” effects that are likely at the heart of the negative correlations observed post 2000. To
test this more formally, we re-estimated the factor model over the 1986-2007 sample period,
including the VIX as an additional factor. We know that VIX increases are associated with
lower correlations between bond and stock returns, but it is conceivable that this effect is a
pure discount rate effect, captured by our two risk premium measures, in particular, by the
variance premium. However, we find that the VIX still comes in significantly with a negative
sign. While it is always possible that our variance premium estimate is an imperfect proxy
to the risk premium variation hidden in VIX movements, we believe research into “flight-to
safety” effects and their interaction with liquidity factors remain of first-order importance to
fully understand stock-bond return comovements.

25

Notes
1

Autocorrelation in daily stock and bond returns potentially biases our estimates of quarterly stock and
bond return volatilities and correlations. While we do find a moderate degree of autocorrelation in both stock
and bond returns, correcting for this bias (using 4 Newey and West (1987) lags) does not meaningfully alter
stock-bond return volatilities and correlations.
2
The output gap uses a quadratic trend to measure potential output (see the data appendix for details).
3
In 1997, quoted tick sizes decreased from eights to sixteens, and in 2001 a system of decimalization was
introduced.
4
For completeness, we estimated a model with betas a function of NBER dummies, but it performs less well
than the regime-switching beta model described here.
5
We then also impose the economic restriction that φ must be positive, setting its value at 0.1.
6
We find mostly parameters in line with the extant literature, including a rather weak monetary transmission
mechanism (see Bekaert, Cho, and Moreno (2008)).
7
We left out the unconditional correlation as the MIDAS model fits the unconditional correlation worse than
our model.

26

References
Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series effects, Journal
of Financial Markets 5, 31–56.
Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1991, Liquidity, maturity, and the yields on united-states
treasury securities, Journal of Finance 46, 1411–1425.
Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Clara Vega, 2007, Real-time
price discovery in global stock, bond and foreign exchange markets, Journal of International
Economics 73, 251–277.
Ang, Andrew, Geert Bekaert, and Min Wei, 2007, Do macro variables, asset markets or surveys
forecast inflation better?, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 1163–1212.
Ang, Andrew, Geert Bekaert, and Min Wei, 2008, The term structure of real rates and expected
inflation, Journal of Finance 63, 797–849.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2008, Government bonds and the cross-section of stock
returns, Working Paper .
Bansal, Naresh, Robert A. Connolly, and Chris Stivers, 2009, Regime-switching in stock and
t-bond futures returns and measures of stock market stress, Working Paper .
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset
pricing puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481–1509.
Bekaert, Geert, Seonghoon Cho, and Antonio Moreno, 2008, New-Keynesian macroeconomics
and the term structure, Working Paper .
Bekaert, Geert, and Eric Engstrom, 2009, Inflation and the stock market: Understanding the
’fed model’, Working Paper .
Bekaert, Geert, Eric Engstrom, and Steve Grenadier, 2005, Stock and bond returns with moody
investors, Working Paper .
Bekaert, Geert, Eric Engstrom, and Yuhang Xing, 2009, Risk, uncertainty, and asset prices,
Journal of Financial Economics 91, 59–82.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad, 2007, Liquidity and expected
returns: Lessons form emerging markets, Review of Financial Studies 20, 1783–1831.
Bekaert, Geert, and Guojun Wu, 2000, Asymmetric volatility and risk in equity markets, Review
of Financial Studies 13, 1–42.
Bikbov, Ruslan, and Mikhail Chernov, 2008, Monetary policy regimes and the term structure
of interest rates, CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP7096 .
27

Blanchard, Olivier, and John Simon, 2001, The long and large decline in us output volatility,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 135–174.
Boivin, Jean, 2005, Has US monetary policy changed? evidence from drifting coefficients and
real-time data, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 38.
Bollerslev, Tim, George Tauchen, and Hao Zhou, 2009, Expected stock returns and variance
risk premia, Review of Financial Studies Forthcoming.
Boyd, John H., Jian Hu, and Ravi Jagannathan, 2005, The stock market’s reaction to unemployment news: Why bad news is usually good for stocks, Journal of Finance 60, 649–672.
Campbell, John, and Ludger Hentschel, 1992, No news is good news: An asymmetric model of
changing volatility in stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 31, 281–318.
Campbell, John, Adi Sunderam, and Luis Viceira, 2009, Inflation bets or deflation hedges? the
changing risks of nominal bonds, Working Paper .
Campbell, John Y., and John Ammer, 1993, What moves the stock and bond markets? a
variance decomposition for long-term asset returns, Journal of Finance 48, 3–37.
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption-based
explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–251.
Campbell, John Y., and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2004, Inflation illusion and stock prices, American
Economic Review 94, 19–23.
Carr, Peter, and Liuren Wu, 2009, Variance risk premia, Review of Financial Studies 22, 1311–
1341.
Chernov, Mikhail, and Philippe Mueller, 2009, The term structure of inflation expectations,
working paper .
Cho, Seonghoon, and Antonio Moreno, 2006, A small-sample study of the New-Keynesian macro
model, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 38, 1461–1482.
Chordia, Tarun, Asani Sarkar, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2005, An empirical analysis of
stock and bond market liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 18, 85–129.
Cogley, Timothy, and Thomas J. Sargent, 2005, Drifts and volatilities: monetary policies and
outcomes in the post WWII US, Review of Economic Dynamics 8, 262–302.
Colacito, Riccardo, Robert F. Engle, and Eric Ghysels, 2009, A component model for dynamic
correlations, Working Paper .
Connolly, Robert, Chris Stivers, and Licheng Sun, 2005, Stock market uncertainty and the
stock-bond return relation, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 40, 161–194.
28

D’Amico, Stefania, Don H. Kim, and Min Wei, 2009, Tips from tips: The informational content
of treasury inflation-protected security prices, working paper .
David, Alexander, and Pietro Veronesi, 2008, Inflation and earnings uncertainty and volatility
forecasts: A structural form approach, Working Paper .
Diebold, Francis. X., and Kamil Yilmaz, 2009, Macroeconomic volatility and stock market
volatility, worldwide, in T. Bollerslev, J. Russell and M. Watson (eds.), Volatility and Time
Series Econometrics: Essays in Honor of Robert F. Engle. Oxford: Oxford University Press .
Drechsler, Itamar, and Amir Yaron, 2009, What’s vol got to do with it?, Working Paper .
Elliott, Graham, Ivana Komunjer, and Allan Timmermann, 2008, Biases in macroeconomic
forecasts: Irrationality or asymmetric loss, Journal of European Economic Association 6,
122–157.
Engle, Robert F., Eric Ghysels, and Bumjean Sohn, 2008, On the economic sources of stock
market volatility, Working Paper .
Engle, Robert F., and Victor K. Ng, 1993, Measuring and testing the impact of news on volatility, Journal of Finance 43, 1749–77.
Engle, Robert F., and Jose Gonzalo Rangel, 2008, The spline-garch model for low-frequency
volatility and its global macroeconomic causes, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1187–1222.
Evans, Martin, and Paul Wachtel, 1993, Inflation regimes and the sources of inflation uncertainty, Journal of Money Credit and Banking 25, 475–511.
Fama, Eugene F., and G. William Schwert, 1977, Asset returns and inflation, Journal of Financial Economics 5, 115–146.
Flannery, Mark J., and Aris A. Protopapadakis, 2002, Macroeconomic factors do influence
aggregate stock returns, Review of Financial Studies 15, 751–782.
Giordani, Paolo, and Paul Soderlind, 2003, Inflation forecast uncertainty, European Economic
Review 47, 1037–1059.
Goyenko, Ruslan, 2006, Stock and bond pricing with liquidity risk, Working Paper .
Goyenko, Ruslan, and Sergei Sarkissian, 2008, Flight-to-liquidity and global equity returns,
Working Paper .
Goyenko, Ruslan, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, and Andrey Ukhov, 2008, The term structure of
bond market liquidity and its implications for expected bond returns, Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis Forthcoming.
Guidolin, Massimo, and Allan Timmermann, 2006, An econometric model of nonlinear dynamics
in the joint distribution of stock and bond returns, Journal of Applied Econometrics 21, 1–22.
29

Hamilton, James D., 1989, A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary time
series and the business cycle, Econometrica 57, 357–384.
Hamilton, James D, and Gang Lin, 1996, Stock market volatility and the business cycle, Journal
of Applied Econometrics 11, 573–593.
Hasbrouck, Joel, 2006, Trading costs and returns for us equities: Estimating effective cost measures from daily data, Journal of Finance 64, 1445–1477.
Kamara, Avraham, 1994, Liquidity, taxes, and short-term treasury yields, Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis 29, 403–417.
Kleidon, Allan W., 1986, Variance bounds tests and stock-price valuation models, Journal of
Political Economy 94, 953–1001.
Lesmond, David A., Joseph P. Ogden, and Charles A. Trzcinka, 1999, A new estimate of transaction costs, Review of Financial Studies 12, 1113–1141.
Lettau, Martin, and Sydney C. Ludvigson, 2001, Consumption, aggregate wealth, and expected
stock returns, Journal of Finance 56, 815–849.
Lettau, Martin, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Jessica A. Wachter, 2008, The declining equity
premium: What role does macroeconomic risk play?, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1653–
1687.
Li, Haitao, Junbo Wang, Chunchi Wu, and Yan He, 2009, Are liquidity and information risks
priced in the treasury bond market?, The Journal of Finance 64, 467–503.
Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A simple, positive semidefinite, heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance-matrix, Econometrica 55, 703–708.
Pesaran, M. H., D. Pettenuzzo, and A. Timmermann, 2006, Forecasting time series subject to
multiple structural breaks, Review of Economic Studies 73, 1057–1084.
Schwert, G. William, 1989, Why does stock volatility change over time?, Journal of Finance
44, 1115–1153.
Shiller, Robert J., 1981, Do stock-prices move too much to be justified by subsequent changes
in dividends, American Economic Review 71, 421–436.
Shiller, Robert J., and Andrea E. Beltratti, 1992, Stock-prices and bond yields - can their
comovements be explained in terms of present value models, Journal of Monetary Economics
30, 25–46.
Sims, Christopher A., and Tao Zha, 2005, Were there regime switches in the us monetary policy,
American Economic Review 96, 54–81.
30

Stock, James H., Mark W. Watson, Jordi Gali, and Robert E. Hall, 2003, Has the business cycle
changed and why?, NBER Macroeconomic Annual 2002 219–224.
Timmermann, Allan, 2000, Moments of markov switching models, Journal of Econometrics 96,
75–111.
Veronesi, Pietro, 1999, Stock market overreaction to bad news in good times: A rational expectations equilibrium model, Review of Financial Studies 12, 975–1007.
Wachter, Jessica A., 2006, A consumption-based-model of the term structure of interest rates,
Journal of Financial Economics 79, 365–399.
White, Halbert, 1980, A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance-matrix estimator and a direct
test for heteroskedasticity, Econometrica 48, 817–838.

31

Appendix
A

Data Appendix

Our dataset consists of stock and bond returns and a number of economic (fundamental) state
variables for the US. Our sample period is from the fourth quarter of 1968 to the fourth quarter
of 2007 for a total of 157 observations. The economic state variables are seasonally adjusted.
We now describe the exact data sources and how the variables are constructed:
1. Stock Excess Returns (re ): End-of-quarter NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ value-weighted
returns including dividends, from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) Stock
File Indices. The returns are in excess of the US 3-month T-bill rate.
2. Bond Excess Returns (rb ): End-of-quarter returns on 10-year Treasury bonds, from
the CRSP US Treasury and Inflation Module, in excess of the US 3-month T-bill rate.
3. Output Gap (y): The output measure is real Gross Domestic Product (GDP), from the
Bureau of Economic Analysis. The gap is computed as the percentage difference between
output and its quadratic trend.
4. Expected Output Gap (ye): The expected output gap is constructed as follows:
¶¸
· µ
gt gt+1
−1
Et [yt+1 ] = Et
gt trt+1
h
i
Et gt+1
gt
= gt
−1
trt+1
where gt is the level of real GDP at time t, and trt the (quadratic) trend value of real GDP
at time t. We use survey-based
of the level of real GDP for the current and
i
h expectations
gt+1
next quarter to measure Et gt . The source is the Survey of Professional Forecasters
(SPF).
5. Output Uncertainty (yd): Average SPF respondents’ assessment of real output uncertainty, taken from Bekaert and Engstrom (2009).
6. Inflation (π): Log difference in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (All
Items), from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
7. Expected Inflation (πe): Median survey reponse of expected growth in the GDP deflator
over the next quarter, from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF).
8. Inflation Uncertainty (πd): Average SPF respondents’ assessment of inflation uncertainty, taken from Bekaert and Engstrom (2009).
9. Fundamental Risk Aversion (f ra): Our measure of fundamental risk aversion is based
on the external habit specification of Campbell and Cochrane (1999), and taken from
Bekaert and Engstrom (2009).
32

10. Nominal Risk-free Rate (i): 3-Month Treasury Bill (secondary market rate) from the
Federal Reserve.
11. Cash Flow Growth (cg): Dividend growth including repurchases, taken from Bekaert
and Engstrom (2009). The source for the dividends is CRSP. The source for the repurchases is Securities Data Corporation. Dividend growth is transformed into cash flow
growth using the ratio of repurchases to (seasonally adjusted) dividends.
12. Stock Market Illiquidity (sliq): Capitalization-based proportion of zero daily returns
across all firms, aggegated over the quarter, obtained from Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad
(2007).
13. Bond Market Illiquidity (bliq): Monthly average of quoted bid-ask spreads across all
maturities, taken from Goyenko (2006). He uses securities of 1 month, 3 months, 1, 2, 3,
5, 7, 10, 20, and 30 years to maturity, and deletes the first month of trading, when the
security is ‘on-the-run’, as well as the last month of trading. Consequently, he calculates
a monthly equally-weighted average of quoted spreads from daily observations for each
security. Finally, the market-wide illiquidity measure is calculated as an equally-weighted
average across all securities for each month. We take the end of quarter value as a quarterly
measure.
14. Variance premium (vp): We calculate the Variance Premium (on a quarterly basis) by
subtracting the fitted MIDAS variance from the VIX squared. The VIX is the implied
volatility of highly liquid S&P500 index options, and is taken at the end of the quarter
from the Chicago Board of Options Exchange (CBOE). Unfortunately, the VIX is only
available from January 1986 onwards. For the 1968-1985 period, we use a projection on
the following explanatory variables: the Michigan Consumer Confidence Index (CC), the
Realized Variance (RV), the consumption-wealth ratio (CAY), the Term Spread (TS),
and the Default Spread (DS). This specification resulted after insignificant variables were
removed from a richer specification, estimated on 1986-2007 data, also involving liquidity
and sentiment variables.
Const
CC
RV
Param -0.0826 0.0006 0.2752

CAY
0.2961

TS
0.0031

DS
0.0095

pval

0.001

0.082

0.049

0.003

0.0230

0.0004

R2
50.19

The variables stock return, bond return, (expected) output gap, (expected) inflation, interest
rate and cash flow growth are expressed in percentages on a quarterly basis. The stock illiquidity,
bond illiquidity and variance premium are multiplied by 100 to make them similar in order of
magnitude. The uncertainty measures and the risk aversion measure are the original series as
taken from Bekaert and Engstrom (2009).

33

B

A Component Model for Dynamic Stock-Bond Correlations

In a recent paper, Colacito, Engle, and Ghysels (2008) introduce a component model for dynamic
correlations. Their model combines the DCC model of Engle (2002) and the GARCH-MIDAS
model of Engle, Ghysels, and Sohn (2006). Consider the vector of stock and bond returns
rt = [re,t , rb,t ]0 , and assume it follows the following process:
rt ∼

iid N

(µ, Ht )

H t = Dt Rt Dt

(B-1)
(B-2)

where µ is the vector of unconditional means, Ht the bivariate conditional variance-covariance
matrix, and Dt a two-by-two diagonal matrix with the conditional stock and bond return
volatilities on the diagonal, and
h 0i
Rt = Et−1 ξ t ξ t
(B-3)
ξ t = Dt−1 (rt − µ)

(B-4)

This model is conveniently estimated in two steps. First, the conditional volatilities in Dt are
estimated, to be followed by the conditional correlation matrix Rt .
A GARCH-MIDAS component model for conditional stock and bond return variances.
Assume that the univariate return follows the following GARCH-MIDAS process:
ri,t = µi +

p

mi,τ × gi,t ξ i,t ,

i = {e, b} , t = (τ − 1) Nvi + 1, ..., τ Nvi

(B-5)

where gi,t and mi,τ are the short and long run variance components of the daily returns of asset
i. The short run component gi,t varies at the daily frequency t, while the long-term component
mi,τ - with a time subscript τ - only changes every Nvi days. The short run variance of stock
and bond returns follows a simple GARCH(1,1) process:
gi,t = (1 − α − β) + αi

(ri,t − µ)2
+ β i gi,t−1
mi,τ

(B-6)

The low-frequency component mi,τ is a weighted sum of Liv lags of realized variances (RV) over
a long horizon:
Liv
X
¡ ¢
(B-7)
ϕl ω iv RVi,τ −l
mi,τ = m̄i + θi
l=1

where the realized variances involve Nvi daily non-overlapping squared returns:
i

RVi,τ =

τ Nv
X
t=(τ −1)Nvi +1

34

(ri,t )2

(B-8)

Because we compare the long-term MIDAS components with our quarterly model counterparts,
we set Nvi equal to the number of trading days within one quarter. As a weighting function, we
use a beta function with decay parameter ω iv :
³
¡ ¢
ϕl ω iv =

1−
Lv ³
X

l
Liv

´ωiv −1

i

1−

j=1

j
Liv

´ωiv −1

(B-9)

The weight attached to past realized variances will depend on the two parameters ω iv and Liv .
The latter determines the number of lagged realized variances taken into account. The decay
parameter ω iv determines the weight attached to those past realized variances. In case of ω iv = 1,
the past Liv will receive an equal weight of 1/Liv . In the likely case of ω iv > 1, past realized
variances will gradually get less and less weight. The larger ω iv , the larger the decay. In our
empirical analysis, we allow both the decay parameter ω iv and the Liv lags of realized variances
to differ between stock and bond returns. We will select optimal values for both parameters
using the likelihood profiling procedure discussed in Engle, Ghysels, and Sohn (2006).
A component model for conditional stock and bond return correlations
In the second step, we calculate correlations based on the standardized residuals ξ t . More
specifically, we calculate a conditional matrix Qt , whose elements are given by:
qi,j,t = ρ̄i,j,τ (1 − a − b) + aξ i,t−1 ξ j,t−1 + bqi,j,t−1

(B-10)

ij

ρ̄i,j,τ =

Lc
X

ϕl (ω c ) ci,j,τ −l

l=1

Pτ Ncij

(B-11)

t=(τ −1)Ncij +1

ci,j,τ = r

Pτ Ncij

ξ2
t=(τ −1)Ncij +1 i,k

ξ i,k ξ j,k

Pτ Ncij

(B-12)

ξ2
t=(τ −1)Ncij +1 j,k

where the weighting scheme is similar to the one used in (B-9). The long-run correlation ρ̄i,j,τ is a
ij
weighted sum of Lij
c lags of realized correlations, calculated on Nc daily non-overlapping returns.
As for the long run variance, we consider one quarter of such daily returns. The conditional
correlations between stock and bond returns at the daily frequency can then be easily calculated
as:
qe,b,t
ρe,b,t = √
√
qe,e,t qb,b,t
Estimation Results
Panel A of the table below reports the estimation results for the conditional bond and equity
return variances. All parameters are significant at the 1 percent level. The sums of α and β are
0.946 and 0.965, for bonds and stocks respectively. The likelihood profiling procedure selects an
optimal number of lags of realized variances of respectively 8 quarters for bonds and 3 quarters
35

for stocks. The decay parameter ω iv is substantially larger than 1 for bonds, indicating that the
weight attached to past realized bond return variances decreases rapidly with the number of lags.
For equity volatility, in contrast, the parameter estimate is close to one, implying a relatively flat
weighting function. The long-term components of stock and bond return volatility are plotted
in Panels C and D of Table 4, respectively.
Panel B shows the estimation results for the MIDAS conditional stock and bond return correlations. The likelihood function peaks at 12 lags of quarterly realized correlations. The estimate
of the decay parameter ω c implies a rather rapidly decreasing weighting function. The a and
b parameters are both highly significant, and their sum of 0.949 is significantly below 1. The
long-term component of stock and bond return correlations is plotted in Panel A of Figure 4.
The long-term correlation is around its unconditional value of 20 percent during most of the
1980s, to increase to levels up to 60 percent in the late 1990s. The stock-bond return correlations
drops to slightly negative levels at the end of the 1990s, to become extremely negative (up to
minus 60 percent) around 2003.

Panel A: Estimates for MIDAS Variance Model
α
β
µ
m̄
θ
ωv
Bond Volatilty
Estim
0.847
0.099
0.0002
2.24E-06
0.016
3.314
St. Error (0.022) (0.015) (0.0001) (9.56E-06) (0.004) (0.830)
Equity Volatility
Estim
0.877
0.088
0.0006
3.55E-05
0.0084
1.044
St. Error (0.013) (0.014) (0.0001) (6.83E-06) (0.004) (0.034)
Panel B: Estimates for MIDAS Correlation Model
a
b
ωc
Estim
0.050
0.899
4.531
St. Error (0.011) (0.028)
(2.013)

36

Liv
8

3

Lc
12

C

An IS Equation with Stochastic Risk Aversion

In a typical model with external habit à la Campbell and Cochrane (1999), the log of the real
pricing kernel mt+1 is given by:
mt+1 = −γ∆ct+1 + γ∆qt+1

(C-13)

where ∆ct+1 is (logarithmic) consumption growth, and γ is the curvature parameter in the
utility function (we ignore the discount factor β, without any consequence for the derivations
to follow):
¶1−γ
µ
Ct − Ht
.
(C-14)
U (Ct ) =
1−γ
t
We define qt as log (Qt ) , where Qt = CtC−H
is the inverse of the surplus ratio. The dynamics of
t
qt are specified as follows:
√
qt = µq + φqq qt−1 + σ qq qt−1 εqt
(C-15)

where µq , φqq ,and σ qq are parameters, and εqt a standard normal innovation process. Notice that
εqt is the sole source of conditional uncertainty in the stochastic risk aversion process. Note that
the fact that we model qt as a square root process makes the conditional variance of the pricing
kernel depend positively on the level of Qt .
The consumption process is defined as:
h¡
i
¢1
√
q
2 2 c
εt + λεt
(C-16)
∆ct = Et−1 [∆ct ] + σ cc qt−1 1 − λ
where σ cc and λ are parameters, and εct a standard normal innovation process specific to the
consumption growth process. We do not need to specify the conditional mean dynamics as we
will solve for the interest rate as a function of expected consumption. Furhermore, we assume
that εct and εqt are jointly N (0, I), so that:
Covt−1 [∆ct , qt ] = λσ qq σ cc qt .

(C-17)

It is easy to see that λ is the conditional correlation between ‘risk aversion’ and consumption
growth. This correlation would be −1 in the Campbell-Cochrane setup, and is generally expected
to be negative to induce counter-cyclical risk aversion.
In any log-normal model, we have:
1
rt = −Et [mt+1 ] − V art [mt+1 ]
2
where rt is the real interest rate. From (C-13), (C-15) and (C-16), it follows:
¤
£
V art [mt+1 ] = γ 2 qt σ 2cc + σ 2qq − 2λσ qq σ cc .

(C-18)

(C-19)

Substituting in (C-18), and using (C-13), we obtain:
£
¡
¢ ¤ γ2 £
¤
rt = γEt [∆ct+1 ] − γ µq + φqq − 1 qt − qt σ 2cc + σ 2qq − 2λσ qq σ cc
2
= −γµq + γEt [ct+1 ] − γct + η̃qt
37

(C-20)

¡
¢
with η̃ = −γ φqq − 1 −

γ2
2

£

¤
σ 2cc + σ 2qq − 2λσ qq σ cc .

Solving for ct , we find:

1
ct = −µq + Et [ct+1 ] − rt + ηqt
(C-21)
γ
¡
¢
£
¤
where η = γη̃ = 1 − φqq − γ2 σ 2cc + σ 2qq − 2λσ qq σ cc . If qt is persistent, and for sufficiently high
γ, and sufficiently negative λ, we likely have η < 0, but its sign is generally indeterminate.
To turn (C-21) into an IS equation, two more steps are required. First, we define
rt = it − Et [π t+1 ] + π r

(C-22)

where π r is a term arising from a Jensen’s inequality. Consequently, we implicitly assume a
constant inflation risk premium. Second, we must get from ct to detrended output. One common
way to do this is to assume:
yt = ct + gt
(C-23)
where gt is a demand shock assumed iid, reflecting all the ‘gaps’ between output and consumption (such as government spending). If we linearly detrend, i.e. ỹt = yt − δt, we get:
ỹt = c̃t + gt .

(C-24)

Substituting (C-22) and (C-24) into (C-21), we obtain:
ỹt = αIS + Et+1 [ỹt+1 ] −

1
(it − Et [π t+1 ]) + ηqt + Fty
γ

where αIS reflects a collection of all the constant terms and Fty = −gt .

38

(C-25)

D
D.1

Specification Tests for the State Variable Model
Univariate Tests

Consider the following model, which encompasses our reduced-form state variable model:
yt = µ (St ) + Xt−1 β + σ (St ) εt

(D-26)

For our purposes, it suffices to assume that St can take on two values. 1 or 2. Let π t−1 be the
conditional probability of St = 1, and π t−1 the corresponding probability of St = 2. We can
define the residuals for the model as:
qt = yt − Xt−1 β − (π t−1 µ1 + (1 − π t−1 ) µ2 )

(D-27)

where µ1 and µ2 are the means in respectively regime 1 and 2. The conditional variance Vt−1
of qt is:
Vt−1 = π t−1 σ 21 + (1 − π t−1 ) σ 22 + π t−1 (1 − π t−1 ) (µ2 − µ1 )2
(D-28)
where σ 21 and σ 22 are the variances in respectively regime 1 and 2. As calculated in Timmermann
(2000), the conditional skewness Skt−1 is given by:
¡
¢
π t−1 (1 − π t−1 ) (µ1 − µ2 ) 3 (σ 21 − σ 22 ) + (1 − 2π t−1 ) (µ2 − µ1 )2
(D-29)
Skt−1 =
£
¤3
π t−1 σ 21 + (1 − π t−1 ) σ 22 + π t−1 (1 − π t−1 ) (µ2 − µ1 )2 2
while the conditional Kurtosis K is equal to:
©
ª
©
ª
π t−1 3σ 21 + (µ1 − µ)4 + 6σ 21 (µ1 − µ)2 + (1 − π t−1 ) 3σ 22 + (µ2 − µ)4 + 6σ 22 (µ2 − µ)2
Kt−1 =
£
¤2
π t−1 σ 21 + (1 − π t−1 ) σ 22 + π t−1 (1 − π t−1 ) (µ2 − µ1 )2
(D-30)
To perform tests using GMM, we actually use the unconditional probabilities π and compute
unconditional moments V, Sk, and K (We also performed tests using ex-ante probabilities, but
then must use unscaled versions of Skt−1 and Kt−1 . Results were very similar).
We test for a zero mean and no second order correlation by testing whether or not b1 , b2 ,and b3
are zero in:
E [qt ] − b1 = 0
E [(qt − b1 ) (qt−1 − b1 )] − b2 = 0
E [(qt − b1 ) (qt−2 − b1 )] − b3 = 0
Define q̃t as (qt − b1 )2 /V − 1. We test for a well specified variance by testing whether or not
b4 , b5 ,and b6 are equal to zero:
E [q̃t ] − b4 = 0
E [q̃t q̃t−1 ] − b5 = 0
E [q̃t q̃t−2 ] − b6 = 0
39

We test for excess skewness by testing whether or not b7 is equal to zero in:
£
¤
E (qt − b1 )3
¤ 3 − Sk − b7 = 0
£
E (qt − b1 )2 2
and for excess kurtosis by testing whether or not b8 is equal to zero in:
£
¤
E (qt − b1 )4
£
¤2 − K − b8 = 0
E (qt − b1 )2
We estimate b1 to b8 using GMM with a Newey-West (1987) weighting matrix with number of
lags equal to 5. The tests for zero mean, unit variance, zero skewness, and zero excess kurtosis
follow a χ2 (1) distribution, the tests for second order autocorrelation a χ2 (2)distribution. We
also perform a small sample analysis of the test statistics. For each series, we use the estimated
parameters from the state variable model to simulate a time-series of similar length as our
sample. For 500 of such simulated time-series, we calculate the test statistics, and use the
resulting distribution to derive empirical probability values.

D.2

Covariance Test

To investigate whether our state variable model adequately captures the covariance between
the factor shocks, we test whether the following conditions hold:
E [qi,t qj,t ] = 0, for i = 1, .., N ; j = 1, .., N ; i 6= j
where N represents the number of state variables. A joint test for the covariances between all
factor shocks follows a χ2 distribution with N (N − 1) /2 degrees of freedom. We also test for
each of the N variables whether its shocks have a zero covariance with all other factor shocks.
This test follows a χ2 distribution with 9 degrees of freedom. As for the univariate tests, we
also perform a small sample analysis of the test statistics.

E

Estimation Results State Variable Model

The table below reports the estimation results of the semi-structural state variable model discussed in Section 2.2.

40

41

qt
0.075
(0.044)

it
0.030
(0.043)

Panel B: Structural Parameters
1. Output, Inflation and Risk Aversion Parameters
µ
η
φ
Estim
0.665
0.028
0.100
St.error
(0.046)
(0.023)
2. Monetary Policy Parameters
ρ
β(Stmp = 1) β(Stmp = 2) γ(Stmp = 1)
Estim
0.832
2.093
0.829
0.878
St.error
(0.038)
(0.353)
(0.197)
(0.363)
3. Feedback Parameters of Non-Macro Variables
ρcg
ρyd
ρπd
ρsliq
Estim
-0.130
0.921
0.968
0.652
St.error
(0.117)
(0.019)
(0.012)
(0.067)

Panel A: Constants
yt
πt
Regime 1 -0.064
0.014
(0.099)
(0.032)
Regime 2

ρbliq
0.536
(0.068)

γ(Stmp = 2)
1.415
(0.321)

δ
0.379
(0.101)

cgt
-0.510
(0.911)

ρvp
0.553
(0.081)

λ
0.098
(0.060)

ydt
2.447
(0.738)
1.405
(0.605)

πdt
-0.129
(0.280)
-0.264
(0.108)

ρq
0.982
(0.011)

sliqt
-1.710
(0.818)

bliqt
-0.028
(0.032)

vpt
0.024
(0.013)
0.006
(0.003)

This table reports the estimation results of the state variable model as outlined in Section 2.2. Panel A reports the drift parameters of the fundamental
state variables. The parameters are expressed in percentages. The drift parameters for the state variables ydt , πdt and vpt are allowed to switch
according to respectively the regime variables Sty , Stπ , and Stvp . Panel B reports the structural parameters of the state variable model. Part 1 shows the
structural parameters of the IS, AS and risk aversion equation. Part 2 shows the structural parameters of the monetary policy rule. Part 3 shows the
feedback parameters of the non-macro variables. Panel C reports the parameters of the gamma matrix for the non-macro variables. Panel D shows the
regime-switching volatilies of the structural factors. The volatilities are expressed in percentages on a quarterly basis. Panel E reports the transition
probabilities for the nine regime-switching variables The regime-switching variables are respectively denoted as Sty , Stπ , Stq , Sti , Stcg , Stsliq , Stbliq , Stvp ,
and Stmp . The parameter P is the probability to stay in the high volatility state (active monetary policy state for Stmp ). The parameter Q is the
probability to stay in the low volatility state (accomodating monetary policy state Stmp ). Standard errors are reported between parentheses.

42

-

1
0
0

0
0
0

ydt
0.531
(0.154)
0.265
(0.029)
Stsliq
0.969
(0.032)
0.921
(0.117)

0

cgt
1.584
(0.334)
0.411
(0.061)
Stcg
0.585
(0.263)
0.884
(0.087)

it
0.290
(0.044)
0.070
(0.011)
Sti
0.849
(0.116)
0.911
(0.070)

Stbliq
0.964
(0.034)
0.966
(0.036)

πdt
0.889
(0.212)
0.208
(0.025)

0

0

1

0

πdt
0

ydt
0

0.003
(0.002)

Matrix for Non-Macro Variables
πt
qt
it
cgt
0.254
-0.210
1
(0.228) (0.113)
-0.173
-0.445
0.260
0
(0.127) (0.147) (0.086)
0.128
0
(0.078)
0.143
0.387
0
(0.148) (0.197)
0

-0.004
(0.002)
Panel D: Volatility Parameters
yt
πt
qt
Regime 1
0.129
0.367
0.226
(0.039) (0.050) (0.049)
Regime 2
0.075
0.214
0.061
(0.011) (0.025) (0.010)
Panel E: Transition Probabilities
Sty
Stq
Stπ
P
0.907
0.850
0.904
(0.112) (0.117) (0.073)
Q
0.975
0.929
0.954
(0.027) (0.056) (0.038)

vpt

Panel C: Gamma
yt
cgt
0.431
(0.208)
ydt
-0.223
(0.147)
πdt
0.249
(0.077)
sliqt
0.371
(0.159)
bliqt
-

Stvp
0.550
(0.227)
0.907
(0.064)

sliqt
1.288
(0.103)
0.188
(0.035)

0

0

1

0

0

sliqt
0

Stmp
0.908
(0.085)
0.934
(0.058)

bliqt
2.061
(0.138)
0.138
(0.016)

0

1

0

0

0

bliqt
0

LOW

HIGH

vpt
0.027
(0.005)
0.007
(0.001)

1

0

0

0

0

vpt
0

43

4) MIDAS versus Realized Correlation
0.174

0.195

3) Alternative Structural State Variable Models
Homoskedastic
0.228
0.272
0.096
State-Dependent
0.209
0.256
0.107

-

0.339

0.225*

0.141

Regime-Switching

0.271

0.160*

0.159*
0.145

0.228

0.275
0.439

0.056
0.153

1) Results 1000 Simulations
Percentile 5%
0.176
0.237
Percentile 95%
0.239
0.276
2) Non-Structural State Variable Models
Homoskedastic
0.265*
0.298*
State-Dependent
0.245*
0.287*

0.688

0.296

0.258

0.099*

0.248
0.449

Panel A: Specification Tests State Variable Model
yt
πt
qt
it
cgt
Univariate Test
0.100
0.499
0.762
0.392
0.094
Covariance Test
0.045
0.183
0.301
0.243
0.073
Panel B: Specification Tests Factor Model (Constant Beta)
Mean Zero Mean AC Mean Joint Variance Asym
Covariance
0.076
0.236
0.148
Stocks
0.676
0.446
0.936
0.271
0.373
Bonds
0.316
0.483
0.675
0.388
0.992
Panel C: Model Selection Statistics
Distance Measures
Corr Measures
Model
MD
Real
Unc
MD
Real
Benchmark
0.186
0.243
0.066
0.394
0.389

πdt
0.023
0.343

0.012

0.082
(0.038)

0.164
(0.036)
0.152
(0.028)

-0.117
0.118

0.874

1.194
(0.311)

0.594
(0.479)
0.702
(0.212)

1.039
2.517

Regression Real
Const
Slope
-0.044
1.659
(0.051) (0.317)

ydt
0.088
0.063

bliqt
0.794
0.489

-

0.107
(0.030)

0.170
(0.028)
0.179
(0.022)

-0.065
0.152

-

1.077
(0.241)

0.754
(0.374)
0.483
(0.168)

0.864
2.052

Regression MD
Const
Slope
0.018
1.322
(0.040) (0.249)

sliqt
0.984
0.419

vpt
0.123
0.120

Panel A reports the specification tests for the state variable model. The first line shows the Monte-Carlo p-values from a joint test on the standardized
residuals of a zero mean, unit variance, no second order autocorrelation in first and second moments, zero skewness, and zero excess kurtosis. The second
line reports Monte-Carlo p-values for a test of zero covariances of the factor shocks of one state variable with the factor shocks of all other state variables.
Panel B reports specification tests for the factor model with constant factor exposures. We test for a zero mean and serial correlation (4 lags) in the level,
both individually and jointly. The variance column performs the serial correlation test on squared residuals. ’Asym’ is a joint test for the sign bias and the
negative and positive sign biases of Engle and Ng (1993). The first line applies tests to the estimated cross-product of the stock and bond residuals from our
benchmark factor model; the second and third line to the standardized residuals of the stock and bond equations, respectively. Panel C presents the model
selection tests for the constant factor model in which factors are generated using three different non-structural and semi-structural models, respectively with
homoskedastic, state-dependent, and regime-switching variances. The semi-structural state variable model with regime-switching variances is our benchmark
case. The distance measures compute the mean absolute deviation of the model-implied correlations from respectively the MIDAS conditional correlations
(column 1), the realized correlations (column 2), and the unconditional correlation (column 3). The correlation measures compute the unconditional correlation
between our model-implied conditional correlations and respectively the MIDAS conditional correlations (column 4) and the realized correlations (column
5). We also report the constant and slope coefficient of a regression of respectively the realized correlations and the MIDAS conditional correlations on
our model-implied conditional correlations. Estimation results are shown respectively in columns 6 and 7 (for realized correlations), and columns 8 and 9
(for MIDAS correlations). Standard errors of the regression coefficients are reported between parentheses. Panel C also shows the results of a Monte Carlo
simulation applied to the factor model with constant factor exposures, as explained in Section 3.2. Distance and correlation measures which fall outside the
90% confidence interval are denoted by a *. The bottom line of the table shows the model selection tests for the MIDAS correlations relative to the realized
correlations as an additional benchmark.

Table 1: Specification Tests for State-Variable and Factor Model

44
0.052
0.064
0.275
0.248
0.439
0.449
State-Dependent
0.416
0.409

Results 1000 Simulations
S.E.
0.021 0.013 0.030
Percentile 5%
0.176 0.237 0.056
Percentile 95% 0.239 0.276 0.153
2) State-Dependent Betas - Original
No Restrictions 0.215 0.255 0.156

0.074
-0.117
0.118
Model
0.134
(0.026)
Restrictions
0.206 0.249 0.127 0.410
0.417
0.095
(0.029)
3) State-Dependent Betas - Risk Aversion as Instrument
No Restrictions 0.188 0.236* 0.104 0.452*
0.421
0.039
(0.036)
Restrictions
0.193 0.242 0.098 0.475*
0.466*
-0.002
(0.038)

0.066
-0.065
0.152
0.160
(0.020)
0.131
(0.023)
0.077
(0.028)
0.051
(0.030)

1.022
(0.184)
1.235
(0.217)
1.106
(0.192)
1.809
(0.277)

0.018
(0.040)

0.935
(0.149)
1.453
(0.217)

0.819
(0.144)
0.956
(0.171)

0.365
0.864
2.052

1.322
(0.249)

Regression MD
Const
Slope

0.479
1.039
2.517

1.659
(0.317)

-0.044
(0.051)

0.394

0.389

Regression Real
Const
Slope

Corr Measures
MD
Real

Distance Measures
Factor Model MD
Real
Unc
1) Constant Betas
No Restrictions 0.186 0.243 0.066

This table presents the model selection tests for alternative beta specifications in the factor model. We differentiate between 9 specifications for the factor
exposures as explained in Section 2.3. Panel 1 reports results for the constant beta specification. Next, we consider three specification with state-dependent
factor exposures, respectively using factor-specific state variables as instruments (Panel 2), risk aversion as instrument (Panel 3), and the variance premium
as instrument (Panel 4). Consequently, we report results for three specifications with regime-switching factor exposures, respectively using the monetary
policy regime variable Stmp as instrument (Panel 5), the own regime variable as instrument (Panel 6), and the illiquidity regime variables Stsliq and Stbliq as
instruments (Panel 7). Finally, we have two specifications for the factor exposures combining regime variables with state variables, respectively using the
monetary policy regime variable Stmp and risk aversion as instruments (Panel 8), and the monetary policy regime variable Stmp and variance premium as
instruments (Panel 9). For each beta specification, we consider two cases, one without restrictions and one in which coefficients are forced to be zero if |
t-stat | < 1 in the unrestricted case. To facilitate comparision, the first panel also shows the results of the Monte Carlo simulation applied to the factor
model with constant factor exposures (see Section 3.2). The distance measures compute the mean absolute deviation of the model-implied correlation from
respectively the MIDAS conditional correlation (column 1), the realized quarterly correlation (column 2), and the unconditional correlation (column 3).
The correlation measures compute the unconditional correlation between our model-implied conditional correlation and respectively the MIDAS (column
4) and realized (column 5) correlation. To test the predictive power of the various models for future correlations, we regress respectively the realized and
the MIDAS conditional correlation on our model-implied conditional correlation. Estimation results are shown respectively in columns 6 and 7 (for realized
correlation), and columns 8 and 9 (for MIDAS correlation) Standard errors of the regression coefficients are reported between parentheses. Distance and
correlation measures which fall outside the 95% (or 5%) percentile are denoted by a *. The bottom line of the table shows the model selection tests for the
MIDAS correlation relative to the realized correlation as an additional benchmark.

Table 2: Model Selection Tests for Model-Implied Conditional Correlations

45

Distance Measures Corr Measures Regression Real Regression MD
Factor Model MD
Real Unc
MD
Real
Const
Slope
Const
Slope
4) State-Dependent Betas - Variance Premium as Instrument
No Restrictions 0.187 0.234* 0.104 0.444*
0.463*
0.037
1.092
0.089
0.826
(0.033) (0.169) (0.027)
(0.134)
Restrictions
0.180 0.231* 0.094 0.477*
0.495*
0.004
1.324
0.064
1.004
(0.035) (0.187) (0.028)
(0.149)
5) Regime-Switching Betas - MP Regime Variable as Instrument
No Restrictions 0.198 0.250 0.099 0.476*
0.439
0.001
1.927
0.043
1.646
(0.039) (0.318) (0.030)
(0.245)
Restrictions
0.193 0.249 0.085 0.489*
0.439
-0.035
2.023
0.008
1.774
(0.044) (0.334) (0.034)
(0.255)
6) Regime-Switching Betas - Own Regime Variable as Instrument
No Restrictions 0.180 0.234* 0.074 0.448*
0.470*
-0.080
1.803
0.002
1.351
(0.047) (0.273) (0.038)
(0.217)
Restrictions
0.180 0.235* 0.066 0.429
0.452*
-0.117
1.922
-0.024
1.434
(0.055) (0.305) (0.044)
(0.244)
7) Regime-Switching Betas - Illiquidity Regime Variables as Instruments
No Restrictions 0.180 0.235* 0.135 0.415
0.429
0.028
0.920
0.082
0.700
(0.037) (0.156) (0.029)
(0.124)
Restrictions
0.181 0.235* 0.132 0.384
0.414
0.032
0.917
0.090
0.669
(0.037) (0.162) (0.030)
(0.130)
8) State-Dependent RS Betas - MP Regime Var and Risk Aversion as Instruments
No Restrictions 0.235 0.266 0.176 0.372
0.382
0.148
0.741
0.173
0.568
(0.025) (0.144) (0.020)
(0.114)
Restrictions
0.207 0.239 0.145 0.410
0.415
0.084
0.741
0.122
0.576
(0.031) (0.131) (0.024)
(0.103)
9) State-Dependent RS Betas - MP Regime Var and Variance Premium as Instruments
No Restrictions 0.229 0.267 0.147 0.291
0.295
0.141
0.564
0.167
0.437
(0.028) (0.147) (0.022)
(0.116)
Restrictions
0.197 0.241 0.109 0.416
0.404
0.059
0.956
0.099
0.776
(0.034) (0.175) (0.027)
(0.137)
MIDAS versus Realized Correlation
No Restrictions
0.174 0.195
0.688
0.012
0.874
(0.024) (0.074)

46

0.140

0.178

0.823

0.338

0.537

1.131

1.567

1.205

i

cg

yd

πd

sliq

bliq

vp

0.276

q

π

Factors
y

Std.
Factors
0.090

Constant
β0
10.723
(6.482)
-4.113
(2.264)
-12.458
(4.686)
-1.882
(3.434)
-0.734
(0.723)
-3.396
(2.136)
2.355
(1.236)
-1.170
(0.635)
-1.724
(0.340)
-2.997
(0.545)

Stock
Time-Varying
Time-Varying Restr
β0
β1
β0
β1
-1.253
9.400
-1.865
9.675
(11.469) (5.866) (11.143)
(5.629)
-10.055
3.478
-10.219
3.548
(3.320) (1.685) (3.331)
(1.681)
-13.142
0.429
-11.992
(10.321) (3.922) (4.747)
-18.374
7.365
-19.229
7.724
(7.187) (3.739) (7.594)
(3.919)
-0.886
0.089
-0.690
(1.674) (0.682) (0.624)
-7.009
2.156
-7.674
2.571
(3.458) (2.108) (3.264)
(1.883)
1.540
0.544
2.527
(2.202) (1.157) (1.336)
-1.261
-0.070
-1.389
(1.141) (0.608) (0.593)
-0.578
-0.620
-0.607
-0.632
(0.719) (0.368) (0.675)
(0.343)
-5.026
0.543
-5.052
0.554
(0.706) (0.278) (0.592)
(0.166)
Constant
β0
-4.029
(3.326)
-0.735
(0.995)
-2.757
(3.065)
-10.020
(1.818)
-0.516
(0.529)
-0.241
(0.955)
0.616
(0.727)
-0.435
(0.300)
-0.872
(0.234)
0.057
(0.250)

Bond
Time-Varying
β0
β1
-4.695
-0.448
(5.834) (2.544)
-2.429
0.681
(1.738) (0.777)
0.887
-1.560
(7.996) (3.211)
-9.550
-0.179
(3.924) (1.515)
-1.378
0.244
(0.968) (0.279)
-0.545
0.227
(1.767) (0.721)
1.079
-0.197
(1.136) (0.521)
-0.955
0.244
(0.580) (0.301)
-1.003
0.033
(0.393) (0.168)
-0.039
0.058
(0.381) (0.108)

Time-Varying Restr
β0
β1
-4.029
(3.326)
-0.735
(0.995)
-2.757
(3.065)
-10.020
(1.818)
-0.516
(0.529)
-0.241
(0.955)
0.616
(0.727)
-0.435
(0.300)
-0.872
(0.234)
0.057
(0.250)

This table reports the estimation results for the factor model with constant exposures and the best performing factor model with time-varying
exposures, which is the model with the variance premium as instrument. For the latter, we further differentiate between the model without
and with restrictions. The estimated betas are shown with White (1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors between parentheses. The
first column further shows the standard deviation of the different factors to facilitate the interpretation of the beta estimates. The mean and
the standard deviation of our instrument (i.e. the variance premium) is respectively 2.126 and 1.724. Stock and bond returns are in quarterly
percentages.

Table 3: Estimation Results for the Factor Models

Table 4: Economic Contributions for Model-Implied Conditional Correlations
This table shows the economic contributions of the different factors for the model-implied conditional correlations. Panel A shows the results for the factor model with constant exposures. Panel
B shows the results for the best performing factor model with time-varying exposures, which is the
model with the variance premium as instrument, imposing zero restrictions on parameters with
absolute t-statistics below one. For both panels, we repeat the results of the model selection tests
of the model including all factors (line ’Full Model’). Next, we compute the model selection test
measures leaving out certain factors. We differentiate between leaving out macro factors and leaving out non-macro factors. For each measure we compute the deterioration of the restricted model
relative to the full model. For the distance measures, we compute the deterioration as 100 times
(distance restricted model - distance full model)/distance full model. For the correlation measures,
we report the difference between the correlation measure for the full model and the correlation
measure for the restricted model, multiplied by 100. All numbers are expressed in percentages.
In Panel A, a * means that the restricted model performs significantly worse than the full model
with constant betas, based on the simulation results in Table 2. MD stands for MIDAS; Real for
realized.

Distance Measures
Factor Model
MD Real Unc
Panel A: Constant Betas
Full Model
0.186 0.243 0.066
minus macro var
7.6
2.8
32.3
minus yt , π t , it
6.4
2.6
25.2
minus qt
8.8
3.3
35.4
minus non-macro var 33.9* 18.8* 113.7
minus cgt
2.3
1.0
5.6
minus sliqt , bliqt
30.6* 16.8* 106.7
minus ydt , πdt
6.8
2.6
23.2
minus vpt
2.9
1.6
3.7
Panel B: Time-Varying Betas
Full Model
0.180 0.231 0.094
minus macro var
10.5
7.4
-4.6
minus yt , π t , it
8.1
5.7
-0.6
minus qt
8.7
4.6
12.9
minus non-macro var 36.1
22.4
66.9
minus cgt
2.1
1.0
2.3
minus sliqt , bliqt
31.9
19.6
58.6
minus ydt , πdt
2.5
1.4
-11.6
minus vpt
1.0
0.7
-3.7

47

Corr Measures
MD
Real
0.394
1.9
2.6
-0.6
30.7*
1.1
21.9*
-1.5
5.8

0.389
-0.3
0.5
-2.2
37.4*
0.4
26.7*
-2.3
5.3

0.477
6.3
10.7
1.8
23.6
1.0
20.0
-3.7
2.8

0.495
6.8
10.5
1.2
24.4
0.5
21.7
-4.5
2.0

48
0.180
0.111
0.192
0.221

Panel B: Time-Varying Betas
Benchmark

MIDAS Covariance

MIDAS Stock Volatility

MIDAS Bond Volatility
-

0.214

MIDAS Bond Volatility

MIDAS All

0.175*

MIDAS Stock Volatility

0.174

0.263

0.232

0.205

0.231

0.267

0.235*

0.200*

-

0.312

0.439

0.943

0.477

0.204

0.409

0.938*

0.104*

MIDAS Covariance

0.688

0.332

0.466

0.642

0.495

0.214

0.397

0.647*

0.389

0.394

0.186

Factor Model
Panel A: Constant Betas
Benchmark
0.243

Corr Measures
MD
Real

Distance Measures
MD
Real

0.004
(0.035)
0.084
(0.022)
0.008
(0.037)
0.084
(0.035)
0.012
(0.024)

-0.044
(0.051)
0.083
(0.022)
-0.031
(0.048)
0.097
(0.044)

1.324
(0.187)
1.003
(0.097)
0.831
(0.127)
0.535
(0.123)
0.874
(0.074)

1.659
(0.317)
0.945
(0.090)
1.131
(0.210)
0.489
(0.180)

Regression Real
Const
Slope

0.064
(0.028)
0.081
(0.008)
0.070
(0.029)
0.127
(0.028)

0.018
(0.040)
0.081
(0.008)
0.025
(0.038)
0.136
(0.034)

1.004
(0.149)
1.161
(0.033)
0.617
(0.102)
0.396
(0.097)

1.322
(0.249)
1.078
(0.032)
0.917
(0.165)
0.366
(0.142)

Regression MD
Const
Slope

This table shows results of the model selection tests for the model-implied conditional correlations imposing respectively the MIDAS data-implied
covariance, stock volatility and bond volatility. Panel A shows the results for the factor model with constant exposures. Panel B shows the results for
the best performing factor model with time-varying exposures, which is the model with the variance premium as instrument. The first line of each
model repeats the results of the model selection tests for the benchmark model without imposing the MIDAS momnts. The bottom line of the table
shows the model selection tests for the MIDAS correlations relative to the realized correlations. MD stands for MIDAS; Real for realized.

Table 5: Correlation Decomposition

49

Distance Measures
Factor Model
MD Real Unc
Panel A: Constant Betas
Full Model
0.227 0.305 0.124
minus macro var
1.5
-4.5
3.4
minus yt , π t , it
2.2
-3.3
5.6
minus qt
0.0
-5.9
4.7
minus non-macro var
12.1
-4.7
73.0
minus cgt
0.2
-1.8
0.4
minus sliqt , bliqt
9.3
-5.5
66.4
minus ydt , πdt
-1.8
-5.7
-2.7
minus vpt
0.7
0.2
2.9
Panel B: Time-Varying Betas
Full Model
0.258 0.302 0.180
minus macro var
-10.6
-3.9
-26.0
minus yt , π t , it
-17.5
-2.0
-8.3
minus qt
2.3
-1.3
4.2
minus non-macro var
10.9
3.7
38.3
minus cgt
-1.4
-2.4
-0.1
minus sliqt , bliqt
7.1
1.1
32.4
minus ydt , πdt
-15.8
-8.1
-18.3
minus vpt
-5.6
-1.2
-3.6
MIDAS Benchmark
0.251 0.252
0.420
-0.7
0.2
-0.1
22.8*
-0.6
15.4*
-0.8
2.3
0.517 †
6.4
10.8
4.6
25.5
0.2
21.8
-3.0
0.4
0.615

0.415
1.7
2.1
0.4
21.4*
1.1
17.8*
-1.0
2.5
0.416
0.8
-5.0
8.0
33.2
0.4
29.0
-9.9
-3.2
-

Corr Measures
MD
Real

This table shows the economic contributions of different factors for the model-implied conditional covariance. Panel A shows the results for the factor
model with constant exposures. Panel B shows the results for the best performing factor model with time-varying exposures, which is the model with
the variance premium as instrument. For both panels, we repeat the results of the model selection tests of the factor model including all factors (line
’Full Model’). Next, we compute the model selection tests leaving out certain factors. We differentiate between leaving out macro factors and leaving
out non-macro factors. For each measure we compute the deterioration of the restricted model relative to the full model. For the distance measures, we
compute the deterioration as 100 times (distance restricted model - distance full model)/distance full model. For the correlation measures, we report
the difference between the correlation measure for the full model and the correlation measure for the restricted model, in percentages. The distance
measures for the full model are multiplied by 100 to improve readability. In Panel A, * means that the restricted model performs significantly worse
than the full model, based on the simulation results in Table 2. In Panel B, a † in the line for the full model with time-varying betas means that the
model performs significantly better than the full model with constant betas. MD stands for MIDAS; Real for realized.

Table 6: Economic Contributions for Stock and Bond Return Covariance

50

Distance Measures
Factor Model
MD
Real
Panel A: Constant Betas
Full Model
0.028
0.038
minus macro var
31.9
3.6
minus yt , π t , it
14.3
1.0
minus qt
21.5
2.2
minus non-macro var
227.1*
120.8*
minus cgt
8.1
1.6
minus sliqt , bliqt
86.9*
25.0*
minus ydt , πdt
24.7
2.9
minus vpt
80.7*
36.2*
Panel B: Time-Varying Betas
Full Model
0.024
0.046
minus macro var
-0.9
-11.3
minus yt , π t , it
-17.5
-12.7
minus qt
-6.1
-7.0
minus non-macro var
212.3
54.7
minus cgt
-2.1
-1.6
minus sliqt , bliqt
8.0
-15.7
minus ydt , πdt
-11.2
-5.5
minus vpt
62.9
-1.3
MIDAS Benchmark
0.034
0.451
-14.4
-7.2
-8.3
46.0*
0.5
-17.0
-8.7
47.5*
0.541
16.6
20.9
-4.0
27.1
0.3
0.2
-2.1
1.0
-

Unc
0.063
14.9
7.1
10.3
100.6*
4.1
39.0*
11.7
36.3*
0.041
23.8
24.7
10.9
175.0
3.3
48.7
16.3
86.2
0.042

0.187
7.4
10.0
-4.0
18.3
0.3
-0.1
-0.2
-0.7
0.481

0.248
-10.5
-4.8
-6.6
31.0*
0.3
-9.3
-5.8
30.9*

Corr Measures
MD
Real

0.347
8.2%
7.1%
2.7%
29.8%
-0.1%
10.4%
2.1%
20.7%
0.662

0.270
4.6%
2.0%
3.0%
22.8%
-0.1%
9.6%
0.8%
14.3%

R2 Measure

This table shows the economic contributions of different factors for stock volatility. Panel A shows the results for the factor model with constant
exposures. Panel B shows the results for the best performing factor model with time-varying exposures, which is the model with the variance premium
as instrument. For both panels, we repeat the results of the model selection tests of the factor model including all factors (line ’Full Model’). Next, we
compute the model selection tests leaving out certain factors. We differentiate between leaving out macro factors and leaving out non-macro factors. For
each measure we compute the deterioration of the restricted model relative to the full model. For the distance measures, we compute the deterioration
as 100 times (distance restricted model - distance full model)/distance full model. For the correlation measures, we report the difference between the
correlation measure for the full model and the correlation measure for the restricted model, in percent. The distance measures of the full model are
expressed in standard deviation units. The last colum reports the adjusted R-squared from the factor model and the absolute deterioration in adjusted
R-squared when factors are eliminated. In Panel A, a * means that the restricted model performs significantly worse than the full model with constant
betas, based on the simulation results in Table 2. MD stands for MIDAS; Real for realized.

Table 7: Economic Contributions for Stock Volatility

51

Distance Measures
Factor Model
MD Real Unc
Panel A: Constant Betas
Full Model
0.030 0.030 0.042
minus macro var
25.4* 23.4* 22.7*
minus yt , π t , it
25.7* 23.6* 23.0*
minus qt
5.2
3.9
6.1
minus non-macro var
4.3
-0.4
7.4
minus cgt
0.4
0.5
0.3
minus sliqt , bliqt
3.5
-1.2
6.9
minus ydt , πdt
2.6
1.6
3.6
minus vpt
-0.2
-0.2
-0.2
MIDAS Benchmark
0.019 0.024
0.208
14.3*
14.3*
0.9
-7.8
-0.6
-7.8
-0.1
0.1
-

0.183
16.9*
16.9*
1.0
-9.8
-0.6
-9.9
-0.1
0.0
0.651

Corr Measures
MD
Real
0.307
12.7
13.2
0.2
7.5
0.3
8.5
-0.5
-0.5
-0.722

R2 Measure

This table shows the economic contributions of different factors for bond volatility. Panel A shows the results for the factor model with constant
exposures. We repeat the results of the model selection tests of the factor model including all factors (line ’Full Model’). Next, we compute the model
selection tests leaving out certain factors. We differentiate between leaving out macro factors and leaving out non-macro factors. For each measure we
compute the deterioration of the restricted model relative to the full model. For the distance measures, we compute the deterioration as 100 times
(distance restricted model - distance full model)/distance full model. For the correlation measures, we report the difference between the correlation
measure for the full model and the correlation measure for the restricted model, in percent. The distance measures of the full model are expressed in
standard deviation units. The last colum reports the adjusted R-squared from the factor model and the absolute deterioration in adjusted R-squared
when factors are eliminated. In Panel A, * means that the restricted model performs significantly worse than the full model with constant betas, based
on the simulation results in Table 2.

Table 8: Economic Contributions for Bond Volatility

Figure 1: Realized and Conditional MIDAS Stock-Bond Return Correlation

ϭ͘Ϭ

Ϭ͘ϴ

Ϭ͘ϲ

Ϭ͘ϰ

Ϭ͘Ϯ

Ϭ͘Ϭ
ϲϴ

ϳϬ

ϳϮ

ϳϰ

ϳϲ

ϳϴ

ϴϬ

ϴϮ

ϴϰ

ϴϲ

ϴϴ

ϵϬ

ϵϮ

ϵϰ

ϵϲ

ϵϴ

ϬϬ

ϬϮ

Ϭϰ

Ϭϲ

ͲϬ͘Ϯ

ͲϬ͘ϰ

ͲϬ͘ϲ

ͲϬ͘ϴ

Ͳϭ͘Ϭ
Z>/KZZ>d/KE

D/^KZZ>d/KE

This figure graphs realized quarterly correlations measured using daily returns, and the dataimplied conditional correlation based on the bivariate DCC-MIDAS model of Colacito, Engle, and
Ghysels (2009). See Appendix B for the technical details about this model.

52

Figure 2: Smoothed Probabilities of Regimes
Panel A: Output and Inflation Volatility Regime
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1970

1975

1980

1985

high output volatility regime

1990

1995

2000

high inflation volatility regime

2005

Panel B: Interest Rate Volatility and Monetary Policy Regime
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1970

1975

1980

1985

high interest rate volatility regime

1990

1995

2000

active monetary policy regime

2005

Panel C: Risk Aversion Volatility and Variance Premium Regime
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

high risk aversion volatility regime

1995

2000

2005

high variance premium volatility regime

53

Panel D: Cash Flow Volatility Regime
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

high cash flow volatility regime

2000

2005

2000

2005

Panel E: Stock and Bond Illiquidity Regime
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1970

1975

1980

1985

high stock illiquidity volatility regime

1990

1995

high bond illiquidity volatility regime

This figure shows the smoothed probabilities of the nine independent regimes in our state variable
model. The different regimes are defined in Section 2.2.3 for the active monetary policy regime
and Section 2.2.5 for the different volatility regimes. Panel A shows the smoothed probability of a
high output gap and inflation volatility regime. Panel B shows the smoothed probability of a high
interest rate volatility regime and the smoothed probability of an active monetary policy regime
in which the FED aggressively stabilizes the price level. Panel C shows the smoothed probability
of a high risk aversion volatility regime and of a high variance premium regime. Panel D shows the
smoothed probability of a high cash flow growth shock volatility regime. Finally Panel E shows
the smooted probability of a high stock and bond illiquidity regime. NBER recessions are shaded
gray.

54

Figure 3: Volatility of the Factors
Panel A: Output, Inflation and Interest Rate Volatility
0.015

0.01

0.005

0

1970

1975

1980

output volatility

1985

1990

inflation volatility

1995

2000

interest rate volatility

2005

Panel B: Risk Aversion, Variance Premium and Cash Flow Volatility
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0

1970

1975

1980

risk aversion volatility

1985

1990

1995

variance premium volatility

2000

2005

cash flow volatility

Panel C: Stock and Bond Illiquidity Volatility
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0

1970

1975

1980

1985

stock illiquidity volatility

1990

1995

2000

bond illiquidity volatility

2005

Panel D: Output Uncertainty and Inflation Uncertainty Volatility
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0

1970

1975

1980

1985

output uncertainty volatility

1990

1995

2000

inflation uncertainty volatility

2005

This figure shows the conditional volatilities (annualized) of the various factors identified in our
state variable model. Panel A shows respectively output, inflation and interest rate volatility.
Panel B shows respectively risk aversion, the variance premium and cash flow volatility. Panel C
shows stock and bond illiquidity volatility. Finally Panel D shows output uncertainty and inflation
uncertainty volatility. NBER recessions are shaded gray.

55

Figure 4: Data-Implied and Model-Implied Moments
Panel A: Correlation
0.6

0.4

0.2

0

−0.2

−0.4

−0.6
1970

1975
Midas

1980
1985
1990
Constant Exposures

1995
2000
2005
Time−varying Exposures

Panel B: Covariance
0.015

0.01

0.005

0

−0.005

−0.01

−0.015

1970

1975
Midas

1980
1985
1990
Constant Exposures

56

1995
2000
2005
Time−varying Exposures

Panel C: Stock Volatility
0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

1970

1975
Midas

1980
1985
1990
Constant Exposures

1995
2000
2005
Time−varying Exposures

Panel D: Bond Volatility
0.2
0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0

1970

1975
Midas

1980
1985
1990
Constant Exposures

1995
2000
2005
Time−varying Exposures

This figure plots the model-implied correlations (Panel A), the model-implied covariances (Panel
B), the model-implied stock volatility (Panel C) and the model-implied bond volatility (Panel D),
for both the factor model with constant exposures and the best performing factor model with
time-varying exposures, which is the model with the variance premium as instrument. In addition,
we plot the data-implied conditional moments based on the MIDAS model described in Apppendix
B.

57

