NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE, FOREIGN INVESTMENT, AND INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES
Ann Harrison
Andrés Rodríguez-Clare
Working Paper 15261
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15261

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2009

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Ann Harrison and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Trade, Foreign Investment, and Industrial Policy for Developing Countries
Ann Harrison and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare
NBER Working Paper No. 15261
August 2009
JEL No. F0,O0
ABSTRACT
In this paper we explore the popular but controversial idea that developing countries benefit from abandoning
policy neutrality vis-a-vis trade, FDI and resource allocation across industries. Are developing countries
justified in imposing tariffs, subsidies, and tax breaks that imply distortions beyond the ones associated
with optimal taxes or revenue constraints? We refer to this set of government interventions as "industrial
policy". We explore the theoretical foundation for industrial policy and then review the related empirical
literature. We follow this with a broader look at the empirical work on the relationship between trade
and FDI and growth. In this review, we find little evidence that countries benefit from "hard" interventions
that distort prices to deal with Marshallian externalities, learning-by-exporting, and knowledge spillovers
from FDI. We discuss an alternative set of "soft" industrial policies that deal directly with the coordination
failures that may arise within the sectors or clusters where the country has a comparative advantage.

Ann Harrison
University of California, Berkeley
329 Giannini Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
harrison@are.berkeley.edu
Andrés Rodríguez-Clare
Pennsylvania State University
Department of Economics
University Park, PA 16802
and NBER
andres1000@gmail.com

1

Introduction
“. . . growth was not a passive, trickle-down strategy for helping
the poor. It was an active, pull-up strategy instead. It required
a government that would energetically take steps to accelerate
growth, through a variety of policies including building infrastructure such as roads and ports and attracting foreign funds."
Jagdish Bhagwati, In Defense of Globalization (2004)

During the last three decades, developing countries have made enormous
strides in opening up their protected domestic markets to international trade
and foreign investment. Yet most countries have not simply opened up their
markets. They have also instituted a range of policies to encourage exports,
attract foreign direct investment (FDI), promote innovation, and favor some
industries over others. This leads to the following question: is openness
to trade and FDI alone su¢ cient to achieve high growth rates in developing countries? If harnessing the gains from globalization requires additional
policies, can we identify them? While some types of complementary policies,
such as building roads and ports, are not controversial, others are. Bhagwati’s suggestion to "attract foreign funds" implies tilting incentives in favor
of foreign investors, which means abandoning policy neutrality. Our goal in
this chapter is to explore the popular but controversial idea that developing
countries bene…t from abandoning policy neutrality vis-a-vis trade, FDI and
resource allocation across industries.
Policy neutrality does not necessarily mean free trade, or a neutral stance
regarding taxation of multinational corporations, or even a common tax
structure for all industries. Both optimal tax theory and practical …scal
considerations imply that countries (especially poor ones) will often want to
rely on tari¤s as a source of revenue or set di¤erent tax rates across industries. Are developing countries justi…ed in imposing tari¤s, subsidies, and tax
breaks that imply distortions beyond the ones associated with optimal taxes
or revenue constraints? We refer to this set of government interventions as
"industrial policy".
The presence of externalities is the main theoretical justi…cation for deviating from policy neutrality. Learning externalities from exports could
justify export subsidies; knowledge spillovers from foreign companies could
justify tax breaks for FDI; production externalities in "advanced" sectors
1

could justify infant-industry protection or other measures to expand those
industries. We begin this review with a series of simple models to highlight
the role of Marshallian and inter-industry externalities, industry-level rents,
sector-speci…c coordination failures and information spillovers as a rationale
for industrial policy ("IP").
The main message that emerges from this review is that the theoretical
justi…cation for infant-industry protection requires at a minimum either that
the country have a latent comparative advantage in the protected industry
or that the international price for this industry is higher than warranted by
the true opportunity cost of this good in the rest of the world. Moreover, for
protection to deliver large gains, the protected industry must exhibit large
Marshallian externalities. In contrast to the temporary trade barriers associated with infant-industry protection, permanent protection of a sector
may raise welfare if it generates positive externalities to other sectors. In all
these models, however, other policies may be more e¢ cient than protection.
Even when protection could improve welfare, a production subsidy would be
more e¢ cient since it avoids the temporary consumption losses associated
with protection. In addition, protection may not work if the market failure
is due to sector-speci…c coordination problems, since tari¤-induced growth
does not necessarily help to solve coordination failures. Finally, just as R&D
subsidies can address the externalities arising from innovation spillovers, policies to promote entry into new industries can address information spillovers
associated with the discovery of new pro…table activities.
While government intervention could address a number of market failures
in theory, one key question is whether IP has been successful in practice. The
theoretical discussion is followed by a review of the empirical literature on
industrial policy in Section 3. One challenge that we face in evaluating the
empirical literature is the large gap between the theoretical justi…cation for
IP and the quantitative work that has been done to evaluate its e¤ectiveness.
Even if we could show that protected sectors grow faster, for example, this
is not su¢ cient evidence to claim that IP increases welfare.
Despite this shortcoming, we proceed in Section 3 to evaluate three di¤erent approaches to measuring the e¤ectiveness of infant-industry protection.
The …rst approach focuses on particular industries that have received protection, such as the steel rail industry in the US and the semiconductor industry
in Japan. The few existing studies of this nature suggest that the conditions
necessary to generate positive net welfare gains from infant industry protection are di¢ cult to satisfy in developing countries.
2

A second empirical strategy exploits the variation in productivity growth
and di¤erent measures of support (including protection and production subsidies) across industries to see whether supported industries exhibit faster
growth. The challenge here is that tari¤s and quotas are frequently imposed
for reasons other than the pursuit of industrial policy. If we cannot identify
the motive for protection, then it is di¢ cult to evaluate the consequences of
IP via trade policy instruments. Generating …scal revenue, improving terms
of trade, and political considerations (rent-seeking) are likely to be just as
important as infant-industry considerations in explaining the pattern of trade
policy and other measures of support.
Finally, a third approach studies the connection between trade policy and
economic growth, both by focusing on particular countries (e.g., South Korea
and Taiwan) and by considering the entire cross section of countries. While
the literature on trade and growth linkages faces many challenging problems,
in Section 4 we suggest two general lessons that may be drawn from the voluminous evidence. First, there was no signi…cant relationship in the second
half of the twentieth century between average protection levels and growth.
Second, there is a positive association between trade volumes and growth.
We interpret the lack of a signi…cant association between average tari¤s and
growth, combined with the strong relationship between trade shares and
growth, to suggest that any successful IP strategy must ultimately increase
the share of international trade in GDP. The fact that so many countries
have been unsuccessful in o¤setting the anti-trade bias of their interventions
may explain why so many have failed to succeed at IP.
We also review a new set of studies that emphasize the complementarity
between trade and FDI reforms and other government policies. These studies
suggest that trade liberalization will not generate faster growth unless accompanied by changes in other parts of the economy, such as reducing barriers
to new …rm entry, encouraging more ‡exible labor markets, and improving
infrastructure. These new studies are consistent with one of the most important new theoretical developments in international trade: the emphasis
on heterogeneous …rms. The new heterogeneous trade models suggest a new
mechanism through which trade a¤ects productivity growth: greater competition forces less productive …rms to exit and increases the market share
of more productive …rms. In this framework, gains from trade cannot be
realized when there are barriers to …rm exit and expansion, which suggests
a need to take into account complementary policies on entry and exit. We
…nish Section 4 with an analysis of whether learning-by-exporting seems to
3

be quantitatively important, and a discussion of the empirical evidence regarding other mechanisms through which trade policy might a¤ect growth.
Aside from intervening in trade, many developing countries deviate from
policy neutrality by introducing tax breaks and other policies to attract foreign direct investment (FDI). While economists are generally skeptical regarding the bene…ts of intervening in trade, they are much more likely to
have interventionist priors when it comes to FDI. In Section 5, we review the
micro studies which have identi…ed a number of important e¤ects of inward
foreign investment ‡ows. While most of the empirical literature focuses on
productivity spillovers, there is also a growing literature that examines export promotion through foreign investment, input linkages, and labor market
e¤ects. We argue that FDI is associated with technology transfer and positive labor market outcomes in developing countries, but that the empirical
literature on FDI does not show evidence of horizontal spillovers, and that
bene…ts from vertical spillovers may not exceed the cost of FDI subsidies.

2

The Theoretical Justi…cation for Industrial
Policy

The textbook model of IP is based on the idea that some sectors or industries exhibit Marshallian externalities, which are local externalities that
increase with the size of the industry. These externalities can arise through
localized industry-level knowledge spillovers, input-output linkages together
with transportation costs to ensure that the externalities remain local, and
labor pooling (see Marshall, 1920, and Krugman, 1991). Marshallian externalities give rise to geographic agglomeration of industries (e.g., software in
Silicon Valley), which have been emphasized in the literature on economic
geography.
The simplest model of IP entails a small-open economy with two sectors,
1 and 2. Sector 1 has constant returns to scale while Sector 2 has Marshallian
externalities. The key result is that under some conditions there are multiple equilibria, with the equilibrium with complete specialization in Sector
2 being superior to the one with complete specialization in Sector 1.1 One
1

Multiple Pareto-ranked equilibria can also arise in a closed economy, although the
behavior of prices makes this less likely. This is because as one sector is expanding, the
relative price moves against this sector, and this may rule out multiplicity. See Murphy,

4

could say that the economy has a "latent" comparative advantage in Sector
2 but that a coordination failure prevents it from exploiting this advantage.2
Since the realization of Marshallian externalities is likely to take some time,
it is customary to talk about countries having a "dynamic" comparative advantage (Wade 1990, Amsden 1989) in sectors other than the ones in which
they are currently specialized, and to think of industrial policy as the way to
undertake the necessary transformation to capitalize on that dynamic advantage. We think of this as the main theoretical justi…cation for infant-industry
protection.
The following subsection presents a simple static model that formally
captures this idea for an economy facing exogenous international prices. We
then move on to endogenize these prices based on production costs in the rest
of the world, and then show how the results extend to a dynamic framework.
If the South does not have a latent comparative advantage in the advanced
sectors likely to have Marshallian externalities, is there still a case to be
made for an IP that would promote a structural transformation towards
those sectors? In Subsection 2.2 we show that there are indeed conditions
under which this is the case. In particular, IP can increase welfare in two
scenarios: …rst, when there are rents associated with the advanced sector, so
that its international price is high relative to its cost; and second, when there
are inter-industry externalities, so that a large advanced sector increases the
economy’s productivity across the board.
Marshallian externalities arise as an automatic consequence of the scale
of the sector: a sector necessarily experiences an increase in productivity as
it becomes larger. As argued by Baldwin (1969), however, the expansion of a
sector does not always bring about positive agglomeration externalities. Such
agglomeration e¤ects may instead depend on the way in which production
is carried out. In other words, externalities may not be intrinsic to sectors,
but to the way in which they are organized (Rodríguez-Clare, 2007). In this
case, a sectoral reallocation of resources is not enough; import substitution,
for example, may allow an economy to expand its manufacturing sector, but
production may take place in unsophisticated ways and no "clustering" bene…ts may materialize. In Subsection 2.3 we present a model where, instead
of Marshallian externalities, sectors present opportunities for collective acShleifer and Vishny (1989).
2
There are other rationales that have been discussed for industrial policy, including
…nancial market imperfections. We ignore these arguments in this chapter (see Baldwin
1969 for an early criticism, and Pack and Saggi, 2006, for a recent survey).

5

tion that increases their productivity by a certain amount (which may be
di¤erent across sectors). If there are no rents (i.e., if international prices
perfectly re‡ect production costs in the North), then the best policy is simply to exploit the opportunities for collective action in the sectors where the
economy is specialized. Under more general conditions, we show that sectors
that could bene…t most from IP would be ones that have large opportunities
for productivity-enhancing collective action, or that have high world demand
relative to the combined size of countries that have achieved such collective
action.
In Subsection 2.4 we turn to IP aimed at "diversi…cation." This is something that is often stated as a goal by many countries. We present a simple
model where diversi…cation is linked to productivity and argue that if there
is a market failure reducing the level of diversi…cation below the optimal one
(as in Hausmann and Rodrik, 2003), then a policy of encouraging discovery
and diversi…cation would indeed be welfare enhancing.

2.1

Multiple Equilibria and Latent Comparative Advantage

We …rst present a static model with exogenous prices, and then discuss the
implications of the model when prices are determined by production costs in
the rest of the world.
2.1.1

Exogenous international prices

There is a small economy, which we call "South," two goods and one factor of
production, labor, in …xed supply, L.3 Good 1 is produced with constant returns to scale (CRS) and no aggregate externalities: a unit of labor produces
1 units of good 1. Good 2 is produced with constant returns to scale at the
…rm level, but there are aggregate externalities, so that labor productivity
is:
2 1 + M in(L; L2 )
with
> 0 and
1 + L > 1. The term 1 + M in(L; L2 ) captures
Marshallian externalities that are increasing with industry-wide employment,
3

This subsection follows Rodríguez-Clare (2007). Models of multiple equilibria in a
small open economy include Okuno-Fujiwara, 1988, Rodríguez-Clare, 1996, Rodrik, 1996,
Ciccone and Matsuyama, 1996.

6

L2 , but that are exhausted once the labor force in a sector reaches the level
L. The term can be seen as the maximum bene…ts of clustering in sector
2.4 We assume that the total labor supply in South is higher than L, so that
if there is complete specialization in good 2 then productivity is 2 .
p2 =p1 . Let us derive
Let pi be the international price of good i and let p
a condition under which there are multiple equilibria, with one equilibrium
characterized by complete specialization in good 1 and the other by complete
specialization in good 2. We …rst check that specialization in good 1 is an
equilibrium. Letting w denote the wage in South, then w = p1 1 if South
is specialized in good 1. The unit cost of producing good 2 in South given
that all labor is devoted to production of good 1 (and hence no bene…ts of
clustering are realized) is w= 2 . Hence complete specialization in good 1 is
an equilibrium if and only if 1 = 2 p . Similarly, complete specialization
in good 2 implies p2 = w= 2 , and hence this is an equilibrium if and only
if 1 = 2
p . Thus, there is multiple equilibria if and only if the following
condition holds,
p
p
(1)
1= 2
Without loss of generality, in the following discussion we restrict attention
to the case in which this condition holds with strict inequalities. If there are
multiple equilibria, which equilibrium yields higher wages? In the equilibrium
with complete specialization in good 1 the wage is w = p1 1 , whereas in the
other equilibrium we have w = p2 2 . If condition (1) is satis…ed with strict
inequalities then p 2 > 1 , so wages are higher in the equilibrium with
complete specialization in good 2.5
4

In the traditional model, L is in…nite, so labor productivity is simply 2 (1 + L2 ).
The alternative assumption that these aggregate externalities are bounded is not only
more realistic, but also leads to a simpler analysis. Moreover, this assumption allows us to
focus on the issue of latent comparative advantage, as opposed to advantages arising from
di¤erences in size or scale. For an analysis where scale (but not infant-industry protection)
takes center stage, see Ethier (1982), which formalizes the discussion relating to Frank
Graham’s argument for protection (Graham, 1923). Scale e¤ects could be captured in the
model presented here by assuming that L is large; in this case small countries could not
exhaust the Marshallian externalities even if they specialized completely in industry 2.
5
The result of multiple Pareto-ranked equilibria can be converted into one of development traps by introducing proper dynamics in the model (see Krugman, 1991 and
Matsuyama, 1991). Under some conditions, the economy may be specialized in the good
in which it doesn’t have latent comparative advantage, and there may be no equilibrium
taking it to specialization in the other good. Government intervention in this case would
require more than simple coordination to select the good equilibrium.

7

We will say that South has a latent comparative advantage in good i if
the opportunity cost of this good given the realization of all Marshallian
externalities is lower than the international price.6 For good 1 this entails
1=p , whereas for good 2 this is 1 = 2 p . Thus, condition (1)
2= 1
with strict inequalities implies that South has a latent comparative advantage
in good 2. The equilibrium with specialization in good 1 is possible because
in this case Marshallian externalities are not realized, and hence the latent
comparative advantage of South in good 2 is not what determines the pattern of specialization. Thus, the previous results (i.e., existence of multiple
equilibria and the fact that generally the equilibrium with specialization in
good 2 yields higher wages than the one with specialization in good 1) can be
reinterpreted as saying that a country may be specialized in a sector where it
doesn’t have a latent comparative advantage, and that in this case a policy
that induces the economy to switch to the equilibrium with specialization
in the good where there is a latent comparative advantage could be welfare
enhancing (see discussion below).
Figure 1 illustrates the previous results. The curve labeled P P F represents the Production Possibilities Frontier for South, which is convex when
L2 < L (or Q2 < 2 L) and becomes linear when L2
L (or Q2
2 L).
The curve labeled P P FN C is the hypothetical Production Possibilities Frontier when there are no Marshallian externalities (i.e., = 0), given simply
by a line with slope 1 = 2 , as in the standard Ricardian model. Note that
the slope of the P P F is the same as the slope of P P FN C at the corner where
there is complete specialization in good 1. Thus, if the international relative
price of good 2 (i.e., p2 =p1 ) is lower than 1 = 2 there is an equilibrium with
complete specialization in good 1, whereas if p2 =p1 is higher than the slope of
the PPF along its linear segment - namely, 1 = 2 - then there is an equilibrium with complete specialization in good 2. Clearly, then, if (1) is satis…ed,
there are multiple equilibria, with the equilibrium with specialization in good
2 delivering a higher consumption possibilities frontier for South.
The standard case for infant industry protection or IP can now be stated
simply by saying that if the South is specialized in good 1, then a high
enough tari¤ would lead this economy to satisfy its own consumption of
good 2. This would allow the South to realize the bene…ts of the Marshallian
externalities associated with this sector, and thereby shift the equilibrium
6

If Marshallian externalities take time to be realized, then one could talk about a
dynamic comparative advantage. See Redding (1999).

8

Figure 1: Marshallian Externalities and Multiple Equilibria

towards complete specialization in good 2.7 At that point the tari¤ would
no longer be needed, and the economy could maintain free trade.
Sauré (2007) presents an interesting and novel argument for why protection may fail to generate the results predicted by this model. He assumes
that goods 1 and 2 are tradable inputs into the production of a …nal nontradable good via a "modern technology." The key assumption is that the
…nal good can also be produced directly from labor with a "traditional technology" which exhibits CRS (no Marshallian economies). Under some conditions protection makes the modern technology unpro…table because of the
increase in the price of input 2. Thus, rather than increasing production
of the good with Marshallian externalities, protection leads to the contraction of the whole modern sector and a reallocation of resources towards the
traditional sector.
2.1.2

International prices determined in North

The previous discussion takes international prices as exogenous. But prices
are (at least in part) determined by productivity levels in the rest of the world.
7

L2

We assume here that the South is su¢ ciently large that under autarky it would have
L.

9

One would imagine that rich countries are already enjoying the lower costs
associated with clustering in sector 2, so these lower costs would be re‡ected
in p . Thus, for a small country to have a latent comparative advantage in
sector 2, it must have some deep parameters that confer it such an advantage.
To see this, imagine now that there are two countries, North and South,
which may di¤er in the productivity parameters, 1 and 2 , so that there are
exogenous international productivity di¤erences (independent of Marshallian
externalities) in the production of both goods 1 and 2. Imagine further that
South is small, so that prices are determined in North as if it were a closed
economy. Choosing labor in North as the numeraire, international prices
are simply given by the North’s unit labor requirements. Assuming that in
equilibrium L2N L then p1 = 1= 1N and p2 = 1= 2N , so p = 1N = 2N .
Note that the bene…ts of clustering are re‡ected in a lower international
relative price of good 2. This will be important in the analysis that follows.
Imagine …rst that there are no Ricardian productivity di¤erences, ji = 1
for all j = S; N and i = 1; 2. Using (1) it is easy to con…rm that there are
multiple equilibria in South (since p = 1= then condition (1) is 1=
1
1), but since the second part of (1) is satis…ed with equality, then the wage is
the same in both equilibria. Thus, although there are multiple equilibria, the
wage is not higher in the equilibrium with specialization in good 2. This is
because even though the economy bene…ts from clustering in this equilibrium,
this is exactly compensated by the lower price of this good, which in turn
arises from the higher productivity in North derived from clustering.
The equilibrium with specialization in good 2 may yield higher wages than
the one with specialization in good 1 if we allow for exogenous productivity
di¤erences. In particular, the equilibrium with specialization in good 2 will
have higher wages if the South has a latent comparative advantage in the
good subject to clustering. To see this, drop the assumption that ji = 1 for
all j; i, and assume instead that
2S = 1S

>

2N = 1N

(CA)

The condition for multiple equilibria (i.e., condition (1)) is now (using p =
1N =
2N )
(2)
1N =
2N
1S = 2S
1N = 2N
The second inequality is satis…ed given (CA), so there is always an equilibrium with specialization in good 2. The …rst inequality (needed for there to

10

be an equilibrium with specialization in good 1) is satis…ed if and only if
2S = 1S
2N = 1N

(3)

That is, the South’s comparative advantage in sector 2 must be weaker than
the bene…ts of clustering.
The analysis here is exactly as above, with condition (2) replacing condition (1). Condition (CA) is necessary for South to have a latent comparative
advantage in good 2, and this is necessary for the wage with specialization
in good 2 to be higher and for IP to raise wages for South.
An important point to note is that for the gains from IP to be large we
need South to have a strong latent comparative advantage in good 2. But
then condition (3) implies that Marshallian externalities must also be high
for there to be multiple equilibria. We can conclude that IP generates large
gains only if the sector that would be promoted exhibits both a strong latent
comparative advantage and large externalities.
One can enrich the model to generate some additional implications. For
example, if sector 2 is intensive in physical and human capital relative to
sector 1, then if South is specialized in 1 this goes together with low levels of
both types of capital and a lower level of TFP than if it were specialized in
sector 2 (Ciccone and Matsuyama, 1996, Rodríguez-Clare, 1996). A policy
to shift resources towards sector 2 would then generate endogenous accumulations of capital, as observed in East Asian countries. In other words, some
LDCs may have low capital stocks as well as low TFP as a consequence of
not exploiting their latent comparative advantage.8
2.1.3

Dynamic externalities

Here we extend the model to allow for dynamic Marshallian externalities,
as in Bardhan (1970), Krugman (1987), Lucas (1988), Redding (1999) and
Melitz (2005). To do so, we assume that productivity in sector 1 in country
i is 1i , just as above, whereas productivity in sector 2 in country i at time
t is now Ait 2i 1 + M in(L; L2it ) . Letting aSt
max fASt =AN t ; 1g and
aN t max fAN t =ASt ; 1g, we assume that Ait grows thanks to both learning
by doing (which happens if country i has a cluster in sector 2, i.e. L2it > 0)
8

One problem with this idea as a way to think about income di¤erences across countries
is that it would imply that poor countries have a lower physical capital share, which is not
consistent with the data (see Gollin, 2002).

11

and international spillovers (which happens if ait < 1). Formally, we assume
that
A_ it = (g=L) min(L; L2it )Ait + "(1 ait )Ait
where " > g > 0. Productivity increases caused by dynamic externalities in
one country eventually di¤use to the other country even if there is no cluster
there. Thus, in this model clusters are important to generate knowledge but
are not critical to bene…t from knowledge spillovers.
Note that if the North has a cluster but the South does not, then A_ St =
"(1 aSt )ASt . There are "bene…ts of backwardness," in the sense that a
lower relative productivity in South (i.e., lower aSt ) leads to a faster rate
of productivity growth. This implies that given " > g there is a steady
state productivity gap ASt =AN t = a
^ given implicitly by g = "(1 a
^): if
aSt < a
^ (aSt > a
^) then aSt increases (decreases) towards a
^. For future
reference, note that the productivity of North relative to South in this steady
state is ( 2N = 2S ) =^
a: the …rst term captures pure Ricardian productivity
di¤erences, whereas the second and third terms capture the impact of static
and dynamic bene…ts of clustering, respectively. Starting from such a steady
state, if South acquires a cluster in sector 2, so that now L2St
L, then
there will be full convergence as aSt increases from a
^ towards 1.
As before, assume that prices are wholly determined in North. Then
p1 = 1= 1N and p2t = 1=A2N t 2N , and assume that condition (CA) holds.
Focusing on the South, complete specialization in 1 is a steady state equilibrium if
2S = 1S
=^
a
(4)
2N = 1N
On the other hand, complete specialization in good 2 is necessarily a steady
state equilibrium (given condition (CA)). Thus, there are multiple steady
states if and only if condition (4) is satis…ed. It can be readily veri…ed that
the steady state with specialization in good 2 entails a higher wage for South
than the steady state with specialization in good 1. This is because condition
(CA) implies that South has a latent or "dynamic" comparative advantage
in good 2.9
Imagine that this condition is satis…ed and that the system is in steady
state with South completely specialized in good 1. Is there an equilibrium in
9
Formally, we would say that a country has a latent or dynamic comparative advantage
in a good if its opportunity cost given the realization of all static and dynamic Marshallian
externalities is lower than the international price.

12

which South moves to the steady state with specialization in good 2? If South
becomes specialized in good 2 then it realizes the static externalities, but it
will take some time for it to catch up to the North in terms of productivity
(i.e., aSt < 1 for some time). During this period, specialization in good 2 is
an equilibrium if
2S = 1S
1=aSt
2N = 1N
This implies that if
1=^
a

2S = 1S
2N = 1N

=^
a

then there are multiple steady states, and also an equilibrium in which simply South switches from specialization in good 1 to specialization in good
2 and eventually reaches the steady state with complete specialization in
good 2. The government could achieve this switch with trade protection for
an in…nitesimally short time, and the gains would necessarily outweigh any
associated costs (see below).
On the other hand, if
2S = 1S
< 1=^
a
2N = 1N
then this is no longer the case. In order to guarentee specialization in good
2, there would need to be temporary protection until aSt increases from a
^ to
0
a level a de…ned implicitly by
2S = 1S
2N = 1N

= 1=a0

After that, complete specialization in good 2 would be an equilibrium for
South. Eventually the system would reach the steady state with aSt = 1.
2.1.4

Discussion

The simple model presented here captures the notion that temporary protection may induce an economy in a bad equilibrium to switch towards the
equilibrium where specialization is according to its latent or dynamic comparative advantage. Of course, this is nothing more than the classic case for
infant-industry protection, where policy is supposed to turn a latent com-

13

parative advantage into an e¤ective one.10 Such a policy would be welfare
enhancing provided it passes both the Mill and Bastable tests: the Mill test
is that the protected sector can eventually survive international competition
without protection, whereas the Bastable test is more stringent in requiring also that the discounted future bene…ts compensate the present costs of
protection (see Kemp, 1960, and Corden, 1997). In the model above, infantindustry protection passes the Mill test if and only if the South has a latent
comparative advantage in the protected sector. The Bastable test requires
that the discounted gains from IP compensate the temporary consumption
loses associated with protection during the period in which the economy is
generating the (dynamic) productivity gains associated with clustering. This
is the period when aSt is increasing from a
^ to a0 . Bardhan (1971), Redding
(1999) and Melitz (2005) - among others - explore the conditions on the
learning process under which the bene…ts of protection justify these initial
losses. Bardhan (1970) and Melitz (2005) explore the optimal way in which
protection should be granted.
Of course, protection does not directly target Marshallian externalities. A
production subsidy would be more e¢ cient, as it would avoid the temporary
consumption losses mentioned above. The whole discussion of infant-industry
protection is based on the presumption that a production subsidy is simply
not feasible, either for …scal, political or practical considerations (see Section
3). If this were not the case, then the analysis would be quite simple: provide
a (Pigovian) subsidy such that the marginal subsidy is equal to the marginal
externality. Naturally, if the source of the externality is not production but
some more speci…c activity (e.g., R&D) then the subsidy could be directed
there.
The condition that the South have a non-exploited latent comparative
advantage to justify protection is speci…c to the simple Ricardian model
we presented, where the production possibilities frontier (PPF) is linear and
there is a tendency for complete specialization. If the PPF is strictly concave
and international prices are such that under free trade the economy is diversi…ed, then the presence of Marshallian externalities in the import competing
10

John Stuart Mill (1848, reference 1909) is generally credited for being the …rst to
express this idea in a clear and simple way, although it was Friedrich List (1885) who vigorously argued for the adoption of infant-industry protection of manufacturing in European
countries. See Corden (1997) for a discussion of the di¤erent arguments for and against
infant-industry protection, and Irwin (1996) for an excellent treatment of its intellectual
history.

14

sector implies that a small tari¤ would necessarily be welfare increasing. But
this kind of "marginal intervention" is not what people commonly associate
with infant-industry protection.
Another possibility that arises with a strictly concave PPF is multiple
equilibria where the bad equilibrium has a low (but positive) production
level, whereas the good equilibrium has a higher production level but not
enough for any of this production to be exported. Even if the economy
does not have a latent comparative advantage, temporary protection may
be welfare enhancing in this case as long as the Mill and Bastable tests are
satis…ed.
Although it is a speci…c result to the simple Ricardian model presented
here, the result that a latent comparative advantage is necessary for infantindustry protection to be welfare-enhancing is of general interest. First, in
all cases in which infant-industry protection has supposedly been successful,
the infant sector eventually generates signi…cant exports. It is simply hard
to imagine otherwise. Second, if there are resource constraints that prevent
the sector from becoming large, then the theoretical framework suggests that
the bene…ts of IP would be small while the associated costs and risk would
be relatively large. For this reason, in the rest of this section we restrict
attention to the Ricardian model (linear PPF).

2.2

Industrial Policy without Latent Comparative Advantage

Can a policy to promote specialization in a good with Marshallian externalities (i.e., good 2 in the model above) be welfare-enhancing in spite of
not having latent comparative advantage in that sector? For this analysis
and the rest of this section we again restrict attention to the simpler static
analysis.
2.2.1

Sector-level rents

Imagine that prices are determined not in a single economy, but in a collection of economies. In particular, assume that North is partitioned into two
regions, N1 and N2 , with labor quantities L1N and L2N . Everything else is as
above. Without loss of generality, assume that region N2 is the one that will
produce good 2. If L2N is su¢ ciently large relative to the world’s demand
for good 2 then it will not be completely specialized in that good, in which
15

case prices will be determined by technology levels (inclusive of clustering
e¤ects), so that p = 1N = 2N , just as in the previous case. But if L2N is
small relative to the world demand for good 2, then in equilibrium one can
have
(5)
1N = 2N > p > 1N =
2N
In contrast to what we have with an integrated North, here p can be strictly
higher than 1N = 2N . The di¤erence can be interpreted as the "rents"
associated with good 2. To capture this, let
p
1N =

R

2N

Condition (5) can now be stated as
(6)

>R>1

Consider again a "small" South, which takes international prices as given.
The condition for multiple equilibria is again given by (1), with p satisfying
(5). This can be written as
R=

1S = 2S
1N = 2N

R

(7)

We are interested in the case where South does not have a latent comparative
advantage in good 2, or
1S = 2S

>

1N = 2N

(8)

In this case, the LHS inequality in (7) is always satis…ed (given (6)), while
the RHS inequality, which is necessary for specialization in good 2 to be an
1S = 2S
is a measure of
equilibrium, is satis…ed if R > CA, where CA
1N = 2N
comparative advantage in South in good 1. In other words, there are multiple equilibria in South if its comparative advantage in good 1 is smaller
than the rents associated with international prices. Moreover, just as in the
previous cases, the equilibrium with specialization in the good with Marshallian externalities sustains a higher wage.11 This result is reminiscent of the
11

Another way to think about rents is if South were no longer a small economy. Consider
Figure 1 again and imagine that there are no productivity di¤erentials between South and
North. Imagine further that these two regions have equal size, and that demand for good
2 is su¢ ciently high that the equilibrium entails one country fully specialized in good 2
and the other fully specialized in good 1. Then, if condition (1) is satis…ed, the country
that specializes in good 2 has higher welfare than the country that specializes in good 1.

16

literature on strategic trade policy, where increasing returns and imperfect
competition leads to the existence of rents which governments try to capture
via trade policy.
An alternative way to get a similar result is by assuming the existence
of a wage premium in sector 1.12 To see this, assume again that North is
a single integrated region, but with a wage premium in sector 2, so that
w2 = Rw1 . Then it is easy to verify that p = R 1N = 2N , which is the same
as above.13 ,14
2.2.2

Inter-industry externalities

We have so far focused on intra-industry externalities. Consider instead
aggregate externalities, so that all sectors in the country bene…t from the externalities realized in a sector (see Succar, 1987, Young, 1991, and Greenwald
and Stiglitz, 2006).15 Assume that now productivity in good i in country j
is
ij 1 + i M in(L; L2j )
with 1 < 2 , so that intra-industry externalities are stronger than interindustry externalities. Let i 1 + i L and note that 1 < 2 . We return to
the case of FPE in North with no rents, so that pi = 1= i iN , and assume
that South has a latent comparative advantage in good 1. It is readily veri…ed
12

Yet another way to have rents would be through the existence of pure pro…ts, as in the
literature on "strategic trade policy" (Brander and Spencer, 1983, Eaton and Grossman,
1989).
13
We have assumed here that there is no wage premium in South. If there were a
wage premium in South of equal magnitude as in North, then in the absence of a latent
comparative advantage in good 2, there would not be multiple equilibria, but it could be
welfare-enhancing for South to implement a policy to specialize in sector 2. This would
no longer be a case of Marshallian externalities and infant-industry protection, but rather
a standard application of the theory of domestic distortions and trade policy.
14
One di¤erence with the case analyzed above, where rents arise from lack of FPE, is
that with wage premia we no longer have the restriction that R < . The reason is that
now the opportunity cost of good 2 given that region is specialized in good 1 is R 1N = 2N ,
and we need this to be higher than p , which is possible even if 1N = 2N < p . Note that
in this case then there is no equilibrium with specialization in good 1 in South.
15
Perhaps the most important type of inter-industry externalities are generated by industries that supply specialized inputs that are used intensively by …rms in many other
sectors. According to Wade (1990), this kind of reasoning was quite important in Taiwan,
where the government promoted several sectors that were deemed to provide critical inputs
for many other industries. Noland and Pack (2003) disagree with this view.

17

in this case that the only equilibrium in South entails specialization in good
1.16 But specialization in good 2 implies w = 2 2S p2 = 2S = 2N , while
specialization in good 1 implies w = 1S p1 = 1S = 1 1N . The …rst is higher
than the second if and only if
1=

1

<

2S = 1S
2N = 1N

If this is satis…ed, then forcing the economy towards specialization in good 2,
even if this is not an equilibrium, is welfare-enhancing compared to staying
in the equilibrium with specialization in good 1. In this case, the losses from
going against comparative advantage by specializing in sector 2 are dominated by the gains associated with the economywide externalities generated.
This may be one way of interpreting the argument in the late 1980s in favor
of protecting the semiconductor industry in the United States (see Borrus,
Tyson and Zysman, 1986).

2.3

Industrial Policy as Sector-Speci…c Collective Action

We have so far focused on Marshallian and inter-industry externalities as
reasons for IP. A more general conceptual framework for thinking about IP
is the existence of coordination failures at the industry or sector level. Of
course, coordination failures arise in the presence of Marshallian externalities. The di¤erence is that the distortions associated with these externalities
(at least as modeled above) disappear when the sector gets su¢ ciently large,
whereas this is not the case with other types of coordination failures. For
example, in Rodríguez-Clare (2007) positive spillovers arise only when "modern" technologies are used in a sector. Thus, even sectors that are seen as
"advanced" in developed countries can behave as backward sectors when they
operate in LDCs, and hence fail to generate any externalities. This captures
the idea that what matters for productivity is not "what you produce, but
how" (Porter, 1998, De Ferranti et. al., 2001). In these circumstances, a
16

The condition for specialization in good 1 to be an equilibrium is
2S = 1S

2S = 1S
2N = 1N

<

2
1

,

which is clearly satis…ed given 2N = 1N < 1 together with 1 < 1 . On the other hand,
specialization in good 2 implies that w= 2 2S = p2 . This is an equilibrium if w= 1 1S > p1 ,
or 2S
> 2N
, which cannot be satis…ed if South has CA in good 1.
1S
1N
2

18

sector can expand and still fail to experience an increase in productivity.17
Protection or export subsidies would fail to be welfare-enhancing, and other
policies would be called for.18
The existence of coordination failures implies that collective action at the
sector level may lead to productivity gains. A concrete example of collective action is the eradication of foot and mouth disease in Uruguay’s cattle
industry, which generated signi…cant bene…ts by allowing the industry to export beef to the United States (see Hausmann, Rodríguez-Clare and Rodrik,
2005). Simply providing a production or export subsidy to the cattle industry would not have led to more exports. A speci…c policy to deal with the
coordination failure associated with strong externalities was introduced. Another example is the case of ‡ower exports from Ecuador (Hernández et. al.
2007). Several attempts to export ‡owers in the 1960s and 70s failed in part
because of the lack of reliable air transport to the main destinations. A key
di¤erence in the 1980s was an e¤ort by the association of ‡ower exporters,
EXPOFLORES, to convince the government and the national airline to set
up the required number of cargo ‡ights for this activity. Thanks in part to
this e¤ort, the value of ‡ower exports boomed from less than half a million
dollars in 1984 to more than $400 million in 2006.19
2.3.1

A simple model

We now want to explore a model where policy can induce higher productivity
in a sector through some kind of industry-level collective action, and where
prices are determined in a collection of economies (not only in "the North"),
so that there may be rents. The goal is not to model the speci…cs of collective
17
This may explain the existence of cases of geographic concentration of sectors that
failed to experience signi…cant agglomeration economies(e.g., concentrations of footwear
and textile producers). Perhaps these are cases of clusters that failed to achieve Marshallian externalities (see Altenburg and Meyer-Stamer, 1999).
18
An appropriate policy could be to subsidize production but only to the extent that it
is done using modern technologies.
19
Another example, also from Ecuador, concerns the development of new exports of
broccoli and mangoes, where …nding the best seeds and meeting international phytosanitary standards presented producers with signi…cant coordination problems. As stated by
Hernández et. al. (2007), collective action fostered and implemented by several private,
public and mixed agencies was important in dealing with such problems and in facilitating
the development of these new sectors. Similar cases are documented for Chile in Agosín
and Bravo-Ortega (2007) and for several countries in Chandra and Kolavalli (2006).

19

action, but rather to examine the conditions under which this may increase
a country’s income level.
There are N countries, indexed by j. Labor is the only factor of production, and is available in total quantity Lj in country j. There are M
industries indexed by m. There are opportunities for collective action in
each industry. Collective action increases productivity in industry m by the
factor xm ; otherwise, productivity is one in all industries in all countries. We
refer to xm as the level of complexity in industry m, since it seems reasonable to expect that more complex industries will bene…t more from collective
action. A country that has achieved high productivity in industry m thanks
to collective action will be said to have HP (for high productivity) in that
industry. Let kjm be the indicator
function for whether country j has HP in
P
industry m , and assume
Lj = 1 soP
that Lj is also the share of worldwide
labor living in country j. Then sm
j kjm Lj is the share of labor in countries with HP in industry m. Also, country j 0 s productivity in industry m
can be written as x^jm (1 kjm ) + kjm xm . P
Preferences are Cobb-Douglas,
with a share vm devoted to industry m, and
vm = 1. Thus, we can think
of vm equivalently as the "size" of industry m, or the extent of the world’s
demand for its output.
The model described thus far is a Ricardian model with N countries and
M industries, where productivity can be either low or high in each industry.
The equilibrium is easy to describe: it consists of a set of wages, wj , prices,
pm , and an allocation, Ljm , for j = 1; :::; N and m = 1; :::; M such that for
all j and m the following conditions
pm and if Ljm > 0 then
Phold: wj x^jmP
wj = x^jm pm (zero pro…ts), and pm j x^jm Ljm = vm j wj Lj (i.e., the value
of sales of m equals total expenditures on m) for all m.
It is useful to describe an equilibrium without rents. Choosing labor as
the numeraire, this entails wj = 1 for all j and pm = 1 if sm = 0 and
pm = 1=xm if sm > 0; it requires that for each industry either no country
has HP or there are enough countries (adjusting for their size) with HP that
the large supply drives the price to its marginal cost with unitary wages.20
Note that in this case a country that does not achieve HP in any industry
would still enjoy the same wage as other countries. We can think of this as
a case in which Factor Price Equalization (FPE) holds.
20

Formally, if sm > vm for all m then there is an equilibrium with wj = w for all j. To
see this, simply assume that wj = 1P
all j, and pm = 1=xm , P
and Ljm > 0 only if kjm = 1.
We only need to check that (1=xm ) j xm Ljm = vm with j Ljm = vm holds for all m.
One can choose Ljm in such a way that this holds as long as sm vm all m.

20

Rents arise when sm is small relative to vm . For example, imagine an
equilibrium where sm = 0 for all m 6= 1, and only country 1 has HP in
industry 1. Then wj = 1 for j = 2; :::; N while w1 > 1 if and only if v1 > s1 :
there are rents in industry 1 (i.e., the price of industry 1 is higher than the
marginal cost at unitary wages, p1 > 1=x1 ).21
Industries di¤er with respect to three variables: complexity (measured by
xm ), size (measured by vm ), and the share of people in the world that live
in countries that have HP (measured by sm ). We will refer to the later as
"prevalence," since it measures the extent to which HP is widespread across
the world in an industry. The previous result suggests that industries will
have rents if they are large relative to their prevalence. Apart from this
result, one can learn more from this model only by considering special cases.
Instead of doing this, we introduce some additional assumptions to "smooth
out" the kinks in the Ricardian model and obtain more general results.
Assume that each industry is composed of a continuum of goods with
varying productivity levels. Preferences remain Cobb-Douglas, but now with
equal shares across all goods. Thus, assuming that industry m has a measure
P
vm of goods, then (as above) expenditures on industry m are vm with vm =
1. (Note that it is natural to think of vm as the "size" of industry m because
it measures both the share of total expenditures devoted to this industry
and the measure of goods belonging to that industry.) More importantly,
we assume that productivity di¤ers across goods within an industry as in
Eaton and Kortum (2002). Speci…cally, productivity for any particular good
in sector m in country j is x^jm z, where x^jm is as above and z is an additional
productivity that is independently drawn from the Fréchet distribution with
parameters Tj and , i.e. Prj (z
Z) = exp[ Tj z ].22 This distribution
has sound microeconomic foundations (see Eaton and Kortum, 2001), but
understanding those foundations or its several convenient properties is not
important for our purposes here; it is su¢ cient to know that a higher Tj
21

The equilibrium could have goods in industry 1 produced by both country 1 and
other countries, in which case it is obvious that w1 > 1. Otherwise, if country 1 is
the only country with positive production in industry 1, then the equilibrium condition
p1 L1 x1 = v1 (1 L1 + w1 L1 ) together with p1 x1 = w1 and s1 = L1 imply that w1 =
v1 (1 s1 )=s1 (1 v1 ), hence v1 > s1 implies w1 > 1. If s1 = L1 > v1 then w1 > 1 cannot
be sustained, because country 1 cannot specialize completely in the good in which it has
a superior productivity.
22
To simplify the discussion, we assume that Tj = Lj for all j. Otherwise, countries
with a higher ratio Tj =Lj would tend to have higher wages for reasons that don’t relate
to IP (although see next subsection).

21

implies better productivity draws for country j (on average).
Since each good is in…nitesimally small and there are no transportation
costs, then each good will be supplied to the whole world by the country
with the lowest cost. If we consider a particular good in industry m with
productivity draws (z1m ; z2m ; :::; zN m ) in countries (1; 2; :::; N ) then this good
will be supplied by country j = arg minl fwl =^
xlm zlm g. Eaton and Kortum
(2002) show that a country with wage wj and productivity parameter x^jm
will capture a share
(wj =^
xjm ) Tj
Djm = P
xlm ) Tl
l (wl =^

(9)

of total sales in industry m. A country with a lower Tj , a higher wj , or a
lower x^jm will capture a smaller market share in industry m. Contrary to the
standard Ricardian model, however, a country will have positive production
in all industries because it will always have a few goods within
P any industry
where its productivity draws are very high. Letting Y = P wj Lj denote
worldwide income, then the trade balance conditions are
m Djm vm Y =
wj Lj (value of sales equal value of purchases for country j). These conditions
determine the equilibrium wages w1 ; :::; wN .
How is the wage in a country a¤ected by acquiring HP in an industry?
If a country had a choice, in which industry would achieving collective action have the greatest impact on wages?23 These are key questions for IP.
Note that we have assumed that there are no deep sources of comparative
advantage, so this would not be an issue in this choice. Then it seems reasonable that countries would be able to increase wages more by focusing their
e¤orts in industries that have higher complexity, are larger (or have higher
demand), and have a lower prevalence: higher complexity means that there
is more to gain from collective action, while larger demand combined with
low prevalence implies higher rents. Under some conditions, one can in fact
prove this result. In particular, assume that countries 1 and 2 are identical
except that they have HP in industries 1 and 2, respectively, with no HP in
the rest of industries (i.e., country 1 has HP only in industry 1 and country
2 has HP only in industry 2). Then one can show that if x^j1 = x^j2 for all
j = 3; :::; N then the wage in country 1 is higher than in country 2 if x1 > x2
23

If the costs of collective action di¤er across industries, then this clearly would have to
be taken into account in this choice. To simplify the analysis, we assume that the cost of
achieving collective action is included in the xm .

22

or if v1 > v2 . Also, assuming that x1 = x2 and v1 = v2 , then w1 > w2 if
s1 < s2 (see Appendix).24
We have assumed thus far that there are no di¤erences in industry-level
productivity across countries. If this were not the case, then it is clear that
a country may want to go against its latent comparative advantage and
specialize in goods with combinations of high complexity, high demand and
low prevalence. Thus, this model may be suitable to think about IP, although
it is important to note that trade protection is not an e¤ective policy in this
framework.
2.3.2

Relation of the model to some recent contributions

We now show how to place some recent arguments for IP in the context
of this simple analytical framework. Hausmann, Hwang and Rodrik (2006)
argue that the varied economic performance of di¤erent countries is partly
explained by the goods that they produce. Other things equal (including
physical and human capital stocks), countries that specialize in what they
call "rich country goods" are richer. Their explanation is that such goods
provide more opportunities for learning by doing (similar to Young, 1991)
and for technological and institutional upgrading that ultimately bene…ts the
whole economy.
The model presented here can capture this notion in a slightly di¤erent
way. In this model we may talk about "rich country industries" as ones
that are more complex, have higher worldwide demand, or exhibit lower
prevalence. Countries that achieve HP in these industries would be able to
sustain higher income levels, and getting there would entail higher growth
rates.
Hausmann and Klinger (2006) argue that goods are connected, so that
productivity in one good would be higher if the country has already achieved
HP in a related good. This has similar implications as inter-industry externalities (think of "industries" as "goods"). For example, coming back to the
role of specialized inputs, if such inputs exist for one good, this would also
24

One could imagine a situation in which countries understand this model and implement
IP to maximize their income. If collective action had no cost, then obviously all countries
would simply achieve HP in all industries. But imagine that collective action is costly. In
the resulting equilibrium sectors with higher complexity and/or larger demand would be
matched by high prevalence in such a way that the return to collective action would be
the same in all sectors.

23

help in the production of a similar or related good. Hausmann and Klinger
show that some goods are connected to many other goods, while other goods
are relatively isolated. They think of the space of goods as a forest, with
each good being represented by a tree, and talk about how this forest is
more dense in some areas. Hausmann and Klinger (2006) and Hausmann
and Rodrik (2006) suggest that if a country could choose, it would want to
locate in the denser parts of the forest.
The idea that there are regions in the forest that are more dense is captured in the model above by having industries di¤er in their size or worldwide
demand. The suggestion that countries in dense part of the forests are better
o¤ corresponds to the result above that countries are better o¤ if they manage to achieve HP in an industry with a high measure of goods, vm , since
this corresponds to high demand. But the model reveals a weakness of this
notion: industries with high demand would not be attractive if they also
have high prevalence. Returning to the forest metaphor, being in a dense
part of the forest would not be better if this is also more crowded. For example, although the electronics industry may be a "highly connected area"
of the forest, there may also be many countries (and large ones, e.g. China)
participating in this area. In principle, it could be better for a country to
remain in an isolated but relatively uncongested part of the forest.
The measure of the "income level" of an industry developed by Hausmann, Hwang and Rodrik (2006) takes this into account: an industry with
high prevalence would exhibit low prices and would thus be classi…ed as one
with a lower income level. Thus, in principle, this measure may be seen
as a reasonable way to guide countries in choosing industries that are ideal
for productivity-enhancing collective action. Unfortunately, however, this
may be a noisy measure of the relevant notion needed for IP because it may
be capturing capital (physical, human, or knowledge capital) intensity, which
leads countries with good conditions for capital accumulation to produce and
export these goods. In other words, if there is an exogenous variation in conditions for capital accumulation across countries, and if goods di¤er in their
capital intensity, then rich countries will tend to produce and export capital intensive goods, and this will have nothing to do with industry-speci…c
collective action and IP. The same association between rich countries and
certain sectors may arise because of an exogenous variation in the quality
of institutions. For example, if rich countries have institutions that are conducive to capital market development, then they would tend to specialize in
goods that rely heavily on outside capital (Manova, 2006). If one could some24

how adjust Hausmann, Hwang and Rodrik’s measure to isolate the income
correlation of goods that is not explained by capital intensity or exogenous
variation in institutions, then this could be a useful measure for IP. In particular, countries could consider inducing collective action in sectors with a
high "adjusted income level."

2.4

Self-discovery and diversi…cation

The notion of IP that we have emphasized so far is that there are "special
industries," and that countries can increase welfare by reallocating resources
to those industries. An alternative idea that we now explore is to think of a
policy to increase diversi…cation. This has been a particular concern in countries that specialize in natural-resource intensive industries (see De Ferranti,
2001, and CAF, 2007, for recent treatments focusing on Latin America). Diversi…cation could be desirable as a way to reduce volatility, or as a way to
increase productivity. Here we focus on the later.
To think about the connection between diversi…cation and productivity,
consider the Eaton and Kortum (2002) model of trade. As explained above,
Eaton and Kortum model productivities as being drawn from a distribution
that is common across countries except for a technology parameter T . This
technology parameter determines the location of the productivity distribution: countries with a higher T have "better" distributions in the sense that,
on average, productivity draws will be higher (formally, this entails …rstorder stochastic dominance). Apart from T , countries also di¤er in size, L.
Assuming away trading costs for simplicity, wages are determined by the ratio of technology to size, T =L. A high T =L means that the country would
have many sectors in which it has absolute advantage relative to its size,
leading to a high equilibrium wage. Moreover, given L, a higher T implies
the production (and export) of more goods, or more diversi…cation.
Of course, higher productivity and higher wages may not go together with
diversi…cation. For example, high productivity in a sector that is not "diversi…ed" or "di¤erentiated" would draw resources away from the diversi…ed
sector and reduce overall diversi…cation even as it increases overall productivity and wages. It is also important to recall that the data reveals that
after a certain level of development, higher income goes together with less,
not more diversi…cation (see Imbs and Wacziarg, 2003).
An interesting way to think about diversi…cation is via what Hausmann
and Rodrik (2003) call "self-discovery." They argue that countries don’t re25

ally know their cost structure, and hence they don’t know the goods in which
they have comparative advantage. This must be discovered through costly
experimentation, which is plagued by information spillovers that render its
private bene…ts low relative to its social bene…ts. The following model shows
a simple way to capture the connection between diversi…cation and productivity, and then between self-discovery and diversi…cation.
Consider an economy with labor as the only factor of production and two
sectors: agriculture and manufactures. Agriculture is a homogenous good,
produced with decreasing marginal returns to labor, with QA = F (LA ).
There are a continuum of manufacturing goods indexed with j 2 [0; 1] that
are produced from an input H = "L (" converts raw labor units L into
e¢ ciency units H) with productivities as in Eaton and Kortum (2002): one
unit of H produces z units of manufactures, with z for each good j 2 [0; 1]
drawn from the Fréchet distribution with parameters T and , as above.
Assuming no transportation costs for either agriculture or manufacturing,
and letting agriculture serve as numeraire, then the wage is w = F 0 (LA ).
The cost of producing a manufacturing good with productivity draw z is
w="z, and, analogous to the expression in (9), the share of manufactures
that will be exported by a country with wage w, labor e¢ ciency ", and
technology parameter T , is
(w=") T
P
(wl ="l ) Tl

Consider now two countries that di¤er only in , " or T . The country with
higher will exhibit a higher wage, but will also devote more resources to
agriculture and less to manufacturing, with a smaller share of manufacturing
goods exported and a lower level of diversi…cation (i.e., the number of goods
exported is lower). This is a case of "good concentration." On the other hand,
a country with a lower " or a lower T would also have a higher share of labor
in agriculture, with higher concentration, but in this case the equilibrium
wage would be lower. This is a case of "bad concentration."
Now let us think about the determinants of T . In a dynamic setting, T
can be seen as the stock of ideas (see Eaton and Kortum, 2001). Imagine
that there is a worldwide stock of ideas, T , that grows at rate n. Discovery can be seen as the process by which a country adopts these worldwide
ideas to the national environment. This is not exactly as in Hausmann and
Rodrik (2003), where productivity is determined ex-ante, and experimentation simply reveals what that productivity is. But the basic implications are
26

the same. If x is the rate of discovery, then T_ = xT , and in steady state
T =T = x=n. Thus, a higher rate of discovery leads to diversi…cation and a
higher equilibrium wage.25
The rate of discovery depends on its cost and associated private returns.
If there are knowledge spillovers, as in Hausmann and Rodrik (2003), so that
once an entrepreneur adopts a foreign idea then it di¤uses rapidly to others
in the economy, then the market by itself would lead to a suboptimal level
of discovery and a level of diversi…cation that would be too low. Polices to
encourage discovery would lead to more diversi…cation and higher welfare.

2.5

National and Global Gains from IP

The gains from IP for a country could come at the expense of other countries,
or they could lead to global e¢ ciency gains. We now explore the nature of
the gains from IP for the di¤erent models discussed above.
Consider …rst the case in which the existence of Marshallian externalities
leads to multiple equilibria. Above we considered a small country, but to
explore whether gains are national or international we have to allow for the
possibility that a country’s IP hurts other countries. Consider a model with
two countries (A and B) and two goods (1 and 2). As above, good 2 exhibits
Marshallian externalities. In this context, IP entails a shift from an equilibrium in which countries are not specialized according to their comparative
advantage to one in which they are. Clearly such a shift increases worldwide
e¢ ciency. What happens to welfare in each of the two countries? First note
that the country that implements IP (country A) experiences an increase in
productivity in industry 2. If the terms of trade didn’t change, country A
would be better o¤ (as in Subsection 2.1.2). But if A is not small, then the
relative price of good 2 will fall, and this will erode some of A’s productivity
gains. Even if A was so large that the terms of trade were now equal to its
domestic prices, however, it would still gain, so country A necessarily gains
from IP.26 This is a simple application of Helpman and Krugman’s (1984)
25

This is not consistent with what happens for rich countries, where higher productivity
goes together with falling diversi…cation. One way to think about this is that at some point
a third sector emerges, a high-tech sector, which is a simple CRS sector where research
implies increasing productivity. When T and productivity in high-tech is su¢ ciently high,
the agriculture sector disappears, and increasing productivity in high tech leads now to
falling exports of manufactures and increasing concentration.
26
A key ingredient in generating this result is that country A0 s opportunity cost of good

27

proposition that a country necessarily gains from a move to an equilibrium
in which it allocates more resources to a sector with positive externalities.
For the other country (country B) welfare can decrease. To see this, note
that for this country the e¤ect of IP is exactly the same as the e¤ect of an
increase in productivity in industry 2 in country A. This could be either
positive or negative for country B. For example, if the opportunity cost of
good 2 in country A is just barely lower than the opportunity cost of good 2
in country B when both countries fully exploit the Marshallian externalities,
then it is clear that country B loses from the IP implemented in country A.
Di¤erent results arise when IP is geared towards the appropriation of
rents or broad (inter-industry) externalities associated with certain goods, as
in the literature on strategic trade policy (see Brander, 1995). In this case,
the use of IP by di¤erent countries entails essentially a zero-sum game, or
worse, as it could lead to an allocation of resources in which countries are
not specialized according to comparative advantage.
Consider next the model where IP entails industry-speci…c collective action. If collective action is costless, then the answer is very simple: IP
necessarily increases global welfare, although it may hurt another country by
worsening its terms of trade. Things become more interesting when collective
action entails costs. If countries bargain e¢ ciently among themselves regarding trade barriers, then (by de…nition) only IP that increases global welfare
will be implemented. One could optimistically argue that global negotiations
that include trade and other policies actually take into account the ability
of countries to implement IP, and that the resulting agreements allow only
policies that increase global welfare. In this case, countries that can follow
IP that increases their own welfare but lowers global welfare would be paid
(perhaps though better trade access to other countries) not to do it, and
countries that can implement IP that lowers national welfare but increases
global welfare would be paid to do it. In fact, this is the way that trade
agreements work in Bagwell and Staiger’s (1998) model of GATT.
Bagwell and Staiger show that as long as countries choose their policies
while disregarding their e¤ects on international prices, then they will lead
to a globally e¢ cient outcome. If international agreements are not e¢ cient
in this sense, however, then countries would evaluate the impact of IP on
welfare while taking into account its e¤ect on international prices. Clearly,
this could lead to a decline in global welfare. For example, imagine that
2 falls below that of country B, a result of A0 s latent comparative advantage in good 2.

28

countries have committed to free trade. If IP for some good X implies a
reduction in the supply of some other good Y then the price of this good
would increase. If IP just barely makes the Home country implementing it
better o¤, then for the world as a whole (which necessarily sees a decline
in TOT) this entails a loss. Note, however, that this is a general feature of
domestic policies implemented by countries that a¤ect international prices,
and not something particular to IP.
Finally, we turn to the model where IP aims at promoting diversi…cation.
As in the cases discussed above, the problem for global welfare may arise from
the in‡uence of IP on international prices. Imagine that the cost of a policy
to encourage "self-discovery" just barely justi…es the associated bene…ts. If
such bene…ts include an improvement in a country’s terms of trade (which
would arise from the decline in the supply of the non-diversi…ed good), then
the global e¢ ciency would decline. Again, global e¢ ciency would necessarily
increase from IP only if countries evaluate it while disregarding its impact
on international prices.

3

Empirical Evidence on Infant-Industry Protection and other forms of IP

Since the best known form of IP is infant-industry protection, we devote most
of this section to a critical review of the empirical literature on this type of
IP. As discussed in Section 2, the theoretical justi…cation for infant-industry
protection relies on the existence of Marshallian externalities. There is
extensive evidence that these externalities exist and are signi…cant (Rosenthal
and Strange (2004)). When such externalities exist, temporary protection
may help the country switch towards a better equilibrium, and this may be
welfare improving if the short-run costs are not too high. Protection may
also be welfare enhancing if the protected industry generates positive (interindustry) externalities to the rest of the economy.27
As we outlined in Section 2, such a policy would be welfare enhancing
only if it passes both the Mill and Bastable tests. Recall that the Mill
test requires that the protected sector can eventually survive international
competition without protection, whereas the Bastable test requires that the
27
It is important to note that this is not infant-industry protection, however, since the
protected industry is not presumed to become competitive at some future period.

29

discounted future bene…ts compensate the present costs of protection. We
emphasize in our review that very few studies of IP have examined whether
industries pass either the Mill or the Bastable test. Consequently, even if we
could show that protected sectors grow faster, this is not su¢ cient evidence
to claim that IP is welfare-improving.
Even if the conditions necessary for protection to increase welfare are satis…ed, protection is not the most e¢ cient policy. The theory of targeting (see
Bhagwati and Ramaswami (1963)) suggests that a government’s objectives
can be met more e¢ ciently using instruments other than tari¤s, and that
when these instruments target the distortion at the source, a tari¤ of zero
maximizes welfare for a small economy. Unless there are speci…c distortions
or externalities associated with trade, the most e¢ cient policy instrument to
conduct industrial policy is not likely to be tari¤s. In a recent review on the
…scal implications of trade reform, Pelzman and Shoham (2006) point out
that "in the theoretical public …nance literature it is well established that
an optimal policy for a small open economy is to reduce tari¤s to zero and
raise consumption taxes (see Dixit (1985) and Diamond-Mirrlees (1971)),
thus maintaining production e¢ ciency" (p. 9).
In practice, however, there are several reasons why countries have continued to use tari¤s to promote domestic industry. The most direct policy
instruments are frequently not available in countries with limited abilities to
collect income, consumption, or production taxes. Anderson (1996) shows
that in a budget constrained economy, where it is di¢ cult to compensate tari¤ cuts with increases in consumption or other taxes, tari¤ reductions lead
to a curtailment of government spending and a resulting under-provision of
public goods, which lowers welfare. Irwin (2007) compares the deadweight
losses per dollar of revenue raised by tari¤s with other forms of taxation in
the United States. He argues that although the deadweight losses (per dollar)
for tari¤s were high in the 19th century, "import duties were probably much
easier to collect and enforce... than other modes of taxation" (p. 19). Irwin
(2002) draws similar conclusions for Argentina and Canada at that time. For
the same reasons, it could be argued that in some developing countries trade
protection could be an e¤ective tool to implement IP. An important implication is that if …scal considerations are the reason to use trade protection
rather than production subsidies, then clearly tari¤s would be the e¢ cient
policy and not quantitative restrictions.
In the rest of this section we review the empirical research on the effectiveness of infant-industry protection. We begin by discussing case stud30

ies where protection was clearly motivated by infant-industry considerations
and then move on to other approaches that exploit the cross-industry and
cross-country variation in trade barriers to see whether protection had the
consequences predicted by infant-industry models.

3.1

Single-Industry Studies

There are very few detailed evaluations of infant-industry protection. Some
important papers that explicitly take into account learning e¤ects include
Baldwin and Krugman (1986, 1988), Head (1994), Luzio and Greenstein
(1995), Hansen, Jensen, and Madsen (2003), and Irwin (2008). Baldwin and
Krugman (1986) study protection to the semi-conductor industry in Japan.
They use a simulation model to show that the Japanese semi-conductor industry in Japan could not have emerged as a global player without the protected domestic market. Protection was needed in order to achieve the kinds
of economies of scale and learning e¤ects that would allow the industry to
move down its marginal cost curve and be competitive on world markets.
However, Baldwin and Krugman (1986) also …nd that the costs to Japanese
consumers outweighed the bene…ts, leading to net welfare losses for both
Japan and the US. Thus, although the semi-conductor sector in Japan satis…ed the Mill test, it did not satisfy the Bastable test.
Baldwin and Krugman (1988) estimate the impact on US and European
welfare of Airbus’s entry into the imperfectly competitive aircraft model.
They show that subsidies to Airbus may have resulted in net welfare gains
for Europe, primarily due to the high degree of imperfect competition (and
monopoly rents) that characterized the industry. However, their simulation
also makes clear that these results depend heavily on the assumed parameters, including the elasticity of demand. In any case, it is possible to evaluate
that sector in such a way that the European subsidy to Airbus passes both
the Mill and the Bastable test.
Head (1994) studies the e¤ect of tari¤ protection on the emergence of the
steel rail industry in the United States. This case …ts the infant-industry
protection view almost perfectly: the local industry was initially uncompetitive (1860s), but a few decades after the imposition of an import tari¤ the
United States was the world leader in this market and the duty was repealed.
Head concludes that "the domestic industry did ‘grow up’and the duty was
eventually removed. Hence, protection certainly did not cause stagnation
and gross ine¢ ciencies. Furthermore, the duty led to long-run reductions in
31

domestic prices. While the savings to railroad builders were too small and
came too late to yield a net gain to consumers, the overall e¤ect on welfare
appears to have been positive" (p. 163).
Hansen, Jensen and Madsen (2003) examine the e¤ect of production subsidies in Denmark for the production of electricity from wind power. They
conclude that the subsidies elicited strong learning-by-doing in the industry,
which achieved a dominant position in the world market. Moreover, according to their calculations, the direct and indirect (environmental) bene…ts
outweighed the overall costs of the policy.
Irwin (2008) evaluates the e¤ects of protection in the tinplate industry in
the United States. The industry ‡ourished after receiving tari¤ protection
in 1890. Whereas there were no US producers at all prior to the imposition
of the tari¤, after the imposition of the tari¤ (at rates exceeding 70 percent)
the industry became entirely self-su¢ cient. According to his counterfactual
simulations, the tari¤ accelerated the industry’s development by about ten
years, which would have developed anyway due to falling costs of iron ore.
However, the costs to consumer surplus were so large that welfare declined
as a consequence of protection. Irwin concludes that a lower tari¤ of around
50 percent could have improved welfare, but that the actual tari¤ imposed
exceeded the optimal level and actually decreased welfare.
All the previous studies are for cases of protection or subsidies in developed countries. One single-industry study of infant-industry protection in a
developing country is that of Luzio and Greenstein (1995), who study the
e¤ects of protection of the microcomputer industry in the 1980s in Brazil.
They show that although there was rapid productivity growth in the protected industry, it never caught up with the also rapidly growing technological frontier. As a result, welfare declined by a signi…cant amount (around
20 per cent of domestic spending on microcomputers) and the policy was
abandoned in the early 1990s.
More studies like these analyzing the welfare implications of infant industry protection would be very useful. Yet even this brief review makes
it clear that protection may lead to higher growth but result in net welfare
losses. For tinplate, steel rail, wind power, semi-conductors and aircraft,
protection allowed domestic producers to grow and eventually become world
class producers. Yet for tinplate, semiconductors, microcomputers, and possibly aircraft, protection led to net welfare losses. These case studies suggest
that designing policies that increase overall welfare is very di¢ cult.

32

3.2

Cross-Industry Studies

The theoretical framework makes a number of predictions for cross-country
empirical studies. If the conditions necessary for infant-industry protection
to improve welfare are satis…ed (see Section 2) are satis…ed, then protected
sectors should experience faster productivity growth than non-protected sectors. With time, protected sectors should increase their importance in the
economy, and eventually become exporters. Under these conditions, one
would expect to …nd a positive correlation between trade protection and
productivity growth.
One of the …rst studies to look for a correlation between trade protection
and productivity growth is Krueger and Tuncer (1982). Using cross-industry
data on protection and productivity growth for Turkey in the period 1963
- 1976, these authors conclude that the empirical evidence does not provide
support for the infant industry argument. However, Harrison (1994) uses
their data to show that more protected sectors did in fact exhibit higher productivity growth. As pointed out by Harrison, "Krueger and Tuncer (1982)
applied no statistical tests to support their conclusion...If one runs simple
correlations..one obtains striking results: Krueger and Tuncer’s data show
a statistically signi…cant positive relationship between increased protection
and higher productivity growth. In contrast to their stated conclusions, it
is possible to show that, in Turkey, protected industries did in fact achieve
greater productivity gains during the sample period."
While Krueger and Tuncer’s results appear to show some support for
infant industry protection, most studies …nd little support. Cross-industry
studies usually show that the removal of protection generates both intra…rm and intra-industry productivity gains (possibly through market share
reallocations, just as in Melitz, 2003). This includes work by Pavcnik (2002),
Tybout and Westbrook (1995) for Mexico, Harrison (1994) for Cote d’Ivoire,
Nishimizu and Page (1982) for Yugoslavia, Kim (2000) for South Korea,
Topalova (2004) for India, Muendler (2003) for Brazil, Beason and Weinstein
(1996) for Japan, and others.
Rodrik (2007) has criticized the use of cross-industry studies to test for the
success of IP on the grounds that if IP is designed to deal with market failures
that impede sector growth, then one should not be surprised to …nd a negative
correlation between protection and growth. He assumes that gi = (1
i )A,
where gi is the growth rate of industry i, i is an index of market failures,
and A is a parameter that captures productivity growth that is common
33

across industries. In this framework, industries with stronger market failures
would exhibit slower productivity growth. If there are political or …scal
costs associated with the promotion of an industry then in equilibrium one
would …nd industries with a higher i exhibiting stronger promotion and lower
growth. Rodrik’s point is that lower growth could be perfectly consistent with
a successful IP, just as it is consistent with a politically motivated policy of
promoting sunset sectors. Rodrik’s argument may be correct for certain
types of IP, but not for IP associated with the infant industry argument (as
de…ned in Section 2), since this would generate a positive correlation between
protection and productivity growth. Even if Rodrik were correct in the short
run, we would expect that in the longer term successful examples of infant
industry protection would lead eventually lead to growth.
In any case, there is a more fundamental problem with existing tests of
infant industry protection. There is no evidence to suggest that intervention
for IP reasons in trade even exists. If intervention were motivated by IP
reasons, we would expect the pattern of protection to be skewed towards
activities where positive externalities or market failures are largest. Instead,
existing evidence suggests that protection is motivated by optimal tari¤ considerations (Broda, Limao, and Weinstein, 2006), for revenue generation, or
to protect special interests (Goldberg and Maggi, 1999, Gawande, Krishna
and Olarreaga, 2005). Tari¤ protection is frequently granted to less successful …rms or declining industries. Beason and Weinstein (1996) study the
pattern of industrial targeting in Japan and speci…cally ask whether the government targeted industries with increasing returns or emerging sectors such
as electrical machinery. They …nd the opposite result: protection and other
forms of targeting such as capital subsidies were highest for declining industries and industries without increasing returns. Most tari¤ protection was
heavily concentrated in processed food and textiles, while most subsidized
loans and tax relief went into mining. Beason and Weinstein conclude that
"industrial policy considerations were dominated by the desire to aid declining sectors or protect the interests of large unproductive industries". Lee
(1996) reaches similar conclusions for South Korea.
Harrison and Hanson (1999) …nd that in Mexico in the 1980s the pattern
of trade protection was skewed towards food processing and garments, presumably for political economy reasons since these were sectors where Mexico
already had a comparative advantage. More recently, Mobarak and Purbasari (2006) use a database on …rms granted import licenses for raw materials and commodities in Indonesia to show that politically connected …rms
34

are more likely to be granted protection. However, …rms that export are
signi…cantly less likely to be granted support. This suggests that …rms most
likely to succeed on world markets in Indonesia were in fact penalized by
restricting their access to import licenses.
There are a number of other areas where additional research is needed.
To properly test the type of model presented in Section 2, we would expect
initial output and productivity gains from the imposition of tari¤s; later
removal of these tari¤s would generate no e¤ects. We are not aware of
any studies that test for these asymmetric e¤ects of imposing protection
and later removing tari¤s through trade reform. Nor do existing empirical
studies address the many other reasons why infant industry protection may
not work. Domestic demand in LDCs may lack the level of sophistication that
would induce …rms to meet the quality standards necessary for penetrating
richer markets (Porter, 1990). Porter also argues that weak competition
in small protected markets may not provide the incentives that …rms need
to upgrade their technologies and increase their e¢ ciency. Small markets
may also fail to reach a critical mass where Marshallian externalities are
fully exploited. Moreover, as mentioned above, industries that use simple
production methods may expand without the generation of any externalities,
even if those same industries do exhibit strong Marshallian externalities in
rich countries (Baldwin, 1969, Rodríguez-Clare, 2007). Firms may believe
that protection will fail to create a cluster, and so they may decide not
adopt the production methods that lead to externalities but are pro…table
only within a cluster. In other cases protection may actually favor the use
of backward technologies that do not contribute to the generation of higher
industry-level productivity (Sauré, 2007).
The realization of Marshallian externalities is a much more complex process
than what the model in Section 2 suggests. As argued by Rosenthal and
Strange (2005), "there are many di¤erent aspects of a location that may
matter to …rms. A well-intentioned policy could easily fail because it failed
to attend to one or two of these... it may not be possible to duplicate elsewhere the circumstances that led to a successful agglomeration in another
place... This is not to say that government policy has never contributed to
the formation of clusters. It certainly has, but the formation of clusters has
been a side-e¤ect rather than the primary goal of the policy..." (p. 19). In
other words, the econometric evidence regarding Marshallian externalities
may in fact be telling us that agglomeration may be necessary but not suf…cient for increased productivity. If a certain factor, policy or institution
35

is necessary for geographic concentration of an industry to lead to higher
productivity, then we may observe Marshallian externalities taking place in
advanced countries, but not in LDCs. To put it crudely, subsidizing the
software sector may not generate a Silicon Valley in a developing country.

3.3

Cross-Country Studies

There are a number of cross-country studies evaluating the success of IP.
These can be grouped into (1) testing for an association between protection
and country performance and (2) qualitative case study evidence. A number
of recent studies emphasize the importance of the pattern of protection in
understanding possible linkages between IP and economic growth. These
include O’Rourke (2000), Clemens and Williams (2001), Chang (2002), Irwin
(2002), Lehmann and O’Rourke (2008),
O’Rourke (2000) and Clemens and Williamson (2001) both …nd a positive correlation between import tari¤s and economic growth across countries
during the late nineteenth century. These two studies hypothesize that
protection was associated with growth because it allowed countries to accelerate the growth of what were then "emerging" sectors (industry) out of
"declining sectors" (agriculture). These emerging sectors were characterized by learning e¤ects and the kinds of Marshallian externalities modelled
in Section 2. These new explanations for the observed positive relationship
between growth and protection at the turn of the twentieth century could
also be used to explain how …rst Britain, and then the United States, were
able to emerge as economic leaders in conjunction with tari¤s that were very
high in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Chang (2002) claimed that
protection was essential in the transformation of the United States into an
industrialized economy in the 19th century.
Others (for one such view,
see Sir Arthur Lewis, 1955) have argued that Latin America’s relatively high
growth rates during the 1960’s and early 1970’s in a time of high e¤ective
rates of protection was also no coincidence.
Irwin (2002) casts doubt on the meaning and robustness of such correlations, arguing that rather than a causal relationship from protection for IP
reasons to growth, the positive correlation comes from the fact that a few
fast growing countries (e.g. the United States, Canada, Argentina) imposed
high tari¤s as a means of raising …scal revenues. Lehmann and O’Rourke
(2008) are able to address this criticism by purging their results of tari¤s
imposed for revenue purposes.
36

As pointed out by Lehmann and O’Rourke (2008), what you protect
matters. If the pattern of protection is skewed towards increasing returns
sectors where there are important externalities, then IP would be much more
likely to work than if protection is given to declining sectors or sectors without externalities. In their book analyzing whether openness to trade is likely
to be associated with higher growth, Grossman and Helpman (1991) make
a similar point. Lehmann and O’Rourke examine the pattern of protection
and growth for a sample of developed countries during the period between
1875 and 1913. They …nd that while agricultural tari¤s were negatively correlated with growth, industrial tari¤s were positively correlated with growth.
Lehmann and O’Rourke also separately examine the relationship between
growth and what they refer to as "revenue tari¤s"–tari¤s imposed on goods
not produced at home and applied to raise revenue. They …nd no relationship between tari¤s imposed to raise revenue and economic growth. They do
not, however, estimate the impact of protection on productivity growth, nor
do they calculate the net welfare e¤ects of these policies.
Two other recent studies that emphasize that it is the pattern of protection which matters and not the average level of protection include Nunn and
Tre‡er (2004) and Estevadeordal and Taylor (2008). Nunn and Tre‡er (2004)
…nd that countries which protect skill-intensive sectors grow more rapidly
than countries which protect unskilled-labor-intensive industries. Estevadeordal and Taylor disaggregate tari¤s into consumption, capital goods, and
intermediate goods tari¤s. For the 1970s through the current decade, Estevadeordal and Taylor show that tari¤ protection a¤ects growth negatively
by more if tari¤s are on capital or intermediate goods than on consumption
goods. We continue and expand this discussion to include a more general
evaluation of the literature on trade and growth in Section 4.
Another approach relies on qualitative case study evidence to contrast
the apparent success of East Asia countries relative to Latin America and
elsewhere in the use of industrial policy. There is signi…cant debate over
whether the use of a range of industrial policy instruments, including infantindustry protection, helped or hurt development in East Asia. A common
view is that East Asian countries used export subsidies whereas Latin American countries used import tari¤s, and that this explains part of the di¤erence
in performance in these two regions. In fact, East Asian countries used both
import tari¤s and export subsidies, and this created a setting in which the incentives were neutral regarding import substitution versus exports, although
manufacturing as a whole enjoyed some net promotion (World Bank, 1993).
37

China’s policies over the last twenty …ve years could similarly be described
as using both import tari¤s and export subsidies.
South Korea and Taiwan had tremendous rates of physical and human
capital accumulation over the 60s, 70s and 80s, and this went together with
rapidly changing comparative advantage towards capital intensive goods. Of
course, the standard explanation of this experience is that capital accumulation caused by some exogenous factors led to a changing comparative advantage. But an alternative interpretation, consistent with the model presented
in Section 2.1.2, is that such a structural transformation was not inevitable
because of multiple equilibria. In particular, without protection or promotion
of the capital intensive sectors, countries would have remained specialized in
the sectors where they enjoyed a static comparative advantage; since these
sectors were not capital intensive, then capital accumulation would not have
taken place. Amsden (1989) and Wade (1990) have argued that IP was crucial for some East Asian countries to capitalize on their latent comparative
advantage in advanced manufacturing.
It is clear that East Asian countries indeed pursued several policies to
encourage particular sectors, such as production subsidies, subsidized credit,
…scal incentives, and trade protection. But what was the actual e¤ect of these
policies relative to what would have happened in their absence? Can IP be
credited with bringing about the successful industrialization experienced in
East Asia? One approach in the literature has been to check whether the
industries that received most support are the ones that have grown most
rapidly.28 As we discussed above, protection is typically motivated by political or terms of trade reasons rather than prospects for higher growth through
IP. In the late twentieth century, in contrast to the last century when industrial countries protected emerging industries, it appears that trade barriers
are often designed to protect "sunset" industries rather than to encourage
"sunrise" industries (see Noland and Pack, 2003).

3.4

Export subsidies and other forms of IP

We have focused our discussion of the empirical evidence regarding the effectiveness of IP on infant-industry protection. But clearly there are many
other forms of IP: countries could subsidize exports across the board or in
28

Beason and Weinstein (1996) perform this exercise for Japan while Lee (1996) does it
for Korea. See Noland and Pack (2003) for a comprehensive review of this literature.

38

particular industries, they could impose di¤erential taxes, as well as di¤erentiated production, credit and R&D subsidies. Since a comprehensive review
of all forms of IP is not possible, in the rest of this section we focus our
discussion on export subsidies.
Consider again the case in which some sectors exhibit Marshallian externalities. An overall export subsidy would simply preserve the allocation
associated with the current pattern of comparative advantage. If export subsidies are targeted to the sectors that exhibit Marshallian externalities, then
they could also be e¤ective in switching the economy to the equilibrium with
higher welfare. Again, production subsidies are less distortionary than export
subsidies but they impose stronger …scal demands. Thus, for governments
with great …scal needs or where taxation is very distortionary at the margin,
export subsidies could be a reasonable option, although import tari¤s would
be less costly.
In any case, the advantages of export subsidies relative to import tari¤s
in improving productivity are threefold: (1) that by promoting exports, a
country makes sure that …rms are subject to the "discipline of the international market," which forces …rms to become more productive; (2) that
by subsidizing only exporting …rms, a country e¤ectively limits the subsidy
to …rms with high productivity; and (3) that domestic markets may be too
small to allow the protected industry to reap the full bene…ts of Marshallian
externalities. All of these arguments are relevant but require some quali…cation. First, the discipline of the international market applies both to
…rms that export and to those that sell in domestic markets as long as there
are no quantitative restrictions. Second, there is in principle no reason to
subsidize highly productive …rms over low productivity …rms (see Demidova
and Rodríguez-Clare, 2007), unless there are barriers that prevent resources
from ‡owing from the latter to the former, in which case the most e¢ cient
policy would be to remove those barriers. Finally, if the economy is small
in relation to the industry size needed to fully exploit the Marshallian externalities, this is not going to be …xed by an export subsidy. A di¤erent
and more reasonable argument is that domestic demand is not su¢ ciently
sophisticated, hence …rms selling to domestic consumers will not develop the
necessary level of sophistication needed for success in international markets.
Export orientation for infant industries would avoid this problem.29
29

Although we have focused on trade policies, the use of local-content requirements
on foreign producers can also be justi…ed by appealing to Marshallian externalities. In

39

One could rede…ne the case for industrial policy as trying to change incentives to produce (or export) some goods and not others. What evidence is
there that what a country exports (or imports) matters? There are a number
of studies listed in Table 2 which suggest that the growth e¤ects of openness
hinge on the composition of trade. These include Dodaro (1991), Giles, Giles
and McCann (1992), Hansen (1994), Ghatak, Milner, and Utkulu (1997),
Pineres and Ferrantino (1997), Xu and Wang (1999), Choudhri and Hakura
(2000), Khalafalla and Webb (2001), and An and Iyigun (2004). With one
exception, all these studies …nd that exports are more likely to lead to growth
if they are in non-traditional sectors such as manufacturing or skill-intensive
goods rather than primary products or raw materials; studies also …nd that
greater export diversi…cation is more likely to be associated with growth.
Hausmann, Hwang and Rodrik (2005) develop a measure of the sophistication of a country’s exports based on the level of GDP per capita associated
with the export of di¤erent goods worldwide. Once they have attached a
level of GDP per capita to each detailed export category based on which
countries export the good, they can then derive the implied GDP level of a
country’s exports. Countries whose export baskets contain items typically
produced by higher income countries have a "high" level of export sophistication relative to what would be expected given their level of development. In
principle, one could construct a measure of the distance between the implied
income level of a country’s exports and the country’s actual level of GDP
per capita. In a related paper, Rodrik (2006) shows that China’s exports in
1992 were associated with an income level more than six times higher than
China’s per-capita GDP at that time. Rodrik suggests that the gap between
the implied level of income of China’s exports and China’s actual GDP per
capita is too large to have occurred naturally and is one outcome of China’s
activist industrial policy.
These studies suggesting that what a country exports is more important than how much the country exports for long run growth are suggestive
that IP has played an important role in country growth experiences, but are
not conclusive. No researchers have identi…ed an association between the
existence of Marshallian externalities in particular sectors, industrial promotion of those sectors, consequent changes in the commodity composition of
fact, such requirements force multinationals to buy local inputs just as protection induces
domestic consumers (and …rms) to buy from local producers. A major di¤erence, of course,
is that local-content requirements are quantitative restrictions rather than explicit tari¤s
or subsidies.

40

a country’s export basket, and growth. Consequently, we can only loosely
infer that rapid changes in the composition of a country’s exports towards
more sophisticated products could be indicative of IP.

4

Trade and Economic Development

Countries intervene in trade for many reasons, including the desire to shift
production towards sectors with positive externalities (industrial policy), to
raise revenue, to a¤ect terms of trade, and to satisfy special interests. We
reviewed in Section 3 some of the studies that explicitly evaluate the success of IP. There is almost no research that has been able to isolate the
e¤ects of IP on welfare, taking into account all the other motives for protection. However, there is a large literature which estimates the reduced
reform relationship between openness to trade and economic growth. In
this section, we review nearly 200 prominent studies that use some kind of
reduced form approach. We identify the di¤erent measures of openness used
in this literature, the datasets, the identi…cation strategies, and the results
Can we use this vast literature to cast light on the IP debate? In de…ning
openness to trade, we make a distinction between trade volumes, such as
exports or imports, and trade policy, such as tari¤ reductions or changes
in quotas. Most of the studies we review below …nd a positive relationship
between trade volumes and growth. While there are far fewer studies that
evaluate the linkages between tari¤s and growth, they tend to get insigni…cant
or weak e¤ects. This should not be surprising given the mixed motives
for imposing tari¤ protection. We hypothesize that these di¤erent results
imply that industrial policy is more likely to induce growth it is "pro-trade".
Yet from a practical standpoint, it is di¢ cult to envision a successful set
of policies that are both pro-trade and protectionist; at a minimum, this
would require policies that fully o¤set any anti-trade biases. The positive
correlation between trade shares and growth is consistent with our hypothesis
that IP implemented via export promotion and encouragement of FDI has
generally led to higher productivity and growth outcomes, relative to IP
implemented through protection from trade. Before we turn to the literature
on trade volumes, trade policies, and country outcomes, we begin with some
stylized facts.

41

4.1

Stylized Facts on Trade policies, 1980-2004

If we use a conventional measure of trade volumes such as export shares
in GDP, developing countries are now more integrated into the world economy than the industrial countries. Figure 2 shows that export shares for
developing countries overtook industrial countries in the early 1990s.
25 .0

D e v e lo p in g c o u n tr ie s

22 .5
20 .0
17 .5

15 .0

H ig h in c o m e c o u n tr ie s
12 .5
10 .0
19 80

82

84

86

88

1 99 0

92

94

96

98

2 000

2

S o urc e: G E P 2 00 3, W o rld B a nk d ata .

Figure 2: Export Shares in Developing and High-Income Countries

Table 1 shows the evolution of country trade policies over the last twenty
…ve years. Countries are ranked according to the net change in tari¤ levels
between 1985 and 2004. We have included both developing and developed
countries to provide an indication of how protection changes at di¤erent
stages of development. The …rst four columns indicate the ratio of tari¤
revenues to trade ‡ows, taken from the World Bank. The next four columns
report the actual administrative tari¤s, averaged across import categories
between 1980 and 2004. The last three columns report changes in these
tari¤s between 1985 and 2004. The last column indicates the change in the
standard deviation of tari¤s over time; this measure is an indication of the
change in the dispersion of tari¤s.
It is evident from Table 1 that there has been a dramatic decline in tari¤
protection among developing countries. Average tari¤s in India declined from
42

98.8 percent in 1980 to 28.1 percent in 2004; in Bangladesh from 86 to 16.4
percent; in Costa Rica from 53 percent to 5.7 percent; in China from 49.5
percent in 1980 to 9.8 percent in 2004; in Turkey from 44 to 2.6 percent, and
in Chile from 30 percent in 1985 to 4.9 percent. Not all countries had such
enormous declines, however: in Algeria, average tari¤s only declined slightly,
from 21 to 18 percent.
There are several other features worth noting in Table 1. The last column
of Table 1 shows that there has been a dramatic decline in tari¤ dispersion, as
indicated by the fall in the standard deviation of tari¤s. There is also a large
discrepancy between tari¤ revenues as a percentage of trade ‡ows ("revenue
tari¤s") and actual statutory tari¤s. Revenue tari¤s are reported in the
…rst 5 columns of Table 1, while statutory tari¤s are reported in columns 6
through 10. To illustrate the di¤erence, Table 1 shows that average tari¤s
in India in 1985 were 98.8 percent but tari¤ collections as a percentage of
trade were only 24.4 percent. In Paraguay, average tari¤s were 71 percent
in 1980, while tari¤ collections were 6 percent; in Costa Rica, tari¤s were 55
percent and collections were 5.3 percent; in Chile, average tari¤s in 1985 were
30 percent but tari¤ collections were 5.7 percent. The di¤erence between
these two measures re‡ects in part the role of tari¤ exemptions–typically
state enterprises were exempt from paying tari¤s, as were many exporters
and foreign enterprises— as well as selective imposition of duties by customs
o¢ cers and the negative impact of high tari¤s on imports.
We also highlight the historically high levels of protection in China. China
has arguably had the most spectacular success in integrating into the world
economy in the last two decades. Yet in 1990, it was still one of the most
protected economies in the world, with an average tari¤ rate of 40 percent.
According to Table 1, in 1990 China was tied for …fth place in average levels
of tari¤ protection, behind Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, and Kenya. The
dispersion of tari¤ levels was also high, and the maximum tari¤ exceeded
200 percent. Figure 3, taken from Rodrik (2006) documents that much of
China’s export surge occurred simultaneously with the imposition of high
tari¤s. Nevertheless, countries such as China and India— because they had
such high tari¤s to begin with— also exhibited the highest tari¤ reductions
between 1985 and 2004.

43

Figure 3: Exports as a share of GDP

44

4.2

Cross-country Evidence on Trade Policies, Trade
Volumes, Productivity, and Growth

A standard approach in the cross-country literature is to regress an outcome
of interest for country i at time t (GDP growth, real GDP per worker, or
total factor productivity growth) on a preferred measure of openness and a
set of controls Z,
Yit = Constant + OP EN N ESSit + Zit +

i

+

t

+ "it

(10)

Most controversies have arisen over the following three issues:
1. How to measure OP EN N ESS
2. How to account for the endogeneity between Y and OP EN N ESS.
3. Which variables to include in the set of controls Z.
(1) How to measure openness. There is a large debate over how to measure
openness. The ideal measures for understanding the linkages between trade
policies and outcomes are measures of policies themselves— such as tari¤s
and quotas, but until recently, these measures were hardly ever used (see
Harrison (1996) for a discussion). How much of a problem is the lack of
information on statutory tari¤s (in contrast to revenue tari¤s) in practice?
If the di¤erence between actual tari¤s and revenues are due to exemptions
in the tari¤ schedule, then the tari¤ schedule is misleading, and it would
actually be better to use revenues as a share of import value. But if the
di¤erential between revenue tari¤s and statutory tari¤s highlighted in Table
1 re‡ects the restrictive impact of high barriers on trade volumes, barriers, or
corrupt practices which impose rent-seeking costs not re‡ected in revenues,
then using trade revenues to proxy for tari¤s is not ideal.
A more fundamental problem which has plagued the literature on the
relationship between trade policies and growth is the continued use of trade
volumes as a proxy for policy. Trade volumes are a¤ected by many di¤erent factors, including policies, distance to neighbors and trading partners,
country size, exchange rate movements, terms of trade changes, and barriers
to entry. Consequently, simply using trade volumes to proxy for changes
in trade policies may be misleading. We evaluate the relationship between
these di¤erent openness measures in Table 3. We present correlations between actual tari¤s, trade taxes as a percentage of trade, two measures of
45

trade volumes, the nominal exchange rate, and the ratio of foreign investment
in‡ows to GDP using annual data from 1980 through 2004. For trade shares,
we include both nominal and real trade shares, where real trade shares are
de…ned as the ratio of trade to GDP in constant prices from the Penn World
Tables (version 6.1). Table 4 repeats the same exercise, but restricts the
sample to developing countries. The correlations reported in Tables 3 and 4
highlight the following:
Although Table 1 indicates a big di¤erence in magnitude between the
ratio of tari¤ revenues to trade and actual administrative tari¤s, the
correlation coe¢ cient reported in Table 3 between the two measures is
actually quite high at .63 and statistically signi…cant.
There is a signi…cant negative correlation between trade shares and
tari¤s. The correlation with nominal openness is -.25. The correlation
with real openness about the same, between -.2 and -.3, depending on
which measure of tari¤s is used.
The negative correlation coe¢ cient between trade policies (tari¤s) and
outcomes (trade shares) does not depend on how tari¤s or trade shares
are measured.
Tari¤ levels are highly (negatively) correlated with the ratio of foreign
investment in‡ows to GDP, and trade volumes are highly (positively)
correlated with foreign investment in‡ows. In fact, trade ‡ows are
more highly correlated with foreign investment in‡ows than they are
with tari¤s. These correlations suggest that measures of openness may
also be capturing the gains from foreign investment in‡ows.
The correlations are the same or stronger if we restrict the sample to
developing countries (see Table 4). Trade taxes as a share of trade ‡ows
continue to be highly correlated with actual tari¤s. The correlation
coe¢ cient between trade shares and both tari¤ measures increases to
(negative) .36.
These stylized facts suggest that trade taxes as a share of trade are a
much better proxy for average tari¤s than trade shares. The correlation
coe¢ cient of statutory tari¤s with revenue tari¤s is signi…cantly higher than
the correlation of statutory tari¤s with trade shares (.70 versus -.35). Yet
46

researchers continue to rely on trade shares as a measure of trade policy,
despite the easily available (World Bank or IMF) tari¤ revenue measure.
The other broad conclusion we can draw from these data is that there is
a signi…cant positive relationship between less restrictive trade policies and
higher trade shares. Pritchett (1996) suggested that:
“alternative objective measures of trade policy are completely
uncorrelated across countries. This result has serious implications for empirical research that attempts to assess the e¤ects of
liberalization on economic performance using comparisons across
countries; it also highlights the di¢ culties of interpretation in
these types of empirical studies”.
We would argue that this is not the case: statutory tari¤s are highly
correlated with revenue tari¤s, indicating that they are excellent measures
of trade policy There is also a signi…cant and negative correlation between
tari¤ measures and outcome measures such as real or nominal trade shares in
GDP. Nevertheless, the magnitude of the (inverse) correlation between trade
shares and trade policies is not nearly large enough to allow proponents of
free trade to argue that high trade shares always re‡ect a free trade stance.
Most studies listed in Table 2 use trade volumes as a measure of openness,
but trade volumes are outcomes of trade policies as well as a host of factors
including geography, shifts in terms of trade, exchange rate shocks, and
changes in transport and communication costs. Much of the criticism in
the important and widely cited Rodriguez and Rodrik (1999) NBER Macro
Annual paper is directed at the inadequacy of typical proxies for openness.
Rodriguez and Rodrik …nd fault with Dollar (1992), Edwards (1998), and
Sachs and Warner (1995) for using exchange rate distortions as measures of
trade policy, since exchange distortions re‡ect macro-economic distortions,
not trade policies per se. They also critique Edwards (1998) for using a World
Bank classi…cation of trade regimes which is subjective. While Dollar’s (1992)
openness measure seems ideal because it directly measures the deviation of
domestic from international prices, Rodriguez and Rodrik argue the measure
is primarily correlated with swings in the exchange rate. Dollar (1992) uses
the following de…nition of openness:
OP EN N ESSi = 100
47

Pi
Ei PU SA

OP EN N ESS is the relative price level compared to the United States,
with all price levels converted to US dollars, using Summers-Heston countryspeci…c consumption price indices. A higher price level should indicate a
higher degree of distortions. Rodriguez and Rodrik (1999) argue that the
law of one price does not hold in general, and that domestic prices could be
high for reasons other than trade policy. These could include high transport
costs or monopolies in distribution channels. In practice, Rodriguez and
Rodrik show that there is no relationship between the openness measure
calculated by Dollar and actual tari¤s or non-tari¤ barriers. In fact, tari¤s
and non-tari¤ barriers enter with the wrong sign if this measure of openness is
regressed on tari¤s and non-tari¤ barriers. They then show that this measure
is primarily capturing exchange rate movements.
Both Rodriguez and Rodrik (1999) and Harrison and Hanson (1999) critique a heavily used measure of openness created by Sachs and Warner (1995).
The Sachs and Warner measure has been updated by Wacziarg and Welch
(2007), but the updated measure may su¤er from the same shortcomings as
the Sachs and Warner measure. Harrison and Hanson show that the Sachs
and Warner (1995) measure of OP EN N ESS does not pick up di¤erences in
trade policy but instead re‡ects di¤erences across countries in exchange rate
policies and political regimes. One way to reinterpret the evidence presented
in Dollar (1992) and Sachs and Warner (1995) is that real exchange rate overvaluation is bad for growth, a theme recently emphasized by Rodrik (2007).
One obvious implication for researchers is that any study which measures
the impact of real price distortions on growth due to protection should also
control for exchange rate movements.
(2) Endogeneity problems. Endogeneity problems could arise for many
reasons. Policy makers may prefer not to open up to trade until …rms are
capable of competing on world markets, suggesting that the causality runs
from incomes to openness. Even statutory measures of trade policy (tari¤s,
quotas) are endogenously determined. The pattern of protection is likely
to be skewed towards protecting weak sectors,promising infant industries,
special interests or vocal minorities.
While empirical work in the 1970s and 1980s largely ignored endogeneity
problems, newer studies give much greater weight to constructing plausible
identi…cation strategies. This progress is evident in Table 2, which lists
prominent studies on the linkages between openness and growth from the
1980s onwards. Most of the early studies had no identi…cation strategy at
48

all, as indicated in column (4). More recent work addresses this omission,
using one of two general approaches.
The …rst approach is to use granger-causality tests that exploit lags in
studies that use time-series datasets. As indicated in Table 2, these studies often …nd that causality runs in the reverse direction, from Y to OP EN N ESS:
more successful economies (or sectors) are more likely to open up to global
competition. Related to this approach is the use of lags as instruments, which
depends on some strong assumptions about the lack of correlation between
the instruments and the error term.
The second general approach to identi…cation has been to seek additional
instruments for OP EN N ESS. One path-breaking study along these lines is
Frankel and Romer (1999). Frankel and Romer use the insights from gravity
models to derive an instrument based on geographic proximity. Gravity
models predict that countries closer to each other trade more with each other.
This means that distance can be used as an instrument for bilateral trade.
In the …rst stage regressions, Frankel and Romer regress the log of country
i’s trade with country j as a share of country i’s GDP on distance and other
variables:
ln ( ij =GDPi ) = a0 Xij + ij
The vector X includes the log of distance between country i and j, the log
of population and area in both countries, and dummy variables indicating
whether the two countries share a common border and whether they are
landlocked. There are no subscripts for time in this speci…cation: this is a
pure cross-section using data for 1985. Frankel and Romer show that greater
distance from a trading partner reduces bilateral trade, and they are able to
explain 36 percent of bilateral trade in the …rst stage. Using the …rst stage
estimates, Frankel and Romer then generate an OP EN N ESS variable by
aggregating predicted bilateral trade with all of country i’s trading partners.
In the second stage, Frankel and Romer regress log of income per capita in
1985 on the predicted trade share, log of population and log of area. They
show that OP EN N ESS positively a¤ects income per capita.
The beauty of this approach is that geographic proximity is without question exogenous with respect to income. There are several problems, however. Since distance does not change over time, the authors cannot allow
for country-speci…c …xed e¤ects i in equation (1) and are restricted to pure
cross-section estimation. While one solution in principle would be to control for factors that vary across countries but remain …xed over time— such
49

as cultural or institutional di¤erences— it may be di¢ cult to control for all
these omitted determinants of income. Another concern is that Frankel and
Romer’s original results are not very robust: the statistical signi…cance on
predicted openness disappears once we add continent dummies, which is not
surprising since all the identi…cation is from the cross-section. Frankel and
Romer also omit observations with zero bilateral trade in the …rst stage,
which probably contributes to the poor …rst stage R-square and the resulting weak instrument problem. Rodriguez and Rodrik (1999) are also critical
of Frankel and Romer because they argue that greater openness to trade generated through geographic proximity may have di¤erent e¤ects from trade
generated through trade policy interventions. One further concern is that
the instrumental variable estimates magnify the impact of trade on incomes,
in contrast to what one would expect if trade is a positive function of income.
The explanation given by Frankel and Romer is that the bias goes in the opposite direction because of measurement error, but one is still left wondering
whether or not the authors have successfully addressed the endogeneity of
trade to income.
Alcala and Ciccone (2004) use the insights of Frankel and Romer to improve on their initial speci…cation. They use all bilateral trade data available
in the …rst stage, including those bilateral trade pairs with zero trade, which
improves the …rst stage F-statistic from 3.06 using Frankel and Romer’s bilateral trade pairs to 11.66. This gives them two and a half times the number of
observations in the …rst stage relative to Frankel and Romer. Consequently,
the second stage relationship between their chosen measure of openness and
their dependent variable Y (the log of PPP GDP per capita in 1985) is more
robust. They also add a measure of institutional quality to the Z vector,
which addresses the concern that trade is positively correlated with income
or growth because greater openness is correlated with better institutions.
They instrument institutional quality with language and settler mortality
data, drawn from Hall and Jones and Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson.
Nevertheless, any analysis which uses geography as an instrument is still
restricted to a pure cross-section analysis, which requires the researcher to
…nd all possible covariates which could induce a spurious correlation between
OP EN N ESS and Y .
There are other aspects to Alcala and Ciccone (2004) which suggest that
the relationship between openness and income in a pure cross-section is not
very robust. Trade openness is only signi…cantly correlated with Y if the
authors use a “real”measure of openness, de…ned as the ratio of PPP trade
50

to GDP. Nominal trade shares are not signi…cantly associated with GDP per
capita, which leads Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi (2004) to suggest that
Alcala and Ciccone’s results are driven by movements in the price level, not
by trade. It is di¢ cult to be sure, however, since Rodrik, Subramanian and
Trebbi do not use exactly the same speci…cation as Alcala and Ciccone.
Romalis (2007) suggests another clever instrument for a country’s OPENNESS:
tari¤s imposed by a country’s trading partners. In particular, Romalis uses
US most-favored nation (MFN) tari¤s as an instrument for developing country trade shares. Using this instrument, he shows that the change in real
per capita GDP is positively and signi…cantly a¤ected by trade, and that
the magnitude is economically important. Using MFN tari¤s is particularly
clever, since these are unlikely to be in‡uenced by developing country behavior and are consequently exogenous. This is at the same time a limitation
of the approach: the instrument only varies over time, not across countries
since the US must apply the same MFN tari¤s to all its trading partners.
The results also could be interpreted to suggest that other country policies matter for developing country growth, but sheds less light on whether
own developing country policies to lower their trade barriers is bene…cial for
growth. What Romalis shows is that access for developing country exports is
bene…cial for growth, but his research does not indicate whether opening up
import-competing sectors to competition through reductions in protection
are also bene…cial for growth.
Two very recent studies which make an important contribution to resolving the endogeneity of trade and growth are Feyrer (2009) and Donaldson
(2009). Feyrer (2009) suggests a solution to the problem faced by Frankel
and Romer in using geography as an instrument. To overcome the fact that
their instrument did not vary over time, which made it impossible to control
for country …xed e¤ects, Feyrer allows the importance of air and sea distance
across countries to vary over time. In the …rst stage of his estimation, Feyrer
allows the coe¢ cient on air and sea distance to be time-varying in explaining
bilateral trade. He then uses those time varying coe¢ cients to construct time
and country-speci…c instruments for the …rst stage. Feyrer shows that trade
has important, robust e¤ects on growth using a panel of countries for 1960
through 1995. Donaldson (2009) uses historical data for 1861 through 1930
across Indian districts to estimate the impact of the introduction of railroads
on trade costs, income volatility, price convergence, and economic growth.
He traces out the mechanisms through which railroads a¤ected income and
shows that the reduction of trade costs through the introduction of railroads
51

had large and important e¤ects on economic growth.
(3) Which variables to include in the set of controls Z : The third major
area of controversy in this literature is which variables to include in the set of
controls Z. There is a growing literature which claims that two key omitted
variables from the Z vector, leading to omitted variable bias in early studies, are institutions and geography. Indeed a recent literature has sought to
distinguish between institutions, economic geography, and trade as sources
of economic growth, including Easterly and Levine (2003), Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi (2004), and Alcala and Ciccone (2004). Only Alcala
and Ciccone …nd that openness matters; the other two studies …nd that “institutions rule”. There are several reasons for why Alcala and Ciccone get
very di¤erent results from Rodrik et. al. (2004). First, Alcala and Ciccone
use real trade shares while Rodrik et. al. use nominal trade shares as their
measure of openness. Second, Alcala and Ciccone improve upon the Frankel
and Romer measure by expanding the …rst-stage and using more countries,
improving the …rst-stage F and reducing the fragility of the instrument.
None of these three studies, which have been extensively cited in the
empirical literature on the determinants of growth, uses trade policy as a
measure of openness. Easterly and Levine (2003) use the Sachs and Warner
(1995) and Dollar (1992) measures to proxy for openness; the ‡aws of these
two measures are discussed above. Rodrik et. al. use the average of nominal
trade shares for 1950 through 1998 as their openness measure. All three
papers focus on a pure cross-section of countries. As pointed out by Harrison
(1996), trade policies and trade shares have changed too much over the last
forty years to make long run averages very meaningful.
Given the problems inherent in the openness measures, and the reliance on
pure cross-sectional estimation, it is not surprising that openness is trumped
by institutions in two of these three studies. This research also highlights
the tremendous problems associated with measuring institutions in a way
which is distinct from trade policy. The correlation between the openness
and institutions measures in Easterly and Levine (2003) is .68, which suggests
that multicollinearity is likely to be a signi…cant problem. Both Rodrik et.
al. and Alcala and Ciccone use the Kaufmann, Kraay and Zoido-Lobaton
measure of institutions, which is constructed from World Bank surveys based
on responses for 1997-1998. Yet the dependent variables in these two studies
are PPP GDP per capita prior to that period: 1985 PPP GDP per worker
for Alcala and Ciccone and PPP GDP per capita in 1995 for Rodrik et. al.
It seems odd to try to understand growth in 1985 or 1995 using measures
52

of institutions based on data from the end of the 1990s, unless institutions
change very little. Yet if institutions are not time-varying, then they may
simply be capturing the country …xed e¤ect i in equation (1).
While this survey has highlighted some of the shortcomings of crosscountry work on openness and growth, there are several promising new areas
of research which deserve mention. Most of the work surveyed so far uses
a measure of real GDP per capita or per capita growth as a measure of Y .
Yet a number of studies have suggested that openness is important because
it allows countries to invest more. Levine and Renelt (1992) show that there
is no robust relationship between di¤erent measures of openness and average
per capita GDP growth in their cross-country sample. Replacing Y with
investment shares in GDP, however, they …nd that openness is robustly correlated with investment rates. They conclude that “the relationship between
trade and growth may be based on enhanced resource accumulation and not
necessarily on the improved allocation of resources”.
Levine and Renelt show that trade matters for growth because it increases
investment. One mechanism could be by reducing the price of investment
goods. Delong and Summers show that countries with lower investment
prices grow faster, and Lee (1995) shows that a higher share of imported
capital goods in total investment are associated with higher growth. More
recently, Hsieh and Klenow (2007) argue that on the contrary there is no link
between lower relative prices of investment goods and trade policy. They cite
as evidence the fact that the actual level of prices for investment goods in
poor countries are not higher than in the rest of the world. Instead, they
argue that investment rates are low in poor countries because the relative
price of investment is high relative to non-traded consumption goods, such
as services.
The importance of barriers to investment in understanding linkages between trade and growth is taken up once more by Estevadeordal and Taylor
(2008). They estimate a version of equation (1) in di¤erences, but separate
their measure of openness into tari¤s on consumption goods, intermediates,
and capital goods. They also allow for a country …xed e¤ect in di¤erences,
leading to a di¤erence-in-di¤erence speci…cation for (1). They show that this
approach successfully addresses the problem of whether institutions or trade
policy is responsible for higher incomes, since in …rst di¤erences there is no
clear correlation between the two. In addition, they address the potential
endogeneity of changes in openness by using as instruments for the change
the level of tari¤s in 1975 interacted with two measures of what they refer to
53

as “GATT potential”: GATT membership in 1975 and a measure of diplomatic pressure constructed from number of diplomats. Estevadeordal and
Taylor show that tari¤ protection a¤ects growth more negatively if tari¤s
are on capital goods or intermediates, which is consistent with Levine and
Renelt’s 1992 hypothesis that openness matters because it a¤ects resource
accumulation.
A second promising area of research is related to an emerging consensus
on the need for openness to trade to be accompanied by key complementary
policies. Recent research emphasizing the importance of complementarities
between trade and other policies includes Chang, Kaltani, and Loayza (2005),
Bolaky and Freund (2006), and Ja¤ee and Sutherland (2003). One reason
why the relationship in (1) may be fragile could be because openness to trade
is most successful if implemented in conjunction with other policies–which
make it possible for …rms to e¤ectively compete on world markets. If such a
policy can be characterized as X (there could be overlap between X and Z),
then it would lead to a slightly di¤erent speci…cation:
Yit = Constant + OP EN N ESSit + Zit + Xit
+ (OP EN N ESS X)it + i + t + "it
Figure 4, taken from Bolaky and Freund (2006), makes this point graphically. Bolaky and Freund use three di¤erent measures of openness, including
real and nominal trade shares, and tari¤s. In countries with low barriers to
entry, there is a positive relationship between openness to trade and growth;
in regulated economies, there is a negative relationship. The importance of
other policies— in this case, low entry barriers— provides one explanation for
why it is so di¢ cult to …nd a robust relationship between openness to trade
and good performance. There is simply too much heterogeneity in outcomes,
in large part because other types of policies are so di¤erent. The necessity for
openness to trade to be accompanied by low barriers to entry and exit can be
understood in light of new trade theories that emphasize …rm heterogeneity,
as illustrated by Melitz (2003). In his model, gains from trade occur through
reallocation of market share from less productive to more productive …rms.
If …rms cannot easily expand or exit, this important source of productivity
gains through trade reforms is lost.
Two other studies also …nd that gains from trade are contingent on other
policies. Chang, Kaltani, and Loayza (2005) use panel data instead of a
cross-section and trade shares corrected for country size are their measure of
54

Figure 4: Trade, Growth, and Regulation of Entry.

openness. In their work, the key complementary policies for ensuring that
openness to trade is associated with growth include infrastructure development, labor market ‡exibility, and low barriers to entry. Given the current levels of those variables, they conclude that “there are many countries
that currently stand to lose from opening their markets”. Chang, Kaltani
and Loayza argue that other types of reforms are not so critical for ensuring growth gains from openness, including educational attainment, …nancial
depth, and good governance. DeJong and Ripoll (2006), using tari¤s as
a measure of openness, also …nd that the e¤ect of openness on growth is
conditional on the level of income. In particular, using cross-country data
for 1975-2000, they …nd a positive relationship between tari¤s and growth
rates for the world’s poorest countries, but a negative relationship for rich
countries.
These three papers have several implications for trade policy. When eliminating both trade and other distortions simultaneously is not possible, these
papers suggest that bene…ts depend on the existence and the degree of nontrade distortions and the feasibility of removing them. Packages tailored to
the speci…c circumstances of each country may be more appropriate than a
55

"one size …ts all" policy. Another implication is that opening up to trade
is not enough to ensure growth; in particular, key complementary reforms
include lowering barriers to new …rm entry, encouraging more ‡exible labor
markets, and improving infrastructure.

4.3

What can the di¤erent e¤ects of trade volumes
versus trade policy tell us about the success of IP?

Our review of recent evidence on trade policies, trade volumes, and growth
suggests that researchers face several challenges. In particular, measuring
openness to trade, identifying the direction of causality between openness
and growth, and identifying additional controls to include in cross-country
estimation are ongoing concerns. Nevertheless, our review of the studies in
Table 2 suggests the following broad conclusions:
Studies that use trade volumes as a measure of openness generally …nd
a positive relationship between changes in openness and growth.
Studies that use tari¤s as a measure of openness for the post World
War II period generally …nd an insigni…cant e¤ect of average tari¤s on
growth. However, the pattern of protection matters. High tari¤s on
intermediates or investment goods may be negatively associated with
growth.
Existing studies suggest that in the post World War II period, tari¤s on
average have not been successful in generating higher growth. We con…rm
these general conclusions using a panel dataset on non-OECD countries, for
the 1960 through 2000 period. In particular, we contrast the results using trade shares (X+M/GDP) as our openness measure relative to using the
World Bank’s revenue tari¤s (tari¤ revenue divided by imports). The dependent variable is log income per capita. The use of a panel of annual
observations allows us to control for country-speci…c …xed e¤ects and also
for time e¤ects. Country …xed e¤ects are one approach to controlling for
country characteristics that vary across countries (such as institutions) that
are not perfectly measured and do not vary systematically from one year to
the next. Time e¤ects allow us to control for world-wide shocks, such as an
oil price shock or a world–wide currency crisis.
The top two rows in Table 5 show that openness measured using trade
shares is positively and signi…cantly associated with growth. These results
56

are consistent with the majority of the studies listed in Table 2 that use trade
shares as a measure of openness and generally …nd that changes in trade
shares are associated with higher growth. However, the bottom two rows
show that revenue tari¤s are not signi…cantly associated with growth. Even
skeptics, such as Rodriguez (2007), generally conclude that there is a strong
correlation between trade volumes and growth, while the association between
trade policy–as measured by the World Bank’s revenue tari¤ measure–and
growth is weak.
The positive correlation between trade shares and growth is very strong
and remains after we add other controls. The negative correlation between
tari¤s and growth is signi…cant in some speci…cations but is not a robust
…nding. What should we make of this? As we discussed in Section 3, tari¤s
are imposed for many reasons. Foremost among these reasons are the need to
raise revenue, political economy considerations, and infant industry concerns.
Either IP via protection has increased growth, or protection on average has
been imposed for other reasons, leading to no net gains in output.
A promising area for new research is to move beyond reduced form evidence on the linkages between openness and growth so that we can identify
how openness to trade a¤ects growth. This is particularly important from
a policy perspective. If openness yields bene…ts because it allows …rms to
import new technology embodied in capital goods, the policy implications
are quite di¤erent than if openness is bene…cial because it forces …rms to
compete internationally or leads to market share reallocation towards more
e¢ cient …rms. Identifying the mechanisms leading from openness to growth
is precisely the focus of new micro-based studies of …rms (see, for example,
Melitz (2003) or Acemoglu, Antras, and Helpman (2007)). These theoretical
advances have been accompanied by a growing empirical literature, to which
we now turn.

4.4

Identifying the mechanisms for gains from trade

Much of the new research evaluates the importance of international trade for
growth using micro models of consumer and …rm behavior. This new research
focuses on the following mechanisms for understanding the linkages between
openness to trade and growth: (1) gains from consumption of increased variety (2) gains from importing goods that embody new technology (3) gains
from increasing competition (4) gains from reaping economies of scale (5)
gains through reallocation of market shares to the most productive …rms and
57

(6) learning by doing through exporting. We describe these in more detail
below.30
Gains from consumption of increased variety Quantitative models are
useful for measuring gains from trade coming from increased variety, as in
Romer (1994). Romer (1994) and Feenstra (1994) showed that these gains
could be large, while Arkolakis et. al. (2008) show that Romer’s results
are sensitive to modeling assumptions. Under heterogeneity, gains could be
small, as the new varieties that are imported after liberalization are "marginal varieties," in the sense that total consumption of these goods is small.
Moreover, the bene…ts from the increase in foreign varieties could be compensated by the losses associated with the displacement of domestic varieties.
Another important paper in this literature is Broda and Weinstein (2006).
Broda and Weinstein show that an important part of growth comes from the
increase in imported variety over the last decades. While this may in part
result from a country’s own trade reforms, it is also driven by diversi…cation
on the part of exporting countries like China.
Gains from importing goods that embody new technology Eaton and Kortum (1999) argue that tari¤s a¤ect the price of capital, and through this
they a¤ect the capital-labor ratio in steady state. Coe and Helpman (1995),
Keller (1998) and others reviewed in Keller (2004) study the role of trade as
a vehicle for "international R&D spillovers." The idea is that by importing
intermediate and capital goods, a country bene…ts from the R&D done in the
exporting countries. This is a key feature of the model of R&D and trade
in Eaton and Kortum (2001). A di¤erent notion is that trade accelerates
the international ‡ow of technical know-how (see Grossman and Helpman,
p. 165). Several papers have explored this empirically with mixed results
(see Rhee et. al., 1984, Aitken et. al., 1997, and Clerides et. al., 1998, and
Bernard and Jensen, 1999).
A number of theoretical papers have explored the role of intermediate
inputs in raising productivity growth (Ethier (1979,1982), Markusen (1989),
Romer (1987, 1990), and Grossman and Helpman (1991)). Some recent studies …nd that increasing intermediate goods inputs or lowering input tari¤s are
associated with large productivity gains. This includes Goldberg, Khandelwal, Pavcnik, and Topalova (2008), Kasahara and Rodrigue (2008), Amiti
30

A note of caution: the fact that we discover more mechanisms through which trade
leads increasing welfare does not necessarily imply that the overall gains from trade are
larger – there are likely to be important "crowding out" e¤ects. See Arkolakis, Costinot
and Rodríguez-Clare (2009).

58

and Konings (2007), Halpern, Koren, and Szeidl (2006) and Broda, Green…eld and Weinstein (2008). Goldberg, Khandelwal, Pavcnik and Topalova
(2008) use Indian data to show that accounting for new imported varieties
lowered the price index for intermediate goods by 4.7 percent per year relative to conventional gains from lower import prices. They also …nd that lower
input tari¤s account for a third of the new products introduced by domestic
Indian …rms, suggesting potentially large gains from trade.
Gains from increasing competition Levinsohn (1993), Harrison (1994),
and Muendler (2005) show that increasing competition due to lowering of
trade barriers reduced price-cost margins, using micro-level data for Turkey,
Cote d’Ivoire, and Brazil. Enhanced competition may encourage …rms to
engage more in innovative activity, or may simply lead to lower prices for
consumers. One important implication is that studies which measure the
productivity gains from trade reforms without allowing mark-ups to fall post
reform are likely to mismeasure the productivity gains from trade, as pointed
out by Harrison (1994). Harrison shows that the direction of the bias in
productivity measurement cannot be identi…ed a priori. She also shows that
a simple way to address this problem is to allow measured factor shares to
vary with changes in trade policy when doing production function estimation.
Gains through reallocation of market shares to the most productive …rms
New heterogeneous trade models suggest that trade enhances productivity by
reallocating output towards more e¢ cient …rms. In the original framework
developed by Melitz (2003), …rms are endowed with di¤erent productivity
draws, which are pre-determined and unchanging over time. When a country
opens up to international trade, only the more productive …rms remain as
the less productive …rms are forced to exit.
There are a number of implications of this framework which could be
tested using …rm-level data. As we discussed earlier, these models which
emphasize reallocation of …rm shares imply a critical role for other complementary policies that make it easy for …rms to expand, contract, enter, or
exit the market. Another implication is that productivity gains from trade
reforms should operate through market share reallocation. An early study
for the United States by Baily, Hulten, and Campbell (1992) did not focus
on trade policy per se but provided a framework for decomposing productivity growth into components due to within-…rm changes versus reallocation
of output. They concluded that the bulk of growth in aggregate total factor
productivity (TFP) was accounted for by the reallocation of output shares.
For developing countries, this decomposition has been performed by Pavcnik
59

(2002) for Chile and by Van Biesebroeck (2003) for Colombia.
Since Pavcnik’s sample begins at the end of the Chilean trade reforms, she
cannot use changes in trade policy as her openness measure. Instead, she separates enterprises into import-competing, export-competing, and non-traded
sectors. She then examines whether import or export-competing …rms had
higher productivity relative to other types of …rms. Using the Olley-Pakes
(1993) approach to estimating productivity, Pavcnik …nds that import competing …rms improved their productivity over time, while export competing
…rms did not. This suggests that in Chile there was no learning among exporters, but import-competing …rms did exhibit productivity growth. Pavcnik calculates that two-thirds of productivity growth in Chile was due to
reallocation of market shares towards more e¢ cient producers, and the remaining one-third was due to improved productivity among surviving …rms.
Van Biesebroeck (2003) uses a variety of methods to compute productivity
growth and …nds that for Colombia the majority of changes in productivity
occur within the same plant. Van Biesebroeck …nds that between two thirds
and three quarters of the total change comes from within plant changes. The
second most important e¤ect is the entry of more productive plants into
the economy. While Pavcnik (2002) …nds that two-thirds of the increases
in productivity growth are due to reallocation of market shares, Van Biesebroeck …nds the opposite: in Colombia, the bulk of aggregate increases in
productivity growth are driven by within-plant changes in productivity.
One possible explanation for these di¤erent results is that entry and exit
barriers (due to restrictions on hiring and …ring) in Colombia were higher
than in Chile during this period. Barriers to entry or exit make it di¢ cult
for a reallocation of market share towards more e¢ cient producers to occur.
More case studies are needed before we can reach any de…nitive conclusions.
However, the limited evidence suggests that productivity growth stems from
both (1) a reshu- ing of production towards more e¢ cient producers and
(2) increasing productivity within the …rm. Consequently, Melitz’s (2003)
simplifying assumption that …rms receive an exogenous productivity draw
which is unchanging over time is not consistent with actual …rm behavior.
The latest heterogeneous …rm research modi…es Melitz (2003) to allow …rmlevel productivity to evolve over time, instead of being …xed at the initial
distribution. Atkeson and Burstein (2006), Costantini and Melitz (2007),
Lileeva and Tre‡er (2007), and Ederington and McCalman (forthcoming) all
develop models with heterogeneous …rms where productivity is allowed to
evolve within the …rm. Lileeva and Tre‡er (2007) allow reductions in foreign
60

tari¤s to induce lower-productivity …rms to invest in raising labor productivity, engage in more product innovation, and increase their adoption of
advanced manufacturing technology, which in turn leads to within-…rm productivity gains. Bernard, Redding and Schott (2006) have also developed a
model where …rms produce multiple goods, and trade liberalization may lead
them to focus on the goods in which they are most productive. Empirically
this would be seen as an increase in productivity within …rms, even though
the mechanism is essentially the same as in Melitz (2003).
Learning by doing through exporting One likely channel through which
international trade leads to productivity gains is through learning by doing
for exporters. Yet a …rst round of empirical studies suggested that there
was very little, if any, learning from exporting. Instead, these …rst generation studies found that the best …rms select into exporting, leading to a
strong positive correlation between productivity levels and export status.
This research included case studies of Colombia (Clerides, Lach, and Tybout
(1998)), Spain (Delgado, Farinas, and Ruano (2002)), Germany (Bernard and
Wagner (1997)),and the United States (Bernard and Jensen (1999)). Pavcnik (2002) also found a similar result: …rms operating in export-competing
sectors are the most e¢ cient in manufacturing, but these …rms do not show
productivity improvements over time.
This …rst-generation evidence is drawn from primarily high and upper
middle income countries. A second wave of empirical studies casts doubt
on the hypothesis that there is no learning by doing for exporters. For
developing countries, this includes Aw, Chung, and Roberts (2000) for Korea,
Van Biesebroeck (2005) for 9 African countries, Lileeva (2004), Blalock and
Gertler (2004) for Indonesia, Hallward-Driemeir, Iarossi, and Sokolo¤ (2005)
for East Asian countries, Fernandes and Isgut (2006), Park, Yang, Shi and
Jiang (2006) for China, Aw, Roberts and Winston (2007), and De Loecker
(2007) for Slovenia.
All of these second generation studies …nd evidence of learning through
exporting. Blalock and Gertler (2004), for example, test for whether exporting confers productivity gains using a panel of Indonesian manufacturing enterprises. They …nd strong evidence that …rms experience a jump in
productivity of 3 to 5 percent following the initiation of exporting. Van
Biesebroeck (2006) examines the evidence in favor of learning by exporting
in Africa and also …nds a causal link from exporting to productivity. Aw,
Roberts and Xu (2009) also …nd evidence of learning by exporting in the
Taiwanese electronics industry.
61

Blalock and Gertler argue that previous tests of learning by exporting
were done on industrialized or middle income developing countries. They
point out that “while …rms in developed and middle income countries are
likely to be as e¢ cient as those in their trading partners’ countries, …rms
in the poorest countries may have much more to gain from exposure to international export markets”. Lileeva and Tre‡er (2007) propose a similar
explanation for these disparate …ndings using Canadian data. They show
that lower productivity …rms are more likely to invest and learn in order
to access foreign markets, in contrast to higher productivity …rms that are
able to export without additional investment. De Loecker (2007) …nds that
for Slovenian …rms, there was evidence of a di¤erent kind of selection into
export markets: only the most productive …rms began exporting. He then
uses nonlinear matching estimation to test whether there was learning by exporting during the 1994-2000 period. He …nds that while there was evidence
of selection into export markets, these same exporters increased productivity
as a result of exporting. The identi…cation strategy uses both matching
techniques and the di¤erence in productivity growth for those who began
exporting this period relative to a control group that did not. De Loecker
also …nds that learning by exporting was higher for …rms exporting to high
income destinations.
All of the identi…cation problems present in (10) for the cross-country
literature are challenges for these micro studies as well. How can we distinguish between selection into exporting (i.e. the most productive …rms choose
to become exporters) and the impact of exporting on learning and productivity? A number of studies exploit the panel nature of the data, testing
whether …rms were more productive prior to becoming exporters. This involves constructing an indicator for the period prior to when the …rm becomes
an exporter and testing whether it is statistically signi…cant in a regression
of productivity on export status. Another approach has been to …nd an instrument for export status. Van Biesebroeck (2005) uses as instruments for
lagged export status the location of the …rm, ethnicity of the owner, foreign
ownership and state ownership, although the validity of these instruments is
not completely clear. Lileeva and Tre‡er (2007) use US tari¤ cuts mandated
by the Canada-US Free Trade Agreement as an instrument for Canadian
export status.
Despite ongoing controversies regarding the importance of learning by
doing through exporting, it is probably safe to conclude the following:

62

1. The most productive …rms are likely to become exporters.
2. While there is selection into exporting, there is also learning through
exporting.
3. Learning from exporting is most likely in technologically backward
countries and among less productive …rms.

5

Foreign Direct Investment

Many countries encourage inward FDI because they expect that foreign …rms
will enable domestic enterprises to become technologically more advanced.
This is nothing other than industrial policy, although it is rarely identi…ed
as such. As pointed out in our introduction, attracting foreign funds typically means tilting incentives in favor of foreign investors. Hanson (2001)
reviews the many incentives o¤ered to foreign …rms, which include income
tax holidays, tari¤ exemptions, and subsidies for infrastructure. In 1998, 103
countries o¤ered tax concessions to foreign companies that set up production
or other facilities within their borders. Some of these concessions were enormous: the Government of Alabama paid the equivalent of 150,000 dollars per
employee to Mercedes for locating its new plant there in 1994; the British
government provided between 30,000 and 50,000 dollars per employee to attract Samsung and Siemens in the late 1990s; Ireland o¤ered until recently
a corporate tax rate of 10 percent to all foreign manufacturers who chose to
locate there (Gorg and Greenaway (2003)). Until 2008, China o¤ered signi…cantly lower corporate tax rates to foreign companies locating there, and
continues to subsidize infrastructure investments for multinationals locating
in foreign enterprise zones.
Most countries encourage FDI in‡ows to speci…c sectors; typically these
are sectors which are technologically more advanced. Chandra and Kolavalli
(2006) document that "attracting FDI has been an important strategy in
technological adaptation" in a number of cases (p. 33) Table 6 from Alfaro
and Charlton (2008) identi…es the speci…c sectors targeted by 29 countries
for the 1985-2000 period. The most targeted sectors include machinery,
computers, telecommunications, and transport equipment.
Alfaro and Charlton …nd that FDI in‡ows are likely to be higher in targetted sectors, and that FDI in these sectors generates higher growth. Their
study suggests support for the argument that IP with respect to FDI has
63

been successful at generating growth, possibly because governments appear
to target sectors with positive externalities. Nevertheless, it is di¢ cult to
econometrically identify whether targeting has worked, since FDI may be
attracted to sectors with high potential for growth.
Aggregate cross-country studies on FDI and growth are reviewed in greater
detail in another chapter of this volume. Given the strong correlation between FDI in‡ows as a share of GDP and openness to trade reported in
Tables 3 and 4, identifying a separate impact of FDI from trade on country
outcomes is likely to be challenging. All of the problems associated with
the cross-country evidence on trade and growth— measuring policies, identifying the direction of causality, and omitted variable bias–are present in this
literature as well. Researchers typically use FDI ‡ows, rather than policies
targeted at FDI, to measure its e¤ects, since panel data on FDI policies is
even more di¢ cult to obtain than data on tari¤s. Reverse causality is also
a problem, since extensive evidence suggests that FDI is attracted to large,
less risky, and growing local markets. Nevertheless, there is generally mixed
evidence on the relationship between FDI and a country’s growth (Carkovic
and Levine (2002), Bosworth and Collins (1999), Borenzstein et al (1998)).
Recent work on FDI and growth suggests that other complementary policies
need to be in place to maximize the gains from inward foreign investment,
reinforcing the theme introduced in Section 4 on trade. Important policies
that need to be in place for a country to bene…t from FDI include a minimum
level of human capital (Borenzstein et al, 1998), developed …nancial markets
(Alfaro et al, 2004) and openness to trade (Balasubramanyam, Salisu, and
Dapsoford, 1996).
There is signi…cant research interest in FDI as a vehicle through which
developing country …rms learn about new technology. While most of the
empirical literature focuses on productivity e¤ects of FDI, there is also a
growing literature that examines the impact of FDI on factor markets. We
review these two research areas below.

5.1

FDI and Productivity

To justify special treatment, foreign enterprises would need to confer some
type of positive externality which is not internalized by …rms. A typical test
of whether foreign …rms transfer technology to domestic enterprises would be
to estimate …rm-level productivity, and measure whether a more extensive
foreign presence increases domestic …rm productivity. As an illustration,
64

Aitken and Harrison (1999) estimate the following production function for
…rm i in sector j at time t:
Yit = Constant + 1 DF I_P lantijt + 2 DF I_Sectorjt
+ 3 (DF I_P lantijt
2 DF I_Sectorjt ) + 4 Zijt +
where
DF I_Sectorjt =

P

i2j

i

+

DF I_P lantijt Employmentijt
P
i2j Employmentijt

t

+ "it

The dependent variable could be log of output, in which case the Z vector
would control for input use, leaving foreign investment to a¤ect the residual determinants of output, which is typically interpreted to be total factor
productivity (TFP) levels. Alternatively, the dependent variable Y could
be output per worker or TFP, and the vector Z could include a number of
other controls, such as size, openness, or other determinants of productivity. DF I_P lant is typically measured as the share of the plant which is
foreign-owned. The coe¢ cient 1 then measures whether …rms with foreign
investment are more productive than other plants. Most researchers …nd
that the own-plant e¤ect is large and signi…cant. In other words, …rms with
foreign equity participation typically have higher output, higher output per
worker, or higher levels of TFP.
This is an important point which has not been emphasized enough in
the literature on FDI. While many researchers are focused on identifying
some sort of externality or technology spillover, probably the most important contribution that foreign …rms make is the direct e¤ect captured by
the coe¢ cient 1 on DF I_P lant. Ramondo (2008) develops a model where
countries gain access to foreign technologies through the activities of multinationals. In counterfactual exercises with her estimated model she …nds
that for small countries the associated bene…ts can be quite large.
Policies that promote joint venture activity are consistent with the empirical results showing productivity gains from FDI that are internalized by
joint ventures. As an illustration, promoting joint ventures has been the core
of China’s policy to bene…t from inward foreign investment. Foreign investors
in key sectors (mobile phones, computers) were required to enter into joint
ventures with domestic …rms (Rodrik, 2006). In electronics, Huchet (1997)
writes that China’s technology strategy has been clear: “allow foreign …rms
access to the domestic market in exchange for technology transfer through
65

joint production or joint ventures.”Wholly owned foreign …rms are a rarity in
China; most …rms are joint ventures between local (frequently state-owned)
and foreign enterprises.
China is a particularly interesting case to study in seeking to understand
the role played by technology transfer via FDI. Since opening its economy to
the outside world in late 1978, China has absorbed an increasing amount of
FDI and is now among the world’s largest hosts of FDI in‡ows. A number
of recent papers use Chinese …rm-level data to evaluate the the own-plant effect (the coe¢ cient 1 that measures whether …rms with foreign investment
are more productive than other plants).
All these studies, including Hu
and Je¤erson (2002), Du, Harrison, and Je¤erson (2008), and Lin, Liu, and
Zhang (2008) …nd that joint ventures in China exhibit not only higher productivity levels than other enterprises but also higher productivity growth.
Du, Harrison, and Je¤erson (2008) …nd that these e¤ects are largest for stateowned enterprises that form partnerships with foreign …rms. The impact on
their productivity is 10 times that on privately-owned enterprises. Du, Harrison, and Je¤erson (2008) suggest that forming joint venture partnerships
for Chinese state-owned enterprises has provided an alternative approach to
privatization as a way of increasing public sector performance. Bartel and
Harrison (2004) also …nd that public sector enterprises in Indonesia improved
performance after forming joint ventures with foreign enterprises.
Although there is a strong relationship between foreign ownership and
productivity levels, that e¤ect often cannot be separately identi…ed from
a …rm …xed e¤ect. So if the equation above is estimated either in …rstdi¤erences or with …rm speci…c e¤ects, then the coe¢ cient on DF I_P lant
may not be signi…cant. What this implies is that …rms with foreign equity
participation are at a higher level of technology, but technological change is
not always higher for these enterprises. This should not be surprising, since
many of these …rms are already at the technology frontier.
Evidence suggests that encouraging less productive state enterprises to
make alliances with foreign …rms may raise productivity. However, most
research has not used any sort of identi…cation strategy to tease out the direction of causality. One possibility is that foreign …rms acquire the most
productive domestic enterprises, or form alliances with the most productive
…rms. Arnold and Javorcik (2006) attack this problem by asking whether foreign …rms are simply acquiring the most productive domestic enterprises (in
Indonesia) or whether they cause these enterprises to become more productive. Combining di¤erences-in-di¤erences estimation with nonlinear match66

ing techniques, they show that the acquired …rms outperformed the control
group in every observable dimension, including exhibiting higher productivity growth, higher investment, and higher sales growth. They conclude that
foreign equity infusions do confer bene…ts to domestic enterprises, and that
the e¤ect is not simply one of picking winners. However, more studies in this
regard would be useful.
The coe¢ cient 2 on DF I_Sector measures the extent to which foreign
ownership in the sector positively a¤ects the productivity of domestic enterprises. This e¤ect is sometimes referred to as a horizontal spillover, since it
measures the extent to which foreign investment in the same sector a¤ects
the productivity of domestic …rms. Early studies, such as Blomstrom and
Wol¤ (1994) for Mexico, typically estimated a pure cross-section or failed to
include …rm or industry-speci…c e¤ects. Consequently, the coe¢ cient 2 was
always positive and frequently signi…cant, indicating the presence of positive
horizontal spillovers. Aitken and Harrison (1999) showed that this positive
coe¢ cient for Venezuelan manufacturing enterprises was spurious, indicating
that foreign …rms were attracted to highly productive sectors. When they
include …rm or sector e¤ects, the coe¢ cient on DF I_Sector switched from
positive to negative. Aitken and Harrison interpreted the negative coe¢ cient as indicative of market-stealing: foreign …rms grab market share from
domestic …rms, driving them up their cost curves in sectors with economies
of scale.
Other recent studies measuring the extent of horizontal spillovers are
listed in Table 7. In contrast to earlier studies which generally found support for positive (horizontal) spillovers, more recent studies that have attempted to reproduce Aitken and Harrison (1999) for other countries have
typically found insigni…cant or negative horizontal externalities. This includes Djankov and Hoekman (2000) for the Czech Republic, Smarzynska
(2002) for Lithuania, Lopez-Cordova (2003) for Mexico, Damijan et al (2001)
for eight transition economies, Kathuria (2000) for India, Hu and Je¤erson
(2002) and others. Most studies published since 1999 has found negative or
insigni…cant horizontal externalities.31
One explanation for the lack of positive horizontal spillovers is that foreign …rms have no incentives to transfer knowledge or technology to competi31
One interesting exeption in Poole (2008), who uses a matched establishment-worker
database from Brazil to present evidence consistent with the existence of positive multinational spillovers through worker mobility in Brazil.

67

tors within the same industry. They should, however, have an incentive to
help the productivity of their suppliers, by transferring knowledge to them
(see Kugler (2001)). More recent work has sought to identify what is now referred to as vertical spillovers, which are positive externalities stemming from
the relationships of foreign enterprises with domestic suppliers or customers.
Forward spillovers could occur if foreign …rms that locate domestically supply inputs that embody new technologies or processes. Backward spillovers
could occur if domestic suppliers to downstream foreign …rms bene…t from
contacts with the …rms to increase productivity. Smarzynska (2004) de…nes
horizontal, forward, and backward FDI spillovers as follows:
P
i2j DF I_P lantijt OU T P U Tijt
P
HorizontalF DIjt =
i2j OU T P U Tijt

and

F orwardF DIjt =

X

m6=j

jm

P

i2m

DF I_P lantijt (Yijt
P
Xijt )
i2m (Yijt

Xijt )

where jm is the share of inputs purchased by industry j from industry m in
total inputs sourced by sector j. Finally, if jkt is the proportion of sector
j’s output that is supplied to sector k (taken from the input-output matrix),
then backward FDI spillovers are de…ned as:
X
HorizontalF DIkt
BackwardF DIjt =
jk
k6=j

Smarzynska …nds a zero or negative impact from forward linkages, and
a positive impact of backward linkages, indicating that technological gains
from FDI are primarily concentrated among domestic suppliers interacting
with downstream foreign …rms. Recent studies on other countries (Table
7) also …nd these positive backward FDI spillovers, including Blalock and
Gertler (2003) for Indonesia, Liu for China (2005), Gorodnichenko, Svejnar,
and Terrell (2006) for 15 transition economies, and Lopez-Cordova (2003) for
Mexico. The evidence in favor of backward spillovers may be one factor that
could explain China’s emphasis on the use of domestic content requirements.
Sutton (2004) describes the use of domestic content requirements in both
India and China as follows:

68

"From the early ’90s onwards, a wave of multinational …rms
entered both markets. In both countries, these entrants were
required to achieve a high level of domestic content within a speci…ed period (typically, 70 percent within 3 years). For at least
some of the new entrants, this was seen as an unreasonable target, as domestic suppliers could not meet the price and quality
requirements of the car makers. Achieving the 70 percent target required the car makers to switch rapidly from a reliance on
imported components to sourcing from local vendors; and this in
turn gave the car makers a strong incentive to work closely with
(…rst-tier) suppliers, to ensure that quality standards were met,
within an acceptable price."

These requirements illustrate how IP has been actively used to shape
China and India’s auto sector through the use of domestic content requirements. Even if there are backward spillovers, however, these spillovers could
be captured by subsidizing domestic input purchases by foreign …rms instead
of imposing them through domestic content requirements. Domestic content
requirements could deter some investments that would have created backward spillovers, and may lead to ine¢ cient outcomes by protecting domestic
suppliers from import competition.
A related approach is to think of the bene…ts of FDI through their impact on the variety of non-tradable inputs available in the host country.
Rodríguez-Clare (1996) presents a model to explore this idea. Under full employment, multinationals expand at the expense of domestic …rms, so what
matters is the demand for domestic inputs per unit of labor hired, a term that
Rodríguez-Clare labels the linkage coe¢ cient.32 If multinationals’linkage coe¢ cient is higher than that of domestic …rms, the multinationals’backward
linkage e¤ect is positive and FDI would lead to an increase in input variety
and host-country productivity.33
Using …rm-level data for several Latin American countries, Alfaro and
Rodríguez-Clare (2004) show that although multinationals source a lower
share of their inputs domestically than domestic …rms, they nevertheless tend
32

This is in contrast to most of the literature on multinationals and linkages, which
focused instead on the share of inputs that multinationals source domestically.
33
The positive productivity e¤ect relies on the presence of love of variety for inputs, as
in Ethier (1982) and Romer (1990).

69

to have a higher linkage coe¢ cient thanks to the fact that they use more
roundabout production methods, requiring more inputs per unit of labor.
Still, to date there is only anecdotal evidence that multinationals indeed lead
to an increase in the variety of inputs available in the host country. Moreover,
one concern is that if multinationals generate positive backward linkages then
this should bene…t domestic …rms that use similar inputs as multinationals.
One would then expect to see positive horizontal externalities, but this is
generally not what the literature …nds (at least in LDCs).
To summarize, the evidence seems to consistently indicate that:
1. Firms that receive FDI (joint ventures) or are acquired by multinationals generally exhibit higher productivity levels.
2. There is evidence of positive vertical spillovers from foreign buyers to
domestic suppliers (backward linkages) and from foreign suppliers to
domestic buyers (forward linkages).
3. There are generally insigni…cant horizontal spillovers to …rms within
the same industry.
Anecdotal evidence and new research (Chandra and Kolavalli (2006), Alfaro and Charlton (2008)) suggests that FDI has been particularly important
in cases where governments were actively engaged in strategies of technological upgrading in certain sectors, and brought in foreign companies as part of
those strategies. Typically, these e¤orts were part of a set of complementary
policies that included increasing the supply of skilled workes in a targetted
industry, improving regulation and infrastructure, promoting new activities
and innovation, and increasing exports. In many of those cases, the government probably encouraged joint ventures, but the direction of causality is
not so clear.
Given these results, do the bene…ts of …scal incentives for foreign enterprises outweigh the costs? If the primary reason for giving these incentives
is to encourage technology transfer, then the answer is likely to be no: if
foreign …rms are the only ones that use the inputs that bene…t from backward spillovers and there are no horizontal spillovers, then FDI will occur
without subsidies. Yet there is clearly a further need to understand the
mechanism through which foreign …rms generate vertical spillovers. Even if
vertical spillovers do exist, Pack and Saggi (2006) argue that "the magnitude
of some of the incentives being used seems di¢ cult to justify”. (p. 281).
70

They also point out that “investment incentives and tax breaks to multinational investors work against their local competitors. Thus, if there are
local …rms that could potentially compete with multinationals, the adverse
e¤ect on such …rms of tax incentives to multinationals needs to be taken into
account. The e¢ cacy of investment incentives is also unclear— such policies
could easily end up transferring rents to foreign investors without a¤ecting
their investment decisions.”(Pack and Saggi (2006), p. 281)

5.2

FDI and host country factor markets

One robust result in the literature on foreign ownership and productivity
is that …rms with foreign equity have higher productivity levels. Foreign
…rms are also typically more capital intensive, and spend more on worker
training. As long as …rms do not face a perfectly ‡at labor supply schedule,
it is likely that these di¤erent …rm characteristics will translate into higher
wages. There could also be other imperfections in the labor market, such as
search costs for …rms seeking skilled workers, or e¢ ciency wage setting, that
could result in foreign …rms paying higher wages. To the extent that there is
worker mobility or productivity spillovers, these wage e¤ects for workers at
foreign enterprises could also spill over to other workers.
Almost all studies …nd that workers in foreign …rms are paid higher wages,
which may re‡ect the fact that foreign …rms or joint ventures have higher
productivity levels. In perfect markets more productive …rms would not pay
higher wages, but market imperfections (such as search costs or informational
asymmetries) could generate such a link. Evidence showing higher wages paid
by multinationals includes Aitken, Harrison and Lipsey (1996) for Mexico
and Venezuela, Lipsey and Sjoholm (2004) for Indonesia using a pure crosssection, Harrison and Scorse (2004) for Indonesia using a panel, Velde and
Morrisey (2003) for a set of African economies, Martins and Esteves (2007) for
Brazil, and Earle and Telegdy (2007) for Hungary. Studies of industrialized
countries also …nd large wage gaps between domestic and foreign enterprise
wages when researchers do not condition for worker or …rm characteristics.
This includes Almeida (2003) for Portugal, Girma, Greenaway and Wakelin
(2001) and Dri¢ eld and Girma (2003) for the United Kingdom, and Feliciano
and Lipsey (1999) for the United States. The unconditional wage gap, which
is the gap in wages paid by foreign versus domestically owned enterprises
without controlling for worker or …rm characteristics, is typically large. It is
frequently as high as 40 percent (for Hungary) or 50 percent (for Brazil).
71

When researchers control for worker and …rm characteristics, then the
wage premium paid by foreign …rms declines dramatically, to around 10 percent. Earle and Telegdy (2007) …nd that the wage gap between workers
employed at foreign and domestic enterprises is not much a¤ected by conditioning on worker characteristics, but that controlling for industry reduces
the premia to 34 percent, and controlling for …rm size further reduces it to 28
percent. (Robert Lipsey has questioned whether it makes sense to control for
characteristics such as …rm size: if foreign …rms are larger and consequently
pay higher wages than domestically owned enterprises, workers are nevertheless better o¤.) When Earle and Telegdy control for unobserved …xed e¤ects
by exploiting changes in …rm ownership to identify its e¤ect on wages, the
premium is further reduced to 7 percent. Harrison and Scorse (2004) also
…nd that the premium falls to between 5 and 10 percent when worker and
…rm characteristics are controlled for. Ibarraran, using data for Mexican
macquilas in 1992 and 1999, …nds no premium in 1992 but a small premium
in 1999.
Martins and Esteves (2007) use matched worker and …rm panel data for
1995 through 1999 to analyze the impact of foreign ownership on wags in
Brazil. Like Earle and Telegdy (2007) they use changes in …rm ownership as
a way to control for unobserved …rm-speci…c e¤ects that could be correlated
with wage premia. They also follow workers who move to or leave foreign
enterprises, to control for unobserved worker-speci…c e¤ects. They …nd that
workers moving from foreign to domestic …rms typically take wage cuts when
they move, while movers form domestic to foreign …rms increase their pay.
However, compared to the unconditional wage gaps of 50 percent, the wage
premium associated with working for a foreign …rm falls to between 3 and 7
percent once worker and …rm characteristics are controlled for. The authors
conclude that their results support a positive impact of foreign …rms on
Brazilian wages.
To summarize, the evidence suggests that foreign …rms pay a small wage
premium of between 5 and 10 percent. While the earlier literature found
larger wage premia of more like twenty percent, these earlier estimates failed
to adequately control for individual characteristics of workers, such as education and experience. Consequently, part of the wage gap stems from the
fact that foreign …rms tend to hire better educated and more skilled workers. Nevertheless, we can safely conclude that foreign enterprises do not pay
workers below what their domestic counterparts would pay. In fact, most
of the evidence suggests that foreign …rms tend to pay higher wages than
72

comparable domestic …rms. There is also evidence that foreign …rms are
more susceptible to pressure from labor groups, leading them to be exhibit
greater compliance with minimum wages and labor standards. Harrison and
Scorse (2008) …nd that foreign …rms in Indonesia were much more likely
than domestic enterprises to raise wages and adhere to minimum wages as a
consequence of the anti-sweatshop campaigns there. They also …nd that the
employment costs of the anti-sweatshop campaigns were minimal, as garment
and footwear subcontractors were able to reduce pro…ts to pay the additional
wage costs without reducing the number of workers.
While most of the emphasis on the role of FDI in local factor markets
is on the relationship between FDI and host country wages, there is also an
emerging literature on FDI’s e¤ect on local capital markets. One reason
policy makers give for promoting foreign investment in developing countries
is the scarcity of capital for new investment. This argument is based on the
assumption that incoming foreign investors provide additional capital when
they set up new enterprises in local markets. However, as exchange rate
volatility has continued to rise many foreign investors have found ways to
hedge by borrowing on local capital markets. This increase in local …nancing
for incoming foreign investors may lead to crowding out of domestic …rms.
Harrison and McMillan (2003) and Love, Harrison, and McMillan (2004)
test whether or not borrowing by local multinationals is crowding out domestic enterprises. The framework in both papers uses an Euler equation
approach combined with Generalized Method of Moment estimation. While
Harrison and McMillan (2003) is a country case study which analyzes the
behavior of mostly French multinationals operating in Cote d’Ivoire, Love,
Harrison and McMillan (2004) use company level data across a panel of
countries. The results suggest that in a country such as the Cote d’Ivoire,
which was riddled with market imperfections and where access to credit was
rationed due to interest rate ceilings, foreign investors did indeed crowd domestic enterprises out of local credit markets. However, Love, Harrison, and
McMillan (2004) found that foreign investors tended to “crowd in” domestic enterprises— i.e., as foreign investment increased, the amount of credit
available to domestically-owned …rms actually rose. The contrasting results
again point to the important role of policy complementarities: in a country
with credit market imperfections such as the Cote d’Ivoire, FDI exacerbated
these problems. These studies using micro-data are consistent with macrolevel evidence on the importance of complementarities with …nancial market
development for ensuring productivity gains from FDI (Alfaro et al, 2004).
73

6

Concluding Remarks

Given the varied experiences across countries and time periods, the di¤erent interpretations possible, and the di¢ culties in conducting clean empirical
analyses, it is not easy to synthesize the literature on industrial, trade, and
FDI policy in development. Our survey of the theory and the evidence nevertheless suggests some tentative conclusions.
There are instances where infant-industry protection led to higher growth
–particularly in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries— but our
review suggests that the conditions needed for infant-industry protection to
produce higher growth in developing countries are not often satis…ed. The
framework in Section 2 shows that the theoretical justi…cation for intervention requires at a minimum either industry-level rents or a latent comparative
advantage, as well as large Marshallian externalities from production. These
necessary conditions are not easy to identify for policy makers ex ante. Nor is
there evidence suggesting that developing countries have generally protected
sectors with latent comparative advantage and Marshallian externalities. The
types of sectors where there are important Marshallian externalities may not
be those where developing countries have a latent comparative advantage
(i.e., sectors that are intensive in knowledge and human capital). It is also
likely that protection has been used as a tool to protect sunset industries instead of sunrise industries; hence, there is an inherent bias against promoting
sectors with a latent comparative advantage.
For infant-industry protection to improve welfare it must pass both the
Mill and Bastable tests. The Mill test requires that the protected sector can
eventually survive international competition without protection, whereas the
Bastable test requires that the discounted future bene…ts compensate the
present costs of protection. This means that the dynamic forces which increase industry productivity must operate quickly. In practice, most research
assessing the success of IP has ignored these tests. Even if studies could show
that protected sectors grew faster, this would not be su¢ cient evidence to
claim that IP is justi…ed from a welfare standpoint. There are other problems as well. In all the models presented in this review, protection is never
the …rst-best policy. In addition, the infant-industry framework typically
assumes that the mere expansion of a sector will generate all sorts of positive e¤ects that will increase industry-wide productivity. But this may not
happen, and the economy may simply end up with a larger version of the
ine¢ cient sector it began with. We discussed an alternative set of policies
74

aimed directly at eliciting the investments that will increase productivity.
Such investments may not occur without public intervention because of coordination failures.
The hundreds of studies on trade policies, trade shares, productivity, and
growth show a strong correlation between increasing trade shares and country
performance, and no signi…cant correlation between tari¤s on …nal goods and
country outcomes. The only exception is for intermediate or capital goods,
where a higher tari¤ is associated with lower growth. Putting aside the
serious problems of reverse causality identi…ed in our review, we interpret
this evidence as suggesting that trade and FDI policies have generated the
greatest welfare gains when they are associated with increasing exposure to
trade. One implication is that interventions that increase exposure to trade
(such as export promotion) are likely to lead to higher welfare gainsthan other
types of interventions (such as tari¤s or domestic content requirements).
New evidence suggests that IP through FDI promotion may lead to higher
welfare gains than intervention in trade, in part because FDI-promotion policies focus on new activities rather than on protecting (possibly unsuccessful) incumbents. Still, as Chandra and Kolavalli (2006) have concluded in
their overview of 10 cases of successful technology upgrading, “without hostcountry policies to develop local capabilities, MNC-led exports are likely
to remain technologically stagnant, leaving developing countries unable to
progress beyond the assembly of imported components” (p. 19). Chandra
and Kolavalli go on to state that “the role of government was most e¤ective
when its support for speci…c industries was embedded in institutions and
policies that were internally consistent, had an explicit purpose, and were
blessed with political commitment” (p. 39). Rodrik refers to this characteristic as “embeddedness.” Chandra and Kolavalli conclude that “in every
case, getting it right depended upon the degree of synchronization between
institutions and government policies to motivate learning among exporters.
The hallmark of these policies was industry speci…city, which o¤ers some
useful lessons for other developing countries”(p. 41).34
34

Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare (2009) expands on the current paper and discusses some
of the policy implications of these …ndings.

75

Appendix
We …rst show how size vm matters for wages. We assume that x1 = x2 =
x. Also, to simplify, we assume that Tj = Lj = 1 all j. In this case
X
x^jm wj
(11)
m
j

We also have x^11 = x^22 = x, while v1 > v2 and x^j1 = x^j2 = zj for any
j = 3; :::N . Then it is clear that 1 > 2 () w1 < w2 . Assuming to
simplify notation that Y = 1 then
X
x^jm vm = m
(12)
wj1+ =
m

Thus,

X vm

w11+ =

m=3

and

m=3

In equilibrium

1

= x

1

X vm

m=3

2

=

and

X vm

m=3

m

m

+

m

X vm

w21+ =

+

m

v1

v2

x +

1

+

v1
1

2

+

v2

x

2

solve the following system of equations
! =1+
!
X vm
v1
v2
v1
v2
+
x +
+
+
+
x
2

1

v1
1

x +

2

v2
2

!

m=3

=1+

+x

m

X vm

m=3

m

+

1

2

v1

v2

1

+

2

x

!

=1+

+A
=1+

+A

P
where A = j=3 zj wj . If v1 = v2 then the solution of the system entails
1 =
2 . Also, if
1 =
2 then necessarily v1 = v2 . Now we show that
when v1 > v2 the solution of the system is such that 1 < 2 : We consider
0
( 1
2 )v1 at the point v1 = v2 and
1 =
2 . At the point v1 = v2 and
=
we
have
1
2
! =(1+ ) 1
X
v
v
v
1
m
1
1
0
( 1
+
x +
x2 + 1 2x < 0
2 )v1 =
1+
1
1
1
m=3 m
This establishes that a small increase in v1 implies that 1 < 2 . Now
suppose there exist v1 > v2 such that 1 > 2 . Due to continuity there
76

would exist v1 > v2 such that 1 = 2 . But this contradicts v1 = v2 ()
1
2 = 0. Thus, the solution of the system above implies that if v1 > v2 ,
then 1 < 2 : Thus, we have that 1 < 2 in equilibrium, and this implies
w1 > w2 .
Now consider two countries such that country 1 has HP in the …rst industry and country 2 has HP in the second industry. We assume that v1 = v2 = v
and (as above) that x^j1 = x^j2 = zj for any j = 3; ::; N . We will show
that x1 > x2 implies w1 > w2 . From 12 we see that w1 > w2 is equivalent to x1 1 2 > x2 1 1 . Obviously, x1 = x2 ()
1 =
2.
We can write 1 = f (x1 ; x2 ) and 2 = g(x1 ; x2 ). Moreover, f (x1 ; x2 ) =
g(x2 ; x1 ):This implies that x1 1 2
x2 1 1 = x1 1 g(x1 ; x2 )
x2 1 f (x1 ; x2 ) = 0 if and only if x1 = x2 : We have that x1 1 2
x2 1 1 is equal to
N
X

zj wj

=1+

x1

x2 + x1

1

j=3

X

x^j2 wj

=1+

x2

1

j=1;2

Notice that
A

PN

j=3 zj wj

x1

1

=1+

X

=1+

x^j1 wj

j=1;2

x2 > 0, as x1 > x2 : Consider then
X
=1+
=1+
x^j2 wj
x2 1
x^j1 wj
x1

X

j=1;2

j=1;2

Using x^11 = x1 , x^21 = 1, x^12 = 1, x^22 = x2 , and 12, and simplifying, we get
! =1+
X vm
vx
v
+ 1+
2x1 1 x1 x2
A =
m

m=3::N

1

X vm

+

vx2

m

m=3::N

2

+

2

v
1

!

=1+

x2 x1

1 + 2x2

Di¤erentiating A w.r.t. x1 and evaluating at x1 = x2 = x and
yields
0
! =1+
X vm
vx
v
A0x1 =
+ 1+
x1 1 @2 x + x
m=3::N

=

m

X vm

m=3::N

m

1

+

vx1
1

2

+

v

2

!

=1+

x1
77

1

0

@2 +

1+

1

=

1+

2

=

2x

P

vm

m=3::N

2x + 1 + x2

P

m=3::N

vm
m

+

x2

1

vx1
1

m

+

1

v x
1

+

vx1

v
2

1
1

1

v x
1

+

v
2

A>0

1
A

x

1

x

1

This implies that if x1 > x2 , then A > 0 and, thereby, 1 1 > 2 2 : This
implies that w1 > w2 :
Now consider two industries with the same size. The only di¤erence is the
number of countries that have HP of size x in these two industries. Assume
that a set Ji of countries have HP in industry i = 1; 2, with J2
J1 . We
have
X
X
X
wj +
wj + x
wj
1 = x w1 + w2 + x
j2J2

xv

= x

v

+

1

+x

X

+

2

X vm

m

m 3

X

wj + x

j2J2

j62J1

j2J1 =J2

!

=(1+ )

+

v

+

xv

1

X

wj

X

wj +

wj +

+

2

X vm

m 3

m

!

=(1+ )

j62J1

j2J1 =J2

and
2

= w1 + x w2 + x

X

j2J2

=

xv

+

1

+x

X

j2J2

v

+

2

X vm

m

m 3

wj +

X

wj +

=(1+ )

+x

v
1

wj +

X

wj

j62J1

j2J1 =J2

!

X

+

xv
2

+

X vm

m 3

m

!

=(1+ )

wj

j62J1

j2J1 =J2

If J2 =J1 = ; (which implies that J1 = J2 ) then 1 = 2 . As J2 =J1 becomes
non-empty, then 1 > 2 . But recall that since x1 = x2 = x and v1 = v2 = v
then
!1=1+
X vm
Xx v
v
+
+
w1 =
1

m

2

m 3

m

and

w2 =

X v
m

1

+

xv
2

This implies that w2 > w1 .

78

+

X vm

m 3

m

!1=1+

References
Abdulnasser, HI., 2002: Export Performance and Economic Growth Nexus
in Japan: A Bootstrap Approach, Japan and the World Economy, Vol. 14,
No. 1, pp. 25-33.
Abhayarathe, ASP., 1996: Foreign Trade and Economic Growth: Evidence from Srilanka, Applied Economic Letters, Vol. 13, pp. 567-570.
Afxentiou, PC. and A. Serletis, 1989: Long Term Trends in Canadian
Economic Development , Economic Notes, Vol. 3, pp. 362-375.
Afxentiou, P. C. 1991. A time-series analysis of the relationship between
government expenditure and gdp in canada. Public Finance Review 19, (3):
316.
Afxentiou, P. C. and A. Serletis. 1991. Exports and GNP causality in
the industrial countries: 1950-1985. Kyklos 44, (2): 167.
Agosín, M. and C. Bravo-Ortega, 2007: The Emergence of New Successful Export Activities in Latin America: The Case of Chile, Department of
Economics, Universidad de Chile.
Ahmad, J and ACC. Kwan, 1991, Causality Between Exports and Economic Growth: Empirical Evidence from Africa, Economics Letters, Vol. 37,
pp. 397-416.
Ahmad, J and S. Harnhirun and J. Yang, 1997, Exports and Economic
Growth in the ASEAN Countries, International Review of Economics and
Business, Vol. 44, pp. 419-430.
Ahmad, J and S. Harnhirun, 1995: Unit Roots and Cointegration in
Estimating Causality Between Exports and Economic Growth: Empirical
Evidence from the ASEAN Countries, Economics Letters, Vol. 49, pp. 329334.
Aitken, B., A. Harrison and R.E. Lipsey. 1996. Wages and foreign ownership A comparative study of mexico, venezuela, and the united states.
Journal of International Economics 40, (3-4) (5): 345-71.
Aitken, B., G.H. Hanson and A.E. Harrison. 1997. Spillovers, foreign
investment, and export behavior. Journal of International Economics 43,
(1-2) (8): 103-32.
Aitken, Brian J., and Ann E. Harrison, 1999: Do Domestic Firms Bene…t from Direct Foreign Investment? Evidence from Venezuela, American
Economic Review, Vol. 89, pp. 605-618.
Alam, MS. 1991, Trade Orientation and Macro Economic Preformance in
LDCs: An Empirical Studies, Economic Development and Cultural Change,

79

Vol. 39, pp. 839-848.
Alcala, F. and Ciccone, A., 2001: Trade and Productivity, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 119, No. 2, pp. 613-46.
Alcalá, F. and A. Ciccone. 2004. Trade and productivity. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 119, (2) (05/01):613-46.
Alege, SP. 1993, Export and Growth in the Nigerian Economy: Causality
Test, Indian Journal of Economics, Vol. 73, pp. 397-416.
Alfaro, Laura and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, Multinationals and Linkages:
an Empirical Investigation, Economia (Journal of LACEA), Spring 2004 (Volume 4, Number 2)
Al-Marhubi, F., 2000, Export Diversi…cation and Growth: An Empirical
Investigation, Applied Economics Letters, Vol. 7, pp. 559-562.
Almeida, Rita. May 6, 2004. The labor market e¤ects of foreign-owned
…rms. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper no. 3300.
Altenburg, T. and J. Meyer-Stamer (1999): How to Promote Clusters.
Policy Experiences from Latin America, World Development, Vol. 27, No.
9.
Alvarez, F. and R. Lucas (2005), General Equilibrium Analysis of the
Eaton-Kortum Model of International Trade, NBER Working Paper No.
11764.
Al-Yousif, YK., 1997: Exports and Economic Growth: Some Empirical
Evidence from the Arab Golf Countries, Applied Economics Letters, Vol. 29,
pp. 263-267.
Amirkhalkhali, S. and A. Dar.,1995: A Varing Coe¢ cients Model of Export Expansion Factor Accumulation and Economic Growth: The Case of
Columbia, Review of Development Economics, pp. 208-280.
Amiti, Mary and Konings, Jozef. 2005. Trade liberalization, intermediate
inputs, and productivity: Evidence from indonesia. IMF Working Paper
(July): 1-35.
Amoateng, K.A. and Amosko-Adu, B., 1996: Economic Growth, Export
and External Debt Causality: The Case of African Countries, Applied Economics, Vol. 28, pp. 21-27.
Amsden, A. H., 1989: Asia’s Next Giant: South Korea and Late Industrialization, Oxford University Press.
An, G. and MF. Lyingun, 2004: The Export Skill Content, Learning By
Exporting and Economic Growth, Economic Letters, Vol. 84, No. 1, pp.
29-34.

80

Anderson, Kym. August 1996. Social policy dimensions of economic
integration: Environmental and labour standards. NBER Working Paper
no. W5702.
Andrew Atkeson & Ariel Burstein. 2007. Pricing-to-market, trade costs,
and international relative prices. Working Paper Series 2007-26, Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Anoruo, E. and Y. Ahmad, 1999-2000: Openness and Economic Growth:
Evidence From Selected Asian Countries, Indian Economic Journal, Vol. 47,
No. 3, pp. 110-116.
Antras, P. and E. Helpman. (January 2007). Contractual frictions and
global sourcing. CEPR Discussion Paper no. 6033.
Anwer, MS. and RK. Sampath, 2000: Exports and Economic Growth,
Indian Economic Journal, Vol. 47, No. 3, pp. 79-88.
Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot and A. Rodríguez-Clare, 2009: New Trade
Theories, Same Welfare Gains? Manuscript, Pennsylvania State University.
Arkolakis, C., S. Demidova, P. Klenow, and A. Rodríguez-Clare, 2008:
Endogenous Variety and the Gains from Trade, American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings.
Arnold, J. M., Javorcik, B.S. and Mattoo, A. September 21, 2006. Does
services liberalization bene…t manufacturing …rms? evidence from the czech
republic. CEPR Discussion Paper no. 5902.
Atesoglu. HS., 1994: An Application of A Kaldorian Export-Led Model
of Growth to the United States, Applied Economics, Vol. 26, pp. 479-83.
Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein. May 2007. Pricing-to-market in
a ricardian model for international trade. American Economics Review 97,
(2): 362-367.
— — — . 2007. Innovation, …rm dynamics, and international trade. NBER
Working Papers 13326, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
— — — . 2007. Pricing-to-market, trade costs, and international relative
prices. Working Paper Series 2007-26, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Aw, B.Y., M.J. Roberts, and T. Winston. 2007. Export market participation, investments in R D and worker training, and the evolution of …rm
productivity. The World Economy 30, (1): 83-.
Aw, B.Y., S., Chung, and M. J. Roberts. 2000. Productivity and turnover
in the export market: Micro-level evidence from the republic of korea and
taiwan (china). The World Bank Economic Review 14, (1): 65.
Aw, B.Y., M. Roberts and D. Xu, 2009, R&D Investment, Exporting,
and Productivity Dynamics, Pennsylvania State University.
81

Awokuse, TO., 2005a: Exports, Economic Growth and Causality in Korea, Applied Economic Letters, Vol. 12, No. 11, pp. 693-696.
Awokuse, TO., 2005b: Export-Led Growth and The Japaness Economy:
Evidence From VAR and Directed Acyclic Graphs, Applied Economic Letters, Vol. 12, No. 14, pp. 849-858.
Bagwell, K., and R. W. Staiger. 1998. Will preferential agreements undermine the multilateral trading system? The Economic Journal 108, (449):
1162.
Bailey, M.N., C. Hulten, D. Campbell. 1992. The distribution of productivity. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 187.
Balaguer, J. and M. Cantavella-Jorda 2004: Structural Change in Exports and Economic Growth: Cointegration and Causality Analysis for Spain
(1961-2000), Applied Economics, Vol. 36, No. 5, pp. 473-477.
Balassa, B., 1985: Exports, Policy Choices, and Economic Growth in
Developing Countries After the 1973 Oil Shock, Journal of Development
Economics, vol 18, pp. 23-35.
Balasubramanyam, V.N., M. Salisu, M and D. Sapsford. January 1996.
Foreign direct investment and growth in EP and IS countries. Economic
Journal, Royal Economic Society 106 (434): 92-105.
Baldwin, R. E., 1969: The Case Against Infant Industry Protection, Journal of Political Economy 77 (May/June): 295-305.
Baldwin, R. and P. R. Krugman. September 1986. PERSISTENT TRADE
EFFECTS OF LARGE EXCHANGE RATE SHOCKS. NBER Working Paper Series 2017–NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH.
Baldwin, R. and P. Krugman. November 1989. Persistent trade e¤ects
of large exchange rate shocks. The Quarterly Journal of Economic 104 (4):
635-654.
Bardhan, P. 1970. Economic growth, development, and foreign trade: A
study in pure theory. Wiley Interscience (New York).
Bardhan, Pranab, 1971. On Optimum Subsidy to a Learning Industry:
An Aspect of the Theory of Infant-Industry Protection. International Economic Review 12: 54-70.
Barrios, Salvador and Eric Strobl, 2002: Foreign Direct Investment and
Productivity Spillovers: Evidence from the Spanish Experience, Weltwirtschaftliches
Archiv, Vol. 138, pp. 459-481.
Bartel, A.P., and A. E. Harrison. January 2000. Ownership versus environment: Disentangling the sources of public sector ine¢ ciency. World Bank
Policy Research Working Paper no. 2272.
82

Bartel, A.P., and A.E. Harrison. 2005. Ownership versus environment:
Disentangling the sources of public-sector ine¢ ciency. Review of Economics
and Statistics 87, (1) (02/01): 135-47.
Beason, R. and D. E. Weinstein, 1996: Growth, Economies of Scale, and
Targeting in Japan (1955-1990) The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.
78, No. 2. (May), pp. 286-295.
Begum, S. and AFM. Shamsuddin, 1998: Exports and Economic Growth
In Bangladesh, Journal of Development Studies, Vol. 35, No. 1, pp. 89-114.
Berg, H., 1997: The Relationship Between International Trade and Economic Growth In Mexico, The North American Journal of Economics and
Finance, Vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 1-21.
Bernard, A.B. and J. Wagner. 1997. Exports and success in german
manufacturing. Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 133, (1): 134.
Bernard, A.B. and J.B Jensen. 1999. Exceptional exporter performance:
Cause, e¤ect, or both? Journal of International Economics 47, (1) (2/1):
1-25.
Bernard, Andrew B., Stephen J. Redding & Peter K. Schott, 2006. MultiProduct Firms and Trade Liberalization, NBER Working Papers 12782, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bhagwati, J. and V.K. Ramaswami. 1963. Domestic distortions, tari¤s
and the theory of optimum subsidy. The Journal of Political Economy 71,
(1): 44.
Biesebroeck, J Van., 2003, Revisiting Some Productivity Debates, NBER
Working Papers, No. W10065.
Biesebroeck, V., 2005: Exporting Raises Productivity In Sub-Saharan
African Manufacturing Firms, Journal of International Economics, Vol. 67,
No. 2, pp. 373-391.
Bigsten, A. et al, 2004: Do African Manufacturing Firms Learn from
Exporting? The Journal of Development Studies, Vol. 40, No.3, pp.115—
141.
Biswal, B. and U. Dhawan, 1998: Export-Led Growth Hypothesis: Cointegration and Causality Analysis for Taiwan, Applied Economics Letters,
Vol. 5, pp. 699-701.
Blalock, Garrick and Paul Gertler, 2003: Technology from Foreign Direct
Investment and Welfare Gains through the Supply Chain, mimeo, Cornel
University.
Blalock, G. and P.J. Gertler. 2004. Learning from exporting revisited
in a less developed setting. Journal of Development Economics 75, (2) (12):
83

397-416.
Blomstrom, Magnus and Hakan Persson, 1983: Foreign Investment and
Spillovers E¢ ciency in An Underdeveloped Economy: Evidence from the
Mexican Manufacturing Industry, World Development, Vol. 11, pp. 493-501.
Blomström, M. 1986. Multinationals and market structure in mexico.
World Development 14, (4) (4): 523-30.
Blomstrom, M. and E. N. Wol¤. 1994. Multinational corporations and
productivity convergence in mexico. NBER Working Papers 3141, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Blomstrom, Magnus and Fredrik Sjoholm, 1999: Multinational Corporations and Productive Convergence in Mexico, In Baumol, William J., Richard
R. Nelson and Edward N. Wol¤ (eds): Convergence of Productivity: Cross
National Studies and Historical Evidence. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
pp. 263-283.
Bodman, PM., 1996: On Export-Led Growth In Australia and Canada:
Cointegration, Causality and Structural Stability, Australian Economic Paper, Vol. 35, pp. 282-99.
Bolaky, B. and C. Freund, 2004: Trade, Regulations, and Growth, The
World Bank, Policy Research Working Paper Series: 3255.
Boltho, A., 1996: Was Japaness Growth Export-Led?, Oxford Economic
Papers, Vol. 48, pp. 415-432.
Borensztein, E., J. De Gregorio and j-W. Lee, 1998b: How Does Foreign Direct Investment A¤ect Economic Growth?, Journal of International
Economics, Vol. 45, pp. 115-135.
Borrus, M., L. Tyson and J. Zysman. 1986. Creating advantage: How
government policies shape high technology trade, in Paul Krugman, editor,
Strategic Trade Policy and the New International Economics.
Borrus, M., Tyson, L. and J. Zysman, 1996: Creating Advantage: How
Government Policies Shape International Trade in the Semiconductor Industry, in Strategic Trade Policy and the New International Economics, edited
by Paul R. Krugman, MIT Press.
Bosco, Maria Goivanna, 2001: Does FDI Contribute to Technological
Spillovers and Growth? A Panel Data Analysis of Hungarian Firms, Transitional Corporations, Vol. 10. pp. 43-68.
Bosworth, B. and S.M. Collins. 1999. Capital ‡ows to developing countries: Implications for saving and investment. Brookings Papers on Economics 1: 143-80.
Brander, J., 1995, Strategic Trade Policy, in Handbook of International
84

Economics, Volume 3, editors Gene Grossman and Kenneth Rogo¤, NorthHolland.
Broda, Christian and Weinstein, David E. 2006. Globalization and the
gains from variety*. Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, (2) (05/01): 54185.
Broda, Christian M., Limão, Nuno and Weinstein, David E.,Optimal
Tari¤s: The Evidence(February 2006). NBER Working Paper Series, Vol.
w12033, pp. -, 2006.
Broda, Christian, Joshua Green…eld, and David Weinstein. 2006. From
groundnuts to globalization: A structural estimate of trade and growth.
NBER Working Papers 12512, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Broda, C., J. Green…eld, and D. E. Weinstein. From Groundnuts to
Globalization: A Structural Estimate of Trade and Growth, NBER Working
Paper 12512, September 2006.
Burney, NA., 1996: Exports and Economic Growth: Evidence from CrossCountry Analysis, Applied Economic Letters, Vol. 3, pp. 369-373.
CAF, 2007: Reporte Economia y Desarrollo 2006: Un Camino Hacia
la Transformación Productiva, Corporación Andina de Fomento, Caracas,
Venezuela.
Carkovic, M. and R. Levine, 2002: Does Foreign Direct Investment Accelarate Economic Growth? University of Minnesota, Working Paper.
Castellani, Davide and Antonello Zanfei, 2002a: technology Gaps, Absorptive Capacity and the Impact of Inward Investments on Productivity of
European Firms, mimeo, University of Urbino (Italy).
Caves, Richard E., 1996: Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis. Second Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chandra, Vandana and Sashi Kolavalli, 2006: Technology, Adaptation,
and Exports: How Some Countres Got it Right, chapter 1 in Technology,
Adaptation and Exports, edited by Vandana Chandra, World Bank Publications.
Chang, Ha-Joon, 2003, Kicking away the ladder: infant industry promotion in historical perspective. Oxford Development Studies 31, 21— 32.
Chang, R., Kaltani, L. and N. Loayza, 2005: Openness Can be Good
for Growth: The Role of Policy Complementarities, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, NBER Working Papers: 11787.
Cheng, BS. and O. Chu, 1996: U.S. Exports and Economic Growth
Causality, Atlantic Economic Journal, Vol. 34, pp. 113-15.

85

Choudhn, EU. and DS. Hakura, 2000: International Trade and Productivity Growth: Exploring the Sectoral E¤ects on Developing Countries, IMF
Sta¤ Papers, Vol. 47, No. 1, pp. 30-53.
Chow, POY., 1987: Causality Between Export Growth and Industrial
Development, Journal of Development Studies, Vol. 26, pp. 55-63.
Chuang, Yih-Chyi and Chi-Mei Lin, 1999: Foreign Direct Investment, R
& D and Spillover E¢ ciency: Evidence from Taiwan’s Manufacturing Firms,
Journal of Development Studies, Vo. 35, pp. 117-137.
Chuang, YC., 2002: The Trade-Induced Learning E¤ect on Growth:
Cross-Country Evidence, Journal of Development Studies, Vol. 39. No.
2, pp. 137-154.
Chuang, Y.C. and P.F. Hsu. 2004. FDI, trade, and spillover e¢ ciency:
Evidence from China s manufacturing sector. Applied Economics 36, (10):
1103-.
Ciccone, A. and K. Matsuyama, 1996: Start-up costs and pecuniary externalities as barriers to economic development, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 49, No. 1 (April).
Clark, DP., 1995: Trade Orientation and Industrial Sector Growth in
Developing Countries, Journal of Developing Areas, Vol. 30, pp. 1-10.
Clark, DP., Sawyer, WC. and L. Spriukle, 1999: Openness and Industrialization in Developing Countries, Applied Economics Letters, Vol. 6, pp.
161-64.
Clemens, Michael A., and Je¤rey G. Williamson. A Tari¤-Growth Paradox? Protection’s Impact the World Around, 1875-1997. NBER Working
Paper No. 8459, September 2001.
Clerides, Sofronis. K., Lach, S., James. R. Tybout, 1998: Is Learning By
Exporting Important? Micro-Dynamics Evidence From Columbia, Mexico,
and Morocco, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 113, No. 3, pp.
903-947.
Coe, David. T. and E.Helpman, 1995: International R&D Spillovers,
European Economic Review, Vol. 39, No. 5, pp. 859-896.
Coe, David. T., Helpman, E. and W.A. Ho¤maister, 1997: North-South
R&D Spillovers, Economic Journal, Vol. 107, pp. 134-149.
Connolly, M., 2003: The Dual Nature of Trade: Measuring Its Impact
On Immitation and Growth,
Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 72, No. 1, pp. 31-55.
Costantini, James, and Marc Melitz. 2007. The dynamics of …rm level
adjustment to trade liberalization. CEPR.
86

Coppin, A., 1994: Determinants of LDC Output Growth During the
1980s, Journal of Developing Areas, pp. 219-28.
Corden, M., 1997: Trade Policy and Economic Welfare, 2nd Edition,
Oxford University Press.
Damijan, Loze P., Boris Majcen, Mark Knell and Matija Rojec, 2001: the
Role of FDI, Absorptive Capacity and Trade in Transferring Technology to
Transition Countries: Evidence from Firm Panel Data for Eight Transition
Countries, mimeo, UN Economic Commission for Europe, Geneva.
Dar, A. and S. Amirkhalkhali, 2003: On the Impact of Trade Openness
On Growth: Further Evidence From OECD Countries, Applied Economics,
Vol. 35, No. 16, pp. 1731-1766.
Darrat, Af. and Hsu, MK. and M. Zhong, 2000: Testing Export Exogeneity in Taiwan: Further Evidence, Applied Economics Letters, Vol. 7, No. 9,
pp. 563-68.
Darrat, AF., 1987: Are Exports An Engine of Growth? Another Look
At The Evidence, Applied Economics, Vol. 19, pp. 277-283.
Dawson, PJ. and LD. Hubbard, 2004: Exports and Economic Growth
In Central And East European Countries During Transition, Applied Economics, Vol. 36, No. 16, pp. 1819-1824.
De Ferranti, D., G. Perry, D. Lederman and W. Maloney, 2001: From
Natural Resources to the Knowledge Economy, World Bank.
De Loecker, Jan. 2007. Do exports generate higher productivity? evidence from slovenia. Journal of International Economics 73, (1) (9): 69-98.
DeJong, D.N. and M. Ripoll. 2006. Tari¤s and growth: An empirical
exploration of contingent relationships. Review of Economics and Statistics
88, (4) (11/01): 625-40.
Delgado, Miguel A., Jose C. Fariñas, and Sonia Ruano. 2002. Firm
productivity and export markets: A non-parametric approach. Journal of
International Economics 57, (2) (8): 397-422.
Demidova, Svetlana and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, 2008, Trade Policy under Firm-Level Heterogeneity in a Small Economy.
Dhawan, U. and B. Biswal, 1999: Re-examining Export-Led Growth
Hypothesis: A Multivariate Cointegration Analysis for India, Applied Economics, Vol. 33, pp. 525-530.
Diamond, P.A. and J.A. Mirrlees. 1971. Optimal taxation and public
production I: Production e¢ ciency. The American Economic Review 61,
(1): 8-.

87

Dimelis, Sophia and Helen Louri, 2002: Foreign Direct Investment and
E¢ ency Bene…ts: A Conditional Quantile Analysis, Oxford Economic Papers, Vol. 54, pp. 449-469.
Dixit, Avinash. 1985. Tax policy in open economies. In Handbook of
public economics., ed. A. J. Auerbach & M. Feldstein. 1st ed. Vol. 1,
313-374, Elsevier.
Djankov, S. and B. Hoekman. 2000. Foreign investment and productivity
growth in czech enterprises. The World Bank Economic Review 14, (1): 49.
Dodaro, Santo. 1991. Comparative advantage, trade and growth: Exportled growth revisited. World Development 19, (9) (9): 1153-65.
Dollar, D. and A. Kraay. 2004. Trade, growth, and poverty. The Economic Journal 114, (493): F22.
Donaldson, D. 2009. Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of
Transportation Infrastructure. Working Paper, London School of Economics.
Dri¢ eld, N. and S. Girma. 2003. Regional foreign direct investment
and wage spillovers: Plant level evidence from the UK electronics industry.
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 65, (4): 453-.
Du, L., A. Harrison, and G. Je¤erson. 2008. Testing for horizontal and
vertical foreign investment spillovers in china, 1998-2005.
Dutta, D. and M. Ahmed. 2004. An aggregate import demand function
for india: A cointegration analysis. Applied Economics Letters 11, (10): 607.
Dodaro, S., 1991: Comparative Advantage, Trade And Growth: ExportLed Growth Revisited, World Development, Vol 19, No. 9, pp. 1153-1165.
Dodzin, S. and A. Vamvakidis, 2004: Trade And Industrialization In
Developing Economies, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 75, No. 1,
pp. 319-328
Dollar, D., 1992: Ourward-Oriented Developing Economics Really Do
Grow More Rapidly: Evidence from 95 LDCs, 1976-85, Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 40, No. 3, pp. 523-44
Doraisami, A., 1996: Export Growth and Economic Growth: A ReExamination of Some Time Series Evidence of The Malaysian Experience,
Journal of Developing Areas, Vol. 30, pp. 223-230.
Doyle, E., 1998: Export-Ouput Causality: The Irish Case, 1953-1993,
Atlantic economic Journal, Vol. 26, pp.147-61.
Dri¢ eld, Nigel, 2001: The Impact on Domestic Productivity of Inward
Investment in the UK, The Manchester School, Vol. 69, pp. 103-119.
Dritsakis, N. 2004: Exports, Investment And Economic Development of
Pre-Accession Countries of The EU: An Empirical Investigation of Bulgaria
88

And Romania, Applied Economics, Vol. 36, No. 16, pp. 1831-1838.
Duankov, Simeon and Bernard Heokman, 2002: Foreign Investment and
Productivity Growth in Czech Enterprises, World Bank Economic Review,
Vol. 14, pp. 49-64.
Dutt, SD. and D. Ghosh, 1994: Trade Libralization And Industrial Growth
In Pakistan: A Cointegration Analysis, Applied Economics, Vol. 36, No. 13,
pp. 1421-1429.
Dutt, SD. and D. Ghosh, 1996: An Empirical Investigation of The Export
Growth, Economic Growth Relationship, Applied Economics Letters, Vol. 1,
pp. 44-48.
Earle, John S. and Telegdy, Almos. March 2007. Ownership and wages:
Estimating public-private and foreign-domestic di¤erentials using leed from
hungary, 1986-2003. NBER Working Paper no. W12997.
Easterly, W. and R. Levine. 2003. Tropics, germs, and crops: How endowments in‡uence economic development. Journal of Monetary Economics
50, (1) (1): 3-39.
Eaton, J. and G. Grossman. May 1986. Optimal trade and industrial
policy under oligopoly. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 101, (2): 383406.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum. 1999. International technology di¤usion: Theory and measurement. International Economic Review 40, (3): 537-.
Edwards, S. 1998. Openness, productivity and growth: What do we really
know? The Economic Journal 108, (447): 383-.
Estevadeordal, A. and Alan M. Taylor. August 2008. IS THE WASHINGTON CONSENSUS DEAD? GROWTH, OPENNESS, AND THE GREAT
LIBERALIZATION, 1970s-2000s. Working Paper ed. NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH 1050 Massachusetts Avenue Cambridge, MA 02138.
Ethier, Wilfred J. September 1982. Decreasing costs in international
trade and frank graham’s argument for protection. Econometrica 50, (5):
1243-68.
— — — . November , 1986. The multinational …rm. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 101, (4): 805-33.
— — — . June 1982. National and international returns to scale in the
modern theory of international trade. 72, (3): 389-405.
— — — . 1982. The general role of factor intensity in the theorems of
international trade. Economics Letters 10, (3-4): 337-342.
— — — . Dumping. Journal of Political Economy June 90, (3): 487-506.
89

Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2001), Technology, Trade and Growth: A uni…ed framework, European Economic Review 45, 742-755.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002), Technology, Geography, and Trade,
Econometrica 70, 1741-1780.Findlay, R., 1995: Factor Proportions, Trade
and Growth, MIT Press.
Ederington J. and Phillip McCalman, 2008, Endogenous Firm Heterogeneity and the Dynamics of Trade Liberalization, Journal of International
Econoimcs (74), pp.422-440.
Edwards, S., 1992: Trade Orientation, Distortions, and Growth in Developing Countries, Journal of Development Economics, Vol 39, pp. 31-57
Egwaikhide, FO. 1992: Oil Export and Economic Growth In Nigeria: A
Preliminary Investigation, Indian Journal of Economics, Vol. 73, pp. 221232.
Erlat, G., 2000: Measuring The Impact of Trade Flows On Employment
In The Turkish Manufacturing Industry, Applied Economics, Vol. 32, No. 9,
pp. 1169-1180.
Esfahani, FIS. 1991: Exports, Imports and Economic Growth In SemiIndustrialized Countries, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 35, pp.
93-116.
Falvey, R., Foster, N. and D. Greenaway, 2004: Imports, Exports, Knowledge Spillovers And Growth, Economics Letters, Vol. 85, No. 2, pp. 209-213.
Feenstra, R. 1994. New goods and index numbers: U.S. import prices.
Working Paper ed. NBER Working Papers 3610, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Feliciano, Z. and Lipsey, R.E. (February 1999). Foreign ownership and
wages in the united states, 1987 - 1992. NBER Working Paper No. W6923.
Fernandes, Anam and A. Isgut. March 22, 2007. Learning-by-exporting
e¤ects: Are they for real?
Feyrer, J. 2009. Trad and income-exploiting time series in geography.
Working Paper, NBER and Dartmouth College.
Freund, C. and B. Bolaky. October 2008. Trade, regulations, and income.
Journal of Development Economics 87, (2): 309-321.
Feder, G., 1982: On Exports and Economic Growth, Journal of Development Economics, Vol 12, pp. 59-73.
Ferreira, PC. and JL. Rossi, 2003: New Evidence From Brazil On Trade
Liberalization And Productivity Growth, International Economic Review,
Vol. 44, No. 4, pp. 1383-1405.

90

Fosu, AK., 1996: Primary Exports and Economic Growth in Developing
Countries, World Economy, Vol. 19, pp. 466-475.
Fosu, AX., 1990: Exports and Economic Growth: The African Case,
World Development, Vol. 18, pp.531-535.
Francisco, F. and R. Ramos, 2001: Exports, Imports and Economic
Growth In Portugal: Evidence from Caulsality and Cointegration Analysis,
Economic Modelling, Vol. 18, No. 4, pp. 613-623.
Frankel, JA. and D. Romer, 1999: Does Trade Cause Growth, American
Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 3, pp.379-399.
Fu, Xiaolan., 2005: Exports Technical Progress and Productivity Growth
in A Transition Economy: A Non-Parametric Approach for China, Applied
Economics, Vol. 37, No. 7, pp. 735-739.
Ghartey, Edward. 1993. Causal relationship between exports and economic growth: Some empirical evidence in taiwan, japan and the US. Applied
Economics 25, (9) (09): 1145-.
Goldberg, P. and G. Maggi. 1999. Protection for sale: An empirical
investigation. The American Economic Review 89: 1135-.
Goldberg, P. and G. maggi. 1999. Protection for sale: An empirical
investigation. American Economic Review 89, (5): 1135-1155.
Goldberg, P. and N. Pavcnik. 2007. Distributional e¤ects of globalization
in developing countries. Journal of Economic Literature 45, (1): 39-.
Goldberg, Pinelopi, Khandelwal, Amit, Pavcnik, Nina and Topalova,
Petia B.,(June 2008). June 2008. Multi-product …rms and product turnover
in the developing world: Evidence from india. NBER Working Paper no.
W14127.
Goldberg, Pinelopi, Koujianou, Khandelwal, Amit, Pavcnik, Nina and
Topalova, Petia B. October 2008. Imported intermediate inputs and domestic
product growth: Evidence from india. NBER Working Paper Series 14416.
Gorg, H. and D. Greenway. 2004. Much ado about nothing? do domestic …rms really bene…t from foreign direct investment? The World Bank
Research Observer, 19, (2): 171-197.
Gorodnichenko, Y., Jan Svejnar, and Katherine Terrell. 2008. Globalization and innovation in emerging markets. National Bureau of Economic
Research, Inc.
Graham, F. D. 1923. Some aspects of protection further considered. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 37, (2):199-.
Greenaway, D. and D. Sapsford. March 1994. What does liberalisation do
for exports and growth? Review of World Economics (Weltwirtschaftliches
91

Archiv) 130, (1): 152-174.
Greenaway, D., W. Morgan and P. Wright. February 2002. Trade liberalisation and growth in developing countries. Journal of Development Economics 67, (1): 229-244.
Grossman, G and E. Helpman. 1991. Innovation and growth in the global
economy. MIT Press, Cambridge MA and London UK.
Grossman, G. M. 1992. Imperfect competition and international trade.
MIT Press.
Gani, A., 1997: Economic Growth in Papua New Guinea: Some Empirical
Evidence, Paci…c Economic Bulletin, Vol. 12, No. 1, pp. 41-52.
Gawande, K., Krishna, P. and M. Olarreaga, 2005, Lobbying Competition
over Trade Policy, manuscript
Gharte, EE., 1993: Cause Relationship Between Exports and Economic
Growth: Some Empirical Evidence in Taiwan, Japan and the US, Applied
Economics, Vol. 25, pp. 1141-1152.
Ghatak, S., Miner, C. and U. Utkulu, 1997: Exports, Exports Expansion
and Growth: Cointegration and Causalit: Evidence for Malaysia, Applied
Economics, Vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 213-23.
Ghirma, T. and Grabowski, R. and SC. Sharma, 2001: Exports, Investment, E¢ ciency and Economic Growth in LDC: An Empirical Investigation,
Applied Economics, Vol. 33, No. 6, pp. 599-700.
Giles, DEA., Giles, JA. and E. McCann, 1992: Causality Unit Roots and
Export-Led Growth: The New Zealand Experience, Journal of Internaitonal
Trade and Economic Development, Vol. 1, pp. 195-218.
Girma, Sourafel and Holger Gorg, 2002: Foreign Direct Investment, Spillovers
and Aborptive Capacity: Evidence from Quantile Regressions, GEP Research
Paper 02/14, University of Nottingham.
Girma, Sourafel and Katharine Wakelin, 2002: Are There Regional Spillovers
from FDI in the UK?, in Greenaway, David, Richard Upward, Katharine
Wakelin (eds.): Trade, Investment, Migration and labor Markets. Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Girma, Sourafel, 2002: Geographic Proximity, Aborptive Capacity and
Productivity Spillovers from FDI: A Threshold Regression Analysis, GEP
Research Paper 02/06, University of Nottingham.
Girma, Sourafel, David Greenaway and Katharine Wakelin, 2001: Who
Bene…ts from Foreign Direct Investment in the UK. Scottish Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 48, pp. 119-133.

92

Globerman, Steven, 1979: Foreign Direct Investment and ’Spillover’E¢ ciency Bene…ts in Canadian Manufacturing Industries, Canadian Journal of
Economics, Vol. 12, pp. 42-56.
Gokceus, O., 1997: Trade LIberalization and Productivity Growth: New
Evidence from the Turkish Rubber Industry, Applied Economics, Vol, 29.
No. 5, pp. 639-645.
Gollin, 2002: Getting Income Shares Right, Journal of Political Economy,
University of Chicago Press, vol. 110(2), pages 458-474, April.
Gordon, DV. and K. Sakyi, 1993: Testing the Export-Growth Hypothesis: Some Parametric and Non-Parametric Results for Ghana, Applied Economics, Vol. 25, No. 4, pp. 553-63.
Gorg, Holger and Eric Strobl, 2002a: Spillovers from Foreign Firms
through Worker Mobility: An Empirical Investigation GEP Research Paper
02/13, University of Nottingham.
Gorg, Holger and Eric Strobl, 2002b: Multinational Companies and Indigenous Development: An Empirical Analysis, European Economic Review,
Vol. 46, pp. 1305-1322.
Grabowski, R., Sharma, SC. and D, Dhakal, 1990: Exports and Japanese
Economic Development, Economics Letters, Vol. 32, No. 2, pp. 127-32.
Greenaway, D. and D. Sapsford, 1994a: What Does Liberalization Do for
Exports and Growth, Weltwirschaftliches Archiv, pp. 152-174.
Greenaway, D., Morgan, W. and P. Wright, 1997: Trade Liberalization
and Growth in Developing Countries: Some New Evidence, World Development, Vol. 25, No. 1, pp. 1885-97.
Greenaway, D., Morgan, W. and P. Wright, 1999: Exports, Export Composition and Growth, Journal of International Trade and Economic Development, Vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 41-51.
Greenwald and Stiglitz, 2006: Helping Infant Economies Grow: Foundations of Trade Policies for Developing Countries, The American Economic
Review, Vol. 96, No. 2 (May).
Gupta, S., 1985: Export Growth and Economic Growth Revisited, Indian
Economic Journal, vol 32, pp. 52-29.
Hallward-Driemeier, M., and Giuseppe Iarossi & Kenneth L. Sokolo¤.
2002. Exports and manufacturing productivity in east asia: A comparative
analysis with …rm-level data. NBER Working Paper Series W8894.National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Halpern, L., M. Koren and A. Szeidl. Imports and productivity. CEPR
Discussion Paper No. 5139. July 2005.
93

Hanson, Gordon H. September 2001. U.S.-mexico integration and regional economies: Evidence from border-city pairs, Journal of Urban Economics 50, (2): 259-287.
Harrison, A., and G. Hanson with Gordon Hanson. 1999. Who gains from
trade reform? some remaining puzzles. Journal of Development Economics
59, : 125-154.
Harrison, A., and J. Scorse. 2004. Globalization’s impact on compliance
with labor standards. In Brookings trade forum 2003., ed. Susan Collins and
Dani Rodrik,Brookings Institution Press 2004, Washington, D.C.
Harrison, Ann E., I. Love, M. S. McMillan. 2004. Global capital ‡ows
and …nancing constraints. Journal of Development Economics 75, (1) (10):
269-301.
Haddad, Mona and Ann. Harrison, 1993: Are There Positive Spillovers
from Direct Foreign Investment? Evidence from Panel Data for Morocco,
Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 42, pp. 51-74.
Hansen, J., Jensen, D. and Madsen, E. 2003. The establishment of the
Danish windmill industry –was it worthwhile? Review of World Economics
139, 324— 47.
Hansen, P., 1994: The Government, Exporters and Economic Growth in
New Zealand, New Zealand Economic Papers, Vol. 28, No. 2, pp. 133-42.
Harris, Richard and Catherine Robinson, 2002: Spillovers from Foreign
Ownership in the United Kingdom: Estimates for UK Manufacturing Using
the ARD, mimeo, University Durham.
Harrison, Ann E., An Empirical Test of the Infant Industry Argument:
Comment, The American Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 4 (Sep., 1994), pp.
1090-1095.
Harrison, Ann E., 1994, February). Productivity, Imperfect Competition, and Trade Reform. Theory and Evidence. Journal of International
Economics 36(1-2), 53-73.
Harrison, Ann E., 1996: Openness and Growth: A Time-Series, CrossCountry Analysis for Developing Countries, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 48, pp. 419-47.
Harrison, Ann E, and J. Scorse, 2008, Multinationals and Anti-Sweatshop
Activism American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Harrison, Ann E, L, Inessa and Margaret S. McMillan, 2004, Global Capital Flows and Financing Constraints, Journal of Development Economics,
75 (1): 269-301, Oct 2004.

94

Harrison, Ann E and Margaret McMillan, 2003, Does Direct Foreign Investment A¤ect Domestic Firm Credit Constraints?, Journal of International
Economics, 61, pp. 73-100.
Harrison, Ann E. and Margaret McMillan, 2007, On the Links Between
Globalization and Poverty, Journal of Economic Inequality (5), pp. 123-134.
Hausmann, R., A. Rodríguez-Clare, and D. Rodrik, 2005, Towards a
Strategy for Economic Growth in Uruguay, Inter-American Development
Bank, Economic and Social Study Series, February 2005.
Hausmann, Ricardo, Jason Hwang and Dani Rodrik, 2007, What You
Export Matters, Journal of Economic Growth, 12, pp. 1-25.
Hausmann, R., and D. Rodrik, 2003: Economic Development as SelfDiscovery (with Ricardo Hausmann), Journal of Development Economics,
vol. 72, December.
Hausmann, R., and D. Rodrik, 2006: Doomed to Choose: Industrial
Policy as Predicament, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard
University.Hausmann, R., Hwang, J. and D. Rodrik, 2005: What You Export Matters, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, NBER Working
Papers: 11905.
Head Keith, 1994, Infant Industry Protection in the Steel Rail Industry,
Journal of International Economics (37), pp. 141-165.
Helpman, Elhanan and Paul R. Krugman, 1985, Market Structure and
Foreign Trade, The MIT Press Cambrige, pp. 26.
Henriques, I. and P. Sadorsky, 1996: Export-Led Growth or GrowthDriven Exports? The Canadian Case, Canadian Journal of Economcis, Vol.
29, No. 3, pp. 540-555.
Hernández, I., N. Cely, F. González, E. Muñoz, and I. Prieto, 2007: The
Discovery of New Export Products in Ecuador, Stratega, Ecuador.
Holman, J. A. and P. E. Graves, 1995: Korean Exports Economic Growth:
An Econometric Reassessment, Journal of Economic Development, Vol. 20,
No. 2, pp. 45-56.
Hsiao, Mei-chu. W., 1987: Tests of Causality and Exogeneity Between
Exports and Economic Growth: The Case of the Asian NICs, Journal of
Economic Development, Vol 12, no. 2, pp. 143-159.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow, 2007, Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India, NBER Working Paper No. 13290.
Hu, Albert and Gary Je¤erson, 2002, FDI Impact and Spillover: Evidence
from China’s Electronic and Textile Industries, The World Economy, 25, pp.
1063-1076.
95

Huchet, Jean-Francois, 1997, The China Circle and Technological Development in the Chinese Electronics Industry, Naughton Barry ed. The China
Circle: Economics and Electronics in the PRC, Taiwan, and Hong Kong.
Washington, D.C., Brookings Institution Press, pp. 254-85.
Hutchison, M. and N. Singh, 1992: Exports, Non-exports and Externalities: A Granger Causality Approach, International Economic Journal, Vol.
6, No. 2, pp. 79-94.
Imbs, J. and R. Wacziarg, R., 2003: Stages of Diversi…cation, American
Economic Review, vol. 93, no. 1, pp. 63-86.
Irwin, D., 1996: Against the Tide: An Intellectual History of Free Trade,
Princeton University Press
.
Irwin, Douglas, 1998. Did late-nineteenth-century U.S. tari¤s promote
infant industries? Evidence from the tinplate industry. Journal of Economic
History 60, 335— 60.
Irwin Douglas, 2000, Did Late Nineteenth Century U.S. Tari¤s Promote
Infant Industries? Evidence from the Tinplate Industry, Journal of Economic
History (60), pp. 335-360.
Irwin, Douglas, 2002, Interpreting the Tari¤-Growth Correlation in the
Late Nineteenth Century . American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings (May).
Irwin Douglas, 2007, Tari¤ Incidence in America’s Gilded Age, Journal
of Economic History, 67, pp. 582-607.
Iscan, Talan., 1998: Exports and Capital Accumulation: Some Empirical Evidence from the Mexican Manufacturing Industry, Applied Economics
Letters, Vol. 5, No. 6, pp. 355-60.
Islam, M. N., 1998: Export Expansion and Economic Growth: Testing
for Cointegration and Causality, Applied Economics, Vol. 30, No. 3, pp.
415-425.
Javorcik, B. S., 2003: Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of Domestic Firms? In Search of Spillovers Through Backward
Linkages, American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Jin, J. C. and Eden. S. H. Yu, 1995: The Causal Relationship Between
Exports and Income, Journal of Economic Development, Vol. 20, No. 1, pp.
131-140.
Jin, J. C. and Eden. S. H. Yu, 1996: Export-Led Growth and the US
Economy: Another Look, Applied Economics Letters, Vol. 3, No. 5, pp.
341-344.
96

Jin, J. C., 1995: Export Led Growth and the Four Little Dragons, Journal
of International Trade and Economics Development, Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 203215.
Jin, J. C., 2000: Openness and Growth: An Interpretation of Empirical
Evidence from East Asian Countries, Journal of International Trade and
Economic Development, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 5-17.
Jung, W. and P. Marchall., 1985: Exports, Growth, and Causality in
Developing Countries, Journal of Development Economics, Vol 18, pp. 241250.
Karunaratne, N. D., 1996: Growth and Trade Dynamics under Regime
Shifts in Australia, Journal of Economic Studies, Vol. 23, No. 2, pp. 55-69.
Kasahara H. and J. Rodrigue, 2008, Does the Use of Imported Intermediates Increase Productivity? Plant-level Evidence, Journal of Development
Economics, 87, pp. 106-118.
Kathuria, Vinish., 2000: Productivity Spillovers from Technology Transfer to Indian Manufacturing Firms, Journal of International Development,
Vol. 12, pp. 343-369.
Kavoussi, R. M., 1985: International Trade and Economic Development:
The Recent Experience of Developing Countries, Journal of Developing Areas, Vol. 19, No. 3, pp. 379-92.
Keller, W., 1998: Are International R&D Spillovers Trade-Related? Analyzing Spillovers Among Randomly Matched Trade Parters, European Economic Review, Vol. 42, pp. 1469-1481.
Keller, Wolfgang. and Stephen Yeaple., 2003: Multinational Enterprises,
International Trade, and Productivity Growth: Firm-Level Evidence from
the United States, GEP Research Paper 03/13, University of Nottingham.
Keller Wolfgang, 2004, International Technology Di¤usion, Journal of
Economic Literature (42), pp. 752-782.
Kemp, M. C. 1960: The Mill-Bastable Infant Industry Dogma. Journal
of Political Economy, 68/1: 65-67.
Ketels, C, G. Lindqvist, and O. Solvell, 2006: Cluster Initiatives in Developing and Transition Economies, Center for Strategy and Competitiveness,
Stockholm.
Khalafalla, K. Y. and A. J. Webb, 2001: Export-Led Growth and Structural Change: Evidence from Malaysiz, Applied Economics, Vol. 33, No. 13,
pp. 1703-1715.
Kim, E., 2000: Trade Liberalization and Productivity Growth in Korean Manufacturing Industries: Price Protection, Market Power, and Scale
97

E¢ ciency, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 62, No. 1, pp. 55-83.
Kinoshita, Yuko., 2001: R & D and Technology Spillovers through FDI:
Innovation and Absorptive Capacity, CEPR Discussion Paper DP2775.
Kohli, I. and N. Singh, 1989: Exports and Growth: Critical Minimum
E¤ort and Dimishing Returns, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 30,
No. 2, pp. 391-400.
Kokko, Ari., 1994: Technology, Market Characteristics, and Spillovers,
Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 43, pp. 279-293.
Kokko, Ari., 1996: Productivity Spillovers from Competition between
Local Firms and Foreign A¢ liates, Journal of International Development,
Vol. 8, pp. 517-530.
Kokko, Ari., Mario Zejan and Ruben Tansini, 2001: Trade Regimes and
Spillover E¤ects of FDI: Evidence from Uruguay, Weltwirschaftliches Archiv,
Vol. 137, pp. 124-149.
Kokko, Ari., Ruben Tansini and Mario C. Zejan, 1996: Local Technological Capability and Productivity Spillovers from FDI in the Uruguayan
Manufacturing Sector, Journal of Development Studies, Vol. 32, pp. 602611.
Konings, Jozef., 2001: The E¤ects of Foreign Direct Investment on Domestic Firms: Evidence from Firm Level Panel Data in Emerging Economies,
Economics of Transition, Vol. 9, pp. 619-633.
Krueger, Anne O., and Baran Tuncer, An Empirical Test of the Infant
Industry Argument, American Economic Review, vol. 72, issue 5, 1982, pages
1142-52.
Krugman Paul R., 1987, Trigger Strategies and Price Dynamics in Equity
and Foreign Exchange Markets, NBER Working Paper No. 2459.
Krugman, P. 1991: Geography and Trade, The MIT Press.
Krugman, P., The Narrow Moving Band, the Dutch Disease, and the
Competitive Consequences of Mrs. Thatcher: Notes on Trade in the Presence
of Dynamic Scale Economies, J. Devel. Econ., 27: 41-55.
Kugler, Maurice, 2001: The Di¤usion of Externalities from Foreign Direct Investment: The Sectoral Pattern of Technologies Spillovers, mimeo,
University of Southampton.
Krugman Paul and M. Obstfeld, 2008, International Economics: Theory
and Policy, 8th, Harper Collins College Publisher.
Kunst, R. M. and D. Marin, 1989: On Exports and Productivity: A
Causal Analysis, Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 71, No. 4, pp.
699-703.
98

Kwan, A. CC. and B. Kwok, 1995: Exogeneity and the Export-Led
Growth Hypothesis: The Case of China, Southern Economic Journal, Vol.
61, No. 4, pp. 1158-1166.
Kwan, A. CC. and J. A. Cotsomitis, 1990: Economic Growth and the Expanding Export Sector: China 1952-1985, International Economic Journal,
Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 105-117.
Kwan, A. CC., J. A. Cotsomitis and B. Kwok, 1996: Exports, Economic
Growth and Exogeneity: Taiwan 1953-1988, Applied Economics, Vol. 28,
No. 4, pp. 467-471.
Lee, H. Y., Ricci, L. A. and R. Rigobon, 2004: Once Again, Is Openness
Good for Growth? Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 75, No. 2, pp.
451-472.
Lee, J. 1996, Government Interventions and Productivity Growth in Korean Manufacturing Industries, Journal of Economic Growth 1, no. 3, pp.
391-414.
Lee, J. W., 1995: Capital Goods Imports and Long-Run Growth, Journal
of Development Economics, Vol. 48, pp. 91-110.
Leea, H. Y., Riccib, L. A., R. Rigobon, 2004: Once again, is openness
good for growth?, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 75, pp. 451— 472.
Lehmann Sibulle H. and Kevin H. O’Rourke, 2008, The Structure of
Protection and Growth in the Late 19th Century, NBER Working Paper,
No. 14493.
Levine, R and D. Renelt., 1992: A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-country
Growth Regressions, American Economic Review, Vol 82, no. 4, pp. 942-963.
Levinsohn James, 1993, Testing the Imports-As-Market-Discipline Hypothesis, Journal of International Economics, 35, pp. 1-22.
Lewis, Sir Arthur., 1955, The Theory of Economic Growth, London: Allen
and Unwin.
Li, Xiaoying, Xiaming Liu and David Parker, 2001: Foreign Direct Investment and Productivity Spillovers in the Chinese Manufacturing Sector,
Economic Systems, Vol. 25, pp. 305-321.
Lileeva Alla, 2004, Import Competition and Selection, Working Paper,
York University.
Lileeva Alla and Daniel Tre‡er, 2007, Improved Access to Foreign Markets
Raises Plant-Level Productivity. . . ...for Some Plants, NBER Working Paper,
No. 13279.
Lipsey Robert E. and Fredrik Sjoholm, 2004, Foreign Direct Investment,
Education and Wages in Indonesian Manufacturing, Journal of Development
99

Economics, 73 (1), pp. 415-422.
List, Friedrich, G.-A Matile, Henri Richelot, and Stephen Colwell. 1856.
National system of political economy. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott & Co.
Liu, Ping, Liu, Zhuomin and Yifan, Zhang, 2008, Do Chinese Domestic Firms Bene…t form FDI In‡ow? Evidence of Horizontal and Vertical
Spillovers, Working Paper, Lingnan University, Hong Kong.
Liu, Xiaming, Pamela Siler, Changqi Wang and Yingqi Wei, 2000: Productivity Spillovers from Foreign Direct Investment: Evidence from UK Industry Level Panel Data, Journal of International Business Studies, Vol. 31,
pp. 407-425.
Liu, Xiaming, Song, Haiyan and P. Romilly, 1997: An Empirical Investgation of the Causal Relationship Between Openness and Economic Growth
in China, Applied Economics, Vol. 29, No. 12, pp. 1679-1686.
Liu, Zhiqiang, 2008, Foreign Direct Investment and Technology Spillovers:
Theory and Evidence, Journal of Development Economics (85), pp. 176-193.
Lopez-Cordova, J. Ernesto., 2002: NAFTA and Mexico’s Manufacturing
Productivity: An Empirical Investigation Using Micro-Level Data, mimeo,
International American Development Bank.
Lopez-Cordova J. Ernesto and Christopher M. Meissner, 2003, ExchangeRate Regimes and International Trade: Evidence from the Classical Gold
Standard Era, American Economic Review, 93 (1), pp. 344-353.
Love, J., 1994: Engines of Growth: The Export and Government Sectors,
World Economy, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 203-218.
Lucas, R. E. Jr., 1988: On the Mechanics of Development Planning.
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 22, pp. 3-42.
Luzio, E. and Greenstein, S. 1995. Measuring the performance of a protected infant industry: the case of Brazilian microcomputers. Review of
Economics and Statistics 77, 622— 33.
Markusen James R. 1989, Trade in Producer Services and in Other Specialized, Intermediate Inputs, American Economic Review, 79, pp. 85-95.
Martins P. S. & Luiz A. Esteves, 2006, Is There Rent Sharing in Developing Countries? Matched-Panel Evidence from Brazil, Institute for the Study
of Labor (IZA) Discussion Papers 2317.
Madden, G., Savege, S. J. and P. Bloxham, 2001: Asian and OECD
International R&D Spillovers, Applied Economics Letters, Vol. 8, No. 7, pp.
431-435.
Mallick, S. K., 1996: Causality Between Exports and Economic Growth in
India: Evidence from Cointegration Based Error Correction Models, Indian
100

Journal of Economics, Vol. 76, pp. 307-320.
Manova, K. 2006: Credit Constraints, Heterogenous Firms, and International Trade, Harvard University.
Markusen James R. 1989, Trade in Producer Services and in Other Specialized, Intermediate Inputs, American Economic Review, 79, pp. 85-95.
Martins P. S. & Luiz A. Esteves, 2006, Is There Rent Sharing in Developing Countries? Matched-Panel Evidence from Brazil, Institute for the Study
of Labor (IZA) Discussion Papers 2317.
Marin, D., 1992: Is the Export-Led Growth Hypothesis Valid for Industrialized Countries, Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 74, No. 4, pp.
678-688.
Marshall, A. 1920: Principles of Economics, MacMillan, London.
Matsuyama Kiminori, 1991, Increasing Returns, Industrialization, and
Indeterminacy of Equilibrium, The Quarterly Journal of Economics (106),
pp. 617-650.
Mbaku, J. M., 1989: Export Growth and Economic Performance in Developing Countries: Further Evidence from Africa, Journal of Economic Development, Vol. 14, No. 2, pp. 127-142.
McCarville, M. and E. Nnadozie, 1995: Causality Tests of Export-Led
Growth: The Case of Mexico, Atlantic Economic Journal, Vol. 23, No. 2,
pp. 140-145.
McNab, R. M. and R. E. Moore, 1998: Trade Policy, Export Expansion,
Human Capital and Growth, Journal of International Trade and Economic
Development, Vol. 7, No. 2, pp. 237-256.
Melitz, M. 2003. Econometrica
Melitz, M. 2005: When and how should infant industries be protected?,
Journal of International Economics 66 (2005), pp. 177— 196.
Mill, J. S. 1909: Principles of Political Economy, London Longmans,
Green.
Mobarak A. M. and Denni P. Purbasari, 2006, Do Multinational Corporations Seek Out Politically Connected Firms? Firm Level Evidence on
Local Partner Search by Multinational Corporations, Working paper.
Moosa, Imad. A., 1999: Is the Export-Led Growth Hypothesis Valid for
Australia? Applied-Economics, Vol. 31, No. 7, pp. 903-06.
Moreira, M. Mesquita. and S. Najberg,2000: Trade Liberalisation in
Brazil: Creating or Exporting Jobs? Journal of Development Studies, Vol.
36, No. 3, pp. 78-99.

101

Morley, B. and N. Perdikis, 2000: Trade Liberalisation, Government Expenditure and Economic Growth in Egypt, Journal of Development Studies,
Vol. 36. No. 4, pp. 38-54.
Moschos, D., 1989: Export Expansion, Growth and The Level of Economic development, Journal of Development Economics, Vol 30, pp. 93-102.
Muendler Marc-Andreas, 2001, Trade and Growth Revisited: Managing
to Converge, Agreeing to Diverge, University of California, San Diego, unpublished manuscript.
Muendler Marc-Andreas, 2004, Trade, Technology and Productivity: A
Study of Brazilian Manufacturers 1986-1998, CESifo Working Paper Series
No. 1148, University of California, San Diego.
Muendler Marc-Andreas, 2007, Trade and Workforce Changeover in Brazil,
NBER Working Papers, No. 12980.
Mulaga, G. and J. Weiss,1996: Trade Reform and Manufacturing Performance in Malawi, World Development, Vol. 24, No. 7, pp. 1267-78.
Murphy, K. M., Shleifer, A., and R. W. Vishny, 1989: Industrialization
and the Big Push, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 97, No. 5.
Nishimizu, Mieko and J. Page, 1982: Total Factor Productivity Growth,
Technological Progress and Technical E¢ ciency Change: Dimensions of Productivity, The Economic Journal (92), pp. 920-936.
Noland, M. and H. Pack, 2003: Industrial Policy in an ear of Globalization: Lessons fromAsia, Institute for International Economics, Washington
DC.
Nunn, N. and D. Tre‡er, 2004, The Political Economy of Tari¤s and
Long-term Growth, revision requested at the American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics.
Okuno-Fujiwara, Masahiro., 1988, Interdependence of Industries, Coordination Failture and Strategic Promotion of an Industry, Journal of International Journal (25), pp. 25-43.
Olley, Steven and A. Pakes, 1993, A Limit Theorem for a Smooth Class
of Semiparametric Estimators, Cowles Foundation Discussion Papers, No.
1066, Yale University.
Onafowora, O. A. and O. Owoye, 1998: Can Trade Liberalization Stimulate Economic Growth in Africa? World Development, Vol. 26, no. 3, pp.
497-506.
O’Rourke, Kevin H. Tari¤s and Growth in the Late 19th Century. Economic Journal 110 (April 2000): 456-483.

102

Oskooee, B. M. and J. Alse, 1993; Export Growth and Economic Growth:
An Application of Cointegration and Error-Correction Modeling, Journal of
Developing Areas, Vol. 27, No. 4, pp.535-42.
Pack, Howard, and Kamal Saggi, Is There a Case for Industrial Policy?
A Critical Survey, TheWorld Bank Research Observer, 21(2), 2006, 267-297.
Park, Albert, Dean Yang, Xinzheng Shi and Yuan Jiang, 2006, Exporting
and Firm Performance: Chinese Exporters and the Asian Financial Crisis,
Working Paper, No. 549, University of Michigan.
Park, J. H. and P. B. Prime, 1997: Export Performance and Growth in
China: A Cross-Provincial Analysis, Applied Economics, Vol. 29, No. 13,
pp. 53-63.
Paul, S. and K. Chowdhury, 1995: Export-Led Growth Hypothesis: Some
Empirical Testing, Applied Economics Letters, Vol. 2, No. 6, pp. 177-79.
Pavcnik, Nina, 2002. Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvement: Evidence from Chilean Plants., Review of Economic Stuides,
69(1), 245-276.
Pelzman J. and Amir Shoham, 2006, De-linking the Relationship between
Trade Liberalization and Reduced Domestic Fiscal Budgets: The Experience
of the Israeli Economy: 1984-2005, Global Economy Journal (6), Article 2.
Pereira, A. M. and Xu, Zhenhui, 2000: Export Growth and Domestic
Performance, Review of International Economics, Vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 60-73.
Piazolo, M., 1996: Determinants of Indonesian Economic Growth, 19651992, Seoul Journal of Economics, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 269-98.
Pineres, A. de-Sheila. and M. J. Ferrantino, 1997: Export Diversi…cation
and Structural Dynamics in the Growth Process: The Case of Chile, Journal
of Development Economics, Vol. 52, No. 2, pp. 375-91.
Pomponio, X. Z., 1996: A Causality Analysis of Growth and Export
Performance, Atlantic Economic Journal, Vol. 24, No. 2, pp. 168-76.
Poole, Jennifer, 2008, Multinational Spillovers through Worker Turnover,
UC Santa Cruz
Porter, M., 1990, The Competitive Adtantage of Nations, New York: Free
Press (republished with a new introduction, 1998).
Porter, M., 1998: Clusters versus Industrial Policy in On Competition,
HBS Press.
Pritchett, L., 1996, Measuring Outward Orientation in LDCs: Can It Be
Done?, Journal of Development Economics (49), pp. 307-335.
Ram, R., 1987: Exports and Economic Growth in Developing Countries:
Evidence from Time-Series and Cross-Section Data, Economic Development
103

and Cultural Change, Vol 36, pp. 51-71.22.
Sheehey, E., 1990: Exports and Growth: A Flawed Framework, Jounral
of Development Studies, pp. 111-116.
Rana, P. B., 1988: Exports, Policy Changes, and Economic Growth in
Developing Countries after the 1973 Oil Shock: Comments, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 28, No. 2, pp. 261-64.
Rashid, A. I., 1995: Trade, Growth, and Liberalization: The Indian Experience, 1977-1989, Journal of Developing Areas, Vol. 29, No. 3, pp. 355-70.
Redding, S. 1999: Dynamic Comparative Advantage and the Welfare
E¤ects of Trade, Oxford Economic Papers, Oxford University Press, vol.
51(1), pages 15-39, January.
Rhee, Y.W. and Belot, T., 1990, Export Catalysts in Low-income countries, World Bank Discussion Paper, No. 72.
Riezman, R. G., Whiteman, C. H. and P. M. Summers, 1996: The Engine
of Growth or Its Handmaiden? A Time-Series Assessment of Export-Led
Growth, Empirical Economics, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 77-110.
Rodríguez-Clare, A. 1996: Multinationals, Linkages and Economic Development, American Economic Review.
Rodríguez-Clare, A. 1996: The division of labor and economic development, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 49, No. 1 (April).
Rodríguez-Clare, A. 2007: Clusters and Comparative Advantage: Implications for Industrial Policy, Journal of Economic Development, Volume 82,
Issue 1, January 2007, Pages 43-57.
Rodriguez, Francisco., 2008, Policymakers Beware: The Use and Misuse
of Regressions in Explaining Economic Growth, Policy Research Brief 5,
International Poverty Centre.
Rodriguez, Francisco and Dani Rodrik, 1999, Trade Policy and Economic
Growth: A Skeptic’s Guide to Cross-National Evidence, NBER Working
Paper, No. W7081.
Rodrik, Dani., 1996, Understanding Economic Policy Reform, Journal of
Economic Literature (XXXIV), pp. 9-41.
Rodrik, D. 2004: Industrial Policy for the Twenty-First Century, Harvard
University.
Rodrik, Dani., 2006, What’s So Special about China’s Exports?, China
and World Economy (14), pp. 1-19.
Rodrik, Dani., 2007, Industrial Development: Stylized Facts and Policies,
in United Nations, Industiral Development for the 21st Century, U.N., New
York.
104

Rodrik, Dani., A. Subramanian and F. Trebbi, 2004, Institutions Rule:
The Primary of Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic
Development, Journal of Economic Growth (9), pp. 131-165.
Romalis, J., 2007: Market Access, Openness and Growth, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, NBER Working Papers: 13048.
Romer, Paul., 1986, Increasing Returns and Long-run Growth, Journal
of Political Economy (94), pp. 1002-37.
Romer, Paul., 1990, Endogenous Technological Change, Journal of Political Economy (98), pp. s71-102.
Romer, Paul., 1994, The Origins of Endogenous Growth, Journal of Economic Perspectives (8), pp. 3-22.
Rosenthal, S. S. and W. C. Strange, 2004: Evidence on the Nature and
Sources of Agglomeration Economies, Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 4, edited by J.V. Henderson and J.F. Thisse.
Rosenthal, S. S. and W. C. Strange, 2005: The Micro-Empirics of Agglomeration Economies, in Blackwell Companion to Urban Economics, edited
by R. Arnott and D. McMillen.
Ruane, Frances and Ali Ugur., 2002: Foreign Direct Investment and Productivity Spillovers in Irish Manufacturing Industry: Evidence from Firm
Level Panel Data, Trinity Economic Papers 02/06, Trinity College, Dublin.
Sachs Je¤rey D. and Andrew M. Warner, 1995, Natural Resource Abundance and Economic growth, NBER Working Paper, No. W5398.
Salvatore, D. and T. Hatcher, 1991: Inward Oriented and Outward Oriented Trade Strategies, Journal of Development Studies, Vol. 27, No. 3, pp.
7-25.
Salvatore, D., 1983: A Simultaneous Equations Model of Trade and Development with Dynamic Policy Simulations, A Model of Trade and Development, Vol 36, pp. 66-90.
Sauré, P. 2007: Revisiting the Infant Industry Argument, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 84, pp. 104-117.
Sengupta, J. and J. R. Espana, 1994: Exports and Economic Growth in
Asian NICs: An Econometric Analysis for Korea, Applied Economics, Vol.
26, pp. 41-51.
Serletis, A., 1992: Export Growth and Canadian Economic Development,
Journal of Development Economics, Vol 38, pp. 133-145.
Shan, Jordan and F. Sun, 1998a: Domestic Saving and Foreign Investment in Australia: A Granger Causality Test, International Economics Journal, Vol. 12, No, 4, pp. 79-87.
105

Shan, Jordan and F. Sun, 1998b: On the Export-Led Growth Hypothesis:
The Econometric Evidence from China, Applied Economics, Vol. 30, No.8,
pp. 1055-65.
Shan, Jordan and F. Sun, 1998c: On the Export-Led Growth Hypothesis
for the Little Dragons: An Empirical Reinvestigation, Atlantic Economic
Journal, Vol. 26, No.4, pp. 353-71.
Sharma, S. C. and D. Dhakal, 1994: Causal Analysis Between Exports
and Economic Growth in Developing Countries, Applied Economics, Vol. 26,
pp. 1145-1157.
Sharma, S. C., Norris, M. and D. W. W. Cheung, 1991: Exports and
Economic Growth in Industrialized Countries, Applied Economics, Vol. 23,
pp. 697-707.
Sheehey, E. J., 1992: Exports and Growth: Additional Evidence, Journal
of Development Studies, Vol. 28, No. 4, pp. 730-34.
Singer, H. W. and P. Gray,1988: Trade Policy and Growth of Developing
Countries: Some New Data, World Development, Vol. 16, No. 3, pp. 395403.
Singh, T., 2003: E¤ects of exports on productivity and growth in India:
an industry-based analysis, Applied Economics, Vol. 35, pp. 741— 749.
Sjoholm, Fredrik., 1999a: Technology Gap, Competition and Spillovers
from Direct Foreign Investment: Evidence from Establishment Data, Journal
of Development Studies, Vol. 36, pp. 53-73.
Sjoholm, Fredrik., 1999b: Productivity Growth in Indonesia: The Role
of Regional Characteristics and Direct Foreign Investment, Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 47, pp. 559-584.
Smarznka, Beata K., 2002: Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the
Productivity of Domestic Firms? In search of Spillovers through Backward
Linkages, World Bank Policy Rerearch Working Paper 2923.
Smarzynska-Javorcik, B., 2004, Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase
Productivity of Domestic Firms? In Search of Spillovers through Backward
Linkages, American Economic Review 94 (3), pp. 605-627.
Spencer, Barbara J. and Brander, James A. August 1983. International
R&D rivalry and industrial strategy. NBER Working Paper Series Vol.
w1192, .
Succar, P., 1987: The Need for Industrial Policy in LDCs - A Re-statement
of the Infant Industry Argument, International Economic Review, Vol. 28,
No. 2 (June).

106

Thangavelu, S. M. and G. Rajaguru, 2004: Is There an Export or ImportLed Productivity Growth in Rapidly Developing Asian Countries? A Multivariate VAR Analysis, Applied Economics, Vol. 36, No. 10, pp. 1083-93.
Thornton, J., 1996: Cointegration, causality and export-led growth in
Mexico, 1895-1992, Economic Letters, Vol 50, pp. 413-416.
Topalova, P., 2004, Trade Liberalization and Firm Productivity: The
Case of India, International Monetary Fund Working Paper, No. 04/28.
Tybout, J. 1992. Linking Trade and Productivity: New Research Directions, World Bank Economic Review 6 (May), pp. 198-211.
Tybout James R. and M. Daniel Westbrook, 1995, Trade Liberalization
and the Dimensions of E¢ ciency Change in Mexican Manufacturing Industries, Journal of International Economics (39), pp. 53-76.
Tyler, William G., 1981: Growth and Export Expansion in Developing
Countries, Journal of Development Economics, vol 9, pp. 121-130.41.
Ukpolo, V., 1994: Export Composition and Growth of Selected LowIncome African Countries: Evidence from Time-Series Data, Applied Economics, Vol. 26, pp. 445-449.
Vamvakidis, A., 1998: Regional Trade Agreements Versus Board Liberalization: Which Path Leads to Faster Growth? Time-Series Evidence,
International Monetary Fund, IMF Working Papers: 98/40.
Wacziarg R. and Karen H. Welch, 2003, Trade Liberalization and Growth:
New Evidence, NBER Working Papers, No. 10152.
Wade, R., 1990: Governing the Market: Economic Theory and the Role
of Government in East Asian Industrialization, Princeton University Press.
Weinhold, D. and J. E. Rauch, 1999: Openness, Specialization, and Productivity Growth in Less Developed Countries, Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 32, No. 4., pp. 1009-27.
Wilbur, William. L and Mohammed. Z. Haque., 1992: An Investigation
of the Export Expansion Hypothesis, Jounral of Development Studies, Vol
28, no. 2, pp.297-313.
World Bank, 1993, The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public
Policy, Oxford University Press.
Xu. Bin and Xianmao. Wang, 1999: Capital Goods Trade and R&D
Spillovers in the OECD, The Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 32, No.
5, pp. 1258-1274.
Yaghmaian, B., 1994: An Empirical Investigation of Exports, Development, and Growth in Developing Countries: Challenging the Neoclassical

107

Theory of Export-Led Growth, World Development, Vol. 22, No. 12, pp.
1977-1995.
Yanikkaya, H., 2003: Trade Openness and Economic Growth: A CrossCountry Empirical Investigation, Journal of Development Economics, Vol.
72, No. 1, pp. 57-89.
Young, A., 1991, Learning by Doing and the Dynamic e¤ects of International Trade, Quarterly Journal of Economics (106), pp. 369-405.
Zagha, Roberto and Gobind T. Nankani, 2005, Economic Growth in the
1990s: Learning from a Decade of Reform, World Bank Publication.
Zukowska-Gagelmann, Katazyna, 2002: Productivity Spillovers from Foriegn
Direct Investment in Poland, Economic Systems, forthcoming.

108

Table 1 Cross‐country studies on openness and growth
Study author and
Measure of openness
Data description
Identification strategy
date
1. Tyler (1981)
(1) Annual average real growth
Cross‐sectional data for 55 No identification strategy
rate of total exports; (2)
middle‐income developing
Manufacturing sector export
countries from 1960 to
earnings
1977
Pooled data from 31
No identification strategy
2. Feder (1982)
(1) Export growth  export/GDP
ratio; (2) Growth rate of exports (in semiindustrialized
specific inter‐sectoral externalities countries and 17
developed countries
regression)
between 1964 and 1973
3. Salvatore (1983) Growth of percentage of exports in Pooling of cross section
Full information maximum
GDP
and time‐series data for likelihood (FIML); uses
52 developing countries consumer price index (CPI) and
from 1961 to 1978
index of real GDP of all market
economics as instruments for
exports

4. Balassa (1985)

Pooled data for 43
(1) Export growth  share of
semiindustrialized
exports in GDP; (2) Trade
orientation (the deviation of actual countries from 1973 to
1979
from hypothetical value of per
capita exports)

5. Gupta (1985)

Growth rate of exports

No identification strategy

Time‐series data for (1)
Sims causality test
South Korea from the first
quarter of 1960 to the last
quarter of 1979 and (2)
Israel from 1967 to 1981

Does openness increase growth?
Significant positive impact of exports on
economic growth

Significant positive impacts of exports
on economic growth (exported‐
oriented policies) bring the economy
closer to an optimal allocation of
resources
No significant positive impact of
exports on economic growth. Trade is
very important to the development
process, but more in the nature of a
handmaiden than as an engine of
growth. The policy implication is that
excessively pursuing a policy of
industrialization through import
substitution can retard growth
The results show that the growth rate
of GNP is higher with a greater extent
of outward orientation at the beginning
of the study period and the greater the
extent of reliance on export promotion
in response to the external shocks of
the period
Bidirectional causality between exports
and economic growth for both
countries

6. Jung and Marshall Growth rate of real value of
(1985)
exports

Time series, annual data Granger causality test
for 37 developing
countries from 1951 to
1981
(1) RX: growth of a specific
Cross‐sectional data for 52 No identification strategy
country’s total export earnings; (2) low‐ and middle‐income
RW: growth of a country’s export developing countries from
earnings due to expansion of world 1967 to 1977
demand for its traditional
commodities; (3) RC: a rise in the
share of world markets for a
country’s traditional commodities;
(4) RD: an increase in the share of
nontraditional commodities in a
country’s total exports; (5) RCD: an
indicator of the effect of trade
policy (where
RCD = (1 + RC)  (1 + RD)  1;
values greater than or equal to 0
imply an outward trade
orientation, while values less than
0 imply an inward trade
orientation

Export‐led growth in only five countries
while no causality in 20 countries

7. Kavoussi (1985)

Firstly, the study shows that a rapid
expansion of export earnings requires
both favorable external markets and
outward‐oriented commercial policies.
Secondly, the results suggest that free
trade appears to enhance growth only
when external demand is favorable

8. Chow (1987)

Export growth in manufactured
goods

Time series, annual data Sims causality test
for eight newly
industrializing countries
(NICs) from the 1960s and
1970s
Time series, annual data White’s causality test
for Hong Kong, Korea,
Taiwan, and Singapore
from 1955 to 1982

9. Darrat (1987)

Growth rate of real value of
exports

10. Goncalves and
Richtering (1987)

(1) Annual average growth rate of Pooled data for 70
No identification strategy
total export volume in 1975 prices; developing countries from
(2) Average share of exports in
1960 to 1981
GDP; (3) Change in share of
exports in GDP in each period

11. Hsiao (1987)

Exports

12. Ram (1987)

(1) Export growth rates; (2) Export Time‐series and cross‐
growth rates  export GDP shares sectional data for 88
countries from 1960 to
1972 and 1973 to 1982

Time series, annual data
for Hong Kong, Korea,
Taiwan, and Singapore
during the 1960s, 1970s,
and 1980s

Granger and Sims causality
tests

No identification strategy

Export‐led growth in only Mexico,
strong bidirectional causality between
export growth and industrial
development in other seven countries
Exports and economic growth are
significantly and positively correlated.
Causality runs from exports to
economic growth only in Korea. For the
remaining three countries, the export‐
led growth hypothesis is rejected
No significant positive impact of
exports on GDP net of exports

The Sims’ test indicates a feedback
relationship while the Granger’s test
indicates no causal relation between
the exports and GDP, except for Hong
Kong where both tests indicate a
unidirectional causality from GDP to
exports
Significant positive impact of exports on
economic growth

13. Grabowski
(1988)

(1) Growth of exports; (2) Share of Time series, annual data Single and simultaneous
exports in GDP
for Japan from the 1880s equations; uses the volume of
to the 1940s
world trade and the time
period as instruments for the
growth of exports

14. Rana (1988)

Pooled data for 43
developing countries

(1) Export growth rate; (2) Export
growth rate  share of exports in
GDP
15. Singer and Gray (1) Growth of country’s total
(1988)
export earnings; (2) Trade policy
factor RCD = (1 + RC)  (1 + RD),
where RC is the competitiveness
factor and RD is the diversification
factor. Positive values of RCD
represent outward trade
orientation
16. Kohli and Singh (1) Growth of exports; (2) Export
(1989)
share in GDP; (3) Growth of
exports  share of exports in GDP
17. Kunst and Marin Manufacturing sector exports
(1989)
18. Mbaku (1989) Growth rate of exports

No identification strategy

The results show that growth in Japan
was not export led, in the sense that
external demand stimulated rapid
export growth resulting in substantial
economic growth. Using a simulation
analysis, it was found that policies
aimed at export promotion had a
positive impact on economic growth
Supports the view that exports would
have less effect on growth when the
world environment is unfavorable

Pooled data for 52
No identification strategy
developing countries from
1967 to 1973 and 1977 to
1983

Positive impact of exports on economic
growth under favorable world market
conditions; however, this positive
impact is weaker for low‐income
countries

Pooled data for 30
countries from 1960 to
1970 and 1970 to 1981

Significant positive impact of exports on
economic growth in export‐oriented
nations. The impact is subject to
diminishing returns
Positive causality from productivity to
exports
The results show that export expansion
significantly enhances economic growth
in Africa

No identification strategy

Time series, annual data Granger causality test
for Australia
Pooled data for 37 African No identification strategy
countries from 1970 to
1981

19. Koschos (1989)

Growth rate of real exports

20. Fosu (1990)

Annual export growth

Cross‐sectional data for 71 No identification strategy
developing countries from
1970 to 1980

Cross sectional data for 28 No identification strategy
least‐developed countries
(LDCs) in Africa from 1960
to 1970 and 1970 to 1980
21. Grabowski,
Growth of exports
Time series, annual data Granger causality test
Sharma, and Dhakal
for Japan from 1885 to
(1990)
1939 and 1952 to 1980
22. Sheehey (1990) Export growth  share of exports in Pooled data for 36
No identification strategy
countries from 1960 to
GDP
1970

The evidence contradicts the view that
among “more advanced” developing
economies the effect of export
expansion on growth is stronger than
among “less advanced” ones. In fact,
among “less developed” countries
output growth is mainly influenced by
export expansion and capital formation,
its response to labor growth being
highly significant
Significant positive impact of exports on
economic growth, but this positive
relationship is smaller compared to
other LDCs
No export‐led growth in pre‐World War
II period but export‐led growth in post‐
World War II
This is a critique of Balassa and Feder’s
work particularly. The author argues
that, since the link between sectoral
growth and growth of GDP is common
to all sectors, the growth clearly cannot
be due to relative productivity
differences and externality effects. By
showing the same tests that support
the “promotion” of all major
components of GDP, the author argues
that the previous tests have no bearing
at all on the export‐promotion/import‐
substitution controversy

23. Afxentiou and
Serletis (1991)

Growth rate of real value of
exports

24. Ahmad and
Kwan (1991)

(1) Total real value of exports; (2) Pooled time‐series and
Granger causality test
Total real value of manufactured cross‐sectional data for 47
exports; (3) Share of manufactured developing African
exports in total exports
countries from 1981 to
1987
No identification strategy
(1) Export growth; (2) Qualitative Pooled data for 41
developing countries from
evaluation of trade orientation
(World Bank Development Report 1965 to 1973 and 1973 to
1987), including effective rates of 1984
protection, export incentives,
exchange rate alignments and
direct controls

25. Alam (1991)

26. Dodaro (1991)

Time series, annual data
for 16 developed
countries

(1) Manufactured exports as a
Pooled data for 41
percentage of total merchandise developing countries
exports; (2) Dummy variable equal
to one if over 50% of a country’s
exports are makeup of fuels,
minerals, and metals, 0 otherwise

Granger causality test

Growth led exports in three nations and
was bidirectional in the United States.
In general, there is no significant
causality between export growth and
GNP growth in these 16 countries
No support for export‐led growth or
growth led exports

Significant positive relationship
between outward orientation and
exports and output growth rates for
both time periods. Moreover, the
impact of trade policies on growth rates
acted more strongly through increases
in productivity rather than increases in
investment rates
Instrumental variable
The level of development is an
technique; uses nominal per
important determinant of the degree of
capita GNP and population size manufacturing and processing in a
as instruments for
country’s export basket. Moreover, the
manufactured exports
results show that the composition of
exports affects economic growth.
Concentration of exports in
manufactures and greater levels of
processing allow for greater
diversification and a reduction in
concentration both with respect to
commodities and market areas. This
reduction in concentration may reduce
export earnings instability, fostering
further economic growth

27. Esfahani (1991) (1) Share of imports in
GDP  growth rate of imports; (2)
Share of exports in GDP  growth
rate of exports

Export promotion is particularly
important for countries that cannot
obtain sufficient foreign aid or capital

28. Kwan and
Cotsomotis (1990)

Bidirectional causality between exports
and economic growth for the
postreform period (since 1978), but no
causality for the prereform period
The study indicates positive causality
from economic growth to export
growth in 4 out of 20 countries (Korea,
Nigeria, South Africa, and Thailand) and
negative causality in Indonesia. Korea
and Thailand exhibit positive causality
in both directions
The econometric results only partially
support the hypothesis that
international trade benefits most
developing countries and that an
outward orientation leads to a more
efficient use of resources and growth
Export‐led growth for Germany and
Japan, while growth led exports for the
United States and the United Kingdom.
There was no causality in either
direction for Italy

29. Oskooee,
Mohtadi, and
Shabsigh (1991)

Cross‐sectional data for 31 Simultaneous equations; uses
semiindustrialized
log GDP per capital and log
labor as instruments for export
countries from 1960 to
1973, 1973 to 1981, and and import variables
1980 to 1986
Ratio of exports to national income Time series, annual data Granger causality test
(the growth rate of exports to
for China from 1952 to
national income is used as a
1985
robustness check)
Export growth
Time series, annual data Granger causality test with
for 20 LDCs from the
Akaike’s optimal lag criterion
1950s to the 1980s

30. Salvatore and
Hatcher (1991)

Growth rate of real value of
exports

31. Sharma, Norris, Export growth
and Cheung (1991)

Time series and pooled, No identification strategy
annual data for 26
developing countries from
1963 to 1973 and 1973 to
1985
Time series, quarterly data Granger causality test
for five industrialized
countries from 1960 to
1987

32. Dollar (1992)

Cross‐sectional data for 95 No identification strategy
(1) Dollar measure of outward
orientation: RPLi = 100  ePi/Pu.s., countries from 1976 to
where RPLi is the index of country 1985
is relative price level, e is the
exchange rate, and Pi is the
consumption price index for
country i; (2) Variability of the real
exchange rate

33. Edwards (1992) (1) Index of trade intervention; (2) Cross‐sectional data for 30 Instrumental variable
INVERV1, overall intervention
developing countries from technique; uses the average
index obtained when a
1970 to 1982
and coefficient of variation of
homoskedastic (unscaled) model is
the black‐market premium to
used to predict trade flows for the
identify the level of trade
183 commodities in the sample; (3)
restrictions
INVERV2, overall intervention
index obtained when a
heteroskedastic (scaled) model
with residuals proportional to GNP
is used; (4) OPEN1, overall
openness index obtained from the
unscaled trade model; (5) OPEN2,
overall openness index obtained
from the residuals of the scaled
trade model; (6) OPENM1,
manufacturing sector openness
index obtained from the unscaled
trade model; (7) OPENM2,
manufacturing sector openness
index obtained from the scaled
heteroskedastic trade model

Significant negative relationship
between distortion in the real exchange
rate and growth of per capita GDP after
controlling for the effects of real
exchange rate variability and
investment level. Trade liberalization,
devaluation of the real exchange rate
and maintenance of a stable real
exchange rate could improve growth
performance in poor countries
A strong positive relationship exists
between trade orientation and
economic performance. The
relationship is robust to the method of
estimation, to correction for errors in
variables and to the deletion of outliers

34. Egwaikhide
(1992)

(1) Natural log of real value of oil
exports; (2) Natural log of real
value of oil imports

Time series, annual data
for Nigeria from 1973 to
1978

Instrumental variable
technique; uses the natural
logs of the lags of real imports
and the price for crude oil as
instruments for real exports
Granger causality test

35. Giles, Giles, and Real value of exports
McCann (1992)

Time series, annual data
for New Zealand from
1963 to 1991

36. Hutchison and
Singh (1992)

Time series, annual data Granger causality test
for 34 developing
countries from the 1950s
to the 1980s

Growth rate of real value of
exports

Crude oil exports have only marginally
stimulated the growth of output in
Nigeria

The study finds mixed evidence for the
export‐led growth hypothesis when
they use growth rates of exports and
output. While they reject the
hypothesis at the aggregate level, there
is some support for the ELG of certain
exporting sectors (such as minerals,
chemicals, plastics, metal, metal
products, live animals, and meat).
However, replacing levels of exports
and output with growth rates, there is
causality from real exports of
manufactured goods, meat, and live
animals to real GDP
11 countries showed evidence of
significantly positive export externality
effects contributing to nonexport sector
domestic growth. Three countries
showed evidence of externalities in the
nonexport sector contributing to export
growth and three countries showed
evidence of negative externalities

37. Levine and
Renelt (1992)

(1) Exports as a percentage of GDP; Pooled data for 119
(2) Imports as a percentage of
countries from 1960 to
GDP; (3) Leamer’s (1988) openness 1989
measure based on factor‐adjusted
trade; (4) Leamer’s(1988) trade‐
distortion measure based on H‐O
deviations; (5) Black‐market
exchange‐rate premium; (6)
Dollar’s (1992) real exchange‐rate
distortion for SH benchmark
countries
38. Marin (1992)
Log of exports of manufacturing
Time‐series data for the
goods (quarterly observations)
United States, the United
Kingdom, Japan, and
Germany
39. Serletis (1992) (1) Log of exports; (2) Log of
Time series, annual data
imports
for Canada from 1870 to
1985
40. Sheehey (1992) (1) Share of exports in GDP; (2)
Pooled data for 53 nonoil
Growth rate of share of exports in exporting and six
GDP; (3) Average annual growth developed countries from
rate of exports
1960 to 1981
41. Wilbur and
Natural log of exports
Time series, annual data
Haque (1992)
for 11 developing and six
developed countries from
1960 to 1972 and 1973 to
1987

No identification strategy

Significant positive correlation between
share of investment in GDP and share
of trade in GDP. None of the measures
of openness are robustly correlated
with growth when other explanatory
variables are introduced

Granger causality test

Exports cause labor productivity in all
the countries studied. The hypothesis
of export‐led growth cannot be
rejected
Causality from exports to growth but no
causality from imports to growth

Granger causality test

No identification strategy

Significant positive impact of exports
only during favorable world demand
and in industrialized countries

No identification strategy

Supports the “export expansion”
hypothesis, emphasizing the significant
importance of exports in the formation
of savings for both highly developed
and less developed countries

42. Alege (1993)

(1) Real value of total exports; (2) Time series, annual data Granger causality test
Real value of oil exports
for Nigeria from covering
the period of 1960‐1985

43. Dodaro (1993)

Manufactured exports as a
percentage of total merchandise
exports

Time series, annual data
for a wide range of LDCs

Granger causality test

44. Ghartey (1993)

Log of exports

Time series, seasonally
adjusted quarterly data
for Taiwan, Japan, and the
United States
Time series, annual data
for Ghana from 1955 to
1987

Stepwise Granger causality test Exports cause economic growth in
(Hsiao’s version of Granger
Taiwan; economic growth causes
causality test)
exports in the United States; and there
is bidirectional causality in Japan
Granger causality test, Sims
Causality results vary depending upon
model, modified Sims model, the model used for testing and the lag
Akaike final prediction (error specification defined. The violation of
model) and the nonparametric the normality assumption leads the
Granger model to the apparently
multiple rank F‐test model
incorrect conclusion that GDP causes
exports

45. Gordon and
Real value of exports
Sakyi‐Bekoe (1993)

The results show the existence of strict
econometric exogeneity between
exports and GDP and a unidirectional
causality from GDP to oil exports. No
causality from total export growth (or
oil export growth) to GDP growth
The causality test shows very little
support for the basic export‐promotion
contention. There are two main results
of this study: first, the level of
development is an important
determinant of the degree of
manufacturing and processing in a
country’s export basket; second, the
efficiency of export‐led growth depends
on the composition of exports and the
stage of development

46. Khan and Saqib Natural log of real value of total
Time series, annual data Simultaneous equations; uses
(1993)
exports, manufactured exports and for Pakistan from 1972 to foreign income and the index
primary exports
1988
of domestic export prices to
world export prices to identify
the export demand function,
and uses the effective
exchange rate index and the
relative price index to identify
the export supply function
47. Oskooee and
Asle (1993)

Real value of exports

A strong positive association between
export performance and economic
growth is found, but more than 90% of
the contribution of exports to economic
growth is indirect in nature

Time series, quarterly data Granger causality tests with the The results indicate bidirectional
for nine LCDs
new techniques of
causality for all countries (except for
cointegration and error‐
Malaysia for which there is no
correction models
cointegration) between export growth
and economic growth when the
cointegrating properties of the time
series are incorporated into the analysis
48. Oxley (1993)
Natural log of real value of exports Time series, annual data Granger causality test
The export‐led growth hypothesis is
for Portugal from 1833 to
rejected in favor of reverse causality
1985
49. Sengupta (1993) (1) Export growth; (2) Export
Time series, annual data, No identification strategy
The empirical evidence supports the
basic premises of the new growth
growth  share of exports in GDP mainly focused on newly
industrialized countries
theory in the case of the successful NICs
(NICs) in Asia including
in Asia and for Korea, in particular
Japan, the Philippines,
South Korea, and Taiwan,
from the 1960s to the
1980s

50. Atesoglu (1994) Growth rate of real value of
exports

51. Coppin (1994)

Time series, annual data Instrumental variables
for the United States from technique; uses the rate of
the 1960s to the 1980s
growth of external prices and
the rate of growth of the
world’s real income to
instrument for exports

(1) Real exports; (2) Growth rate of Pooled data for 59 low‐
No identification strategy
real exports; (3) Share of
and middle‐income
manufactured exports in total
countries during the 1980s
exports; (4) Share of the growth
rate of manufactured exports in
total exports
52. Dutt and Ghosh Real value of exports
Time series, annual data No identification strategy
(1994)
for 26 low‐, middle‐, and
high‐income countries
from 1953 to 1991
53. Greenaway and Growth rate of share of exports in Cross‐sectional data for No identification strategy
Sapsford (1994a)
GDP
104 countries from 1960
to 1988

The export‐led Kaldor growth model
interprets and predicts the short‐run
fluctuation in the growth rate of the US
economy. Moreover, the dynamic
Harrod foreign trade multiplier rule of
Thirlwall is not preferable to the
Kaldorian model for explaining annual
changes in the US rate of growth
Positive impact of exports (but not
manufactured exports) on economic
growth. The results also show that the
growth in the labor force was an
important factor in explaining growth
For the majority of the countries in the
sample, export growth and economic
growth have moved together
The results support the hypothesis that
exports and growth are positively
correlated. This relationship is robust to
variations in the composition of the
country samples. Moreover, the
strength of the association varies from
subperiod to subperiod, but the
positive association becomes stronger
over time. Export growth does not
always follow reform

54. Greenaway and Growth rate of share of exports in Time series, annual data
Sapsford (1994)
GDP
for five developing
countries from 1956 to
1988
55. Hansen (1994)

56. Hotchkiss,
Moore, and Rockel
(1994)

57. Love (1994)

No identification strategy

Significant positive impact of exports on
economic growth for Sri Lanka, but
negative for Turkey

(1) Growth rate of
exports  percentage of exports in
GDP; (2) Growth rate of exports of
manufactured goods and
services  percentage of
manufacturing and service exports
in GDP; (3) Growth rate of “other”
commodity exports  percentage
of “other” commodity exports in
GDP
(1) Annualized growth rate of
exports weighted by the
proportion of exports in GNP; (2)
Annualized growth rate of exports
(unweighted)

Time series, annual data
for New Zealand from
1968 to 1991

Engle‐Granger cointegration
test

Exports of manufactures and services
have had a greater effect on the
economy’s recent growth experience
than exports of primary products and
raw materials

Annual data for 85
countries from 1960 to
1986

No identification strategy

Export growth

Time series, annual data Granger causality test
for 20 developing
countries from the 1960s
to the 1990s

The results indicate that exports
contribute to growth through both a
sector‐externality effect and a factor‐
productivity effect for middle income
countries, but only through a factor‐
productivity effect for low‐income
countries
Substantial support for the hypothesis
that exports cause growth. In 14 out of
20 countries there is evidence of
causality from export growth to GDP
growth, with causality being positive for
10 countries and negative for 4. The
export‐led results are highly sensitive to
the definition of economic growth

58. Sengupta and
Espana (1994)

(1) Time derivative of exports; (2) Time series, annual data Engle‐Granger cointegration
Average share of exports in GDP; for Japan, the Philippines, test
(3) Real export growth
Taiwan, Thailand, and
South Korea from the
1960s to the 1980s

59. Sharma and
Dhakal (1994)

Growth rate of real value of
exports

60. Ukpolo (1994)

Annual percentage growth rates of Time series, annual data
exports of fuel products
for eight low‐income
African countries from
1969 to 1988
(1) Exports in constant prices; (2) Pooled and time‐series
Average annual growth rate of
data for 66 developing
exports
countries from 1971 to
1980 and 1981 to 1990

61. Yaghmaian
(1994)

62. Ahmad and
Harnhirun (1995)

Real exports evaluated in per
capita terms in 1980 prices

Time series, annual data
for 30 developing
countries from 1960 to
1988

Time series, annual data
for five Asian countries
from 1966 to 1990

Granger causality test

No identification strategy

No identification strategy

Granger causality test with
error‐correction model

The externality effect of exports and
their productivity growth played the
role of a catalyst for other sectors’
growth. Exports and output are
cointegrated and there is evidence of a
significant positive impact of exports on
economic growth, particularly in South
Korea
Causal relationship between export
growth and output growth is found in
five countries; export‐led growth is
found in six; output growth causes
export growth in eight; no causal
relationship for remaining countries. No
causal relationship between export and
output growth for South Korea
Significant positive impact of nonfuel
primary exports on economy

A positive and statistically significant
association was obtained between
export growth and the growth of
output when population statistics were
used for the labor variable in the
neoclassical growth model. However,
when substituting employment for
population, there was no statistical
support for export‐led growth
Causality between exports and
economic growth in both directions for
Singapore

63. Amirkhalkhaili
and Dar (1995)

Growth rate of real value of
exports

Time series, annual data No identification strategy
for 23 developing
countries from the 1960s
to the 1990s

64. Clark (1995)

(1) Qualitative evaluation of trade
orientation (World Bank
Development Report 1987),
including effective rates of
protection, export incentives,
exchange rate alignments, and
direct controls; (2) Real export
growth

Time series and pooled, No identification strategy
annual data for 35
developing countries from
1973 to 1985

65. Coe and
Helpman (1995)

(Ratio of imports of goods and
services to GDP)  (Natural log of
foreign R&D capital stock)

Pooled data for 21 OECD No identification strategy
countries and Israel from
1971 to 1990

66. Holman and
Graves (1995)

First difference of log of exports

Time series, annual data Granger and Sims causality
for South Korea from 1953 tests
to 1990

There is evidence of export‐led growth
for all except the strongly inward‐
oriented group of countries. No major
difference between moderately inward‐
oriented countries and moderately and
strongly outward‐oriented countries in
terms of the impact of export
expansion on economic growth
Significant positive impact of exports
and outwardly oriented trade policy on
industrial diffusion rather on output
growth

Demonstrates the extent to which a
country’s total factor productivity
depends not only on domestic R&D
capital but also on foreign R&D. Foreign
R&D has beneficial effects on domestic
productivity and the result is stronger
when the country is more open to
foreign trade
The Sims results found consistent two‐
way exogeneity between exports and
GNP growth. The Granger causality
results indicate that there is
bidirectional causality between exports
and economic growth

67. Jin (1995)

(1) Natural log of real value of
goods exported; (2) Natural log of
world commodity price level for all
exports (used as a proxy for
foreign price shocks); (3) Natural
log of industrial production index
for all industrial countries (used as
a proxy for foreign output shocks)

Granger causality tests
Time series, seasonally
adjusted quarterly data
for Hong Kong, Singapore,
South Korea, and Taiwan
from 1973 to 1993

68. Jin and Yu (1995) Exports of goods and services

Time series, seasonally
Granger causality test
adjusted quarterly data
for Korea, Japan, Canada,
and the United States

69. Kwan and Kwok Export growth
(1995)

Time series, annual data
for China from 1952 to
1985

Granger causality test

The results from the variance
decompositions indicate significant
feedback relations between exports
and output for Hong Kong, Singapore,
and South Korea, which can be
interpreted to suggest that in the short
run, economic growth and export
growth reinforce each other. However,
the Granger cointegration test suggests
that no long‐run equilibrium exists
between exports and the level of
output
The results do not support the causal
implication of the export‐led growth
hypothesis. For Korea and Japan, there
is bidirectional causality between
export growth and GNP growth; for
Canada and the United States, growth
led exports
Exports led growth including
instantaneous causality

70. Lee (1995)

(1) Ratio of imported to domestic Cross‐sectional data for 79 Instrumental variable
capital goods; (2) Ratio of imports countries from 1960 to
technique; uses land size,
to investment; (3) Share of imports 1985
distance from trade distortion
in GDP
as instruments for openness
measures

71. McCarville and
Nnadozie (1995)

Real value of exports

72. Paul and
Chowdhury (1995)

Natural log of growth rate of real
exports

73. Rashid (1995)

74. Abhayaratne
(1996)

Time series, annual data Granger causality test
for Mexico from 1926 to
1988
Time series, annual data Granger causality test
for Australia from 1949 to
1991

The ratio of imported to domestically
produced capital goods in the
composition of investment has a
significant positive impact on per capita
income growth rates across countries,
and for developing countries in
particular. Moreover, the ratio of
foreign to domestic components of
investment is an important factor in
economic growth. The policy
implication is that any trade distortions
that restrict the importance of capital
goods hurt the economy in the long run
Supports the export‐led growth
argument

There is evidence of Granger causality
running from exports to GDP growth,
implying that expansion of exports
promotes economic growth in Australia
Growth of the real value of exports Time series, annual data 2SLS, four equations
The results support that idea that trade
for India from 1960 to
multivariate simultaneous
is the handmaiden of growth and
1989
model; uses RER and LW to
suggest that domestic factors play a
instrument for the growth rate more important role in increasing
of exports. Note: RER is the
growth rates. Furthermore, the study
shows
that liberalization has not had a
nominal exchange rate 
producer prices in the United significant effect on industrialization
States divided by India’s CPI as and investment in the study period
a percentage change; LW is
world income
Logs of real exports and imports Time series, annual data Granger causality test
The results reject the notion that
(measured in 1985 prices)
for Sri Lanka from 1960 to
foreign trade stimulates economic
1992
growth

75. Amoateng and Growth rate of real value of
Amoako‐Adu (1996) exports

Pooled (including time‐
series and cross‐sectional
data) data for 35 African
countries from 1970 to
1990

76. Bodman (1996) Logs of manufacturing goods
exports

Time series, seasonally
adjusted quarterly data
for Australia and Canada
from 1960 to 1995

77. Boltho (1996)

Time series, annual data
for Japan from 1913 to
1937, 1952 to 1973, and
1973 to 1990

Export growth

Both the export‐driven GDP growth and
GDP growth‐led export‐promotion
hypotheses are supported. During the
1983‐1990 subperiod, the structural
adjustment programs that removed
some of the economic distortions and
encouraged regular repayment of the
external debt also improved economic
outcomes in the countries studied
No identification strategy
Export‐led growth hypothesis holds for
both economies. The reverse causality
is rejected for both countries, except
for the Canadian manufacturing sector,
for which there is a small, significant
positive effect of labor productivity on
manufactured exports
Granger causality test (in both For the period 1952‐1973, not one of
directions)
the five tests supports the idea of
export‐led growth. For the remaining
two periods, the export‐led growth
hypothesis seems to be rejected

Granger causality test
(trivariate model, introducing
external debt servicing as a
third variable)

78. Burney (1996)

Export growth

Cross‐sectional data from No identification strategy
1965 to 1980 and 1980 to
1990, which consists of 89
and 95 countries,
respectively

79. Cheng and Chu
(1996)

Natural log of exports in constant Time series, annual data Granger causality test
dollars
for the United States from
1940 to 1990
80. Doraisami (1996) Growth rate of real values of
Time series, annual data Engle‐Granger causality test
exports
for Malaysia from 1963 to
1993

81. Dutt and Ghosh Real value of exports
(1996)

Time series, annual data
for 26 developed and
developing countries

The study confirms that there is a
positive relationship between exports
and economic growth. However, the
relationship is significant only for the
period 1980‐1990. Moreover, the level
of significance of the impact of exports
on economic growth is relatively higher
for high‐income economies
The results show bidirectional causality
between exports and economic growth

The study provides strong empirical
support for bidirectional causality
between exports and output and a
positive long‐run relationship between
exports and growth
Engle‐Granger cointegration
The study provides evidence of
and causality tests with error‐ cointegration in only 14 countries. It
correction model
shows that export causes growth in five
countries, while growth causes exports
in two countries. Bidirectional causality
is found in three countries, and no
causality is found in four countries

82. Fosu (1996)

(1) Growth rate of real exports; (2)
Mean annual growth rate of
nonfuel primary exports; (3)
Average annual nonfuel primary
exports as a percentage of total
exports

83. Harrison (1996) (1) Trade reform (1960‐1984); (2)
Trade reform (1979‐1988); (3)
Black‐market premium; (4) Price
distortion; (5) Trade shares; (6)
Unprotected agriculture; (7)
Movement toward international
prices
84. Henriques and Natural log of real value of exports
Sadorsky (1996)

85. Jin and Yu (1996) Real value of exports

Pooled, time‐series and No identification strategy
cross‐sectional data for 76
less developed countries
from 1967 to 1986

Pooled, time‐series and
cross‐sectional data for
developing countries

Granger causality test

Time series, annual data
for Canada from 1870 to
1991

Granger causality test

Time series, quarterly data No identification strategy
for the United States from
1959 to 1992

The study shows that exports have a
positive effect on GDP growth.
Moreover, this positive impact
generally remains positive when
nonexport GDP is the dependent
variable. Lastly, the growth of nonfuel
primary exports exhibits little or no
external impact on the nonexport
sector (casting some doubt on the
sustainability of primary product
export‐led growth)
Significant positive impact of openness
on economic growth. The Granger
causality test shows that causality
between exports and growth runs in
both directions. However, the choice of
time period for analysis is critical
The results tend to favor the one‐way
Granger causal relationship that the
growth rate of GDP influences export
growth
Based on the VAR techniques, no
significant causal impacts are found
between exports and output. This
suggests that export expansion is
neutral with respect to the growth of
the US economy

86. Karunaratne
(1996)

Growth rate of value of exports

Granger causality test with
Time series, seasonally
adjusted quarterly data
error correction
from Australia from 1979
to 1994

Trade operated as an engine of growth
in Australia during the study period

87. Kwan,
Cosotmitis, and
Kwok (1996)

Growth rate of real value of
exports

Time series, annual data
for Taiwan from 1953 to
1988

No identification strategy

88. Mallick (1996)

Growth rate of real value of
exports

Time series, annual data
for India from 1950 to
1992

Engle‐Granger causality tests
with error‐correction model

89. Mollik (1996)

Growth rate of real value of
exports

The result shows that while the weak
exogeneity assumption appears to be
valid, the super exogeneity assumption
is rejected. Thus, the results cast doubt
on policy recommendations based on
the export‐led growth hypothesis
Cointegration and causality test results
indicate the existence of strong
cointegration and Granger causality
between income and exports growth.
Causality runs from income to export
growth
Exports cause economic growth but not
the opposite

90. Mulaga and
Weiss (1996)

Time series, annual data Granger and Sims causality
for Bangladesh from 1972 tests
to 1992
Growth rate of effective protection Firm‐level data for Malawi No identification strategy
from 1970 to 1991
(ERP): ERPi = (ti‐aij  ij)/(1  aij)
where ti and tj are the tariffs or
tariff‐equivalents for goods i and j,
respectively, and aij is the share of
input j in the value of output i at
world prices

The impact of a decline in protection on
total factor productivity depends upon
the way productivity growth is
measured. The study finds a positive
relationship for the simple TFP
estimates. However, the growth seems
unassociated with changes in
protection when capital input is
measured by capital services rather
than capital stock

91. Piazolo (1996)

(1) Real value of exports of goods
and services; (2) Real value of
imports of goods and services; (3)
Trade orientation dummy variable
(import‐substitution dummy
variable is 0 from 1965 to 1982;
export diversification dummy
variable is 1 from 1983 to 1992)
92. Pomponio (1996) Manufactured goods exports

93. Riezman,
Whiteman, and
Summers (1996)

Time series, annual data Engle‐Granger causality test
for Indonesia from 1965 to
1992

Indonesian long‐run economic growth
is more investment driven than trade‐
or export driven. However, the short‐
run terms effects of exports are
strongly positive

Time series, annual data Granger causality test
for 66 developing and
OECD countries from 1960
to 1988

The bivariate causality tests show weak
evidence supporting the idea that
manufactured exports lead to output
growth. However, when the investment
factor is included in the trivariate
causality test, there is mixed evidence
in support of the trivariate causal
relationships
30 out of 126 countries support the
export‐led growth hypothesis; 25 out of
126 countries support the growth‐led
exports hypothesis. Using a weaker
notion of “support,” 65 out of 126
countries support the export‐led
growth hypothesis. For the “Asian
Tiger” countries, the relationship
between export growth and output
growth becomes clearer when
conditioned on human capital and
investment growth as well as import
growth

(1) Growth rate of exports; (2)
Time series, annual data
Growth rate of imports; (3) Share for 126 countries from
of exports + imports in GDP
1960 to 1985

Granger causality test

94. Thornton (1996) Natural log of real value of exports Time series, annual data Granger causality test
for Mexico from 1895 to
1992
95. Al‐Youslf (1997) (1) Growth rate of value of
Time series, annual data No identification strategy
exports; (2) Growth rate of
for Saudi Arabia, Kuwait,
exports  share of exports in GDP UAE, and Oman from 1973
to 1993

Positive Granger causal relationship
running from exports to economic
growth
Significant positive impact of exports on
economic growth. However, economic
growth is highly affected by oil

During the period 1960‐1991, trade and
Granger causality test;
Simultaneous equations; uses real output growth were positively
the real exchange rate and the related in Mexico. Simultaneous
growth rate of real GDP of the equation regressions suggest that both
United States to instrument for exports and imports significantly
exports; uses the real exchange explain the growth of total factor
rate and a measure of foreign productivity in Mexico. However, this
capital inflows to instrument study also points out the limitations of
for imports
empirical exercises due to the changing
composition of exports and shifting
policy regimes, and emphasizes the
importance of theoretical work
Pooled data for 77
No identification strategy
The results imply that a developing
developing countries and
country’s total factor productivity is
22 industrialized countries
larger the larger is its foreign R&D
from 1971 to 1990
capital stock, the more open it is to
machinery and equipment imports
from industrial countries and the more
educated is its labor force
Time series, annual data No identification strategy
Exports and stable exchange rates have
for Papua New Guinea
positively contributed to economic
from 1970 to 1992
growth

96. Berg (1997)

(1) Growth rate of real value of
Time‐series data for
exports (in Granger causality test); Mexico from 1960 to 1991
(2) Growth rates of real values of
exports and imports (in
simultaneous equations)

97. Coe, Helpman,
and Hoffmaister
(1997)

(1) Change of the share of
machinery and equipment imports
from industrial countries in GDP in
each developing country (denoted
by M); (2) M log of foreign R&D
capital stock

98. Gani (1997)

Growth rate of the (real) share of
exports in GDP

99. Ghatak, Milner, (1) Natural log of the real value of
and Utkulu (1997) exports (in Granger causality test);
(2) Real value of exports of
manufactured goods, fuel, and
nonfuel primary products (in
Johansen maximum likelihood
procedure)
100. Gokkceus
Natural log of the industry‐specific
(1997)
annual total protection rate,
including all charges on imports
such as customs duty, municipality
tax, stamps, funds, etc.
101. Greenaway,
(1) Growth in real value of
Morgan, and Wright merchandise exports; (2)
(1997)
Percentage change in exports

102. Liu, Song, and
Romilly (1997)

Time series, annual data Granger causality test
for Malaysia from 1955 to
1990

Panel data with annual
No identification strategy
observations for 29 four‐
digit rubber industry
plants in Turkey from 1983
to 1986
Pooled data for 74
No identification strategy
developing countries from
the 1980s to the 1990s

Natural logs of exports and imports Time series, quarterly data Granger causality test
for China from 1983 to
1995

103. Park and Prime (1) Growth rate of exports; (2)
(1997)
Share of exports in GDP; (3)
Growth rate of exports  share of
exports in GDP

Pooled and cross‐sectional No identification strategy
data for 26 inland
provinces and 11 coastal
provinces in China

The results provide support for the
export‐led growth hypothesis;
aggregate exports Granger‐cause real
GDP and nonexport GDP. This
relationship is found to be driven by
manufactured exports rather than by
traditional exports
This study reveals that trade
liberalization or declining protection
have a significant positive effect on
productivity growth
In general, liberalization seems to have
been associated with deterioration in
growth for this sample; the result was
robust for both the full and the
restricted samples
Bidirectional causality between
economic growth and exports plus
imports, which is consistent with
China’s development strategy of
protected export‐promotion
The results support the hypothesis that
exports have contributed to the growth
of provincial incomes in China for the
period examined with both the cross‐
sectional and pooled analyses, with the
results being primarily driven by the
comparison between the coastal
provinces and the inland areas

104. Pineres and
Ferrantino (1997)

(1) GEXP, the growth rate of the
Time series, annual data
real value of exports; (2) RXR, the for Chile from 1962 to
real exchange rate; (3) TRAD7 is
1992
the variance of the traditional
index calculated across industries;
(4) Specl, a static measure of
specialization; (5) CSX, a measure
of the change in export
composition

Granger causality test

In general, growth periods in Chile have
been associated with stability in the
composition of exports and an
acceleration of export diversification.
There is a positive relationship between
export diversification and economic
growth

105. Begum and
(1) Level of exports; (2) Share of
Time series, annual data
Shamsuddin (1998) exports in GDP; (3) Growth rate of for Bangladesh from 1961
to 1992
exports; (4) Export growth rate
weighted by the share of exports in
GDP. Note: OLS results use the last
measure as the exports variable

Instrumental variable
technique; uses the annual
growth rate of world income
and the difference between
foreign and domestic inflation
rates to instrument for exports

106. Biswal and
Dhawan (1998)

Granger causality test with
error‐correction model

Export growth has significantly
increased economic growth through its
positive impact on total factor
productivity in the economy. The
contribution of exports to economic
growth was more pronounced during
1982‐1990, when the government
pursued a policy of trade liberalization
and structural reform and political
turmoil was not persistent
The study finds evidence of
bidirectional causality between exports
and growth

Natural log of total real value of
exports and total real value of
manufactured goods exports

Time series, annual data
for Taiwan from 1960 to
1990

107. Clerides et al.
(1998)

108. Doyle (1998)

109. Iscan (1998)

The study addresses the question of
A dummy variable that equals 1 if Plant‐level, panel data for (1) FIML; simultaneously
whether the association between
the plant exports, 0 otherwise
Columbia (1981‐1991),
estimates export market
exporting and efficiency reflects
Morocco (1984‐1990), and participation patterns and
Mexico (1984‐1990)
marginal cost realizations; (2) causation flowing from exporting
experience to improvements in
GMM; used to test the
robustness of the marginal cost performance. The actual data suggest
estimate
an inconsistent causality pattern (no‐
learning‐by‐exporting scenario). The
FIML and GMM tests confirm that the
association between exporting and
efficiency is most plausibly explained as
low‐cost producers choosing to become
exporters
Natural log of the real value of
Time series, annual data Granger causality test with
Exports and GDP are cointegrated.
exports
for Ireland from 1953 to error correction
Evidence of short‐run and long‐run
1993
causality runs from exports to growth
Share of exports in GDP
Panel, sector‐level data for Granger causality test with VAR The study found no evidence that
Mexico from 1970 to 1990 model
exports lead to capital accumulation or
vice versa. However, there is evidence
that common determinants, such as the
real exchange rate, may be the driving
force for the capital accumulation

110. Islam (1998)

Value of exports

Time‐series data for 15
Multivariate error‐correction
Asian countries from 1967 model to test the Granger
to 1991
causality between exports and
growth

Causality test results indicate that
export expansion causes growth in two
third of these countries, corrected for
simultaneity between the causal
factors. A country with a large public
sector, higher level of economic
development, and lower vulnerability
to external economic shocks, is more
likely to reap the benefits of export‐
promotion strategies
111. Keller (1998)
A foreign knowledge stock variable Panel data for 21 OECD
Monte Carlo‐based robustness Randomly matched trade patterns give
rise to greater positive R&D spillovers
which is a weighted sum of the
countries from 1971 to
test; R&D spillovers among
than do true bilateral trade patterns,
cumulative R&D expenditures of a 1990
randomly matched trade
partners investigated
suggesting that the Coe and Helpman
country’s trading partners (the
(1995) model of trade‐related
weights are given by the bilateral
international R&D spillovers is not
import shares)
robust
112. McNab and
Dummy variables for inwardly
Pooled data for 41
Simultaneous estimations;
Outward trade policy increased annual
Moore (1998)
oriented trade policy and
countries
openness measures are used as GDP, and trade policy is a robust
outwardly oriented trade policy
instruments
determinant of growth
113. Onafowora and Real value of exports and trade
Data from 12 sub‐Saharan Johansen’s cointegration tests Changes in trade policies and exports
Owoye (1998)
policy dummies
African (SSA) countries
and VECM
have positive effects on growth for 10
from 1963 to 1993
out of 12 SSA countries
114. Shan and Sun Growth rate of real value of
Quarterly, seasonally
Granger causality test using
Results indicate one‐way causality from
(1998a)
exports
adjusted data for Australia Toda and Yamamoto method industrial growth to export growth with
from 1978 to 1996
a 1‐year lag
115. Shan and Sun Natural log of exports
Monthly, seasonally
Granger causality test using
Results indicate bidirectional causality
(1998b)
adjusted data for China
Toda and Yamamoto method between exports and real industrial
from 1978 to 1996
output in China

Granger causality test using
Principal results from the paper cannot
Quarterly, seasonally
adjusted data for Hong
Toda and Yamamoto method, offer support for the export‐led growth
followed by sensitivity analysis hypothesis. Hong Kong and Korea show
Kong, South Korea, and
Taiwan from 1978 to 1996
bidirectional Granger causality between
exports and growth
117. Pineres and
(1) Natural log of real value of
Traditional Granger causality tests
Annual data for Columbia (1) Cointegration and error‐
Ferrantino (1999)
exports; (2) The mean of a
reveal little evidence of export‐led
from 1962 to 1993
correction modeling used to
cumulative export experience
test relationship between GDP growth. However, analysis of structural
function for each commodity
and exports; (2) simultaneous export change and export
(traditionality scores); (3) A static
diversification sheds significant light on
equation system: using the
measure of specialization which
price of coffee, oil, lagged log the trade‐growth linkages. Results
approaches 1 implying a high
of real exports, world interest reveal a positive interaction between
degree of specialization and nears
structural changes in the export sector
rates as instruments for
0 suggesting a degree of export
and Colombian GDP growth. Results
openness measures
diversification
indicate that increased export
diversification leads to more rapid
growth in real exports; and that more
rapid structural change in exports is
associated with accelerated growth in
Colombian GDP
118. Clark, Sawyer, Trade policy orientation, measured Pooled data for 94
No identification strategy
Outward‐oriented trade strategies are
and Sprinkle (1999) using Dollar’s index of real
developing countries
found to have an important effect on
exchange rate distortion
industrialization
116. Shan and Sun
(1998c)

(1) Natural log of the growth rate
of exports; (2) Natural log of the
growth rate of imports

119. Dhawan and
Biswal (1999)

(1) Natural log of real value of
exports; (2) Terms of trade

120. Frankel and
Romer (1999)

The results suggest that there is one
long‐run equilibrium relationship
among real GDP, real exports and terms
of trade, and the causal relationship
flows from GDP growth and terms of
trade to export growth. The causality
from exports to GDP appears to be a
short‐run phenomenon
OLS and instrumental variables Trade has a positive effect on income
techniques
growth

Annual data for India from VAR model; Johansen test for
1961 to 1993
cointegration; Engle and
Granger’s error‐correction
approach (to determine the
direction of causal flow in the
short run as well as in the long
run)

Trade is measured using
instrumental variables that take
account of countries’ geographic
locations
121. Greenaway,
(1) Real value of exports; (2)
Morgan, and Wright Decomposition of exports into
(1999)
different categories

Cross‐sectional data for
150 countries

122. Moosa (1999)

Annual data for Australia Cointegration and causality
from 1900 to 1993
tests

Sum of exports of goods and
services

Panel data for 69
countries from 1975 to
1993

No identification strategy

Results report a strong positive
relationship between real export
growth and real output growth. The
study also finds that export
composition does matter
Results fail to detect either a long‐run
or short‐run relationship between
exports and growth

123. Vamvakidis
(1998)

(1) Share of exports plus imports in Data cover the period
GDP; (2) Economy judged “open” if from 1950 to 1992. Data
it meets five conditions from Sachs for real GDP per capita,
and Warner: (a) average tariff less investment share, and
than 40%; (b) average nontariff
population growth are
barriers less than 40%; (c) black‐ from the Penn World
market premium less than 20% of Table; trade shares come
official exchange rate; (d)
from the World Table
government is not communist; (f) (World Bank, 1994), and
no state monopoly on major
school enrollment ratio
exports
are from Barro and Lee
(1994). The analysis
focuses on 109 countries
engaged in regional trade
agreements (RTA) and 51
countries engaged in
broad liberalization
between 1958 and 1989
124. Weinhold and Share of exports plus imports in
Data from 39 countries
Rauch (1999)
GDP
1960‐1990
125. Xu and Wang Foreign R&D spillovers weighted Data from 21 OECD
countries from 1983 to
(1999)
by total imports, capital goods
1990
imports, and noncapital goods
imports
126. Anoruo and
Growth rate of the share exports Time series, annual data
Ahmad (1999)
plus imports in GDP
for Indonesia, Malaysia,
the Philippines, and
Thailand from 1960 to
1997

No identification strategy

Economies grow faster after broad
liberalization, in both the short run and
the long run; however, they grow more
slowly after an RTA

No identification strategy

Increased trade may lead to growth

No identification strategy

Trade in capital goods was found to be
a significant channel of R&D spillovers

Granger causality test

The results show bidirectional causality
between economic growth and
openness

127. Al‐Marhubi
(2000)

(1) Average share of exports in
Cross‐sectional data for 91 No identification strategy
GDP from 1961 to 1988; (2) Export countries from 1961 to
structure, measured as the ratio of 1988
manufactured good exports to
total exports from the World
Development Indicators (WDI)
1997

128. Anwer and
Sampath (2000)

Natural logs of goods and
nonfactor service exports

Time series, annual data Granger causality test
for 97 countries from 1960
to 1992

The results show that export
diversification is associated with faster
growth. This relationship is
economically large and is robust to
different model specifications and
different measures of export
diversification. Moreover, distortions to
international trade and market‐
oriented resource allocation that run
counter to a country’s comparative
advantage can have adverse effects on
economic efficiency and growth
performance
In 97 countries, GDP and exports are
integrated of different orders for 36
countries. Among the other 61
countries, 17 countries exhibit no long‐
run relationship between the two
variables; 35 countries show causality
in at least one direction (10 countries
show unidirectional causality from GDP
to exports, 5 show unidirectional
causality from exports to GDP, and 20
show bidirectional causality), and 9
countries do not show any causality

129. Choudhri and
Hakura (2000)

Sector openness index, which
depends on how international
trade affects the technology
transfer process

130. Darrat, Hsu,
and Zhong (2000)

Real value of exports

131. Erlat (2000)

Export and import flows, divide
into three categories: net
exporting, import competing,
noncompeting

Panel data for 44
countries (including 33
developing countries)
from 1970 to 1993

No identification strategy

The effect of increased openness on
productivity growth differs across
sectors. In traditional (low‐growth)
manufacturing sectors, no effect or
little effect exists; for medium‐growth
sectors, import competition has a
significant growth‐enhancing effect;
and there is some evidence to show
that export expansion in high‐growth
sectors leads to an increase in
productivity growth
Data for Taiwan from 1953 VECM model after Johansen
The exports are both weakly and super‐
to 1988
cointegration tests, instead of exogenous to output
simple Engel‐Granger
procedure
Annual data for Turkey
No identification strategy
First, trade plays a more significant role
from 1963 to 1994,
in employment changes during the
divided into four
post‐1980 periods; this is observed
subperiods
more in the net exporting and
noncompeting categories rather than
the import‐competing category.
Second, the switch to export‐oriented
growth in 1980 did not lead export‐
based employment to be dominant in
employment changes, but has acted as
a buffer in the sense that employment
may either have grown much less or
declined more severely if the post‐1980
expansion of exports had not occurred

132. Jin (2000)

Share of imports in GDP

133. Kim (2000)

Direct policy measures such as
legal rates of tariff, quota ratios,
and nominal rates of protection

134. Morley and
Perdikis (2000)

Growth rate of exports

Annual data for Egypt
from 1955 to 1996

VECM and Granger causality
tests

135. Moreira and
Najberg (2000)

Value of exports and imports

National accounts series
for Brazil from 1990 to
1997

No identification strategy

136. Pereira and Xu Growth rate of exports
(2000)

Annual data for Japan,
VAR model
South Korea, Japan, the
Philippines, Thailand,
Malaysia, and Singapore
from 1955 to 1995
Panel data for 36 Korean No identification strategy
manufacturing industries
over nine subperiods from
1966 to 1988

The results do not strongly support the
idea that openness leads to growth

Total factor productivity estimates
based on the standard assumption of
perfect competition and constant
returns are biased and show a spurious
relationship with changes in trade
regimes. When both imperfect
competition and nonconstant returns
are taken into account, the growth
accounting approach yields estimates
of total factor‐productivity growth that
are quite low
There appears no evidence of either
direction of causality between exports
and growth
Trade liberalization has a negative
short‐run impact on employment, in
long run, overweighed by a more labor‐
intensive output mix

Data for 39 countries from Multivariate VAR approach test Results strongly support the theory of
1960 to 1992
to Granger relations
export‐led growth

137. Francisco and
Ramos (2001)

Real value of exports and imports Annual data for Portugal
from 1865 to 1998

Granger causality in the ECM‐ The empirical results reject
VAR
unidirectional causality between
exports, imports, and economic growth.
However, there are feedback effects
between exports, output growth and
import growth
138. Ghirmay,
Real value of exports
Time‐series data for 19
Granger causality tests based Export expansion leads to economic
Grabowski, and
least developed countries on error‐correction modeling growth in 15 out of 19 countries by
Sharma (2001)
(each with at least 30
either increasing the volume of
annual observations)
investment, improving efficiency, or
both
139. Khalafalla and Real value of exports and imports Quarterly data for
VAR model, VECM, Granger
Statistical tests confirm export‐led
Webb (2001)
(export data are broken down into Malaysia from 1965 to
causality test
growth for the full period and for the
period to 1980, but tests on the 1981‐
two additional series: total value of 1996
1996 period show growth causing
primary commodity exports, and
exports. Primary exports have a
total value manufacturing exports)
stronger direct impact on economic
growth than manufactures
140. Madden,
No identification strategy
Total factor productivity and domestic
Share of imports in GDP  foreign Panel data for 15 OECD
Savage, and
countries and six Asian
R&D are positively related. Domestic
R&D capital stock
Bloxham (2001)
countries from 1980 to
R&D has relatively large impact on total
1995
factor productivity
141. Abdulnasser
Value of exports
Quarterly data for Japan Granger causality test in VAR There is bidirectional causality between
(2002)
from 1966 to 1999
model, LR test for causality and export and output growth in Japan
bootstrap simulation technique
142. Chuang (2002) A set of trade‐induced learning
Cross‐country panel data Panel regression. The general Holding other variables constant, trade‐
for 78 countries from 1960 problem of causality is
variables that take into account
induced learning has a positive and
to 1985
relatively minor in this study as significant effect on growth
trade partners and learning
characteristics
only traded goods in a subset
are taken

143. Greenaway,
(1) A dummy variable, equal to 1 if Panel data for 73
Morgan, and Wright it is activated at the time of a
countries from 1975 to
(2002)
1993
country’s first World Bank
Structural Adjustment Loans (SALs)
(2) a dummy variable based on
tariffs, quotas, export impediments
and promoters, and exchange rate
misalignment; (3) a dummy
variable for whether an economy is
open or closed based on five
criteria from Sachs and Warner:
nontariff barrier coverage; average
tariffs; the black‐market exchange
rate premium; whether the
economy is socialist or not;
whether a state monopoly exists
over major exports
144. Jin (2002)
Real value of exports
Monthly data for Korea’s
four largest provinces
(Seoul, Kyunggee,
Kyungnam, and Pusan)
from 1987 to 1996
145. Ahmed (2003) (1) Share of exports in GDP; (2)
Average tariff collection rate

No identification strategy

Engle and Granger tests for
cointegration, Granger
causality tests, four‐variable
VAR model, variance
decompositions and impulse
responses
Times series data for
VECM model after
Bangladesh from 1974 to cointegration tests
1996

Liberalization may favorably impact
growth of real GDP per capita.
However, the effect would appear to be
lagged and relatively modest

Export growth has a significant impact
on output growth for all provinces,
although a feedback effect from output
to export growth appears in Seoul and
the Kyungnam province
Exports and average tariff collection
rates are significant in explaining GDP
growth

146. Connolly (2003) Sum of high technology imports
and nonhigh technology imports,
which are measured as total
imports from the world, excluding
high technology goods imported
from developed countries

Annual panel data for 86 No identification strategy
countries from 1965 to
1995 (data are not
available for all countries
in all years)

147. Dar and
(1) Real value of exports; (2) Share Data for 19 countries from No identification strategy
Amirahalkhali (2003) of exports plus imports in GDP
1971 to 1999

148. Ferreira and
Rossi (2003)

149. Singh (2003)

High technology imports positively
affect domestic imitation and
innovation. Moreover, their role is
greater in developing nations. Finally,
foreign technology embodied in
imports plays a greater role in growth
than domestic technology

Results generally indicate that trade
openness is important for economic
growth, but the magnitude of the
relationship varies significantly across
countries
(1) Effective rate of protection; (2) Annual data for 16
Panel regression includes IV
There is significant evidence that
Nominal tariff
industrial sectors in Brazil (the measurement of effective reducing trade barriers improves total
from 1985 to 1997
rate of protection and mess
factor productivity and labor
nominal tariff), 2SLS FE, and FE, productivity
no causality tests used
Share of real exports in real GDP Panel data for 10
No identification strategy
Exports do not induce convergence, but
instead seem to accentuate the process
for each industry
manufacturing industries
in India from 1973/1974
of divergence among industries. The
to 1993/1994
study provides some evidence for the
significant effects of exports on the
level of output per capita and total
factor productivity in the
manufacturing sector. The effects of
exports on total factor productivity are
significant in half of the sample
industries, but are statistically
insignificant in the remaining half

150. Yanikkaya
(2003)

(1) Trade volumes (import
penetration; export share in GDP;
trade with OECD countries; trade
with non‐OECD countries; US
bilateral exports; US bilateral
imports and population density),
(2) Trade restrictions (import
duties, export duties, taxes on
international trade, bilateral
payment arrangements, and other
measures of trade barriers)

Panel data for over 100
developed and developing
countries from 1970 to
1997

151. An and Iyigun
(2004)

Skill‐intensive exports

Panel data for 86
countries from 1970 to
1990

152. Balaguer and
Cantavella‐Jorda
(2004)

(1) Real value of exports; (2) Export Annual data for Spain
composition (in relative terms),
from 1961 to 2000
calculated as share of consumption
goods, semimanufactured and
capital goods in total exports

Cross‐country regression,
The regression results for trade
including OLS, SUR, 3SLS;
volumes provide substantial support for
instrumental variables
the hypothesis that trade promotes
technique, using log of average growth through a number of channels
GDP per capita for the previous such as technology transfer, scale
5 years, 5‐year lagged value of economies, and comparative
life expectancy, actual value of advantage. Interestingly, all measures
telephone mainlines, the
of trade barriers used in the study are
access to international water, significantly and positively correlated
war deaths, tropical climate, with growth except for restrictions on
and political regime as
current account payments, which are
instruments for trade measures negatively but insignificantly correlated
with growth. Thus, the results provide
considerable evidence for the
hypothesis that restrictions on trade
can promote growth, particularly for
developing countries and under certain
conditions
Panel regression, followed by After controlling for GDP per capita,
education, openness to foreign trade,
robustness tests including
dropping outliers, causality test and political and macroeconomic
stability, a higher export content of
for direction of relationship
between rate of per capita GDP skill‐intensive goods generates higher
per capita GDP growth rates, but the
growth and subsequent skill
reverse does not hold
content of exports
Johansen’s cointegration test Exports and growth are cointegrated,
followed by Granger causality and there is bidirectional causality
between exports and growth
tests

153. Bugsten et al.
(2004)

154. Chuang and
Hsu (2004)

155. Dawson and
Hubbard (2004)

Firm‐level, panel data for Simultaneous estimation of a
the manufacturing sectors dynamic production function
of four African countries: and a dynamic discrete choice
Kenya (1992‐1994); Ghana model for the decision to
(1991‐1993); Zimbabwe export
(1992‐1994); Cameroon
(1992/1993‐1994/1995)
(1) Natural log of share of exports Firm‐level data for China No identification strategy
to OECD in total industry sales; (2) from 1995
Natural log of share of imports in
total industry sales

A dummy variable, equal to 1 if a
firm exports more than a certain
amount (depending on company
size, labor productivity, capital
productivity, etc.), 0 otherwise

The study finds that exporting increases
productivity

The presence of foreign ownership has
a positive and significant effect on the
productivity of domestic firms.
Moreover, trading with more advanced
countries helps China gain access to
new technology and information, which
improves China’s productivity and
enables it to compete in international
markets

Export growth is a significant
(1) Growth rate of exports; (2)
Annual panel data for 14 First stage, aggregate
determinant
of GDP growth
Central
and
East
European
production
into
export
growth rate of exports  the share
countries CEECs from 1994 production and nonexport
of exports in GDP
to 1999
production; in the second
stage, random effects and fixed
effects model applied to test
relationship between GDP
growth and export production
variants

156. Dritsakis (2004) (1) Investment, measured as gross Quarterly data for Bulgaria Johansen cointegration test
fixed capital adjusted by the GDP and Romania from 1991 to and Granger causality test
deflator; (2) Real export revenue 2001
based on a vector error‐
correction model

157. Dutta and
Ahmed (2004)

(1) Real value of exports; (2)
Import tariff collection rate

158. Dodzin
andVamvakidis
(2004)

Share of exports plus imports in
GDP

159. Falvey, Foster, Trade‐mediated knowledge
and Greenway
spillovers (export spillovers and
(2004)
import spillovers)
160. Lee, Ricci, and (1) The share of trade in GDP; (2)
Rigobon (2004)
Tariff; (3) Import duties; and (4)
Black‐market premium

There is significant evidence to show
cointegration between exports and
growth, as well as investment and
growth. Exports promote growth in
both countries; growth also promotes
exports in both countries. Investment
leads to growth in both countries
Time‐series data for
VAR model to test long‐run
There is a unique long‐run relationship
Pakistan from 1973 to
between industrial growth and its
effects, VECM model to test
1995
major determinants including real
short‐run effects, both with
human capital included in the exports. The short‐run relationship
between industrial growth and real
model framework
exports is also significant
Panel data for 92
Granger causality test
The impact of trade liberalization on
developing countries from
different sectors of production in
1960 to 2000
developing economies shows increases
in the production share of the industrial
sector, at the expense of agricultural
production
Data for 21 OECD
Griliches’ (1979) perpetual
Results support the existence of
countries from 1975 to
inventory method, weighted by spillovers through imports, but the
1990
imports or exports
evidence of spillovers through exports
is less compelling
A panel data of eight
The results suggest that openness has a
“Identification through
periods of 5 years each, is Heteroskedasticity” (IH):
small positive effect on growth, which is
spanning from 1961 to
exploit plausible differences in not particularly robust
1965 and 1996 to 2000, variances of structural
including 100 countries
innovations (error terms)
across subsamples of the data

161. Thangavelu and Value of exports and imports
Rajaguru (2004)

Time‐series data for Hong VECM approach
Kong, India, Indonesia,
Japan, Malaysia,
Philippines, Singapore,
Taiwan, and Thailand from
1960 to 1996

The long‐run result shows that there is
no causal effect of exports on labor
productivity growth for Hong Kong,
Indonesia, Japan, Taiwan, and Thailand,
thereby suggesting that there is no
export‐led productivity growth in these
countries. However, significant causal
effects were found from imports to
productivity growth, suggesting import‐
led productivity growth in India,
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines,
Singapore, and Taiwan. In addition, the
results indicate that imports tend to
have greater positive impacts on
productivity growth in the long run

162. Awokuse
(2005a)

Real value of exports

There is bidirectional causality between
exports and GDP growth

163. Awokuse
(2005b)

Real value of exports

Quarterly time‐series data VECM approach and
from 1963 to 2001 for
augmented levels VAR
Korea
modeling with integrated and
cointegrated processes (of
arbitrary orders) used to test
Granger causality
Quarterly time‐series data Augmented VAR methodology
from 1960 to 1991 for
used to test Granger causality;
Japan
Direct acyclic graphs (DAG)
used to further restrict VAR

The causal path between exports and
GDP growth in Japan is bidirectional;
other variables such as capital and
foreign output are also significant
determinants of productivity growth in
Japan

164. Biesbroeck
(2005)

Value of exports

Panel survey data for
approximately 200
manufacturing firms in
each of nine African
countries from 1992 to
1996

(1) GMM; uses lagged exports
to test unidirectional causality
from exports to productivity
improvement; (2) Instrument
variables technique; uses
ethnicity of the owner and the
state ownership

165. Fu (2005)

Value of exports

Uses a two stage process. First No significant evidence was found in
(1) Panel data of 26
favor of significant productivity gains
manufacturing industries stage uses a nonparametric
caused by exports at the industry level
for the period 1990‐1997 Malmquist TFP approach to
for China; (2) Pooled data decompose TFP growth into
technical change and efficiency
for 358 subindustries,
including 179 state‐owned improvements. Second stage
uses regressions to test the
enterprises (SOEs)
impact of exports on TFP
industries and 179
comparable township and growth
village enterprises (TVE)
industries from 1995

166. Dollar and
Kraay (2004)

(1) Trade volumes; (2) Tariffs; (3) Cross‐sectional data for 92 No identification strategy
Membership in the World Bank; (4) countries and spanning
Presence of capital controls
the 1960s to the 1990s

The study tests whether openness has
systematic effects on the share of
income accruing to the poorest in
society. It finds little evidence to
support such systematic effects, even
when allowing the effects of openness
to depend on the level of development
and differences in factor endowments

167. Dollar and
Kraay (2004)

(1) Decade‐over‐decade changes in Cross‐sectional data for
the volume of trade; (2)
101 countries and
Reductions in average tariff rates; covering periods from the
1970s to the 1990s
(3) Share of trade in GDP

Instrumental variables
technique; uses lagged trade
volumes as instruments for
current trade volumes

168. Wacziarg and
Welch (2003)

Composite measure of openness
including exchange rate reforms

169. Alcalá and
Ciccone (2004)

The natural log of the share of the Cross‐sectional data from
sum of imports and exports in
Penn World Tables for
purchasing power parity GDP (real 1985
openness)

Trade is a significant and robust
IV using a geography‐based
instrument for trade (obtained determinant of aggregate productivity
when real openness is used
from aggregating bilateral
trade shares predicted by the
gravity equation). This method
was first used by Frankel and
Romer (1999)

170. Rigobon and
Rodrik (2004)

Log of the share of trade in GDP

“Identification through
Heteroskedasticity” (IH):
exploit plausible differences in
variances of structural
innovations (error terms)
across subsamples of the data

Changes in growth rates are highly
correlated with changes in trade
volumes, controlling for lagged growth
and addressing a variety of econometric
difficulties. However, there is no
significant correlation between changes
in inequality and changes in trade
volumes, controlling for changes in
average incomes
Positive relationship between a
composite measure of economic
reforms and economic growth, but not
significant for the 1990s

Cross‐sectional dataset
from Penn World Tables
and World Development
Indicator, including 86
countries

The share of trade in GDP has a
negative impact on income levels and
democracy, but a positive impact on
the rule of law

172. Chang et al.
(2005)

Share of real exports plus real
imports in real GDP

Pooled cross‐country and
time‐series data for 82
countries from 1960 to
2000

Nonlinear growth regression The growth effects of openness are
positive and economically significant if
specification that interacts a
proxy of trade openness with certain complementary reforms are
undertaken
proxies of educational
investment, financial depth,
inflation stabilization, public
infrastructure, governance,
labor‐market flexibility, ease of
firm entry, and ease of firm exit

173. Hausmann et
al. (2005)

A measure of the income level of a
country’s exports, which also
captures the level of sophistication
of those exports

There are two sources of
data. (1) The first is the
United Nations
Commodity Trade
Statistics Database
(COMTRADE) covering
over 5000 products at the
Harmonized System 6‐
digit level for the years
1992‐2003 (available for
124 countries over 1999‐
2001); (2) the real per
capita GDP data from the
WDI, which is available for
113 countries

Instrumental variables
Export sophistication positively affects
technique; uses log population growth
and log land area as
instruments for the export
sophistication measure

174. Freund and
Bolaky (2008)

The log of the share of the sum of Cross‐country data from IV using a geography‐based
imports and exports in GDP
126 countries covering
instrument (followed by
periods from 2000 to 2004 Frankel and Romer (1999)) and
also using remoteness from
other markets as an additional
instrument for trade

Openness interacts with regulation and
only positively affects growth in
unregulated economies with minimal
restrictions on entry

175. Romalis (2007) Share of trade (evaluated at either Data for developing
current or constant price) in GDP countries from 1961 to
2000

Openness positively affects per capita
Instrumental variables
technique; uses US MFN tariffs GDP growth
as instruments for developing
country trade shares

176. Estevadeordal Tariffs on consumption, capital,
and Taylor (2008)
and intermediate goods from
primary sources

Data on growth rate come IV using two “GATT Potential”
instruments (the interaction of
from the Penn World
Table database (version an indicator of GATT
6.2); data on average tariff membership in 1975 with the
come from the Economic pre‐Uruguay Round tariff level
and the interaction of Great
Freedom in the World
2005 database, which are Depression intensity with the
initial period tariff level) to
available every 5 years
from 1970 to 2000, plus identify for trade liberalization
annually for 2001, 2002, (reflected by tariff policy)
and 2003, and the sample
size grows from 77
countries in 1970 to 122 in
the year 2000

177. Donaldson
(2009)

Historical district by
Uses the introduction of
district (239 districts) data railroads as an exogenous
within India for 1861‐1930 shifter of trade costs

Introduction of railroads within
Indian states

178. Feyrer (2009) Trade shares

The results show that liberalizing tariffs
on imported capital and intermediate
goods did lead to faster GDP growth,
but the negative effects of tariff on
growth is not as strong for consumption
goods tariffs

Annual cross country data Uses geography as an
Trade has a significant effect on income
between 1960 and 1995 instrument for trade shares in a with an elasticity of roughly one half.
Differences in predicted trade growth
first stage gravity equation.
Differerences over time in the can explain roughly 17 percent of the
variation in
importance of air and sea
distance lead to time variation. cross country income growth between
1960 and 1995.

Table 2 The evolution of country trade policies over the last 25 years
Countries
Tariff revenues
Tariffs
1980 1985 1990 2000 2004 1980 1985
India
Bangladesh
Paraguay
Pakistan
Peru
Nicaragua
Costa Rica
Guatemala
Brazil
Madagascar
China
Ecuador
Senegal
Chile
Turkey
Egypt
Benin
Uganda
Philippines
Kenya
Colombia
Mali
Zambia
Venezuela
Uruguay
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Burundi

15.5
13.4
6
15.3
10.6
8.7
5.3
4.8
10
8.5
5.7
7.2
11.4
2.8
6.3
13.1
10.6
3.1
6.8
6.1
7.8
3.8
2.4
3
8.9
11.7
6.9
18.1

24.2
17.9
2.2
14.7
8.3
7.4
6.9
7.5
3.2
–
10
6.2
8.3
5.7
3
12.1
–
11.6
6.2
7.4
7.5
5
6.4
9.1
5.8
10.6
6.5
17

21.1
12.1
3.3
15.2
3.9
4.3
7
3.6
3.7
14
3.7
4
11.8
3.7
2.8
5.9
–
10.8
6.6
6.3
6
4.6
4.8
2.2
5.6
8.8
5.4
22.9

8.4
7
3.4
5.6
4.5
1.8
1.1
2.5
4.2
10.2
1.5
5.2
8.3
2.3
0.7
7
–
11.4
2.7
7.5
2.5
–
7.3
3.1
2
2.1
1.4
13.3

5.7
8.2
2.2
3.9
3.4
1.3
1.1
2.7
4.2
10.3
1.8
5.2
9.3
0.7
0.4
6
–
9.8
2.5
7.5
2.3
–
7.3
1.8
1.9
2.5
1.3
13.3

74.3
99.9
71
77.6
57
54
55
50
–
31.5
49.5
–
–
10
44
47.4
–
–
38
40.3
33.5
35
–
–
–
41.3
32.3
–

98.8
86
71.7
78
64
54
53
50
55.6
46
39.5
37.7
39
30
26.6
42.8
37.4
30
27.6
39.2
33.6
35
34.8
32.9
31
29
31.2
37.9

1990

2000

2004

79.2
102.2
16
58.8
36
24.8
16.4
23
30
36
40.3
37.1
35
15
22.7
33.5
–
30.1
24.3
43.7
30.4
25
25.6
30.6
30.5
26.9
40.8
37

32.5
21.6
10.9
46.6
13.4
3.2
5.4
7.2
14.4
–
16.3
12.9
12
9
7.1
20.5
12
8.3
7.6
19.3
11.7
12
14.7
13.5
11.1
9.9
17
–

28.1
16.4
8.5
16.1
9.6
4.9
5.7
5.1
13.1
5.2
9.8
11.5
13.4
4.9
2.6
18.9
14
6.7
4.4
16.2
11.3
12.8
13.2
12.2
10.8
9.8
13.3
20

Changes 1985‐2004
Change Change Change
Rev
tariff
STD
18.5
9.7
0
10.8
4.9
6.1
5.8
4.8
1.0
–
8.2
1
1
5
2.6
6.1
–
1.8
3.7
0.09
5.2
–
0.9
7.3
3.9
8.1
5.2
3.7

70.7
69.6
63.2
61.9
54.4
49.1
47.3
44.9
42.5
40.8
29.7
26.2
25.6
25.1
24
23.9
23.4
23.3
23.2
23
22.3
22.2
21.6
20.7
20.2
19.2
17.9
17.9

32.8
36.8
6.5
14.8
22.1
–
5.4
19
10.3
–
22.1
20.7
–
0
21
386.3
–
–
1.9
8
2.1
–
–
18.5
2.1
16.2
7.2
–

Countries

Tanzania
Ghana
Argentina
Mexico
South Korea
Central African
Rep.
Congo, Rep.
Syria
New Zealand
Bolivia
Nigeria
Indonesia
Mauritius
Gabon
Cote d’Ivoire
Congo, Dem.
Rep.
Poland
Australia
Austria
Nepal
Jamaica
Trinidad &
Tobago
Canada
Malaysia
Italy
Denmark

Tariff revenues
1980 1985 1990

2004

Tariffs
1980 1985

2000

1990

2000

2004

7.7
17.3
9.5
17.6
4.1
10.6

6.3
21.7
12.7
2.6
3.6
–

7.5
11.6
9.9
2
3.4
11.5

11.9
4.6
3.1
1
1.3
8.6

11.9
4.6
7.4
1
1.3
8.6

–
–
27.8
30.9
20.4
–

32
30
27
30
23
32

29.7
17.5
20.5
11.1
13.3
32

19.1
15.2
12.6
16.2
8.7
18.6

14.1
13.1
11.4
14.6
9.3
18.9

3.8
7.1
2.5
7.8
8.5
2.9
9.6
7.3
12.8
10.3

–
5.6
2
7
5.1
1.6
9.6
6.4
11.8
8.4

8.2
2.9
1.7
2.3
4
2.4
7.6
4.8
10.9
9.1

1.1
3.7
0.8
2.4
–
0.5
4.6
–
9.3
6.4

1.6
3.7
1.6
2
–
1
3.6
–
9.9
5.5

–
37.3
13
–
32.6
29
34.9
43.3
27.5
23.6

32
27
16
19.8
37
18.1
34.9
29.6
23.3
22.4

–
20.4
14.5
16.7
34.3
20.3
27.6
–
33
20.7

17.6
–
3.4
9.5
–
8.4
31
20.4
12
–

19.6
14.6
3.7
7.5
24.8
6.4
23.5
18.6
12.7
13

–
3.6
0.7
8.6
0.9
3.2

8.6
3.2
0.6
7.7
1.7
5.7

6
3.1
0.7
8.8
–
2.7

1.2
1.3
0.3
5.1
2.2
10.2

1
1.6
0.2
6.9
3
10.2

–
14.5
11.6
22.1
16.5
–

13.6
13.3
10
22.6
17
17

11.7
14.2
8.7
22.6
17
18.6

10
5.8
2.4
14.7
10.6
18.4

2.4
7.7
0.4
0.5

1.7
5.7
0.3
0.4

1.2
3.2
0.3
0.3

0.3
1.6
0.3
0.3

0.3
0.6
0.2
0.2

11.2
10.6
8.8
8.8

10.5
13.6
7.5
7.5

9.4
13
7.4
7.4

3.9
9.2
2.4
2.4

Changes 1985‐2004
Change Change Change
Rev
tariff
STD
5.5
–
17.9
–
17.1
16.9
5.3
1.6
2.3
–

15.6
15.4
13.7
13.1

–

1.9
2.9

12.4
12.4
12.3
12.3
12.2
11.7
11.4
11
10.6
9.4

4.3
5.1
1.8
14.8
9.4
9.7

7.6
1.6
0.4
0.79
1.3
4.5

9.3
8.2
8.2
7.8
7.6
7.3

3.7
7.4
1.8
1.8

1.4
5.1
0.1
0.2

6.8
6.2
5.7
5.7

1.9
.4
5
–
.6
6
–

17.1
2.3
.7
–
–
–
11.3
–
15.2
5.9
63.7
–
–
–
0.90
7.8
5.2
–
–
4.7
2.1
20.8
2.3
2.3

Countries

Belgium
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Germany
Ireland
Spain
France
Greece
United
Kingdom
Finland
Norway
Guyana
Belize
Malawi
Japan
United States
Algeria
Iran
Sweden
Haiti
Iceland
Namibia
Cyprus
Switzerland
Botswana
Papua New
Guinea
Kuwait

Tariff revenues
1980 1985 1990

2004

Tariffs
1980 1985

2000

1990

2000

2004

0.3
0.1
0.4
0.5
3.5
2.7
0.5
3.2
0.7

0.3
0.1
0.4
0.5
3
3
0.4
0.7
0.6

0.4
0.1
0.5
0.5
3
1.5
0.4
0.6
0.6

0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3

0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2

8.8
8.8
8.8
8.8
8.8
8.8
8.8
8.8
8.8

7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5

7.4
7.4
7.4
7.4
7.4
7.4
7.4
7.4
7.4

2.4
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.4

1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8

0.8
0.3
1.8
8.7
6.6
0.9
1.1
–
17
0.7
9.9
6.5
–
4
2.4
12.8
3.3

0.4
0.3
3.9
10.9
8.8
0.8
1.7
–
14.2
0.3
8
4.6
–
4.4
2
7.1
5.9

0.6
0.3
–
10.8
5.7
0.9
1.5
–
5.4
0.4
6.7
4
7.3
4.2
1.9
6.6
7.1

0.3
0.3
–
6.6
8.1
1.5
0.8
5.5
3.1
0.3
–
0.5
12.5
1.3
0.3
6.1
7.3

0.2
0.2
–
6.6
8.1
1.5
0.9
7.6
4.9
0.2
–
0.4
8.5
1.3
0.3
6.1
6.1

10.4
6.2
–
–
–
9.5
7.3
11.7
20.7
7.5
27.7
9.6
9.4
17.1
4.6
9.4
–

7
5.7
17
17
16.7
6.7
6.6
21.7
20.7
4.1
11.6
6.7
6
17.6
4.4
6
7

7.7
5.7
–
–
15.2
6.9
6.2
24.6
20.7
4.7
–
3.8
11
16.5
4.4
11
7

2.4
2.9
17
–
19.6
4.5
4
24.6
4.9
2.4
10
1.9
7.2
16.4
0
7.2
21.1

1.8
0.5
12
12.9
12.9
2.9
3.2
18.4
17.5
1.8
10
5.1
4.5
16.4
3.2
5
6.4

–

–

1.2

1.1

1.3

–

4

–

–

3.5

Changes 1985‐2004
Change Change Change
Rev
tariff
STD
0.1
0.1

5.7
5.7
5.7
5.7
5.7
5.7
5.7
5.7
5.7

2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
5.2
7.1
–
–
–

3.1
1.7
1
0.1

5.2
5.2
5
4.1
3.8
3.8
3.4
3.3
3.2
2.3
1.6
1.6
1.5
1.2
1.2
1
0.5

–

0.5

–

0.2
0.3
2.8
2.8
0.2
0.5
0.4
0.2
0.1
–
4.3
0.6
0.7
0.8
–
9.2
0.1
–
4.2
–

0.8
3.4
–
–
0.09
–
0.6
1.3
–
0
1.3
–

Countries

Singapore
Hong Kong
United Arab
Emirates
Jordan
Tunisia
Barbados
South Africa
Bahamas
Morocco
Oman
Zimbabwe
Romania
Guinea‐Bissau
Ukraine
Sierra Leone
Myanmar
Rwanda
Russia
Czech Rep.
Niger
Albania
Togo
Fiji
El Salvador
Croatia
Portugal
Vietnam
Honduras
Lithuania

Tariff revenues
1980 1985 1990

2004

Tariffs
1980 1985

1990

2000

2004

Changes 1985‐2004
Change Change Change
Rev
tariff
STD

2000

0.4
0.5
0

0.3
0.6
0

0.1
0.4
0

0.1
0.3
0

0
0
0

0.3
0
–

0.3
0
4

0.4
0
–

0.4
0
4

0
0
4

0.3
0.6
0

0.3
0
0

1.8
0
–

7.1
9
3.7
1.2
8.1
10.7
–
1.7
–
–
–
13.3
14.2
13.3
–
–
8.4
–
12.4
5.8
6.2
–
2.1
–
6.7
–

6.1
13.3
3.4
1.4
9.3
6.4
1.4
8
–
7.7
–
11.9
17.6
–
–
–
9.5
–
8.6
7.9
7.1
–
1.2
–
–
–

5
9.5
3.6
2.2
9.6
8.6
1
9.2
0.4
–
–
4
19.4
14.2
–
–
9.8
–
9.2
6.4
4.1
–
1.3
–
–
–

4.6
3.6
–
1.5
11
7.4
0.9
7.3
1.6
–
1
10
19.8
–
4.6
0.5
–
7.3
–
4.5
1.5
2.6
0.3
–
2.9
0.3

3.1
2.4
3.1
1.6
11
7.4
0.8
7.3
0.9
–
1.7
10
15.2
0.
9.8
0.1
0.
3.4
0.
4.5
1.6
0.7
0.2
2.8
2.9
0.1

–
26.4
–
9.4
29.8
54
–
10
–
–
–
25.8
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
48
–
–
–
41
–

13.8
24
17
6
32.3
23.5
3
8.7
–
–
–
25.8
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

–
27.5
–
11
–
23.5
–
10.1
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
21.1
–
7.4
–
20
–

24
30.6
19
8.5
35
33.6
4.7
21.4
15.2
12
10.5
–
–
–
12.6
6.5
12
17
12
12.4
7.4
6.7
2.4
–
7.9
5.4

14.4
25.3
19
8.5
35
28.3
8
15.9
13.3
13.9
7.9
–
4.4
8.3
10.3
5.1
12.8
8.3
14.4
12.4
5.4
4.1
1.8
13.6
5.2
1.2

3
10.9
0.3
0.2
1.7
1
0.6
0.6
–
–
–
1.9
2.4
–
–
–
–
–
–
3.4
5.5
–
1
–
–
–

0.5
1.2
2
2.5
2.7
4.7
5
7.2
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

2.9
2.5
–
0.3
–
–
–
6.8
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
2.3
–
–
–

Countries

Dominican
Republic
Hungary
Bahrain
Panama
Israel
Latvia
Taiwan
Slovenia
Slovak Rep.
Cameroon
Malta
Bulgaria

Tariff revenues
1980 1985 1990

2004

Tariffs
1980 1985

1990

2000

2004

7.2

6.5

–

–

28

19.5

10.3

Changes 1985‐2004
Change Change Change
Rev
tariff
STD
0
–
–

2000

9.8

6.5

6.3

5
0.9
3.1
5.1
–
3.6
–
–
11
4.9
–

3.7
–7
4.1
2.9
–
2.8
–
–
6.1
4.5
5.4

5.1
1.1
1.8
–9
–
2.1
–
–
5.4
4.9
1.3

0.8
1.3
4
0.3
0.3
1.5
0.8
1
9.2
0.6
0.7

0.6
0.9
1.6
0.4
0.2
0.8
0.3
0.2
9.2
0.7
0.7

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

–
6
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

–
–
40
–
–
9.7
–
–
–
–
11.4

8.2
–
9.5
2
5.6
8.8
11.8
6
18.4
8.8
13.7

8.9
–
7.9
4.5
3.2
6.9
3.9
22.1
18.1
8.8
10.2

3.1
0.2
2.5
2.5
–
2
–
–
3.1
3.8
4.7

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

3.7
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

Table 3 All countries
Correlation between different openness measures
Tariffs
Exchange
Trade
rate
taxes/Trade
volumes
(PWT 6.1)
Trade
0.0452
1.0000
Taxes/Trade 283
919
Tariffs
0.6271*
1.0000
0.0314
274
Openness
Real open

0.0172
291
0.0662
293

666
‐0.2459*

Openness
(X + M/GDP)

Real
openness

DFI/GDP

716

561

0.2470*
464

0.2200*
579

0.2970*
461

1.0000
607
0.8921*

1.0000

566
0.3708*

630
0.4129*

1.0000
0.0066
0.2501*
0.3016*
281
559
445
567
576
607
Notes: Data from World Bank. Time period includes 1970‐2004. The asterisk indicates significant at the 5% level. A number of observations are
underneath correlation coefficient.
DFI/GDP

Table 4 Developing countries only
Correlation between Different Openness Measures
Exchange
Trade
Tariffs
rate
taxes/Trade
volumes
(PWT 6.1)
Trade
1.0000
0.0194
Taxes/Trade
Tariffs
Openness

188
0.1051
180
0.0153

(X + M)/GDP 196
Real
0.0625
openness
200
DFI/GDP
0.0377

435
0.5863*
301
0.3594*
392

Openness
(X + M/GDP)

Real
openness

DFI/GDP

1.0000
323
0.3556*
313

0.2370*

0.3473*

423

315

1.0000
432
0.8379*

1.0000

419
0.4568*

470
0.3685*

1.0000
0.2465*
0.3291*
196
406
311
415
439
450
Notes: Data from World Bank. Time period includes 1970‐2004. The asterisk indicates significant at the 5% level. A number of observations are
underneath correlation coefficient.

Table 5 Incomes, trade shares, and import tariffs in a panel of non‐OECD countries
Using trade shares as a measure of openness, 1960‐2000
Dependent variable: ln income per capita, in PPP $1993
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
OLS No
OLS No
OLS
OLS
IV No
controls
controls
Includes
Includes
controls
controls
controls
3‐Year lag trade share
0.907
0.514
0.214
0.203
(0.036)** (0.037)** (0.038)** (0.035)**
*
*
*
*
Trade share
0.978
(0.037)**
*
Country fixed effects?
NO
YES
YES
YES
NO
Time fixed effects
NO
NO
YES
YES
NO
Observations
3294
3294
1996
2657
3288
Using import tariffs as a measure of openness, 1970‐2000
3‐Year lag import tariff
3.586
0.721
0.298
0.137
(0.377)** (0.142)** (0.117)** (0.119)
*
*
Average import tariff
4.830
(0.441)**
*
Country fixed effects?
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Time fixed effects
Observations
1617
1617
1261
1485
1415

(6)
IV No
controls

(7)
IV
Includes
controls

(8)
IV
Includes
controls

0.857
(0.057)**
*
YES
NO
3288

0.426
(0.067)**
*
YES
YES
1996

0.402
(0.064)**
*
YES
YES
2657

4.830
(0.441)**
*
Yes
No
1415

0.635
(0.328)*

0.338
(0.379)

Yes
Yes
1125

Yes
Yes
1306

Notes: Source is Aisbett, Harrison, and Zwane (2005), as reported in Harrison (2007). Huber robust standard errors in parenthesis. Data are annual data, with one
observation for each country and year. The dependent variable is the log of income per capita, in PPP $1993. Trade share is the share of exports plus imports in
GDP. Import tariffs are import revenues divided by the value of imports. Both are taken from the World Bank’s indicators. OLS indicates ordinary least squares and
IV indicates instrumental variables. All regressions exclude OECD high‐income countries. Columns (3) and (7) include controls for inflation, government
expenditure in GDP, currency crises, investment in GDP, and the fraction of the population that is literate. Columns (4) and (8) include controls for inflation,
government expenditure, and currency crises. In instrumental variable regressions, trade share is instrumented using 3‐year lagged value, and import tariff is
instrumented using 3‐year lagged value.

Table 6 The specific sectors targeted by 29 countries for the 1985‐2000 period (from Alfaro & Charlton, 2008)
Code
Industries

Agriculture and fishing
Mining of metals
Extraction of petrochemicals
Food products
Textile and wood activities
Petroleum, chemical, rubber, plastic products
Metal and mechanical products
Machinery, computers, RTV, communication
Vehicles and other transport equipments
Electricity, gas and water
Construction
Trade and repairs
Hotels and restaurants
Land, sea, and air transport
Telecommunications
Monetary intermediation
Other financial intermediation
Insurance
Real estate and business activities

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

Targeted
by number
of
countries
4
2
5
5
5
9
3
10
11
3
0
1
5
1
12
1
1
1
11

Growth in
value
added

FDI/value
added

Share of
value
added

Dep.
external
finance

White
high
skill

Blue and
white high
skill

2.617
3.309
1.473
5.314
3.362
5.755
5.104
5.821
5.999
4.471
6.563
6.004
7.518
5.733
6.762
5.071
9.184
5.974
8.741

0.001
0.000
0.009
0.013
0.015
0.033
0.024
0.013
0.032
0.004
0.001
0.010
0.003
0.002
0.007
0.030
0.050
0.050
0.008

0.055
0.015
0.012
0.041
0.026
0.043
0.037
0.051
0.022
0.038
0.087
0.163
0.031
0.071
0.031
0.053
0.006
0.013
0.210

0.297
0.455
0.318
1.717
0.946
0.285
0.796
0.692
0.664
0.359
0.919
0.416
0.100
0.150
0.119
2.445
3.613
3.586
0.173

0.040
0.168
0.341
0.074
0.145
0.397
0.181
0.352
0.357
0.257
0.071
0.151
0.062
0.055
0.033
0.820
0.714
0.761
0.564

0.707
0.687
0.674
0.427
0.594
0.546
0.615
0.619
0.644
0.599
0.711
0.262
0.349
0.140
0.190
0.827
0.737
0.773
0.612

Notes: Number of industries corresponds to the 3‐digit ISIC Rev. 3. FDI corresponds to Foreign Direct Investment Flows from OECD International Direct Investment
Database. Dependence on external finance is the difference between investment and cash generated from operations in the US following Rajan and Zingales (1998).
Skill data are the ratio of high‐skilled workers to other workers in German Industries. Skilled workers include: White‐collar high‐skill (WCHS): Legislators, senior officials
and managers (Group 1), Professionals (Group 2), Technicians and associate professionals (Group 3). White‐collar low‐skill (WCLS): Clerks, service workers (Group 4),
shop and sales workers (Group 5). Blue‐collar high‐skill (BCHS): Skilled agricultural and fishery workers (Group 6), Craft and related trade workers (Group 7). Blue‐collar
low‐skill (BCLS): Plant and machine operators and assemblers (Group 8), Elementary occupations (Group 9). See Appendix for detailed explanation of all variables and
sources.

Table 7 Foreign investment and technology spillovers
Countries
Years
Data

Technology
spillovers?
Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)
Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)

1. Globerman and
Steven (1979)
2. Blomstrom and
Persson (1983)

Canada

1972

Industry level

Mexico

1970

3.
Blomström(1986)

Mexico

Mexican census
of manufactures
1970 and 1975

Industry level (the
Mexican
manufacturing
industry 1970)
Industry level

4.Haddad and
Harrison (1993)

Morocco

1985‐1989

Firm level

No

5. Blomstrom and
Wolff (1994)

Mexico

1970/1975

Industry level

Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)

6. Caves (1996)

Australia
and Canada

Canada (1965‐
1967) and
Australia (1963‐
1963, 1966‐
1967)

Industry level

Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)

Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)

Details
Positive horizontal spillovers
Positive horizontal spillovers (the existence
of spillovers efficiency benefits from the
foreign‐owned plants to the domestically
owned ones)
Positive horizontal spillovers (a result of
the fact that input market start to operate
better because of foreign entry rather than
technology transfer)
No evidence of spillovers (The results reject
the hypothesis that foreign presence
accelerated productivity growth in
domestic firms)
Positive horizontal spillovers (suggested by
the fact that productivity levels of locally
owned firms in Mexico have converged on
those of foreign‐owned firms)
Positive horizontal spillovers for both
Canada and Australia (foreign investment
impels higher technical efficiency in
competing domestic firms and speeds the
transfer of new technology of them).
However, this result is not that significant
for Canada probably because of the
existence of tariffs

7. Kokko (1994)

Mexico

1970

Industry level (the
Mexican
manufacturing
industry 1970)

Large technology and
high foreign shares
are harmful for
spillovers.

8. Kokko (1996)

Mexico

1970

Industry level (the
Mexican
manufacturing
industry 1970)

This chapter
examines the signs of
productivity
spillovers

9. Kokko, Tansini,
and Zejan (1996)

Uruguay

1988‐1990

Firm level

No

10. Borensztein et
al. (1998)

69 LDC

1970‐1989

Industry level (cross
section)

Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)

11. Aitken and
Harrison (1999)

Venezuela

1976‐1989

Firm level (panel)

No

The results suggest that advanced MNC
technologies or large technology gaps
alone do not constitute unsurmountable
obstacles to spillovers, but that spillovers
are less likely in industries when large
technology gaps and high foreign shares
coincide.
This chapter examines if there are signs of
productivity spillovers from competition
between local firms and foreign affiliates.
The results indicate that spillovers from
competition are not determined by foreign
presence alone, but rather by the
simultaneous interactions between foreign
and local firms
No spillovers in a general sense. But there
is a positive horizontal spillover in the
subsample of plants with moderate
technology gaps vis‐à‐vis foreign firms
Positive horizontal spillovers from FDI only
when a sufficient absorptive capability of
the advanced technologies is available in
the host economy
No evidence supports the existence of
technology “spillovers” from foreign firms
to domestically owned firms

12. Blomstrom
and Sjoholm
(1999)

Indonesia

1991

Plant level
(Indonesian Central
Bureau of Statistics)

Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)

13. Chuang and
Lin (1999)

Taiwan

1991

Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)

14. Sjoholm
(1999)

Indonesia

1980 and 1991

Firm level (Taiwan’s
manufacturing
census data)
Plant level

15. Sjoholm
(1999)

Indonesia

1980 and 1991

Plant level

Yes (both positive
horizontal and
vertical)

16. Djankov and
Hoekman (2000)

Czech
Republic

1992‐1996

Firm level

Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)

Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)

Positive horizontal spillovers (Labor
productivity is higher in establishments
with foreign equity than in purely
domestically owned firms and the latter
benefit from spillovers from FDI). But these
spillovers were restricted to nonexporting
local firms
Positive horizontal spillovers effect on
firm’s productivity
Positive horizontal spillovers (suggested by
the fact that high competition to increase
the degree of spillovers from FDI) and high
technology gaps give rise to large spillovers
Both interindustry and intraindustry
spillovers are found, which indicates an
evidence of positive horizontal as well as
vertical spillovers
Positive horizontal spillovers (foreign
investment has the predicted positive
impact on TFP growth of recipient firms.
FDI appears to have a greater impact on
TFP growth than do joint ventures,
suggesting that parent firms are
transferring more knowledge to affiliates
than joint venture firms obtain from their
partners)

17. Kathuria
(2000)

India

1976‐1989

Firm level

No (negative
horizontal spillovers)

18. Liu, Siler,
Wang, and Wei
(2000)

UK

1991‐1995

Industry level

Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)

19. Bosco (2001)

Hungary

1993‐1997

Firm level

Insufficient evidence

20. Damijan et al.
(2001)

Bulgaria,
Czech
Republic,
Estonia,
Hungary,
Poland,
Romania,
Slovakia
Republic,
and Slovenia
UK

1994‐1998

Firm level

No

1989‐1992

Industry level (report
on the census of
production)

No

21. Driffield
(2001)

There is an efficiency gain for foreign‐
owned in 13 out of 26 sectors. For these 13
sectors, there is a negative horizontal
spillover from the presence of foreign firms
in the sector, but foreign technical capital
stock has a positive impact
Positive horizontal spillovers. The study
also shows that the extent to which local
firms benefit from the introduction of
advanced technology depends largely on
their own technological capabilities
The evidence for technological spillovers is
weak and does not allow clear‐cut
conclusions. Foreign presence in high‐tech
industries does seem to have a positive
effect on both local and foreign firms
There are no significant positive horizontal
spillovers for domestic firms from FDI.
(Note: trade is an important alternative
source of international R&D spillovers to
firms without foreign participation in the
Czech Republic, Poland, Romania, and
Slovenia)

No evidence of investment or output
spillovers occurring as a result of inward
investment. However, catching up does
occur in foreign‐owned sector

22. Girma,
Greeway, and
Wakelin (2001)

UK

1991‐1996

Firm level

No

23. Kinoshita
(2001)

Czech
Republic

1995‐1998

Firm level

Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)

24. Kokko, Zejan,
and Tansini
(2001)

Uruguay

1988

Firm level

Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)

25. Konings
(2001)

Bulgaria,
Romania,
and Poland

1993‐1997

Firm level

Yes (negative
horizontal spillovers)
for Gulgaria and
Romaina, No for
Poland

26. Kugler (2001)

Colombia

1974‐1998

Industry level

Yes (positive vertical
spillovers)

No aggregate evidence of horizontal
(intraindustry) spillovers. Specifically, no
wage and productivity spillovers to
domestic firms as a result of foreign
presence
First, technology spillovers from FDI occur
for firms that are more R&D intensive;
second, spillovers from foreign joint
ventures are insignificant for Czech
manufacturing firms; lastly, the extent of
technology spillovers is greater in
oligopolistic sectors than in
nonoligopolistic sectors
Positive horizontal spillovers from FDI to a
subsample of locally owned manufacturing
plants with moderate technology gaps vis‐
à‐vis foreign firms
On average, there are negative horizontal
spillovers to domestic firms in Bulgaria and
Romania and there is no evidence of
spillovers in Poland (a negative competition
effect that dominates a positive technology
effect)
This study distinguishes intra‐ and
interindustry spillovers. He finds
widespread evidence for positive vertical
(interindustry) spillovers, while horizontal
spillovers appear only to be important in
machinery equipment sector

27. Li, Liu, and
Parker (2001)

China

1995 (1995
industrial
census)

Industry level

Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)

28. Barrios and
Strobl (2002)

Spain

1990‐1998

Firm level

Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)

29. Castellani and
Zanfei (2002)

France, Italy,
Spain

1992‐1997

Firm level

Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)

30. Carkovic and
Levine (2002)
31. Dimelis and
Louri (2002)

72 countries

1960‐1995

No

Greece

1997

Industry level (cross
section)
Firm level

UK

1973‐1992

Plant level

Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)

Positive horizontal spillovers. Moreover,
the spillovers stemming form minority‐
owned foreign establishments are larger
than those from majority‐owned ones
Positive horizontal spillovers from inward
FDI to domestic plants

UK

1989‐1999

Firm level

No

No evidence of productivity spillovers

32. Haskel,
Pereira, and
Slaughter (2002)
33. Girma (2002)

Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)

Positive horizontal spillovers for SOEs.
Collective‐and‐private‐owned enterprises
benefit from demonstration and contagion
effects form foreign presence
Positive horizontal spillovers only when
domestic firms had the appropriate
“absorptive capacity.”
Positive and significant horizontal
productivity spillovers for Italian firms,
negative spillovers on Spanish firms and
nonsignificant effects on French firms
No evidence of spillovers

34. Girma and
Gorg (2002)

UK

1980‐1992

Firm level

This chapter focuses
on the role of
absorptive capacity
in benefiting from
spillovers from FDI

35. Girma and
Wakelin (2002)

UK

1988‐1996

Firm level
(OneSource
Database)

Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)

36. Grog and
Strobl (2002)
37. Gorg and
Strobl (2002)
38. Ruane and
Ugur (2002)

Ghana

1991‐1997

Firm level

Ireland

1973‐1996

Plant level

Ireland

1991‐1998

Plant level

Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)
Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)
No

This chapter focuses on the role of
absorptive capacity in determining whether
or not domestic firms benefit from
productivity spillovers from FDI. The results
show that there is an evidence for a u‐
shaped relationship between productivity
growth and FDI interacted with absorptive
capacity, which suggests that
improvements in absorptive capacity of
firms may enhance their ability to benefit
from spillovers from FDI
Positive horizontal spillovers occur in the
domestic firms (with the presence of
multinational firms in the same sector and
region)
Positive horizontal spillovers from labor
mobility
Positive horizontal spillovers for indigenous
plants in high‐tech industries
No evidence of productivity spillovers
(when the measurement of foreign
presence is the MNC employment as a
percentage of total employment).
However, a weak evidence of productivity
spillovers is found when foreign presence
measures as the level of employment in
foreign companies in the relevant sector

39. Smarzynska
(2002)

Lithuania

1996‐2000

Firm level

Yes (positive vertical
spillovers)

40. Zukowska‐
Gagelmann
(2002)

Poland

1993‐1997

Firm level

No (negative
horizontal spillovers)

41. Blalock and
Gertler (2003)
42. Javorcik
(2003)

Indonesia

1988‐1996

Firm level (panel)

Lithuania

1996‐2000

Firm level

Yes (positive vertical
spillovers)
Yes (positive vertical
spillovers)

43. Keller and
Yeaple (2003)

USA

1987‐1996

Firm level

Yes (positive
horizontal spillovers)

44. Liu (2008)

China

1995‐1999

Firm level

Yes (no horizontal
but positive vertical
spillovers)

Positive vertical spillovers (the study shows
that the existence of productivity spillovers
from FDI taking place through contacts
between foreign affiliates and their local
suppliers in upstream sectors but there is
no indication of spillovers occurring within
the same industry)
Negative horizontal spillovers for the most
productive local firms in high competition
industries and positive horizontal spillovers
for the least productive local firms in low
competition industries
Strongly positive vertical spillovers from
FDI
Positive vertical productivity spillovers.
Moreover, the results indicate that
spillovers are associated with projects with
shared domestic and foreign ownership but
not with fully owned foreign investment
Positive horizontal spillovers form FDI
(accounts for 14% of productivity growth of
US firm, FDI leads to significant
productivity gains for domestic firms), also
a evidence of imports‐related spillovers
No positive horizontal spillovers (negative
short‐run effects) but strong positive
backward linkages

45. Hu and
Jefferson (2002)

China

1995‐1999

Firm level

No (negative
horizontal spillovers)

46. Liu et al.
(2008)

China

1998‐2005

Firm level

Yes (positive forward
spillovers, net zero
horizontal spillovers)

Sample restricted to China’s electronic and
textile industries, drawn from the survey of
large and medium enterprises conducted
by the Chinese National Statistical Bureau.
The authors find negative horizontal
spillovers, although the impact is positive
for firms receiving foreign investment
They find that Hong Kong, Macao, and
Taiwan (HMT) invested firms generate
negative horizontal spillovers, while Non‐
HMT foreign firms tend to bring positive
horizontal spillovers. These two opposing
horizontal effects seem to cancel out at the
aggregate level. They also find forward
spillover effects from all types of FDI

