                                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




USTMENT OF STATE OWNED AND FOREIGN-FUNDED ENTERPRISES IN CHINA TO ECONOMIC REFORMS,1980S-
                  A LOGISTIC SMOOTH TRANSITION REGRESSION (LSTR) APPROACH

                                                     Joshua Aizenman
                                                        Nan Geng

                                                   Working Paper 15274
                                           http://www.nber.org/papers/w15274


                                 NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                August 2009




           The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
           National Bureau of Economic Research.

           NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
           reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
           NBER publications.

           © 2009 by Joshua Aizenman and Nan Geng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
           two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
           is given to the source.
Adjustment of State Owned and Foreign-Funded Enterprises in China to Economic Reforms,
1980s-2007: a logistic smooth transition regression (LSTR) approach
Joshua Aizenman and Nan Geng
NBER Working Paper No. 15274
August 2009
JEL No. F14,F15,F21,F23,F36,F43

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper applies a logistic smooth transition regression approach to the estimation of a homogenous
aggregate value added production function of the State Owned (SOE) and Foreign-Funded Enterprises
(FFE) in China, 1980s-2007. The transition associated with the economic reforms in China is estimated
applying a curvilinear logistic function, where the speed and the timing of the transition are endogenously
determined by the data. We find high but gradually declining markups in both SOEs and FFEs during
the early stages of the adjustment, with SOEs having a much larger scale and market size than the
FFEs. However, over the transition process, returns to scale in industrial SOEs dropped sharply. For
both FFEs and SOEs the transition is slow, with a midpoint about 7 and 14 years, respectively. We
find significant increase of TFP growth rate for both FFEs and SOEs, by 0.1436 and 0.1971, respectively.


Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics; E2
1156 High St.
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@ucsc.edu

Nan Geng
Economics E2, UCSC
1156 High St., Santa Cruz, CA, 95064
ngeng@ucsc.edu
1     Introduction
The Government of China has employed foreign direct investment (FDI) as a
key element in its development strategy since the adoption of the Open Door
Policy in December 1978. Against a background of radical change, China
is now estimated to be the second largest economy in the world in terms of
purchasing power parity (World Bank, 2001), and since 1993, second only to
the United States as a destination for global FDI. However, disentangling the
effects of any one of the myriad of fundamental changes since the structural
reforms is highly problematic. As a result, although foreign direct invest-
ment have played important roles in China’s economic growth, few studies
have systematically examined the performance of FDI, or more specifically
model the development of Foreign-Funded Enterprises (FFE) in China over
the past 30 years after the Open Door Policy.


    This paper takes a new approach to the question. It starts from the
presumption that any changes in economic performance following reforms
and liberalization may be more appropriately modeled as a steady transition
rather than a discrete change. A standard explicit or implicit assumption
underlying linear models is that there is a single structural break in the sam-
ple. In this paper that assumption is replaced by a more general one stating
that the parameters of the model may change continuously over time. In the
context of China, we model the changes in development and improvements
of economic performance of the FFEs following the ’Open Door’ policy as a
steady transition rather than a discrete change. This assumption is more rea-
sonable than that of a structural break especially if we take into account that

                                      2
it is a slow process for foreign technology and capital to adjust to and interact
with domestic environment and innovative activity in creating productivity
improvements. Learning of the new rules and the game, and inferring the
credibility and durability of new policies is a gradual process. Thus, we adopt
an estimation process where the transition starting date and the speed of ad-
justment to the new long run equilibrium is determined endogenously. Such
a specification allows the data to determine the timing, duration and direc-
tion of the regime change.


   Since China didn’t open up its service sector to FDI until 2001, we only
consider the industrial sector (representing about half of output), where most
all of the foreign direct investment in the post-reform period goes. Our anal-
ysis is in three stages. First, together with the adoption of the value added
production function, we take a novel approach, a logistic smooth transition
regression (LSTR) model to modeling growth of FFEs in China, which allows
us to model deterministic changes without, as other analysis have done, im-
posing discrete changes. The value added production incorporating the mar-
ket structure parameters allow us to give an estimates of the price-marginal
cost markups, returns to scales (RTS) and productivity growth of industrial
FFEs. Then we compare the growth performances of FFEs with that of State
Owned Enterprises (SOEs), which are estimated using the same approach.
Having identified the transitions in growth of the two different ownership
groups we are investigating, we then explore the coincidence of these tran-
sitions with well-documented episodes of liberalization in China. We do not
formally test whether liberalization and foreign direct investment results in


                                       3
growth. Our results are, however, informative in two respects. Firstly, they
post a clear picture of the adjustment and development process of FFEs and
SOEs in China after liberalization and FDI. Secondly, they also point the
way to improved econometric modeling of these processes.


    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly
discusses the economic reforms context in China against which our analysis
is set. Section 3 outlines the Time Varying Logistic Smooth Transition Re-
gression Model (TV-LSTR) and estimation methodology, and discusses some
econometric issues and describes the data. Section 4 presents and discusses
the estimation results. Section 5 concludes.




2     Open Door Policy and Economic Reforms
      in China
The Open Door Policy has been carried out for more than 20 years since
the late 1970’s by Deng Xiaoping. Before Deng’s era, China was ruled under
the radical politics-oriented and self-sustained policy by Mao Zedong, which
had China’s door closed in front of the foreign countries. The central gov-
ernment in Beijing exerted strict controls over the economy, all enterprises
were publicly owned and managed, and all staff deployed according to the
political and economic interests of the state. Enterprises were required to
submit profits to the central government, and workers salaries were deter-

                                     4
mined by the state. The term ”Open Door Policy”, announced by Deng
in 1978, refers to the equal trading rights among countries. In 1980, four
coastal cities (Shenzhen, Zhuhai, Shantou in Guangdong and Xiamen in Fu-
jian) were designated as Special Economic Zones in order to attract foreign
investment, and in 1984, this so-called open-door policy was extended to
14 coastal cities (such as Shanghai, Tianjin, GuangZhou and Nanjing) and
Hainan Island. In these preferential areas, foreign investment was encour-
aged and new factories were established offering tax privileges, that were,
reduced import tariffs on raw materials, tax exemption for importation of
certain capital goods, etc. The foreign funded enterprises in these areas took
the forms of Joint Owned Economic Units, Cooperative Economic Units and
Foreign (or Oversea Chinese) Owned units. Later in 1986, China eventually
accepted wholly foreign-owned enterprises. The Open Door Policy, which
encouraged foreign investments and market liberalization, had achieved the
desired effect of stimulating China’s economic growth during the past three
decades. China’s actual and contract utilization of foreign capital are illus-
trated in Figure 1. Due to the lack of precedent, coupled with an uncertain
political climate and other unfavorable factors, at first severely hindered Chi-
nese attempts to attract FDI. In 1980, the flow of FDI into China totalled
less than $200 million (US dollars). However, the actual utilization of FDI
picked up dramatically since 1992 after Deng’s famous southern tour of China
reasserting his economic policy after his retirement from office, and in 2007,
                                            1
China received around US$75 billion             foreign direct investments.


  1
      Data from National Statistics Yearbook of China



                                            5
   At the same time, efforts were made to reform poorly managed, inef-
ficient and wasteful state-owned enterprises (SOEs). The process of SOE
reform has taken over two decades, and although it is now largely complete,
the effects of reform are still being felt all over China. The reform process
can be divided into three stages, progressing from mild changes to funda-
mental overhaul. The first stage (1978-1984) is management reform during
which increase economic incentives for SOEs by giving management greater
autonomy. The second stage (1984-1992) of reform is the Dual Track System
marked by the promulgation of the Provisional Regulations on Expanding the
Autonomy of Enterprises in May 1984. Under the new provisions, if they
exceeded their production quotas, enterprises were allowed to sell their prod-
ucts outside the state plan at as much as 20 percent above the state price.
This was referred to the Dual Track (Plan and Market) System. In terms
of personnel management, enterprises were allowed to appoint technical and
mid-level staff and to hire or fire middle-level administrative staff, to offer
rewards and bonuses, and to establish direct links with suppliers. At the
same time, profit tax was introduced to replace profit remittance. However,
enterprises still didn’t have the freedom to recruit or terminate staff simply
based on business considerations. The third stage (post-1992) is ownership
reform. Between 1988 and 1992, SOE reform slowed due to concerns about
the social and economic impact of reform, such as high unemployment, in-
creases in the cost of living, and political unrest. However, the economic
performance of the majority of SOEs remained at a very low level. It was
not until Deng Xiaoping’s now famous Southern Tour in early 1992 that the
reform process got back on track. Deng called for an intensification of reform


                                      6
and urged officials to think less about ideological correctness and more about
economic development. In Deng’s own words, ”It doesnt matter if a cat is
black or white, as long as it catches mice, it is a good cat.” In July 1992, the
government issued Regulations on Transforming the Operational Mechanism
of State-owned Industrial Enterprises. These regulations allowed inefficient,
under-performing enterprises to completely overhaul their structure. The
government also allowed some SOEs to be leased or sold to the public or
the employees.2 The number of SOEs fell from 74,066 in 1992 to 41,125 in
2002, and then 20,680 in 2007. At the same time, industrial output increased
from 1709 billion yuan ($309.9 billion) in 1992 to 11969 billion yuan ($1574
billion) in 2007.3




3         The Time Varying Logistic Smooth Tran-
          sition Regression (TV-LSTR) Model and
          Estimation Issues

3.1         The TV-LSTR Model

Smooth Transition Regression Model (STR), initiated by Bacon and Watts
(1971), can be seen as a generalized switching regression models in such a way
that the transition from one extreme regime to the other is not discrete but
    2
        See Lardy (1998) for further details on the gradual economic transition in China.
    3
        Data from National Statistics Yearbook of China



                                               7
smooth as a function of the continuous transition variable. The TV-LSTR
model, as a member of the STR family, is a more recently developed type of
STR model by Granger and Terasvirta (1993) and Lin and Terasvirta (1994),
which models deterministic structural change in a time-series regression and
use time t as the transition variable.


       Consider the nonlinear regression model

                           ′          ′
                   yt = xt ϕ + (xt θ)S(γ, c; zt ) + ut , t = 1, . . . , T                 (1)

                                  ′
where xt = (1, x1t , . . . , xqt ) with m = 1 + q is the vector of explanatory
                                          ′                                 ′
variables. ϕ = (ϕ0 , ϕ1 , . . . , ϕm ) , and θ = (θ0 , θ1 , . . . , θm ) are parameter
vectors, and {ut } is a sequence of i.i.d. errors. S is the well-known curvilinear
logistic transition function, bounded continuously between zero and unity.
Granger and Terasverta(1993, Chap. 7) define S of the form


                   S(r, c; zt ) = (1 + exp{−γ(zt − c)})−1 , γ > 0                         (2)


Assuming γ > 0 4 , the transition function (2) is monotonically increasing
function of zt .5 The slope parameter γ indicates how rapid the transition is,
   4
      If γ < 0, the initial and final model states are reversed but the interpretation of the
parameters remains the same.
    5
      The logistic function St as specified here does impose certain restrictions, in that the
transition path is monotonic. More flexible specifications could also be considered, which
allow for non-monotonic transition paths, by including a higher order polynomial in t in
the exponential term of St . However, this more complex specifications will lose economic
sense and the advantage of straightforward interpretation of our specification. Moreover,
since the number of observations available in this study is relatively small, degrees of
freedom problems would also quickly arise. Therefore, we will use equation (2) as the
definition of St for the estimation, and solve this problem by testing the flexibility of


                                              8
and the location parameter c determines in which year the transition mid-
point occurs. If γ takes a large value then the transition is completed in
a short period of time and as γ → ∞, the model collapses to one with an
instantaneous structural break at time t = τ ; the smaller the γ, the smoother
(slower) the transition process. Thus our model is a more general framework,
which embeds the standard structural break model (the most popular alter-
native to parameter constancy in econometric work) as a special case, and
may often be a more realistic assumption than that of a single structural
break. With the transition variable zt =t, the TV-LSTR model is testing the
constancy of regression parameters against continuous structural change.


                                ′
    By writing (1) as yt = xt (ϕ + θS) + ut , it is seen that the model is locally
linear in xt and that the combined parameter vector ϕ + θS. If S is bounded
between 0 and 1, the combined parameters fluctuate between ϕ and ϕ + θ,
and the model transition occurs smoothly between the initial and final state.


    A standard explicit or implicit assumption underlying linear models is
that there is a single structural break in the sample. In this paper that as-
sumption is replaced by a more general one stating that the parameters of
the model may change continuously over time. Moreover, in sharp contrast
to conventional approaches to modeling structural changes, no a priori in-
formation is used to fix the date of a transition since the midpoint of the
transition is determined endogenously by the location parameter c, together
model specification later based on a short sequence of nested tests as in Terasvirta (1994)
and Granger and Terasvirta (1993, ch.7). Our specification survives the tests, and results
are available upon requests.



                                            9
with the transition speed parameter γ effectively determining the start and
end points. In terms of modeling liberalization reforms, this means that we
can take into account all the reforms happening after the Open Door Policy
and allow the data to determine all the pertinent features of any transition in
the growth performances of enterprises with different ownership – its timing,
duration and direction. If any such transition is found, and it need not be,
one can then refer back to the dating of a liberalization or economic reform
episode, as established from policy accounts, to see whether or not there is
any apparent coincidence of timing.6




       In developing the analytical framework we follow the methodology ini-
tially advocated by Hall (1988) and extended by Harrison (1994) and Krishna
& Mitra (1998). Consider a homogenous aggregate value added production
function of degree θ , for the industrial sector with a certain type of owner-
ship:


                                     Y = A · G(L, K)                                       (3)

where value added of production Y is produced with inputs, labor L and
   6
     Among the few papers applying of the LSTR in International Economics and macro,
see Fouquau, Hurlin, and Rabaud (2008), studying the Feldstein Horioka puzzle, and Geng
(2008), studying the dynamics of output and market adjustments to trade liberalization
in India using the panel smooth transition regression approach, finding that the effects
of liberalization are better modelled as a smooth transition process instead of previously
assumed instantaneous ‘big-bang’ shift just after reforms. Further Geng (2008) shows that
it actually took years for the Indian firms start to react to the reforms, and the transitional
impact of reforms takes approximately 4-8 years to complete, with different timing across
industries. Also see Greenaway et al. (1997) for a study of the long-run growth rates in a
number of developing countries which have undertaken liberalization.


                                              10
capital K. A is the technology shock, G() is a general functional form.
Taking the logs and differentiating both sides of (3) w.r.t time gives:
                                            
           1 dY        ∂G L 1 dL     ∂G K 1 dK
            ·        =   ·    ·    +   ·   ·
           Y dt        ∂L G L dt     ∂K G K dt
                        1 dA
                       + ·                                                   (4)
                        A dt



Assuming that there is market power in the goods market but are competi-
tive in the factor market, the resulting first-order optimality conditions imply:

                                    
                                    
                         ∂G L    P    wL
                           · =           = µα                                (5)
                         ∂L G   MC P Y
                                   
                        ∂G K      P   rK
                          ·  =           = µβ                                (6)
                        ∂K G     MC P Y
where P , w, r are the prices of output, labor, and capital respectively; MC
is marginal cost; µ = P/MC is the price-marginal cost markup; α and β are
labor and capital revenue shares. Combining equations (4) and (5)–(6) and
expressing the result in discrete time, we get:


                           △y = µ(α△l + β△k) + △a                            (7)

where lower case letters are log terms. To incorporate the returns-to-scale
parameter (θ) into the framework we apply Euler’s theorem to equation (3)
and get:
                           ∂G L  ∂G K
                      θ=     · +   ·  = µ(α + β)                             (8)
                           ∂L G ∂K G




                                        11
Combining (7) and (8) we can write:


                       △y ∗ = µ△l∗ + (θ − 1)△k + △a                       (9)


where y ∗ = ln(Y /K), and △l∗ = ln(L/K). Equation (9) is the basic estimat-
ing equation which permits both non-competitive pricing behavior through
a mark-up µ and non-constant returns to scale through a scale parameter θ.


   The TV-LSTR model for equation (9) can be written as:


       △yt∗ = µ△lt∗ + µl St △lt∗ + (θ − 1)△kt + θk St △kt + ηSt + ut     (10)


where ut is disturbance term, and St = 1/{1 + exp[−γ(t − c)]} is the smooth
transition function (monotonically increasing in t and lies between 0 and 1).
The subscripts t is for time (year); η measures the change in productivity
growth over the transition process; γ is the velocity or speed of transition;
and c is the location of transition, which measures the number of years before
the transition midpoint, and will be a number between 0 and total number
of years T in the sample. µl and θk are the total change of markup and RTS
over the transition.




3.2    Estimation Methodology and Data

Equation (10) is our final estimation equation. Since the model is highly non-
linear in parameters, to get the consistent estimates of the TV-LSTR model
for equation (10), we will apply Iterated Nonlinear Least Square (ITNLS)

                                      12
using a suitable iterative optimization algorithm to determine the values of
the parameters that minimize the concentrated sum of squared errors, condi-
tional on γ and c7 . The variance matrix for NLS estimation is reestimated at
each iteration with the parameters determined by the NLS estimation. The
iteration terminates when the variance matrix for the equation errors change
less than the preset convergence value. A practical issue that deserves special
attention in the estimation of the LSTR model is the selection of starting
values of the parameters in the transition function. In this paper, we apply
simulated annealing8 instead of the often used means of grid search to get
the starting value of (γ, c). The (γ, c) space is then sampled more densely
than in the case of a grid search, which improves the quality of the starting
values. As pointed out in Granger and Terasvirta (1993, Chap. 7), while
the other parameter estimates can converge quickly, that for γ may converge
very slowly, particularly if the true parameter value is large (such that the
transition occurs quickly). This is because a large set of estimated values of
γ result in very similar values of St , which deviate noticeably from each other
only in a local neighborhood of the location parameter τ . The practical con-
sequence of this is that standard errors of the NLS estimate of γ may appear
artificially large and should not, therefore, be taken necessarily to indicate
insignificance of the estimate.
   7
     Parameters are obtained by ordinary least squares at each iteration in the non-linear
optimization. In case the errors are normally distributed, this estimation procedure is
equivalent to maximum likelihood, (where the likelihood function is first concentrated
with respect to the fixed effects µ). An appendix Gonzalez et al (2005) paper considers
the properties of the ML estimator in full detail, including a formal proof of its consistency
and asymptotic normality.
   8
     For practical implementation, see Goffe, Ferrier, and Rogers (1994) and Brooks and
Morgan (1995)



                                             13
       Based on the LSTR model outlined in equation (10), we are going to
examine the economic performances and growth process of both the indus-
trial enterprises funded by foreign capital or overseas Chinese from Hong
Kong, Macao and Taiwan in China (FFEs)9 , and those industrial enterprises
owned by state government of China (SOEs) separately. The data used in
the estimation are sector level longitudinal data of different ownership from
Statistical Year Book of China.


       Real value added of production, labor, capital stock, and labor share of
the value added of production are used in the estimation. Real value added of
production are obtained by deflating the aggregate industrial sectoral value
added of production of FFEs or SOEs by Industrial Sectoral Level Price In-
dex. Labor is total number of staff and workers in manufacturing FFEs or
SOEs. Real capital stock is computed by deflating annual average balance of
Net Value of Fixed Assets deflated by Fix Asset Investment Price Index. The
sample period covered in this study is 1980-2007 for SOEs, and 1984-2007
for FFEs. The real value added of production and real net fixed assets of
both FFEs and SOEs are depicted in Figure 2. There are generally smoothly
increasing trends in all series, with larger speed of increasing in later years.
As illustrated in Figure 3, while the number of employees in FFEs grows
faster and faster, SOEs has a significant reduction in labor force since 1999
following the dramatic SOE reforms to gain efficiency.
   9
    Here FFEs include three different types of ownership funded by foreign capital: the
Joint Owned Economic Units, Cooperative Economic Units and Foreign (or Oversea Chi-
nese) Owned units.



                                          14
4        Estimation Results from the TV-LSTR Model

4.1       Goodness of Fit of the TV-LSTR Model

The convergence criteria we set to the ITNLS estimation is 0.001 and has
been met, which means all the estimates converge. The estimation results on
the TV-LSTR Model from equation (10) are presented in Table 1. Asymp-
totic heteroscedasticity-consistent standard error are given in parenthesis. R2
of model estimations for FFEs and SOEs are 0.377 and 0.482, respectively,
which show overall good fit of the model.


       To test the null hypothesis of constancy of parameters (linearity) against
the smooth transition alternative, we cannot rely on the standard likelihood
ratio test for the restriction γ = 0. This is because under this null the pa-
rameters µl , θk , η and c are no longer identified. However, a valid Lagrange
Multiplier (Fisher) test10 of this hypothesis, which is based on a two-step ap-
proach proposed by Davies (1977), has been suggested by Lin and Terasvirta
(1994). This test procedure first assume that the logistic function St can be
adequately approximated by a polynomial function of t up to some order k,
say, via a Taylor series expansion. Next, the residuals from the model under
  10
    They are not Lagrange multiplier statistics but are related in the sense that testing
does not require the estimation of equation under the alternative. Furthermore, the tests
can be carried out by means of a simple auxiliary regression. Hence, following Lin and
Terasvirta (1994) we also call them ’LM type’ tests, and they recommend the use of the
F statistic in practice.

                                           15
the null hypothesis (which assumes constant parameters) are constructed,
together with the residual sum of squares which we denote as SSR0 . These
residuals are then regressed on the same regressors in the model in the first
step together with additional regressors which are polynomial terms in t up
to order k. If we denote the SSR from the second regression as SSR1 , the
Lagrange multiplier (Fisher) test statistic can be written as:


                       LMF = (SSR0 − SSR1 )/(SSR0 /T )                               (11)


Given standard regularity conditions LMF has an asymptotic χ2 (k) distribu-
tion under the null hypothesis of constancy of parameters. For our purposes,
following Greenaway et al. (1997), we assume a first-order Taylor-series ap-
proximation of St is adequate, requiring that polynomial terms in t up to
the third order are included in the second regression11 Therefore the LMF
statistic here follows a χ2 (3) distribution under the null hypothesis of param-
eter constancy over time, and the critical value for χ2 (3) distribution is 7.81
under the 5 percent significance level. The reported LMF test values in (1)
for both ownership types are significant at the 5 per cent level, suggesting
that for both FFEs and SOEs evidence of nonlinear transition of parame-
ters is present. Moreover, all estimates survive the diagnostic checks and
model specification tests, which means no remaining heterogeneity in the er-
ror term and enough flexibility of our specification of transition function and
the results of which are available upon request.
  11
    For k = 3 the transition function (change) need no longer be monotonic in t, and
rather different types of structural change if existing can be captured by the third-order
Taylor-series expansion.



                                           16
4.2    Estimation Results

Based on the mark-up, scale, and transition parameter estimates from Ta-
ble 1 the time-series smooth transition behavior of the mark-up and scale
parameters is plotted in Figures 4 and 5. As shown in Figure 4, the initial
mark-ups vary substantially between industrial FFEs (6.3) and SOEs (15.9)
during the earlier years after the Open Door Policy, and generally linked to
the level of protection and the level of labor cost. Moreover, they are all val-
ues significant and much higher than unity, which reflects the market reality
of lack of competition and the privileges enjoyed by both FFEs (e.g.: tax
and tariff break) and SOEs in China at the beginning of the reforms. the
change of markup µx for both ownerships are negative, but only significant
for FFEs, which provide strong evidences of increase in competition, which
pushes down the markup and make it possible for China to get welfare gains
from reduction of dead weight losses by increasing competition and lower
markups. After the 30-years transition, although the price marginal cost ra-
tios converge a bit, it seems that the SOEs are still enjoying more privileges
in terms of competitiveness of market than FFEs.


   As illustrated in both Table 1 and Figure 5, the initial scale parame-
ter θ − 1 are all positive and significant, with SOEs having a much larger
scale and market size. However over the transition process, returns to scale
in industrial SOEs dropped significantly by −2.7829 with their market size
shrinking significantly.


   As shown in Table 1, the transition speed parameter γ for both FFEs


                                      17
and SOEs are relatively small numbers, 86.5 and 0.4017 respectively, with
the transition process of SOEs appearing to be much more gradual than that
of FFEs. Importantly, however, none of transitions appear to occur in an in-
stantaneous fashion (which would be associated with a very large estimated
value of γ). This, therefore, raises rather serious doubts about the ability of
models which only permit discrete structural breaks, as typically employed
in other studies, to capture the features of transition of industries or sectors.
Especially, as outlined in Figure 4, it took 6 years for the industrial FFEs
to start to transit, and this reflects the FFEs’ initial difficulties of adapting
themselves to the environment in China. However, Figures 4 and 5 also show
that the transition of FFEs happened in a faster pace from a pre-reform to a
post-reform era, and reached its transition midpoint around the year 1991-92.
In comparison, though the transition of SOEs started earlier, the transition
midpoint for it happened in the later year around 1994.


       The good news for both FFEs and SOEs are the significant increase of
TFP growth rate by 0.1436 for FFEs and 0.1971 for SOEs, respectively. This
means that after the painful SOEs reforms, SOEs did have some efficiency
gains, and are significantly more productive. For FFEs, it is indeed a slow
process for foreign technology and capital to adjust to and interact with
domestic environment and innovative activity in creating productivity im-
provements. To look at the transition of TFP growth rate closer and in more
details, we impute the TFP growth rate12 for both FFEs and SOEs based on
  12
    Here TFP growth is calculated using the relevant Tornquist index number formula
with markup µ and θ incorporated in the definition:

TFP      = [ln Yt − ln Yt−1 ] − µ[α(ln(L/K)t − ln(L/K)t−1 )) + (θ/µ − α)(ln Kt − ln Kt−1 )].


                                            18
our estimates, and graph them in Figure 6. The fact that the change of TFP
growth rate during the transition seems to be higher with the SOEs is partly
due to the fact that they were much less efficient to start with. Although
overtime both FFEs and SOEs improved their efficiency, not only the start-
ing point of TFP growth rate of FFEs was higher than that of SOEs, but
also did TFP of FFEs increase with a higher speed than that of SOEs all the
times throughout our sample period.




4.3     Comparison of the Estimated Timing of Transition
        and the Timing of Major Policy

Together with γ, estimated parameter c shown in Table 1 give us a good
idea of the timing of the transition. After taking log difference, there are
23 sample points (years) in the sample for FFEs, and 27 for SOEs. Hence
the total number of years T for the FFEs sample equals to 23, and 27 for
SOEs. Therefore the transition mid-point for FFEs happened around 1992,
and 1994 for SOEs. These coincide with Deng’s famous southern tour of
China in the spring of 1992, which brings the Open Door Policy in a much
deeper level and was the starting point of ownership reform of the SOEs . To
reassert his economic agenda, he visiting Guangzhou, Shenzhen, Zhuhai and
spending the New Year in Shanghai, in reality using his travels as a method of
reasserting his economic policy after his retirement from office. On his tour,
Deng made various important speeches and generated large local support for
his reformist platform. He stressed the importance of economic construc-
where α = (1/2)(αt + αt−1 ).


                                      19
tion in China, and criticized those who were against further economic and
openness reforms. Deng called for an intensification of reform and urged of-
ficials to think less about ideological correctness and more about economic
development. While this does not constitute a formal test of the relationship
between policy reforms and growth, rather it is an attempt to see whether
there are any obvious associations, and examine the goodness of fit of the
model.




5    Conclusions
This paper illustrated the usefulness of the Smooth Transition Regression ap-
proach in tracing the adjustment to reforms in China. The flexible smooth
transition methodology helps in identifying the speed of the adjustment in
the various sectors of the economy, and should be useful in estimating the
adjustment process to policy changes in other countries. The transition asso-
ciated with the economic reforms in China is estimated applying a curvilinear
logistic function, where the speed and the timing of the transition are endoge-
nously determined by the data. We find high but gradually declining markups
in both SOEs and FFEs during the early stages of the adjustment, with SOEs
having a much larger scale and market size than the FFEs. However, over
the transition process, returns to scale in industrial SOEs dropped sharply.
For both FFEs and SOEs the transition is slow, with a midpoint about 7
and 14 years, respectively. We find significant increase of TFP growth rate


                                      20
for both FFEs and SOEs, by 0.1436 and 0.1971, respectively. In interpreting
the results, one should keep in mind that aggregation issues and imprecise
data affect adversely the quality of the results. Thus, while the trends of
the markups and productivity identified in our study are reasonable, one
should take the point estimates of the various parameters with a grain of
salt. Another challenge facing our study is that the reform process in China
is gradual, and policies in China have been modified sequentially. Hence, the
gradual transition may reflect both gradual adjustments to a given reform,
and the sequential nature of the reform process in China, when every sev-
eral years new initiatives are adopted. Dealing with these challenges requires
better disaggregated data, and is left for future research.




References


Bacon, D. W. and D. G. Watts, 1971. Estimating the transition between two
    interesting straight lines. Biometrika, 58, pp. 525-534.


Davies, R. B., 1987. Hypothesis testing when a nuisance parameter is present
    only under the alternative. Biometrika, 64(2), pp. 247-254.


Fouquau, J., Hurlin, C. and Rabaud, I., 2008. The Feldstein-Horioka puzzle:
    A panel smooth transition regression approach. Economic Modelling,
    25(2), March 2008, pp. 284-299.


                                      21
Geng, Nan, 2008. Trade Liberalization, Market Efficiency and Productivity
   Growth: A Smooth Transition Approach on Indian Firms, UCSC Work-
   ing Paper, 2008.


Gonzalez, A.,Terasverta, T. and Van Dijk, D., 2005. Panel Smooth Transi-
   tion Regression Models. Research Paper 165, University of Technology
   Sydney, August 2005.


Granger, C. W. J. and T. Terasvirta, 1993. Modeling nonlinear economic
   relationships. Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Greenaway, D., Leybourne, S. and Sapsford, D., 1997. Modelling Growth
   (and Liberalization) Using Smooth Transition Analysis, Economic In-
   quiry, October, 798-814.


Hall, R. E., 1988. The Relation between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S.
   Industry, Journal of Political Economy, October, pp. 921-947.


Harrison, A. E., 1994. Productivity, Imperfect Competition and Trade Re-
   form, Journal of International Economics, 36, February, 53-73.


Krishna, P., Mitra, D., 1998. Trade liberalization, market discipline and
   productivity growth: new evidence from India. Journal of Development
   Economics, 56, pp. 447-462.


                                   22
Lardy, Nicholas, 1998. China’s Unfinished Economic Revolution. Washing-
   ton, D. C.:Brookings Institution.


Lin, C. J. and T. Terasvirta, 1994. Testing the constancy of regression pa-
   rameters against continuous structural change. Journal of Econometrics,
   March 1994, pp. 211-228.


T. Terasvirta, 1994. Specification, estimation, and evaluation of smooth
   transition autoregressive models. Journal of the American Statistical
   Association 89, 1994.


World Bank, 2001. Finance for Growth: Policy Choices in a Volatile World.
   Oxford University Press.




                                       23
          Table 1: Estimation Results from the TV-LSTR Model

             Industrial Sector   Foreign-Funded State Owned
                    by             Enterprises   Enterprises
             Ownership Type        1984-2007     1980-2007
                     µ              6.2923 ∗∗∗
                                                  15.9385∗∗
                                    (1.6999)       (7.5227)
                     µl             -5.3998∗        -13.63
                                    (2.8150)       (1.6743)
                   θ−1              0.5687 ∗∗∗
                                                  2.6965 ∗∗
                                    (0.0891)       (1.0624)
                     θk              -0.0805       -2.7829∗
                                    (0.2858)       (1.3617)
                     η              0.1436  ∗∗
                                                  0.1971∗∗
                                    (0.0584)       (0.0696)
                     γ               86.5000        0.4017
                                     (73.15)       (0.4906)
                     c              6.9544 ∗∗∗
                                                 13.7985 ∗∗∗
                                    (0.0000)       (1.6743)
                    R2               0.3770         0.4822
                   LMF                 14.2          15.9
                    N                   23            27

a
  Asymptotic heteroscedasticity-consistent standard error in parenthesis.
b
   Two-sided statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent and 10 percent
levels are marked by ***, ** and *, respectively.
c
    As pointed out in Granger and Terasvirta(1993, Chap. 7), while the
other parameter estimates can converge quickly, that for γ may converge
very slowly. This is because a large set of estimated values of γ result in very
similar values of St , which deviate noticeably from each other only in a local
neighborhood of the location parameter τ . The practical consequence of this
is that standard errors of the NLS estimate of γ may appear artificially large
and should not, therefore, be taken necessarily to indicate insignificance of
the estimate.



                                      24
Figure 1: Utilization of Foreign Capital




                  25
Figure 2: Real Value Added of Production and Real Net Fixed Assets in
Industrial FFEs and SOEs




                                 26
Figure 3: Total Number of Employees in Industrial FFEs and SOEs




                              27
Figure 4: Estimated Price-Marginal Cost Markups of Industrial FFEs and
SOEs




                                 28
Figure 5: Estimated Scale Parameters of Industrial FFEs and SOEs




                              29
Figure 6: Total Factor Productivity Growth Estimates of Industrial FFEs
and SOEs




                                  30
