                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               MONETARY POLICY SHIFTS AND THE TERM STRUCTURE

                                          Andrew Ang
                                          Jean Boivin
                                           Sen Dong
                                         Rudy Loo-Kung

                                       Working Paper 15270
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15270


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2009




The paper has benefited from discussions with Marc Giannoni, Michael Johannes and Monika Piazzesi.
We thank the editor and two referees for excellent comments that have improved the paper. We thank
Giorgio Primiceri, Oreste Tristani, Kenneth West, and seminar participants at the American Finance
Association, Banque de France, Capital Group, Cornell University, the Federal Reserve Board, the
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco conference on Monetary Policy and Asset Prices, IMF, McGill
University, Norwegian School of Management (BI), Oxford University, Simon Fraser University,
and UT Austin. Andrew Ang acknowledge support from the NSF (SES-0137145) and Jean Boivin
from the NSF (SES-0518770) and the IFM2. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Andrew Ang, Jean Boivin, Sen Dong, and Rudy Loo-Kung. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy Shifts and the Term Structure
Andrew Ang, Jean Boivin, Sen Dong, and Rudy Loo-Kung
NBER Working Paper No. 15270
August 2009
JEL No. E4,E5,G1

                                              ABSTRACT

We estimate the effect of shifts in monetary policy using the term structure of interest rates. In our
no-arbitrage model, the short rate follows a version of the Taylor (1993) rule where the coefficients
on the output gap and inflation vary over time. The monetary policy loading on the output gap has
averaged around 0.4 and has not changed very much over time. The overall response of the yield curve
to output gap components is relatively small. In contrast, the inflation loading has changed substantially
over the last 50 years and ranges from close to zero in 2003 to a high of 2.4 in 1983. Long-term bonds
are sensitive to inflation policy shifts with increases in inflation loadings leading to higher short rates
and widening yield spreads.


Andrew Ang                                           Sen Dong
Columbia Business School                             Ortus Capital Management Ltd
3022 Broadway 413 Uris                               27th Floor, The Center
New York, NY 10027                                   99 Queen’s Road Central
and NBER                                             Hong Kong
aa610@columbia.edu                                   sen.dong@ortuscapital.com

Jean Boivin                                          Rudy Loo-Kung
HEC Montreal                                         Columbia University
3000, chemin de la Cote-Sainte-Catherine             420 West 118th Street
Montreal (Quebec)                                    New York NY 10027
Canada H3T 2A7                                       rjl2119@columbia.edu
and NBER
jean.boivin@hec.ca
1        Introduction
Over the last fifty years there have been dramatic changes in the intellectual foundation guiding
monetary policy. The understanding of the nature of the trade-off between inflation on the one
hand, and unemployment and real activity on the other, played a central role in this evolution.
According to typical textbook accounts of this evolution, monetary policy in the 1960s was
believed to have a lasting influence on unemployment and real activity, which could be achieved
by trading off higher inflation with lower unemployment. In the late 1960s and 1970s, the
work of Friedman and Phelps leading to the natural-rate hypothesis, the new understanding
of the role of expectations, and the bruising macroeconomic experience of high inflation, all
led to a fundamental shift in the paradigm. Since then, monetary policy’s ability to influence
unemployment and real activity is believed to be short lived, and has only a lasting effect on
inflation.
        Given this evolution of the understanding of the economic environment, it is difficult to
believe that the conduct of monetary policy – the way policy authorities respond to the state of
the economy – did not change in substantial ways. Sargent (1999) explains the rise of inflation
in the 1970s and its subsequent fall in the 1980s on the basis of evolving beliefs about the
trade-off between inflation and real activity. The Volcker disinflation in the early 1980s is
an important and well-known example of the influence of the shifting paradigm on the actual
conduct of monetary policy. The increased independence of central banks and the adoption of
inflation targeting by many countries since the early 1990s are other clear manifestations of
how the evolution of monetary policy theory has influenced monetary authorities.1 Such shifts
would have translated into time-varying responses of the Fed to inflation and real activity.
        Not surprisingly, there has been a voluminous empirical literature attempting to document
and quantify the importance of the changes in monetary policy.2 One question that has received
little attention so far is the implications of the shifting response of monetary policy to inflation
and real activity on the term structure of interest rates. A growing number of studies that have
employed macro factors in term structure models have found that macroeconomic fluctuations
    1
        The implied evolution of monetary policy is complex and is not necessarily confined to a unidirectional evo-
lution from worse to better. Romer and Romer (2002) discuss how the evolution of economic theory maps into
changes in the way stabilization policies have been conducted. They argue that monetary policy in the 1980s is
much more similar to monetary policy during the 1950s and 1960s than monetary policy during the 1970s.
  2
    See, among many others, Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler (2000), Orphanides (2001), Cogley and Sargent (2001,
2005), Sims and Zha (2006), and Boivin (2006).




                                                           1
are an important source of uncertainty affecting bond risk premia.3 Shifts in monetary policy
could produce similar effects and be priced risk factors. In fact, monetary policy changes should
affect the entire term structure because the actions of the Fed at the short end of the yield curve
influence the dynamics of the long end of the yield curve through no-arbitrage restrictions.4
       However, it is not clear how changing monetary policy affects long-term yields. Suppose
the post-Volcker period can indeed be characterized as a much stronger desire to control infla-
tion. On the one hand, for a given expected inflation rate, the higher sensitivity of short term
interest rate to inflation might build up into higher long-term interest rates. On the other hand,
the stronger stance on inflation, if credible, might lead to lower and less variable expected in-
flation, and thus, lower risk premia. Another interesting episode is the recent flattening yield
curve between 2002 and 2005: an open question question is how much of this behavior is due
to changes in monetary policy stances as opposed to other macro forces, such as the risk of
deflation and low economic growth.
       One central goal of this paper is to investigate the implications of the changes in the conduct
of monetary policy on the shape and dynamics of the term structure of interest rates. To the ex-
tent that monetary policy has implications for the whole term structure, this also means that the
entire yield curve, not just the short rate, contains potentially valuable information about mon-
etary policy shifts. Exploiting additional information to identify policy shifts is useful because
the literature has not come to a consensus in characterizing the nature of monetary policy shifts
and their quantitative importance. On one side, Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler (2000) and Cogley
and Sargent (2003, 2005) conclude that there have been important changes in the conduct of
monetary policy that overall line up with a shift pre- and post-Volcker. On the opposite side of
the debate, Orphanides (2001, 2003) and Sims and Zha (2005) find that either the conduct of
monetary policy has not changed, or that if it did, the changes are not quantitatively important.
   3
       A now large literature incorporating Taylor (1993) policy rules into term structure models following Ang and
Piazzesi (2003) documents that the yield curve prices inflation and economic growth risk. Recently, Duffee (2006)
disputes how much macro risk matters in bond prices, but most recent work including Buraschi and Jiltsov (2007),
Ang, Bekaert and Wei (2008), Rudebusch and Wu (2008), and Joslin, Priebsch and Singleton (2009) find that
inflation or economic growth, or both, play important roles in determining bond risk premia. Other studies that use
other measures of macro factors like Pennachi (1991), who uses inflation surveys, and Buraschi and Jiltsov (2005),
who use monetary aggregates, also find macro factors are priced.
  4
    Two papers allowing for discrete regime shifts in monetary policy affecting the yield curve are Fuhrer (1996)
and Bikbov (2006). As we explain below, our monetary policy shifts can approximate discrete regime shifts but
better account for more a gradual evolution of monetary policy. Neither Fuhrer (1996) nor Bikbov (2006) estimate
the price of risk of monetary policy changes.



                                                          2
Following this literature, we estimate monetary policy shifts by estimating changes in the pa-
rameters of a reaction function, where the Fed implements monetary policy through the setting
of a short-term interest rate. Our study is the first to use a no-arbitrage model to identify policy
shifts, which carry their own prices of risk, that allows information from the whole yield curve
to be used.
       We estimate a quadratic term structure model, where the dynamics of the short rate follow a
version of Taylor’s (1993) policy rule. Our no-arbitrage model allows for the Fed responses to
inflation and output to potentially vary over time. Their evolution is assumed to obey a VAR that
includes inflation and real activity. This allows changes in the policy parameters to be arbitrarily
persistent and entertains the possibility that their current value may be influenced by the past
behavior of the economy. For instance, an aggressive inflation response today might be due to
inflation being high in the past. This is in contrast to most existing studies which assume that
the time variation in the policy parameters is exogenous. Most importantly, modeling the policy
shifts as stationary processes allows us to let agents form expectations with the knowledge that
monetary policy is shifting. That is, agents are not oblivious to the fact that monetary policy
changes over time and take into account future changes in forming prices. Since one objective
is estimating the price of risk of policy shifts, this modeling approach is particularly desirable.5
       We perform a series of exercises with the estimated model. We document the importance of
the historical changes in monetary policy and discuss these changes in the context of evolving
economic views. We investigate the effect of these policy changes on the term structure of
interest rates by computing impulse responses and expected holding period returns. Finally, we
directly estimate the price of risk of monetary policy shifts.
       Our key findings can be summarized as follows. First, our estimates suggest that monetary
policy changed substantially over the last 50 years. In particular, the Fed’s sensitivity to inflation
has changed markedly over time and our estimates are consistent with the broad contours of
shifts in the intellectual framework behind monetary policy practice. In this respect, these
estimates are largely consistent with the evidence reported in Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler (2000),
and Cogley and Sargent (2005). One important feature of our results is that the evolution of
monetary policy cannot be simply summarized by a once and for all shift of monetary policy
under Volcker. For instance, we find that the response to inflation under Greenspan has been
subject to large fluctuations and that in the early 1990s and in 2003-2004, it was as low or lower
   5
       Note this modeling approach is in the spirit of Christopher Sims’ perspective on policy intervention in a
rational expectations context. See Sargent (1984) and Sims (1987).



                                                        3
than in the 1970s. The use of term structure information in the estimation of the policy rule
leads to sharp parameter estimates, which statistically allow us to reject the hypothesis that the
nominal short rate increased by more than inflation – the so-called Taylor principle – throughout
the 1970s.
       Second, we find shifts of monetary policy stances with regards to the output gap exhibit
small variation. Our model estimates imply that most of the discretion in monetary policy has
resulted from changing the response of the Fed to inflation rather than to output. The finding of
very small variation in the output loadings is the opposite conclusion to estimates from models
using random walks to capture the time variation of monetary policy coefficients. In these
models estimated without yield curve information the policy loadings on output shocks exhibit
much larger time variation.
       Third, changes in monetary policy have a quantitatively important influence on the shape
of the term structure. A surprise increase in the Fed response to inflation fluctuations, ceteris
paribus, raises short term rates and increases the term spread. This suggests that investors
perceive a higher response to inflation at the short-end of the yield curve as giving bonds of
all maturities greater exposure to inflation and other macro risk. A stronger inflation policy
response does not reduce inflation and other risk premia. Surprise increases in the inflation
response induce a relatively large increase in yield spreads. In contrast, the effect of a surprise
increase in the output gap stance increases the short rate and shrinks the term spread, which is
also qualitatively similar to the effect of positive surprise to inflation or real activity. However,
output gap components account for a relatively small proportion of yield movements.
       We find that recently the stance of the Fed to inflation has decreased dramatically during the
post-2001 period. The Fed response to inflation decreased to below one in 2001 and reached a
low close to zero in 2003. This is consistent with an aggressive response of the Fed to a deflation
threat during that period.6 This would imply that the relationship between the Fed’s forecast
for inflation and current and past values of inflation and real activity changed over this period.
Another interpretation is that short-term interest rates were held too low for too long a period
of time in the face of deflationary threats from the aftermath of the 2001 recession and the
September 2001 terrorist attacks.7 Short rates reached 0.90% in 2003:Q2. If the Fed had held
   6
       The Fed was concerned about the possibility of deflation at the time. Since contemporaneous inflation re-
mained positive and we estimate the policy response to contemporaneous inflation, an aggressive reduction in the
policy rate justified by expected deflation would be estimated in our framework as a weaker response to current
inflation.
    7
      This is a popular view taken by some media commentators including John B. Taylor in “How Government



                                                        4
its responses on the output gap and inflation constant at their values during 2000, the short rate
during this period would have been 2.74%. Thus, according to this counter-factual experiment,
interest rates would have been substantially higher if the Fed had not eased its stance to inflation
as much as it did during the early 2000s.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the modeling framework.
It first describes the short rate equation, specified as a time-varying policy reaction function, and
then derives bond prices based on a quadratic, arbitrage-free, term structure model. Section 3
describes the data. In Section 4 we discuss the parameter estimates, describe the estimated time
series of the policy coefficients, show how policy changes affect the yield curve, and quantify
how policy shift risk is priced. Section 5 concludes. The details of the bond pricing derivations
and the Bayesian estimation technique can be found in the Appendix.



2       Model
We begin by describing a standard Taylor (1993) policy rule without policy shifts and then
introduce shifts in inflation and output gap responses in Section 2.1. We model factor dynamics
in Section 2.2 and compute bond prices in Section 2.3.


2.1     Policy Rules
2.1.1    Rule with No Policy Shifts

In a standard Taylor (1993) policy rule, the monetary authority sets the short rate as a linear
function of inflation and the output gap:

                                         rt = δ0 + āgt + b̄πt + ftstd ,                                        (1)

where rt is the short rate which we take to be the three-month T-bill yield, gt is the output gap,
and πt is inflation.8 In this specification, the Fed response to output and inflation in the system-
atic component of monetary policy, δ0 + āgt + b̄πt , is held fixed. The mean-zero residual in the
Created the Financial Crisis,” Wall Street Journal, February 9, 2009.
   8
     The original Taylor (1993) rule was applied to the federal funds rate (FFR). We follow Cogley and Sargent
(2001), Ang and Piazzesi (2003), and many others by using the three-month T-bill, which has a correlation of
96.7% with the FFR over 1954:Q3 to 2007:Q4 (the FFR is unavailable in the beginning nine quarters of our full
sample). Several reasons for the difference between T-bill yields and FFRs are greater liquidity for T-bills, the
ability of T-bills to be used as collateral, and default risk (the FFR embeds default risk while T-bills do not). We
use the T-bill yield as the basic building block because it has the same maturity as the quarterly frequency of the

                                                         5
standard policy rule, ftstd , can be interpreted as a monetary policy shock where the superscript
“std” refers to a standard Taylor rule. If ftstd is correlated with the macro variables gt and πt
then OLS does not yield consistent estimates of the Fed responses ā and b̄ to output gap and
inflation shocks, respectively. However, Ang, Dong and Piazzesi (2006), Bikbov and Chernov
(2006), and others show that ft can be identified by the movements of long-term bond prices
in a no-arbitrage model. Ang and Piazzesi (2003) show that estimating equation (1) yields a
process of ft that is very persistent and is highly correlated with short rate movements. We
refer to the policy rule in equation (1) as the constant Taylor rule.
    Our Taylor rule specification assumes that the policy instrument used by the Fed throughout
this period is the short term interest rate. This might seem at odds with some anecdotal evidence,
including some Fed official statements, suggesting that the Fed has used different instruments at
different points in time. For instance, between 1979 and 1982, the Fed was officially targeting
non-borrowed reserves. In practice, however, existing evidence suggests that using the short
term interest is a good approximation to the operating procedure followed by Fed throughout
that period, at least outside of the 1979-1982 period.9 This is why most of the empirical litera-
ture modeling the Fed’s behavior specifies a policy reaction function in terms of the short term
interest rate.10 In fact, all the existing evidence on changes in the conduct of monetary policy
of which we are aware, including the evidence cited in this paper, is based on this assumption.
Still, the fact remains that this assumption might be more problematic between 1979 and 1982,
and we should keep in mind that this could contaminate our results for this period. However,
this would not explain why the changes have persisted outside 1979-1982. In particular, this
could not explain the fact that we observe a dramatically different conduct of monetary in the
1970s versus the 1980s, or during the early 2000s.
macro variables, the model is specified at the quarterly frequency, and, like the other Treasury bonds used in the
estimation, it is a risk-free rate.
   9
     Bernanke and Mihov (1998) estimate parameters describing the operating procedure of the Fed over time.
They find that the Fed followed something very close to an interest rate target since the 1950s, except perhaps
between the Volcker non-borrowed reserved targeting experiment between 1979 and 1982. Cook (1989) argues
that the Fed funds rate is a good indicator of monetary policy even during 1979-1982.
  10
     Notable exceptions are Bakshi and Chen (1996) and Burashi and Jiltsov (2005) who specify a policy reaction
function in terms of a money aggregate.




                                                        6
2.1.2   Rules with Policy Shifts

In order to capture the changing responses of the Federal Reserve to the macro environment, we
let the policy responses on output and inflation vary over time. In our benchmark specification
we set the systematic component of monetary policy to be

                                       rt = δ0 + at gt + bt πt ,                                  (2)

where the policy responses to gt and πt are stochastic processes. If there has been no change to
the Fed’s policy reaction function, then at = ā and bt = b̄ for all t, otherwise time variation in
at and bt represent policy shifts in the relative importance of output gap or inflation shocks in
the Fed’s policy rule.
   The monetary policy rule with policy shifts in equation (2) can be written in a similar form
of the standard time-invariant Taylor rule in (1) by redefining the policy shock to explicitly
depend on the level of the output gap and inflation combined with a time-varying policy stance:

                         rt = δ0 + (ā + at − ā)gt + (b̄ + bt − b̄)πt
                            = δ0 + āgt + b̄πt + [(at − ā)gt + (bt − b̄)πt ]
                            = δ0 + āgt + b̄πt + ftbmk                                            (3)

where the redefined discretionary policy shock is ftbmk = (at − ā)gt + (bt − b̄)πt , where the
superscript “bmk” refers to the implied policy shock from our benchmark specification. Our
estimations show that (at − ā)gt + (bt − b̄)πt is highly correlated with the linear factor ftstd from
the constant Taylor rule (2). Thus, the constant Taylor rule may potentially confuse changes in
systematic policy reaction components with true discretionary shocks. Previous research like
Ang, Dong and Piazzesi (2006) has also shown that latent linear factors like ft are correlated
with output and inflation. In our setup, we decompose this traditional ft term into policy shifts
by the Fed (the (at − ā) and (bt − b̄) terms) and separate shocks to the output gap and inflation
components.
   In a final specification, we consider the possibility that there is also a linear policy shock in
addition to the time-varying policy shifts in the benchmark specification in (2):

                                   rt = δ0 + at gt + bt πt + ftext ,                              (4)

where we specify ftext to be orthogonal to at and gt . We refer to equation (4) as the extended
model. We find that by allowing the policy shifts at and bt , the effect of the monetary policy
shock factor ftext becomes small. Thus, in presenting our results we concentrate on the bench-
mark model, but also compare our results across the models.

                                                  7
2.2       Factor Dynamics
We collect the macro and policy variables in the state vector Xt = [gt πt at bt ft ]> , where ft
is either ftstd in the constant Taylor rule or ftext in the extended Taylor rule, which follows the
stationary VAR:
                                           Xt = µ + ΦXt−1 + Σεt ,                                                  (5)

where εt ∼ IID N (0, I). We order the macro variables first in the VAR. The constant Taylor
rule and benchmark specifications omit the dynamics of (at , bt ) and ft , respectively, and are
special cases of the extended model.
       We parameterize Φ as
                                                                               
                                             Φgg Φgπ Φga            0     Φgf
                                                         
                                       Φπg Φππ 0 Φπb Φπf 
                                                         
                                                         
                                   Φ = Φag 0 Φaa 0    0 .                                                        (6)
                                                         
                                        0 Φ    0 Φbb 0 
                                            bπ           
                                         0   0  0  0 Φf f

The upper 2 × 2 matrix of Φ represents a regular VAR of output and inflation. The coefficients
Φga and Φπb allow changes in the policy coefficients to influence the future path of output and
inflation.11 Similarly, non-zero Φgf and Φπf imply that discretionary linear policy shocks affect
output and inflation next period. Previous research by Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler (2000) and
many others find negative estimates of Φπf so tighter monetary policy reduces future inflation.
We capture an endogenous response of the Fed policy to changing output and inflation in the
coefficients Φag and Φbπ . Specifically, we allow the response of inflation and output to depend
on whether past inflation or output is high or low. If Φbπ is positive, then the Fed becomes more
aggressive in responding to inflation shocks when past inflation is high.12
  11
       We do not allow the Fed’s response to inflation to influence the future output gap or the Fed’s output gap
sensitivity to influence future inflation (Φgb = Φπa = 0). In systems with latent factors, the same reduced-form
model may often be produced by arbitrarily scaling or shifting the coefficients governing the dynamics of at and
bt in Φ or Σ. To identify at and bt , we allow their shocks to be correlated in Σ, but do not allow any feedback
between at and bt in Φ.
  12
     A version of the Lucas critique would suggest that the time variation in the policy rule could imply time
variation in the upper left 2 × 2 block of the matrix Φ. Unfortunately, modeling this time variation takes us outside
the tractable class of quadratic term structure models (see below) and we can no longer derive long-term bond
prices. In our current setup, the first two equations have thus to be interpreted as a first-order approximation to the
true dynamics of these two variables.



                                                          8
   We set Σ to take the following form:
                                                                  
                                   Σgg 0   0   0               0
                                                                 
                                 Σπg Σππ 0    0              0 
                                                                 
                                                                 
                             Σ = Σaa Σaπ Σaa 0               0 .                             (7)
                                                                 
                                 Σ                           0 
                                  bg Σbπ Σba Σbb                 
                                      0     0       0    0   Σf f

Our specification of Σ allows inflation, output and policy shifts to be contemporaneously cor-
related. We also specify that conditional shocks to ft are orthogonal to all other factors as an
identifying assumption.
   We treat the policy variables, at and bt , and the policy shock factor, ft as latent factors.
We are especially interested in the variation of at and bt through the sample. We assume that
the time variation in the policy coefficients is a covariance stationary process, that is all the
eigenvalues of Φ lie inside the unit circle. Under our formulation, agents form expectations
taking into account the probability that monetary policy will shift in the future according to a
known stationary law of motion. That is, agents know that monetary policy has changed and will
change again. Our specification thus accounts for a version of the Lucas critique, in the spirit
of the Sims’ perspective on policy intervention in a rational expectations context (see Sargent,
1984; Sims, 1987). Furthermore, the time variation of at and bt is also allowed to endogenously
depend on past macro variables, as is potentially the future path of gt and πt allowed to depend
on the current monetary policy stance. Since the persistence of the process could be estimated
to be arbitrarily high, our setup can approximate the random walk specification that have been
used in previous studies (see, among others, Cooley and Prescott, 1976; Cogley and Sargent,
2001, 2005; Cogley, 2005; Boivin, 2006; Justiniano and Primiceri, 2006).
   The benchmark Taylor rule with changing policy stances (equation (2)) and the extended
version which also incorporates additional policy shocks (equation (4)) are examples of regres-
sion models with stochastically varying coefficients. Using only macro data and short rates,
these systems may be asymptotically identified (see Pagan, 1980). However, it is hard to use
only one observable variable, short rates, to identify two or more latent processes in small sam-
ples. Fortunately, it is not only the short rate that responds to policy shifts – we identify the
variation in at , bt , and ft by using information from the entire yield curve. A further advantage
of using the entire term structure is that we can identify the prices of risk that agents assign
to the policy authority’s time-varying policy rules. Thus, we can infer the effect on long-term
yields of a policy shift by the Fed on its inflation stance, as well as the traditional analysis of

                                                9
tracing through the effect of an inflation shock on the term structure. We now show how bond
prices embed the dynamics of all factors through no arbitrage.


2.3     Bond Prices
To derive bond prices from the policy shift model of equation (2), we write the short rate as a
quadratic function of the factors Xt = [gt πt at bt ft ]> :

                                    rt = δ0 + δ1> Xt + Xt> ΩXt                                    (8)

where δ0 is a scalar and δ1 = [0 0 0 0 1]> , which picks up the linear factor ft . In the quadratic
term Xt> ΩXt in equation (8), Ω is specified as
                                                     
                                           0 0 12 0 0
                                                     
                                         0 0 0 1 0
                                                 2   
                                        1            
                                   Ω =  2 0 0 0 0 .                                             (9)
                                                     
                                         0 1 0 0 0
                                         2           
                                             0 0 0 0 0

The short rate is linear in the observable macro variables and the quadratic form results from the
interaction of the stochastic policy coefficients at and bt with the macro factors gt and πt . The
constant Taylor rule model is a standard affine term structure model where at and bt are constant
at at = ā and bt = b̄ and the vector of loadings in the short rate takes the form δ1 = [ā b̄ 1]> for
the factors [g π f std ]> .
    To price long-term bonds, we specify the pricing kernel to take the form:
                                       µ                          ¶
                                                1 >        >
                          mt+1 = exp −rt − λt λt − λt εt+1 ,                                     (10)
                                                2
with the time-varying prices of risk depending on the state variables Xt following Duffee (2002)
and others:
                                         λt = λ0 + λ1 Xt ,                                       (11)

for the 4 × 1 vector λ0 and the 4 × 4 matrix λ1 . The prices of risk control the response of
long-term yields to macro and policy shocks and cause the expected holding period returns of
long-term bonds to vary over time (see Dai and Singleton, 2002). We can rewrite equation (10)
to emphasize how each shock is separately priced:
                       µ                                                  ¶
                                 1 >        g g   π π a a     b b     f f
            mt+1 = exp −rt − λt λt − λt εt − λt εt − λt εt − λt εt − λt εt ,
                                 2

                                                 10
for εt = [εgt επt εat εbt εft ]> and λt = [λgt λπt λat λbt λft ]> . If a risk is not priced, then the
corresponding row of λt is equal to zero and payoffs of an asset correlated with those factor
innovations receive no risk premium. Of particular interest are the risk premia parameters λat
and λbt on the policy shift variables at and bt . These have not been examined before because
the prices of risk in equation (11) have almost exclusively been employed in traditional affine
macro-term structure models where the policy coefficients are constant (see, for example, Ang
and Piazzesi, 2003).
   The pricing kernel prices zero-coupon bonds from the recursive relation

                                       Ptn = Et [mt+1 Pt+1
                                                        n−1
                                                            ],

where Ptn is the price of a zero-coupon bond of maturity n quarters at time t. Equivalently we
can solve the price of a zero-coupon bond as
                                        "    Ã        n−1
                                                                   !#
                                                      X
                                 Ptn = EQ
                                        t exp −             rt+i        ,                       (12)
                                                      i=0

where EQ
       t denotes the expectation under the risk-neutral probability measure Q, under which

the dynamics of the state vector Xt are characterized by the risk-neutral constant and companion
form matrix:

                                        µQ = µ − Σλ0
                                        ΦQ = Φ − Σλ1 ,                                          (13)

where Xt follows the process

                                    Xt = µQ + ΦQ Xt−1 + Σεt

under Q. In our estimation, we impose ΦQ to take the same restrictions as the companion form
under the real measure, Φ, given in equation (6). The relevant dynamics for bond prices are
given by the risk-neutral parameters µQ and ΦQ .
   The quadratic short rate (2) or (8), combined with the linear VAR in equation (5), and the
pricing kernel (10) gives rise to a quadratic term structure model. We can write the bond price
for maturity n implied by the model as:

                              Ptn = exp(An + Bn> Xt + Xt> Cn Xt ),                              (14)

where the terms An , Bn , and Cn are given in Appendix A. Hence, if we denote the yield on a
zero-coupon bond with maturity n quarters as ytn = −1/n log Ptn , yields are quadratic functions

                                                 11
of Xt :
                                         ytn = an + b>       >
                                                     n Xt + Xt cn Xt ,                                        (15)

where an = −An /n, bn = −Bn /n, and cn = −Cn /n. This analytical form enables the
estimation of the model and allows us to investigate how the entire term structure responds to
policy changes and macro shocks.
       We define an excess holding period return as the return on holding a long-term bond in
excess of the short rate:
                                                                 n−1
                                               n              P̂t+1
                                           xhprt+1   = log    − rt ,
                                                         P̂tn
                       n
where the notation xhprt+1           denotes that the excess holding period return applies to a zero
coupon bond of n periods today at time t. The conditional expected excess holding period
return implied by the model is also given by a quadratic function:
                                          n
                                  Et [xhprt+1 ] = Ān + B̄n> Xt + Xt> C̄n Xt ,                                (16)

where the coefficients Ān , B̄n and C̄n are given in Appendix A.
       Since the yields are quadratic functions of the state variables, the model belongs to the class
of quadratic term structure models developed by Longstaff (1989), Beaglehold and Tenney
(1992), Constantinides (1992), Leippold and Wu (2002, 2003), and Ahn, Dittmar and Gallant
(2002).13 None of these authors incorporate observable macro factors or investigate policy
shifts. Ahn, Dittmar and Gallant (2002) and Brandt and Chapman (2003) demonstrate that
quadratic models have several advantages over the Duffie and Kan (1996) affine class in adding
more flexibility to better match conditional moments of yields and matching correlations across
yields. The non-linearity of yields also aids in estimating prices of risk because there is an addi-
tional source of identification, through the non-linear mapping of state variables to yields, that
is absent in an affine setting. Our model naturally shares these advantages. However, while we
share the main technical methodology of the general class of quadratic term structure models,
in our setting the quadratic structure arises naturally by allowing policy shifts in a Taylor pol-
icy rule, rather than immediately assuming the use of a quadratic term structure model. Thus,
we provide some economic interpretation behind a general quadratic term structure model and
interpret the factors and prices of risk in an interesting and important policy application.
  13
       These quadratic models are related to the broader class of Wishart term structure models as they have linear
representations of yields involving factors Xt and second moments of factors, vech(Xt Xt0 ). In these models, the
quadratic term itself follows an affine process, as shown by Filipovic and Teichmann (2002) and Gourieroux and
Sufana (2003). Buraschi, Cieslak and Trojani (2007) show that the quadratic short rate process can be supported
in a Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1985) production economy with a representative agent.

                                                         12
    To estimate the model, we assume that all yields, including the short rate, are measured with
error. Specifically, we assume:
                                         ỹtn = ytn + unt ,                                   (17)

where ytn is the model-implied yield in equation (15), ỹtn is the yield observed in data, and unt
IID ∼ N (0, σn2 ), are additive measurement errors for all yields n. The quadratic form of the
yields implies that there is not a one-to-one correspondence between certain yields assumed to
be observed without error and latent state variables. Thus, standard Kalman filtering techniques
for estimating affine models cannot be used to estimate our quadratic term structure model. We
employ a Bayesian filtering algorithm that requires no approximation to estimate the model,
which we detail in Appendix B.



3    Data
All our data is at a quarterly frequency and the sample period is from June 1952 to December
2007. The output gap is constructed following Rudebusch and Svensson (2002) and is given by
                                               1 Qt − Q∗t
                                        gt =              ,                                   (18)
                                               4 Q∗t
where Qt is real GDP and Q∗t is potential GDP. We obtain real GDP from the Bureau of Eco-
nomic Analysis (BEA), which is produced using chained 2000 dollars. We use the measure of
potential output published by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) in the Budget and Eco-
nomic Outlook using chained 1996 dollars. To make the BEA series comparable to the CBO
series, we translate real GDP to 1996 dollars. Finally, we demean the output gap and divide the
output gap by four to correspond to quarterly units. Since we will be using per quarter short
rates, this allows us to read the coefficient on the output gap as an annualized number. Our series
for inflation is the year-on-year GDP deflator expressed as a continuously compounded growth
rate. This is also divided by four to be in per quarter units. In addition to the one-quarter short
rate, our term structure of interest rates comprises take zero-coupon bond yields from CRSP of
maturities 4, 8, 12, 16, and 20 quarters. These are all expressed as continuously compounded
yields per quarter.
    Figure 1 plots the output gap, inflation, and the short rate over our sample in annualized
terms. The output gap decreases during all the NBER recessions and reaches a low of -7.1%
during the 1981:Q3 to 1983:Q4 recession. The output gap strongly trends upwards during
the expansions of the 1960’s, the mid-1980’s, and the 1990’s. Inflation is slightly negatively

                                                13
correlated with the output gap at -0.245. Inflation rises to near 10% during the mid-1970’s and
early 1980’s, but otherwise remains below 5%. In the data, the correlation between the output
gap and the short rate is -0.147 and the correlation between inflation and the short rate is 0.698.
These correlations are matched closely by the model, with implied correlations of gt and πt with
the short rate of -0.135 and 0.788, respectively.
   As a benchmark, we report OLS estimates of simple Taylor (1993) rules where the short
rate is a linear combination of macro factors and lagged inflation:

                    rt   =    0.005     +     0.025 gt     +       0.906 πt   +    εt ,
                                                                                                     (19)
                              (0.001)       (0.059)            (0.063)

where standard errors are reported in parentheses. Adding lagged short rates we obtain

           rt   =   0.000     +    0.072 gt    +        0.143 πt     +   0.872 rt−1       +   εt ,
                                                                                                     (20)
                    (0.000)       (0.028)           (0.040)              (0.031)

which can be written in partial adjustment format as:

                rt = 0.001 + 0.872 rt−1 + (1 − 0.872)(0.562 gt + 1.117 πt ) + εt .

These estimates are very similar to those reported in the literature. We report these OLS coeffi-
cients for comparison. In our model, the latent factor ftstd in the constant Taylor rule or extended
model and the redefined residual term ftbmk = (at − ā)gt + (bt − b̄)πt in the benchmark model
are correlated with the regressors. This implies that our estimated (time-varying) loadings may
be potentially different from the OLS estimates.
   In Table 1 we report summary statistics of the factors in data and implied by the bench-
mark model. The factors and yields are expressed in percentage terms at a quarterly frequency.
The model provides a good match to the data, with model-implied unconditional means and
standard deviations very close to the moments in data. In Panel A, the unconditional moments
of the output gap and inflation implied by the model are well within 95% confidence bounds
of the data estimates. Panel B of Table 1 compares the yields in data with the model-implied
yields. We construct the posterior moments of the model-implied yields by using the generated
latent factors in each iteration from the Gibbs sampler estimation. The tight posterior standard
deviations indicate that the draws of the latent at and bt factors in the estimation result in yields
that very closely lie around the data yields. All of the model-implied estimates are very similar
to the data. Note that we match the mean of the short rate exactly in the estimation.


                                                   14
4       Empirical Results
Section 4.1 discusses the parameter estimates starting from the constant Taylor rule model and
working up to the extended model. Section 4.2 documents how the Fed reaction to output gap
and inflation shocks have changed over time. In Section 4.3, we discuss how the yield curve
reacts to changes in the Fed’s policy parameters. Section 4.4 characterizes risk premia of long-
term bonds. In Section 4.5, we present a counter-factual experiment of how the yield curve in
the early 2000s might have been had the Fed not lowered its output gap and inflation stance as
much as it did during this time.


4.1     Parameter Estimates
We report parameter estimates of the constant Taylor rule model in Table 2, the benchmark
model in Table 3, and the extended model in Table 4. Each table reports posterior means of the
model parameters, with posterior standard deviations in parentheses.
    Across all specifications we find that high inflation Granger-causes lower economic growth
and higher economic activity Granger-causes higher inflation consistent with a Phillips curve.
For example, in the benchmark specification Φgπ = −0.083 with a posterior standard devia-
tion of 0.036 and Φπg = 0.064 with a posterior standard deviation of 0.011. In the conditional
covariance matrix, Σ, conditional shocks to the output gap and inflation have almost zero cor-
relation. These effects have been noted before in standard VAR macro models like Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Evans (1996, 1999). Consistent with previous macro-affine models estimated
in the literature, there are several significant price of risk parameters for gt and πt indicating
that macro risk plays an important role in bond pricing.


4.1.1    Constant Taylor Rule Model

Table 2 reports that for the constant Taylor rule model the policy rule is given by

                   rt   =   0.008     +   0.364 gt    +    0.609 πt   +   ftstd ,
                            (0.002)       (0.063)          (0.237)

which are different to the OLS estimates in equation (19) as the policy shock factor ftstd has
an unconditional correlation with gt and πt of 7.2% and -16.4%, respectively. In particular,
the long-term output gap response ā = 0.364 compared to the OLS estimate of 0.025 and the
long-term inflation response is b̄ = 0.609 compared to the OLS estimate of 0.906.


                                               15
       Not surprisingly, Table 2 shows that the f std factor is highly persistent with Φf f = 0.940
as f std inherits the high autocorrelation of the short rate. The correlation of f std with the short
rate is 0.849. Thus, in common with other affine estimations like Ang and Piazzesi (2003),
f is a “level” factor in the sense of Knez, Litterman and Scheinkman (1994) and affects all
yields across the term structure in a parallel fashion. Table 2 shows there is some evidence that
high f values Granger-cause lower economic activity and lower inflation with coefficients of
Φgf = −0.023 and Φπf = −0.015. While statistically weak, these coefficients are economically
consistent with previous estimates in the literature that monetary policy shocks influence future
inflation and output.


4.1.2      Benchmark Model

In the benchmark model the response of the Fed to the output gap and inflation vary through
time. In Table 3 we report two estimates for the long-run Fed responses, which we refer to
as ā and b̄. The first “sample” estimate is the average posterior values of at and bt over the
sample. The second long-run estimate is the population long-run mean implied by the VAR.
Both estimates are similar to each other. The sample long-run response to the output gap is
ā = 0.356 with a posterior standard deviation of 0.047. The long-run inflation response in the
sample is b̄ = 1.117 with a posterior standard deviation of 0.138. The corresponding population
VAR-implied long-run values are very similar at ā = 0.372 and b̄ = 1.154, respectively.14
       According to the benchmark model, the long-run inflation response of b̄ = 1.154 is higher
than the OLS estimate of 0.906 in equation (19) and is also higher than the constant Taylor rule
estimate of 0.609 in Table 2. This suggests that the time variation of at and bt plays an important
role in determining the short rate. We further explore the policy shift dynamics of the output
gap and inflation responses below.
       The benchmark model’s implied policy factor, ftbmk , in equation (3) is dependent on the
time-varying at and bt coefficients and should be highly correlated with the latent ftstd factor
from the model with the constant Taylor rule. This is indeed the case with a correlation of 0.864
between ftstd and ftbmk . Thus, most of the variation of a standard linear policy factor is attributed
to time-varying policy stances in the benchmark model.
       Table 3 shows there is little evidence that changes in at and bt affect the future path of output
  14
       The posterior standard deviations for the VAR-implied values are larger the sample estimates because the
population-implied value from the VAR can takes a wider range of values, especially when a simulated value for
Φ is close to the unit circle.



                                                       16
and inflation, with estimates of Φga = Φπb = 0. In contrast, we find large endogenous responses
of the Fed to the macro environment, but these estimates have posterior standard deviations that
are quite wide. A 1% increase in the output gap lowers at by 1.114, with a posterior standard
deviation of 0.763, and a 1% increase in inflation increases bt by 2.682, but this coefficient has
a fairly large posterior standard deviation of 2.595. Thus, overall we find only weak statistical
evidence that monetary policy stances endogenously respond to past output gap and inflation
realizations.
   In the conditional volatility matrix, the conditional shocks of at and bt have a correlation of
85.4% with each other indicating that the Fed is likely to raise or lower the responses on inflation
and output simultaneously. Conditional shocks to the macro factors and at and bt have relatively
low correlations, but some of these are significant. The conditional correlation of shocks to πt
and shocks to at and bt are -0.332 and -0.203, respectively, with posterior standard deviations
of 0.077 and 0.075. This implies that the Fed has a slight tendency to lower its stances to macro
shocks at times when larger macro shocks are expected. The conditional volatility matrix also
reveals that the conditional volatility of bt is 0.048 and is approximately 10 times the conditional
volatility of at , so the Fed’s stance to output gap shocks has been much more stable than the
Fed’s response to inflation. Below, we further investigate the time-series variation of at and bt .


4.1.3   Extended Model

Table 4 reports the estimates of the extended model, which are largely similar to the benchmark
model for the common parameters. The estimates of the long-run Fed responses to the output
gap and inflation are also very similar across the benchmark and extended models. For example,
the sample long-run inflation response is 1.075 in the full model and 1.117 in the benchmark
model. Similar to the benchmark model, we find weak evidence of Granger-causality of past
inflation to next-period bt values. In the extended model, Φbπ = 2.952, with a posterior standard
deviation of 2.334, compared to Φbπ = 2.682 with a posterior standard deviation of 2.595 in the
benchmark model.
   The extended model has a linear latent ftext model in addition to time-varying policy load-
ings. Table 4 shows that the conditional volatility of ftext is 0.007 × 10−3 which is several orders
of magnitude smaller than the conditional volatilities of the policy shift parameters at and bt ,
which are 0.003 and 0.036, respectively. The correlation between ftext and the short rate is low at
0.228 and thus must of the movements in the short rate come from changing gt and πt interacted
with monetary policy shifts. Put another way, time-varying at and bt in the benchmark mone-


                                                17
tary policy shock, ftbmk accounts for most of the movements of the short rate, and the extended
model’s remainder monetary policy effect, ftext , plays a relatively small role in explaining short
rate movements.
       This is also seen in a formal variance decomposition of the short rate, where f ext accounts
for 4.6% of the total short rate variance, which is computed as
                                                        varf (r)
                                                   1−            ,
                                                        var(r)
where varf (r) is the variance of the short rate computed through the sample where f ext is set to
be constant at its sample mean and var(r) is the variance of the short rate in data.15 In contrast,
the corresponding variance decomposition for f bmk in the benchmark model is 0.257. This is as
expected. The benchmark model already allows the output gap and inflation response to vary
over time and further allowing an independent f ext factor in addition to the at and bt variation
indicates that the role of f ext is small. Furthermore, since the estimated time-series paths of at
and bt are very similar across the benchmark and the extended models, we concentrate on the
benchmark model for looking at how Fed policy shifts have changed over time, which we turn
to next.


4.2       Policy Shifts in Output and Inflation Responses
4.2.1      Short Rate Components

In the benchmark model, short rates move due to movements in the output gap component, at gt ,
or movements in the inflation component, bt πt . A formal variance decomposition is given by
(See Appendix C for details):

                       var(rt ) =     var(at gt ) + var(bt πt )       +    2cov(at gt , bt πt )
                       100%       =     7.74%            98.67%                 -6.41%

Thus, almost all movements in the short rate are attributable to inflation and the Fed response
to inflation. The variation of the output component of the short rate is relatively very small.
Although the unconditional standard deviation (in annual terms) in the output gap and inflation
are similar at 2.35% and 2.20% for gt and πt , respectively (see Table 1), the smaller policy
responses on output shocks and the relatively larger responses on inflation cause the inflation
component to dominate.
  15
       The variance decompositions of long-term yields in the extended model in terms of f ext are also very small.
For example, the variance decomposition for the 20-quarter yield for f ext is 0.008.

                                                         18
       Figure 2 reports the decomposition of the short rate into these two components in the bench-
mark model. The policy factors are evaluated at the best estimates of at and bt through the
sample, together with the short rate. The correlation between the actual short rate and the fitted
components δ0 + at gt + bt πt is 0.976, indicating that movements in the macro variables and
policy rule account for almost all of the variation in the short rate and the observation error
component is small. The bottom panel of Figure 2 visually confirms the very high attribution to
bt πt in the variance decomposition of the short rate by clearly demonstrating that the inflation
components shadow the level of the short rate while the output gap terms are relatively stable.
       Figure 3 displays the policy parameters at and bt over the sample from the benchmark model.
We plot the mean posterior estimates at each point in time of the Fed’s response to output and
inflation produced by the Gibbs sampler, along with two posterior standard deviations. There
are two main differences between the Fed’s output gap and inflation responses. First, the overall
variation of the output gap loading is small compared to the inflation loading variation. The
sample standard deviation of the posterior mean of at is 0.167 compared to 0.552 for the bt
loadings. Thus, the Fed has exhibited relatively little change in its responsiveness to economic
growth and comparatively large changes in its inflation response.16
       Second, the Fed places relatively more importance on responding to inflation than it does to
the output gap. The inflation loading in the second panel of Figure 3 has a long-run mean of
b̄ = 1.117 compared to ā = 0.356 and ranges from a low of 0.08 in 2003:Q3 to a high of 2.43
in 1983:Q4. These estimates lend support to the conjecture that the changes in monetary policy,
at least to inflation, during this period were substantial.


4.2.2      Shifts in Inflation Stance

We now comment in detail on changes in Fed sensitivities to inflation plotted in the bottom
panel of Figure 3. The response to inflation during the 1950s starts well below one at around
0.2 and sharply increases to above 2 during the late 1950s. In the last quarter of 1959 bt reaches
a temporary high of 2.23. From this high, the Fed’s inflation coefficient starts to decrease during
the 1960s, dips below one in the mid-1960s and stays low through the 1970s until 1979-1980.
For instance, by the end of the 1970 recession, the response to inflation is less than 0.5.
       In the late 1970s the Fed’s inflation response starts to increase. Interestingly, and as in
  16
       A previous version of the paper shows that there is significantly more variation in the output gap loading when
the additional term structure information that this model brings to bear on the identification of policy stances is
ignored. These results are available upon request.



                                                          19
Boivin (2006), the sharpest increase in the inflation response is not in late 1979, as is often
assumed because of the appointment of Volcker in July 1979, but after 1981. At the beginning
of January 1979 bt starts out at 1.17 and reaches a high of 2.42 in June 1984. From this high
the inflation loading starts to decrease over the 1980s and early 1990s. In 1992:Q3 bt decreases
to 0.68 before increasing to 2.05 in December 1994. Interestingly, this increase is completely
consistent with anecdotal accounts of the Fed’s “preemptive strike on inflation,” which is the
name given to this unprecedented episode as the Fed started to tighten monetary policy well
before any concrete signs of inflation started to materialize (see Beckner, 1996, for further
details on these events).
    Recently the response to inflation falls well below one during the 2001 recession and the
aftermath of the September 2001 terrorism acts. Specifically, the short rate declines from 4.25%
in 2001:Q1 to 0.90% in 2003:Q2. During this time the Fed’s response to inflation shocks also
sinks below one in 2001:Q1 to 0.98 reaching a low of 0.08 in 2003:Q3. Thus, we find that
the last few years of monetary policy under Greenspan was similar to monetary policy in the
1950s and 1970s with policy coefficients of inflation below one. From the low in 2003:Q3 to
the 2007:Q2, the Fed response to inflation increases sharply, rising above one in 20055:Q4 to a
value of 1.45 in 2007:Q2. Our estimates indicate a slight decrease in the inflation loading during
the second part of 2007 associated with the beginning of the current financial and economic
crisis.
    The time-series pattern of the inflation coefficient is in broad agreement with the evidence
reported in Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler (2000), Cogley and Sargent (2005), and Boivin (2006). In
general, we find a low response to inflation in the 1970s and much higher response in the early
1980s. The response in most of the 1960s and 1970s is such that a unit increase in inflation
translates into a less than a unit increase in the nominal policy rate, thus a decline in the real
rate, and hence implies an easing of monetary policy. If agents had been expecting the response
to inflation to remain permanently below one, it might have been possible for inflation expecta-
tions, and thus economic fluctuations, to be driven by non-fundamental sunspot shocks. Some
commentators argue that the failure to rule out the presence of such shocks is responsible for
the greater economic volatility of the 1970s (see the discussion by Taylor, 1999; Clarida, Galı́
and Gertler, 2000). It is important to note that in the context of our model, however, agents
understand that the response to inflation shift in the future. As long as they believe that the
long-run mean of the response to inflation is above one, sunspot fluctuations should be ruled
out, even if the response is temporarily below one.


                                               20
       It is also reassuring to observe that the secular evolution of our estimates of inflation stances
is also consistent with the evolution of the intellectual debate and development of monetary
policy theory. In particular, Romer and Romer (2002) argue that this evolution has not been
a linear improvement in the understanding of the economy, but rather “it is a more interesting
evolution from a crude but fundamentally sensible model of how the economy worked in the
1950s, to more formal but faulty models in the 1960s and 1970s, and finally to a model that was
both sensible and sophisticated in the 1980s and 1990s.” This lines up well with our estimated
response to inflation, where monetary policy in the late 1950s is quite similar to the one observed
in the early 1980s under Volcker and in the mid-1990s under Greenspan.
       Interestingly, the more recent evidence suggests that monetary policy in the 2003-2004 pe-
riod is closer to monetary policy observed in the 1970s with both periods having inflation re-
sponses below one. However, there is an important difference with the 1970s: during the 2003-
2004 episode, the Fed was concerned about the possibility of deflation. Since we are modeling
the Fed’s response to contemporaneous inflation, the estimated decline in the response to infla-
tion could be explained by expected deflation at the time that was not reflected in current in-
flation. This explanation requires that the historical relationship between the Fed’s forecast for
inflation at that point in time and other macro variables broke down during that period. Whether
it is due to markedly different forecasts for inflation or an actual change in the Fed’s response
to inflation, this period certainly stands out as unusual relative to our historical estimates.
       A final comment is that the timing of monetary policy shifts in Figure 3 is broadly consistent
with the general increase in volatility in the 1960s and 1970s and the general decline of macro
volatility in the mid-1980s, suggesting monetary policy could have played a significant role in
this pattern of change in inflation and economic growth.17 This view might be reinforced by the
fact that the increased volatility in the last few years of our sample is preceded, according to our
estimates, by a substantial reduction in the response to inflation between 2003-2004. However,
this remains highly speculative at this stage.


4.3       Policy Shifts and the Yield Curve
To gauge how important each factor is in determining the dynamics of yields, we compute
unconditional variance decompositions in Table 5. Movements in GDP growth account for only
a small proportion of yield curve movements whereas inflation accounts for 60.3% of short
  17
       This issue is explored by, among others, Stock and Watson (2003), Boivin and Giannoni (2006), Sims and Zha
(2006), and Justiniano and Primiceri (2006).


                                                        21
rate movements and 19.1% of long rate movements. Time-varying output gap loadings have
their greatest impact on yield variation at the middle part of the yield curve with a variance
decomposition reaching 11.6% at at a one-year maturity. Similarly, the attribution of yield
variance to movements in bt is the highest at a two-year maturity with a value of 27.5%. The
majority of yield variation is given by the inflation term bt πt for all maturities, which echoes the
high comovement between bt πt and the short rate in Figure 8. These variance decompositions
suggest that the main determinants of yield curve variation are inflation and inflation loadings.
    In Figure 4 we plot the impulse response of the yield curve to macro shocks and inflation
policy shifts. Since the yields are non-linear functions of macro and policy variables, we com-
pute the impulse responses numerically, which we detail in Appendix D. We graph in columns
the response of an unconditional one-standard deviation shock to each factor and trace the ef-
fect on the short rate rt , the 20-quarter long rate, yt20 , and the yield spread, yt20 − rt , which are
presented in rows. The units on the x-axis are in quarters whereas the impulse responses are
expressed in annualized percentage terms.
    In the first column, a positive output shock initially increases short rates and decreases
spreads. A unit unconditional standard deviation shock to gt of 2.35% first increases the short
rate by 0.79% and reaches a peak of 1.31% at 12 quarters. The effect on the long yield is
smaller, which initially increases by 0.42%. Consequently the term spread initially shrinks by
-0.37% before shrinking to its maximum absolute value of -0.50% at 13 quarters. A similar
pattern is observed for a shock to inflation on the yield curve in the second column. A 2.20%
shock to inflation causes the short rate to jump 0.93% and shrinks the term spread by 0.66%.
These effects die out faster than the output gap shock, with the effect of an inflation shock on
the short rate dying out by 30 quarters. These results are similar to those reported by Ang and
Piazzesi (2003), among many others, who show that the macro shocks have a greater influence
on the short end of the yield curve compared to the long end of the yield curve.
    The third and fourth columns of Figure 4 show the response of the yield curve to monetary
policy shifts. Note that these responses would be the same across the yield curve if monetary
policy shifts were not priced or the price of at and bt risk were constant. The third column
traces the response of an unconditional one standard deviation change in at , which is 0.170.
This causes the short rate to increase to 1.70% and the 20-quarter yield to increase to 0.64%.
Whereas the shock to the long bond dies out quickly after 20 quarters, the shock to at on the
short rate persists up to 40 quarters. Thus, changing the output gap response mostly affects the
short end of the yield curve and causes the term spread to shrink.


                                                  22
   In contrast, the last column shows inflation policy shifts affect the long end of the yield
curve more than the short end. In the last column we shock the short rate, long yield, and term
spread by an unconditional one standard deviation shock in bt , which is 0.560. This increases
the short rate by 1.81%, which dies out after 30 quarters. The 20-quarter yield moves almost
twice as much as the short rate to 3.36%. The shock to bt also has a more persistent effect on the
long end of the yield curve than the short rate, which does not reach close to zero until around
40 quarters.
   The stronger effect on the long end of the yield curve of changing inflation stances compared
to changing economic growth stances is also observed in Figure 5. We plot the yield curve as
a function of maturity in quarters on the x-axis and trace the response of the yield curve after
an initial shock at t = 0 for various t in quarters in rows. The left-hand column, which plots
the effect of a unit unconditional standard deviation shock to at has overall smaller responses,
which die out more quickly, than the term structure responses in the right-hand column, which
traces the effect of an initial unconditional one standard deviation shock to bt . Figure 5 shows
the effect of the shocks to at and bt are monotonic across the yield curve with the at shocks
affecting short maturities more whereas the long end of the yield curve is more sensitive to
changes in bt . After 20 quarters the whole yield curve is still around 50 basis points higher for
the bt shock, with the long yield slightly higher than the short rate, but only the short end of the
yield curve remains around 50 basis points for the at shock. In summary, long-term yields are
especially sensitive to policy changes in inflation loadings.
   What can explain the stronger effect of bt on long-term yields compared to short-term
yields? In principle, if investors perceived the stronger inflation response as implying lower
and less variable inflation, it would suggest bt might carry a negative price of risk and long-term
yields may decrease to reflect lower risk premia when bt is higher. Instead, according to our
estimates, when bt changes the short rate, and by no arbitrage the entire yield curve, becomes
more exposed to inflation risk. This suggests bt carries a positive risk premium. Moreover, since
bt does not affect (or barely affects) the path of future inflation, raising bt then causes all bond
prices to be exposed to greater inflation and other macro risk – and since bt also responds to
inflation but not vice versa, this effect is magnified. Long-maturity bonds pick up this feedback
sensitivity and hence are relatively more sensitive to changes in bt . To investigate this further
we now examine bond risk premia and factor prices of risk.




                                                23
4.4     Risk Premia
In this section we characterize risk premia of long-term bonds by computing expected excess
holding period returns. We first examine impulse responses of risk premia and then directly
examine the price of risk of monetary policy shifts.


4.4.1    Risk Premia Responses
                                                                                n
Figure 6 graphs the response of expected excess holding period returns, Et [xhprt+1 ], defined in
equation (16) of the n = 4-quarter bond plotted in the solid line and the n = 20-quarter bond
plotted in the dashed line. The shocks are unit unconditional standard deviation shocks to each
factor and the conditional risk premia are evaluated at the model’s implied unconditional mean.
The top row shows that bond risk premia are strongly counter-cyclical, as documented by many
studies. Positive output gap shocks decrease risk premia with a 2.35% shock to gt producing a
0.32% decrease in the intermediate-term bond risk premium and a 1.96% decrease in the long-
term bond risk premium. These shocks are very persistent and for the long bond do not die
out until after 40 quarters. Similarly, during economic expansions when inflation is high, risk
premia also decrease. These responses are relatively larger than the risk premia responses to
the output gap. In particular, a 2.20% inflation shock decreases the long-bond risk premium by
2.71%.
   The bottom row of Figure 6 shows the risk premia responses to shocks in monetary policy
stances. The 0.170 shock to at increases the risk premium of the four-quarter bond by 0.19%
while the same shock produces a maximum decrease in the 20-quarter bond risk premium of
0.36% after 15 quarters. The non-linear effect comes from the quadratic form and implies that
an unexpected more responsive stance to output gap shocks is felt non-monotonically across the
yield curve with higher risk premia on intermediate-bonds and lower risk premia on long-term
bonds. However, the absolute size of the the risk premia responses to changes in at shocks
is relatively small, which is consistent with the small role that output gap components play in
determining the short rate and term structure.
   The lower right-hand panel of Figure 6 shows that risk premia are very responsive to bt
shocks. A 0.560 shock to bt increases the risk premium on the four-quarter bond by 1.79%
and the 20-quarter bond by 6.86%. Both responses die out monotonically and disappear after
40 quarters for the long bond. These responses are large and reflect a risk premium for agents
being subject to changing inflation policy stances, which we now directly examine.



                                                 24
4.4.2   Interpreting Price of Risk Parameters

To directly interpret the λ0 and λ1 price of risk coefficients consider first a standard CRRA
representative agent economy with the pricing kernel
                               µ      ¶−γ
                                 Ct+1
                        mt+1 =              = exp(−γ(µc + σc εct+1 )),
                                   Ct

where Ct is aggregate consumption, γ is the representative agent’s risk aversion, µc and σc are
the mean and volatility of log consumption growth, respectively, and εct+1 ∼ N (0, 1) is the
shock to consumption growth. In this economy consider a security paying off εct+1 , which is a
unit consumption shock. This has price
                                                                     c
                          Pt = Et [mt+1 εct+1 ] = Et [e−γ(µc +σc εt+1 ) εct+1 ]
                               = −γe−rt ,                                                         (21)

where the risk-free rate rt = γµc − 12 γ 2 σc2 . Equation (21) shows that the price of this security is
equal to a bond multiplied by minus the degree of risk aversion. The security has a mean zero
payoff since E[εct+1 ] = 0. If agents are risk neutral, then the price of the security has the same
zero value as its mean payoff. If agents are risk averse, γ > 0, then the price of the security is
negative. In this case, agents bid down the price of the security below its risk neutral price and
must be paid to bear consumption risk. Consequently, consumption risk carries a positive risk
premium.
   In the term structure model there is no direct correspondence to representative risk aversion
because there are multiple shocks, the prices of risk vary over time, and the prices of risk of at
and bt also depend on the correlated movements of gt and πt as well as each other. Nevertheless,
we can use the difference between the actual price and risk-neutral price of claims to the factor
shocks to provide economic intuition for the policy shift risk priced by the yield curve. The
prices of unit shock payoffs are given by
                                        ·     µ                  ¶    ¸
                                                 1 >        >
                  Et [mt+1 εt+1 ] = Et exp −rt − λt λt − λt εt+1 εt+1
                                                 2
                                          −rt
                                  = −λt e = −(λ0 + λ1 Xt )e−rt ,                                  (22)

where we use the definition of the pricing kernel in equation (10) and the short rate rt = δ0 +
δ1> Xt + Xt> ΩXt is also a function of Xt .
   Equation (22) carries the same intuition as the simple CRRA economy in equation (21). In
this case the effect of risk aversion is specified over multiple factors and if the price of a factor

                                                   25
shock is negative, the risk premium attached to that factor shock is positive, and vice versa. In
the model the prices of risk also depend on the level of the state variables. Note that because
there is no structural representative agent utility in the model, we cannot directly translate the
price of a factor shock to an overall aggregate measure of risk aversion.
   Figure 7 plots the price of a unit shock to at and bt as a function of the policy loadings.
We denote with vertical lines the steady-state values of ā = 0.372 and b̄ = 1.154. Figure 7
shows that both the price of risk of at and the price of risk of bt are positive indicating that
agents demand a risk premium for bearing at and bt factor shocks. Note that the pure factor risk
prices do not translate directly into a one-to-one relation into risk premia, as Figure 6 shows.
This happens even in an affine model because multiple factors are correlated, but the effects
are exacerbated in our non-linear setting. Nevertheless, for changing inflation stances, which
play the most important role in explaining term structure movements, the higher risk premia
on bt shocks when bt is high is consistent with agents demanding higher risk premia on bonds
when bt is high (see Figure 6). Intuitively, when bt is high the entire yield curve becomes more
exposed to inflation risk and the risk of bt itself. Agents dislike this risk and bid down the prices
of bonds and increase long-term yields.
   It is also possible to price the implied monetary policy shock, f bmk , in equation (3) implied
by the benchmark model:

                       Et [mt+1 f bmk ] = Et [mt+1 [(at − ā)gt + (bt − b̄)πt ],

which can be computed in closed form as a function of various quadratic terms. Evaluated at the
posterior mean of all factors, this price is 0.001 and is close to zero for all sample values of the
parameters. Hence, the benchmark model implies that agents apply a price of risk to monetary
policy shifts but not to a linear monetary policy shock.


4.5    The Post-2001 Episode
It is an interesting question to see what the yield curve would have looked like had the Fed not
changed its inflation loading over the post-2001 period. Some commentators have raised the
possibility that short-term interest rates were held too low for too long after the Fed lowered in-
terest rates to respond to the September 2001 terrorist attacks and the 2001 recession. However,
during the early 2000s, inflation was low, possibly even below an implicit target (see Figure 1)
and the output gap was negative, so interest rates may have declined over this period even with
unchanged policy coefficients. Our model provides a way to precisely quantify at what level

                                                  26
interest rates would have been in the counter-factual experiment where the Fed did not change
its stance to output or inflation in the years following 2001.18
       Figure 8 reports the results of a counter-factual experiment where we hold the Fed weight on
the output gap and inflation at the average weight of at and bt over 2000 and trace the effects on
the yields post-2001. We allow the other macro factors, gt and πt , to take their sample values.
Figure 8 plots the path of the short rate and term spread if the Fed had maintained the same
output and inflation stance as in 2000 in the dashed lines and overlays the actual short rate and
term spread in the solid lines.
       The top panel of Figure 8 shows that had the Fed not changed its output and inflation stances
since 2000, short rates would indeed have been higher post-2001 than in data. During 2002 the
average difference between the actual short rate and the theoretical short rate had the Fed not
changed its policy stance is 1.19%. Thus, even with no additional policy response to the terrorist
attacks and the recession, short term interest rates would have fallen. However, the gap between
the short rate in data and the theoretical short rate with no policy changes widens in 2003
and 2004 to 2.12% and 2.96%, respectively. Short rates reach a minimum level of 0.90% in
2003:Q2, whereas at this time the short rate without any policy shifts would have been 2.74%.
Even in 2005, short rates in data remain considerably below the short rates predicted by the
Fed’s 2000 policy stance with an average difference of 1.37%.
       The bottom panel graphs the five-year term spread. Figure 8 shows that there is qualitatively
little difference between the slope of the yield curve over 2001-2004 comparing actual data and
the counter-factual exercise where the Fed did not take a more dovish stance. The overall
pattern of both the data and the predicted term spread with no policy changes is similar with
both exhibiting an overall decrease post-2001 over the next five years. In summary, if the Fed
had maintained its output gap and inflation stance during 2000 over the early 2000s, the overall
level of the yield curve would have been much higher than observed in data but there would
have been little effect on the slope of the yield curve compared to its data realization. Thus,
the reduction in the response to inflation between post-2001 does not explain any part in the
flattening of the yield curve during this period (the so-called Greenspan conundrum).
  18
       Naturally, like any counter-factual experiment, the usual caveats on the Lucas critique apply since agents
would have reacted differently if they would have known the Fed’s monetary policy stance would be fixed under
the counter-factual.




                                                        27
5    Conclusion
Despite how convincing the anecdotal evidence and historical accounts may be, diverging con-
clusions have been reached in the literature concerning the importance, or even the existence, of
changes in the conduct of monetary policy over the last 50 years. The literature has also concen-
trated on using only short rate information to estimate changes in policy stances, but potential
shifts in monetary policy should affect the entire term structure; the actions of the Fed at the
short end of the yield curve influence the dynamics of the long end of the yield curve through
no-arbitrage restrictions. These shifts in monetary policy are in principle another source of un-
certainty affecting bond risk premia. Thus, long-term bonds provide valuable information on
identifying monetary policy shifts.
    In this paper we propose to model monetary policy and the term structure of interest rates
jointly using a quadratic term structure model, where the coefficients of the short rate equation
– which describe the monetary policy response to the state of the economy – can change over
time. The model allows the entire yield curve to be used to estimate potential monetary policy
shifts. Importantly, long-term bonds are priced by agents who care about shifting monetary
policy risk. These agents are not oblivious to the fact that monetary policy changes over time
and take into account future changes in forming prices.
    We find that monetary policy has changed in quantitatively important ways which are almost
entirely summarized by the evolution of the the Fed’s response to inflation. The response of the
Fed to the output gap has remained relatively constant. Our estimates of the time-varying infla-
tion response line up largely with narrative accounts of monetary policy and with some existing
empirical estimates. The Fed’s response to inflation lies below one during the 1970s, increases
during the 1980s, and again decreases below one during the early 2000s. The changing response
to inflation carries a positive price of risk with an unexpected increase in the Fed’s response to
inflation increasing the short rate and increasing the term spread. Intuitively investors perceive
a higher policy loading to inflation at the short-end of the yield curve as giving bonds of all
maturities greater exposure to inflation and other risk.




                                                28
Appendix

A Bond Pricing
The price of a one-period zero-coupon bond is given by:

                              Pt1    = exp(−rt ) = exp(−δ0 − δ1> Xt − Xt> ΩXt )
                                     = exp(A1 + B1> Xt + Xt> C1 Xt ),                                         (A-1)

where A1 = −δ0 , B1 = −δ1 = −[0 0 0 0 1]> , and C1 = −Ω, with Ω given in equation (9).
   Under measure Q, the price of a n-period zero-coupon bond, Ptn , is:

          Ptn    = EQ            n−1
                    t (exp(−rt )Pt+1 )
                           ¡                                         ¢
                 = EQ                      >             >
                    t (exp −rt + An−1 + Bn−1 Xt+1 + Xt+1 Cn−1 Xt+1 )
                       ¡               >
                                                                                            ¢
                 = exp −rt + An−1 + Bn−1   (µQ + ΦQ Xt ) + (µQ + ΦQ Xt )> Cn−1 (µQ + ΦQ Xt )                  (A-2)
                               ¡ >                                                         ¢
                     × EQ                    Q    Q      >               >    >
                         t (exp (Bn−1 Σ + 2(µ + Φ Xt ) Cn−1 Σ)εt+1 + εt+1 Σ Cn−1 Σεt+1 ) .

To take the expectation, note that the expectation of the exponential of a quadratic Gaussian variable is given by:
                                                µ                                                ¶
                                                    1                      1
                E[exp(A> ² + ²> Γ²)] = exp − ln det (I − 2ΨΓ) + A> (Ψ−1 − 2Γ)−1 A
                                                    2                      2
for ² ∼ N (0, Ψ). This can be derived by general properties of Gaussian quadratic forms (see Mathai and Provost,
1992; Searle, 1997).
     After taking the expectation and equating the terms with

                                         Ptn = exp(An + Bn> Xt + Xt> Cn Xt ),
the coefficients An , Bn , and Cn are given by the recursions:

                        >                    >           1
An    =   −δ0 + An−1 + Bn−1 µQ + µQ Cn−1 µQ −              ln det(I − 2Σ> Cn−1 Σ)
                                                         2
              1
             + (Σ> Bn−1 + 2Σ> Cn−1 µQ )> (I − 2Σ> Cn−1 Σ)−1 (Σ> Bn−1 + 2Σ> Cn−1 µQ )
              2
                                     >
Bn>   =           >
          −δ1> + Bn−1 ΦQ + 2µQ Cn−1 ΦQ + 2(Σ> Bn−1 + 2Σ> Cn−1 µQ )> (I − 2Σ> Cn−1 Σ)−1 Σ> Cn−1 ΦQ

                     >
Cn    =   −Ω + ΦQ Cn−1 ΦQ + 2(Σ> Cn−1 ΦQ )> (I − 2Σ> Cn−1 Σ)−1 (Σ> Cn−1 ΦQ )                                  (A-3)
If the model were specified in continuous time, then the recursions in equation (A-3) are versions of the ordinary
differential equations derived by Ahn, Dittmar and Gallant (2002) on the bond pricing coefficients.
     To compute conditional excess holding period returns, we use the exponential quadratic form for zero-coupon
bond prices in equation (14) to write:
                                     n−1
                    n               Pt+1
                xhprt+1   = log          − rt
                                     Ptn
                                    >           >
                          = An−1 + Bn−1 Xt+1 + Xt+1 Cn−1 Xt+1 − (An + Bn> Xt + Xt> Cn Xt )
                                    +(A1 + B1> Xt + Xt> C1 Xt ).                                              (A-4)

Since Xt+1 ∼ N (µ + ΦXt , ΣΣ> ), we can write the expectation of a quadratic form, Et (Xt+1
                                                                                        >
                                                                                            CXt+1 ), as:
                               >
                          Et (Xt+1 CXt+1 ) = tr(CΣΣ> ) + (µ + ΦXt )> C(µ + ΦXt ).
This allows us to compute the expectation as:
                                             n
                                     Et [xhprt+1 ] = Ān + B̄n> Xt + Xt> C̄n Xt ,                             (A-5)

                                                         29
where
                      Ān   =    An−1 − An + A1 + tr(Cn−1 ΣΣ> ) + µ> Cn−1 µ + Bn−1
                                                                               >
                                                                                   µ
                      B̄n   =    Φ> Bn−1 − Bn + B1 + 2Φ> Cn−1 µ
                      C̄n   =    Φ> Cn−1 Φ − Cn + C1 .                                                           (A-6)



B       Estimating the Model
The model is estimated using a Bayesian Gibbs sampling algorithm. While there are several examples of these
types of estimations for affine models (see, among others, Lamoureux and Witte, 2002; Johannes and Polson,
2005; Ang, Dong and Piazzesi, 2006; Dong, 2006), these cannot be directly employed to estimate the quadratic
model because in an affine setting, drawing the latent factors requires a Kalman filter. The Kalman filter assumes
that yields are linear functions of state variables, whereas they are non-linear functions in the quadratic model. In
this appendix, we develop an acceptance-rejection algorithm to draw the latent factors without approximation.
     For ease of notation, we group the macro variables as Mt = [gt πt ]> and the latent factors as Lt = [at bt ft ]>
                                     £         ¤>
and rewrite the dynamics of Xt = Mt> L>      t    in equation (5) as:
                        µ ¶ µ ¶ µ                       ¶µ         ¶ µ              ¶µ       ¶
                         Mt         µ1         Φ11 Φ12      Mt−1         Σ11     0      εM,t
                               =          +                           +                        ,               (B-1)
                          Lt        µ2         Φ21 Φ22       Lt−1        Σ21 Σ22        εL,t

where εt = (ε>     > >
              M,t εL,t ) ∼ IID N (0, I) and Σ11 and Σ22 are lower triangular.
    The parameters of the model are Θ = (µ, Φ, Σ, δ0 , δ1 , Ω, µQ , ΦQ , σu ), where µQ and ΦQ are parameters
governing the state variable process under the risk neutral probability measure, and σu denotes the vector of
observation error volatilities {σn }. We draw µQ and ΦQ , but invert the prices of risk λ0 and λ1 using the relations:
                                              λ0   =    Σ−1 (µ − µQ )
                                              λ1   =    Σ−1 (Φ − ΦQ ).                                           (B-2)
The latent factors Lt = {at bt ft } are generated in each iteration of the Gibbs sampler. Note that Ω and δ1 are not
estimated, given that they are fixed from equation (9). We also do not draw δ0 , but set this parameter to match the
sample mean of the short rate in each iteration.
     We simulate 500,000 observations in addition to using a burn-in period of 50,000. We sample every fifth
observation to lower the serial correlation of the parameter draws. To check the adequacy of the number of
simulations, we use the tests of Geweke (1992) and Raftery and Lewis (1992). For all parameters the simulation
length is more than adequate except for some companion form parameters where the stationarity constraint is
binding. These parameters are estimated to be always close to the unit circle no matter how many iterations are
used as they capture the high persistence of the factors.
     We now detail the procedure for drawing each of these variables. We denote the factors X = {Xt } and the
set of yields for all maturities in data as Ỹ = {ỹtn }. Note that the model-implied yields Y = {ytn } differ from the
yields in data, Y , by observation error. By definition, Ỹ = Y + u, where u = {unt } is the set of all observation
errors for all yields. This notation also implies that the short rate in data, r̃t , is the same as ỹt1 .


B.1      Drawing the Latent Factors
We use a single-move algorithm based on Jacquier, Polson and Rossi (1994, 2004) adapted to our model. We
derive a draw from the distribution P (Lt |Ỹ , L−t , M ), where Lt is the t-th observation of the latent factors, L−t
denotes all the latent factors except the t-th observation, and Ỹ and M are the complete time-series of yields and
macro variables, respectively. We use the notation Ỹt and Mt to denote the t-th observation of the set of yields and
macro variables. We draw the latent factors Lt conditional on the macro factors, yields, and other parameters.
    From the Markov structure of the model, we can write:
                 P (Lt |L−t , Ỹ , M, Θ) ∝ P (Lt |Lt−1 , M, Θ)P (Ỹt |Lt , M, Θ)P (Lt+1 |Lt , M, Θ).             (B-3)
To keep the notation to a minimum, we write this as:
                                 P (Lt |L−t ) ∝ P (Lt |Lt−1 )P (Ỹt |Lt )P (Lt+1 |Lt ).

                                                          30
    Since M and Θ are treated as known, we can write the dynamics for Lt in equation (B-1) as

                              Lt   =   µ2 + Σ12 εM,t + Φ21 Mt−1 + Φ22 Lt−1 + Σ22 εL,t
                                   =   µL,t + ΦL Lt−1 + ΣL εL,t ,                                                 (B-4)

where µL,t = µ2 + Σ12 εM,t , ΦL = Φ22 , and ΣL = Σ22 . Since M is observable and we hold Θ as fixed, µL,t is
known at time t.
   Each conditional distribution of the RHS of equation (B-3) is known. From equation (B-4) we have
                               µ                                                                  ¶
                                    1
            P (Lt |Lt−1 ) ∝ exp − (Lt − µL,t − ΦL Lt−1 )> (ΣL Σ>    L ) −1
                                                                           (L t − µL,t − Φ  L
                                                                                           L t−1 )  . (B-5)
                                    2

Similarly, from the VAR in equation (B-4) we can write:
                                 µ                                                        ¶
                                    1                     >     > −1
              P (Lt+1 |Lt ) ∝ exp − (Lt+1 − µL,t − ΦL Lt ) (ΣL ΣL ) (Lt+1 − µL,t − ΦL Lt ) .                      (B-6)
                                    2

Finally, the likelihood of bond yields, P (Ỹt |Lt ), is given by:
                                         Ã              ·                               ¸!
                                                1 X (ỹtn − (an + b>       >
                                                                   n Xt + Xt cn Xt ))
                                                                                      2
                        P (Yt |Lt ) ∝ exp −                                                ,                      (B-7)
                                                2 n                 σn2

where Xt = [L>      >
               t Mt ] and the summation is taken over yield maturities n. In the likelihood, the model-implied
yield, yt = an + bn Xt + Xt> cn Xt , is given in equation (15), and σn2 is the observation error variance of the yield
        n         >

of maturity n.
     We can combine equations (B-5)-(B-7) and complete the square to obtain:
                                        ³ 1h
  P (Lt |L−t ) ∝        P (Ỹt |Lt ) exp − L> (Φ0> (ΣL Σ>
                                                        L)
                                                          −1
                                                             ΦL + (ΣL Σ>
                                                                       L)
                                                                         −1
                                                                            )Lt                                   (B-8)
                                          2 t L                                                                    i´
                        −2(L>            > −1
                                t+1 (ΣL ΣL )   ΦL + L>             > −1
                                                     t−1 ΦL (ΣL ΣL )     − µL (ΣL Σ>
                                                                                   L)
                                                                                     −1
                                                                                        ΦL + µL (ΣL Σ>
                                                                                                     L)
                                                                                                       −1
                                                                                                          )Lt
                                        µ                                   ¶
                                             1
                  ∝     P (Ỹt |Lt ) exp − (Lt − µ∗t )> (Σ∗t )−1 (Lt − µ∗t )
                                             2

where
                  ¡                                  ¢−1
        Σ∗t   =       Φ0>     > −1
                       L (ΣL ΣL )  ΦL + (ΣL Σ>
                                             L)
                                                −1

        µ∗t   =   Σ∗t (L>        > −1
                        t+1 (ΣL ΣL )  ΦL + L>           > −1
                                            t−1 ΦL (ΣL ΣL )  − µL,t (ΣL Σ>
                                                                         L)
                                                                           −1
                                                                              ΦL + µL,t (ΣL Σ>
                                                                                             L)
                                                                                                −1 >
                                                                                                  ) .

     Since this distribution is not recognizable, we use a Metropolis draw. We draw a proposal from the distribution
N (µ∗t , Σ∗t ) and then the acceptance probability is based on the likelihood of P (Ỹt |Lt ).
     In the three-factor constant Taylor rule model, yields are linear functions of the factors and there is no need for
the single-move algorithm. In this case, we employ the more efficient Carter and Kohn (1994) forward-backward
algorithm to first run a Kalman filter forward and then sample ft backwards. When the single-move algorithm
is employed, it produces parameter values and posterior sample paths of ft that are almost identical to those
produced by the forward-backward algorithm. Since we specify the mean of ft to be zero for identification, we set
each generated draw of this factor to have a mean of zero.
     In the benchmark four-factor specification, we additionally require that at each point in time both at and bt are
non-negative for purposes of identification.
     In the extended five-factor model, we impose a prior for the draw of at and bt period by period. Specifically,
the prior used is given by the uniform distribution on the interval [ktp - σk,tp
                                                                                  ; ktp + σk,t
                                                                                             p
                                                                                               ] for k = a, b; where ktp
       p
and σk,t represent the posterior mean and standard deviation of factor k in period t from the estimated benchmark
model. The motivation for imposing this prior is that we want the latent factor ftext in the extended model to capture
only for short rate and term structure movements not accounted for by the four factors [gt πt at bt ]> since the
model specifies ftext as a factor orthogonal to [gt πt at bt ]> .




                                                           31
B.2     Drawing µ and Φ
We follow Johannes and Polson (2005) and explicitly differentiate between {µ, Φ} under the real measure and
{µQ , ΦQ } under the risk-neutral measure. As Xt follows a VAR in equation (5), we follow standard Gibbs sam-
pling and use conjugate normal priors and posteriors for the draw of µ and Φ. We note that the posterior of µ and
Φ conditional on X, Ỹ and the other parameters is:

                 P (µ, Φ|Θ− , X, Ỹ ) ∝     P (Ỹ |Θ, X)P (X|µ, Φ, Σ)P (µ, Φ)                                  (B-9)
                                                             Q    Q
                                       ∝    P (Ỹ |Σ, δ0 , δ1 , µ , Φ , ση , X)P (X|µ, Φ, Σ)P (µ, Φ)
                                       ∝    P (X|µ, Φ, Σ)P (µ, Φ),                                            (B-10)
where Θ− denotes the set of all parameters except µ and Φ, and P (X|µ, Φ, Σ) is the likelihood function of the
VAR, which is normally distributed from the assumption of normality for the errors in the VAR. The validity of
going from the first line to the second line is ensured by the bond recursion in equation (A-3): given µQ and
ΦQ , the bond price is independent of µ and Φ. We specify the prior P (µ, Φ) to be N (0, 1000), which effectively
represents an uninformative prior. We draw µ and Φ separately for each equation in the VAR system (5). Given
that we impose the restriction that ft is mean zero for identification, we set µf to zero.


B.3     Drawing ΣΣ>
To draw ΣΣ> , we note that the posterior of ΣΣ> conditional on X, Ỹ and the other parameters is:

                            P (ΣΣ> |Θ− , X, Ỹ ) ∝ P (Y |Θ, X)P (X|µ, Φ, Σ)P (ΣΣ> ),                          (B-11)
where Θ− denotes the set of all parameters except Σ. This posterior suggests an Independence Metropolis draw.
We draw ΣΣ> from the proposal density

                                       q(ΣΣ> ) = P (X | µ, Φ, Σ)P (ΣΣ> ),
which is an Inverse Wishart (IW ) distribution if we specify the prior P (ΣΣ> ) to be IW , so that q(ΣΣ> ) is an
IW natural conjugate. The proposal draw (ΣΣ> )m+1 for the (m + 1)th draw is then accepted with probability α,
where
                                     (                                                )
                                        P ((ΣΣ> )m+1 | Θ− , X, Ỹ ) q((ΣΣ> )m )
                       α = min                                                     ,1
                                         P ((ΣΣ> )m | Θ− , X, Ỹ ) q((ΣΣ> )m+1 )
                                     (                                 )
                                        P (Ỹ | (ΣΣ> )m+1 , Θ− , X)
                            = min                                   ,1 ,                                (B-12)
                                         P (Ỹ | (ΣΣ> )m , Θ− , X)

where P (Ỹ |µ, Φ, Θ− , X) is the likelihood function of all yields, including the short rate, which is normally dis-
tributed from the assumption of normality for the observation errors. From equation (B-12), α is just the ratio of
the likelihoods of the new draw of ΣΣ> relative to the old draw.


B.4     Drawing µQ and ΦQ
We draw µQ and ΦQ with a Random Walk Metropolis algorithm assuming a flat prior. We draw each parameter
separately in µQ , and each row in ΦQ . The accept/reject probability for the draws of µQ and ΦQ is the ratio of the
likelihood of bond yields based on candidate and last draw of µQ and ΦQ :
                                    (                                                      )
                                      P ((µQ , ΦQ )m+1 | Θ− , X, Ỹ ) q((µQ , ΦQ )m )
                       α = min                                                          ,1
                                        P ((µQ , ΦQ )m | Θ− , X, Ỹ ) q((µQ , ΦQ )m+1 )
                                    (                                    )
                                      P (Ỹ | (µQ , ΦQ )m+1 , Θ− , X)
                           = min                                       ,1 ,                                  (B-13)
                                        P (Ỹ | (µQ , ΦQ )m , Θ− , X)

In each iteration, we invert λ0 and λ1 and report the estimates of the prices of risk instead of µQ and ΦQ . We
discard non-stationary draws of ΦQ .

                                                        32
B.5     Drawing σu
Drawing the variance of the observation errors, σu2 , is straightforward, because we can view the observation errors
η as regression residuals from equation (17). We draw the observation variance (σηn )2 separately from each yield.
We specify a conjugate prior IG(0, 0.00001), so that the posterior distribution of ση2 is a natural conjugate Inverse
Gamma distribution. The prior information roughly translates into a 30bp bid-ask spread in Treasury securities,
which is consistent with studies on the liquidity of spot Treasury market yields (see, for example, Fleming, 2000).



C       Short Rate Variance Decomposition
For the short rate variance decomposition presented in Section 4.2.1, we write the short rate given by equation (8)
as
                                   rt = δ0 + δ1> Xt + Xt> Ω1 Xt + Xt> Ω2 Xt ,                                 (C-1)
where the matrices Ω1 and Ω2 have elements Ω1ga = Ω1ag = Ω2πb = Ω2bπ = 0.5 and zeros elsewhere. Then, the
unconditional variance of the short rate can be decomposed as:

                  var(rt ) =    var(at gt ) + var(bt πt ) + 2cov(at gt , bt πt )
                           =    var(Xt> Ω1 Xt ) + var(Xt> Ω2 Xt ) + 2cov(Xt> Ω1 Xt , Xt> Ω2 Xt ),              (C-2)

where

                           var(Xt> Ω1 Xt ) =       2tr(Ω1 ΣX Σ>  2    > 1     > 1
                                                              X ) + 4µX Ω ΣX ΣX Ω µX
                           var(Xt> Ω2 Xt ) =       2tr(Ω2 ΣX Σ>  2    > 1     > 2
                                                              X ) + 4µX Ω ΣX ΣX Ω µX
              2cov(Xt> Ω1 Xt , Xt> Ω2 Xt ) =       4tr(Ω1 ΣX Σ>  2    >       > 1     > 2
                                                              X Ω ΣX ΣX ) + 8µX Ω ΣX ΣX Ω µX ,

and ΣX is the unconditional covariance matrix of Xt implied by the VAR in equation (5).



D       Impulse Responses
Since the yields are non-linear, we follow Gallant, Rossi and Tauchen (1993) and Potter (2000), among others,
and compute the impulse response functions using simulation. We start with the sample series of data (gt and πt )
and the posterior means of the latent factors (at and bt ) at each observation t. We term these points Xt∗ . From the
VAR in equation (5), we construct an orthogonalized error term νt by taking the Cholesky of ΣΣ> . To construct
the impulse response for the jth variable of Xt , we first draw a shock vt that represents a shock only to variable
j from the error term distribution νt . From the points Xt∗ , we construct a new series where each observation has
been shocked by vt , which we denote as Xtv = Xt∗ + vt .
     The impulse response functions are taken as the difference between the averaged response of the yields to the
evolution of Xt∗ without shocks to the evolution of the shocked Xtv series:
                                               n
                                            E(yt+k |Xtv ) − E(yt+k
                                                               n
                                                                   |Xt∗ ).
                                                                v
Using the VAR in equation (5), we simulate out the value of Xt+k     from Xtv and the value of Xt+k
                                                                                                 ∗
                                                                                                     from Xt∗ . This
                                                                 n
is done at each observation t. Then, we construct the yields, yt+k , from equation (15) corresponding to the state
          v          ∗
vectors Xt+k  and Xt+k . We take values of k = 1 . . . 60 quarters.
                                                                                                                 n
     The impulse responses are computed at each observation by taking the average of the sample paths of yt+k
                   v                                               n                     ∗
computed using Xt+k minus the average of the sample paths of yt+k computed using Xt+k . We report the average
of the impulse responses across all observations t. This procedure results in impulse responses that are identical to
impulse responses computed for traditional VAR systems for large numbers of observations.




                                                           33
References
 [1] Ahn, D. H., R. F. Dittmar, and A. R. Gallant, 2002, “Quadratic Term Structure Models: Theory and Evi-
     dence,” Review of Financial Studies, 15, 243-288.
 [2] Ang, A., G. Bekaert, and M. Wei, 2008, “The Term Structure of Real Rates and Expected Inflation,” Journal
     of Finance, 63, 797-849.
 [3] Ang, A., S. Dong, and M. Piazzesi, 2006, “No-Arbitrage Taylor Rules,” working paper, Columbia University.
 [4] Ang, A., and M. Piazzesi, 2003, “A No-Arbitrage Vector Autoregression of Term Structure Dynamics with
     Macroeconomic and Latent Variables,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 4, 745-787.
 [5] Bakshi, G. S., and Z. Chen, 1996, “Inflation, Asset Prices, and the Term Structure of Interest Rates in Mone-
     tary Economies,” Review of Financial Studies, 9, 241-275.
 [6] Beckner, S. K., 1996, Back from the Brink: The Greenspan Years, John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY.
 [7] Beaglehold, D., and M. Tenney, 1992, “A Nonlinear Equilibrium Model of the Term Structure of Interest
     Rates: Corrections and Additions,” Journal of Financial Economics, 12, 763-806.
 [8] Bernanke, B. S., and I. Mihov, 1998, “Measuring Monetary Policy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113,
     3, 869-902.
 [9] Bikbov, R., 2006, “Monetary Policy Regimes and the Term Structure of Interest Rates,” unpublished disser-
     tation, Columbia University.
[10] Bikbov, R., and M. Chernov, 2006, “No-Arbitrage Macroeconomic Determinants of the Yield Curve,” work-
     ing paper, London Business School.
[11] Boivin, J., 2006, “Has U.S. Monetary Policy Changed? Evidence from Drifting Coefficients and Real-Time
     Data,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 38, 5, 1149-1174.
[12] Boivin, J. and M. Giannoni, 2006, “Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?,” The Review of Eco-
     nomics and Statistics. 88, 3, 445-462.
[13] Brandt, M. W., and Chapman, D. A., 2003, “Comparing Multifactor Models of the Term Structure,” working
     paper, Duke University.
[14] Buraschi, A., A. Cieslak, and F. Trojani, 2007, “Correlation Risk and the Term Structure of Interest Rates,”
     working paper, Imperial College.
[15] Buraschi, A., and A. Jiltsov, 2005, “Inflation Risk Premia and the Expectations Hypothesis,” Journal of
     Financial Economics, 75, 429-490.
[16] Buraschi, A., and A. Jiltsov, 2007, “Habit Formation and Macroeconomic Models of the Term Structure of
     Interest Rates,” Journal of Finance, 62, 3009-3062.
[17] Carter, C. K., and R. Kohn, 1994, “On Gibbs Sampling for State Space Models,” Biometrika, 81, 541-553.
[18] Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. Evans, 1996, “The Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks: Evidence
     from the Flow of Funds,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 78, 16-34.
[19] Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, M., and C. Evans, 1999, “Monetary Policy Shocks: What have we Learned
     and to what End?” in J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, ed., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Elsevier Science,
     North Holland.
[20] Clarida, R., Galı́, J., and M. Gertler, 2000, “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence
     and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 147-80.
[21] Cogley, T., 2005, “Changing Beliefs and the Term Structure of Interest Rates: Cross-Equation Restrictions
     with Drifting Parameters,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 8, 420-451.
[22] Cogley, T., and T. J. Sargent, 2001, “Evolving Post World War II U.S. Inflation Dynamics,” NBER Macroe-
     conomics Annual, 16, 331-373.


                                                       34
[23] Cogley, T., and T. J. Sargent, 2005, “Drifts and Volatilities: Monetary Policies and Outcomes in the Post
     WWII U.S.,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 8, 262-302.
[24] Constantinides, G., 1992, “A Theory of the Nominal Term Structure of Interest Rates,” Review of Financial
     Studies, 5, 531-552.
[25] Cooley, T., and E. Prescott, 1976, “Estimation in the Presence of Stochastic Parameter Variation,” Economet-
     rica, 44, 167-184.
[26] Cook, T., 1989, “Determinants of the Federal Funds Rate: 1979-1982,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
     Economic Review, January/February, 3-19.
[27] Cox, J. C., J. E. Ingersoll, and S. A. Ross, 1985, “An Intertemporal General Equilibrium Model of Asset
     Prices,” Econometrica, 53, 363-384.
[28] Dai, Q., and K. J. Singleton, 2002, “Expectation Puzzles, Time-Varying Risk Premia, and Affine Models of
     the Term Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 63, 415-41.
[29] Dong, S., 2006, “Macro Variables Do Drive Exchange Rate Movements: Evidence from a No-Arbitrage
     Model,” unpublished dissertation, Columbia University.
[30] Duffee, G. R., 2002, “Term Premia and Interest Rate Forecasts in Affine Models,” Journal of Finance, 57,
     405443.
[31] Duffee, G. R., 2006, “Term Structure Estimation without using Latent Factors” Journal of Financial Eco-
     nomics, 79, 507-536.
[32] Duffie, D., and R. Kan, 1996, “A Yield-Factor Model of Interest Rates,” Mathematical Finance, 6, 379-406.
[33] Estrella, A., and F. S. Mishkin, 1998, “Predicting U.S. Recessions: Financial Variables as Leading Indica-
     tors,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1, 45-61.
[34] Filipovic, D., and J. Teichmann, 2002, “On Finite Dimensional Term Structure Models,” working paper,
     Princeton University.
[35] Fleming, M. J., 2003, “Measuring Teasury Market Liquidity,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic
     Policy Review, 9, 83-108.
[36] Gallant, A. R., P. E. Rossi, and G. Tauchen, 1993, “Nonlinear Dynamic Structures,” Econometrica, 61, 871-
     908.
[37] Geweke, J., 1992, “Evaluating the Accuracy of Sampling-Based Approaches to Calculating Posterior Mo-
     ments” in J. M. Bernardo, J. Berger, A. P. David, and A. F. M. Smith, ed., Bayesian Statistics 4, Oxford
     University Press, Oxford, pp. 169-193.
[38] Gourieroux, C., and R. Sufana, 2003, “Wishart Quadratic Term Structure Models,” working paper, University
     of Toronto.
[39] Jacquier, E., N. G. Polson, and P. E. Rossi, 1994, “Bayesian Analysis of Stochastic Volatility Models,”
     Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 12, 371-417.
[40] Jacquier, E., N. G. Polson, and P. E. Rossi, 2004, “Bayesian Analysis of Fat-Tailed Stochastic Volatility
     Models with Correlated Errors,” Journal of Econometrics, 122, 185-212.
[41] Johannes, M., and N. Polson, 2005, “MCMC Methods for Financial Econometrics,” working paper, Columbia
     University.
[42] Joslin, S., M. Priebsch, and K. J. Singleton, 2009, “Risk Premium Accounting in Macro-Dynamic Term
     Structure Models,” working paper, Stanford University.
[43] Justiniano, A., and G. E. Primiceri, 2006, “The Time Varying Volatility of Macroeconomic Fluctuations,”
     NBER working paper 12022.
[44] Knez, P. K., R. Litterman, and J. A. Scheinkman, 1994, “Explorations into Factors Explaining Money Market
     Returns,” Journal of Finance, 49, 1861-1862.


                                                       35
[45] Koop, G., M. H. Pesaran, and S. M. Potter, 1996, “Impulse Response Analysis in Nonlinear Multivariate
     Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 74, 119-147.
[46] Lamoureux, C., and D. Witte, 2002, “Empirical Analysis of the Yield Curve: The Information in the Data
     Viewed through the Window of Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross,” Journal of Finance, 57, 1479-1520.
[47] Leippold, M., and L. Wu, 2002, “Asset Pricing under the Quadratic Class,” Journal of Financial and Quan-
     titative Analysis, 37, 271-295.
[48] Leippold, M., and L. Wu, 2003, “Design and Estimation of Quadratic Term Structure Models,” European
     Finance Review, 7, 47-73.
[49] Longstaff, F., 1989, “A Nonlinear General Equilibrium Model of the Term Structure of Interest Rates,” Jour-
     nal of Finance, 23, 1259-1282.
[50] Mathai, A. M., and S. B. Provost, 1992, Quadratic Forms in Random Variables: Theory and Applications,
     Marcel Dekker, New York.
[51] Orphanides, A., 2001, “Monetary Policy Rules Based on Real-Time Data,” American Economic Review, 91,
     964-85.
[52] Oraphnides, A., 2003, “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule,” Journal of Monetary
     Economics, 50, 983-1022.
[53] Pagan, A., 1980, “Some Identification and Estimation Results for Regression Models with Stochastically
     Varying Coefficients,” Journal of Econometrics, 13, 341-363.
[54] Pennachi, G. G., 1991, “Identifying the Dynamics of Real Interest Rates and Inflation: Evidence Using
     Survey Data,” Review of Financial Studies, 4, 53-86.
[55] Raftery, A. E., and S. Lewis, 1992, “How Many Iterations in the Gibbs Sampler?” in J. M. Bernardo, J.
     Berger, A. P. David, and A. F. M. Smith, ed., Bayesian Statistics 4, Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp.
     763-773.
[56] Romer, C. D., and D. H. Romer, 2002, “A Rehabilitation of Monetary Policy in the 1950’s,” American
     Economic Review, 92, 121-127.
[57] Rudebusch, G. D., and L. E. O. Svensson, 2002, “Eurosystem Monetary Targeting: Lessons from U.S. Data,”
     European Economic Review, 46, 417-442.
[58] Rudebusch, G., and T. Wu, 2008, “A Macro-Finance Model of the Term Strucutre, Monetary Policy, and the
     Economy,” Economic Journal, 118, 906-926.
[59] Sargent, T. J., 1984, “Autoregressions, Expectations, and Advice,” American Economic Review, 74, 408-420.
[60] Sargent, T. J., 1999, The Conquest of American Inflation, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
[61] Searle, S. R., 1997, Linear Models, John Wiley & Sons.
[62] Sims, C. A., 1987, “A Rational Expectations Framework for Short-Run Policy Analysis,” in Barnett, W. A.,
     and Singleton, K. J., eds., New Approaches to Monetary Economics: Proceedings of the Second International
     Symposium in Economic Theory and Econometrics, pp293-308, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
     MA.
[63] Sims, C. A., and T. Zha, 2006, “Macroeconomic Switching,” American Economic Review, 96, 54-81.
[64] Stock, J., and M. Watson, 2003, “Has the Business Cycle Changed? Evidence and Explanations,” working
     paper, Princeton University.
[65] Taylor, J. B., 1993, “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
     Public Policy, 39, 195-214.




                                                       36
                                        Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                    Panel A: Moments of Macro Factors

                        Means (%)             Standard Deviations (%)         Autocorrelations

                      Data      Model          Data           Model            Data       Model

                g    0.000     -0.094          2.349           2.372          0.930       0.927
                    (0.323)    (0.528)        (0.056)         (0.116)        (0.034)     (0.021)
                π    3.419      3.327          2.199           2.407          0.982       0.983
                    (0.321)    (2.163)        (0.262)         (1.051)        (0.026)     (0.007)


                                          Panel B: Moments of Yields

                              n=1         n=4         n=8       n = 12    n = 16      n = 20

                    Means (%)

                    Data       5.083       5.429     5.616       5.775     5.895       5.973
                              (0.403)     (0.400)   (0.397)     (0.388)   (0.385)     (0.380)
                    Model      5.083       5.437     5.660       5.766     5.862       6.005
                                 –        (0.051)   (0.025)     (0.007)   (0.008)     (0.010)

                    Standard Deviations (%)

                    Data       2.820       2.784     2.749       2.683     2.656       2.615
                              (0.347)     (0.308)   (0.304)     (0.297)   (0.296)     (0.284)
                    Model      2.796       2.782     2.754       2.701     2.644       2.597
                              (0.166)     (0.060)   (0.013)     (0.006)   (0.004)     (0.008)


The table lists various moments of the factors in data and implied by the four-factor benchmark model.
All the factors and yields are expressed in annualized percentage terms. All standard errors are reported
in parentheses. Panel A lists moments of the output gap and inflation. for the benchmark model Panel B
reports data and benchmark model unconditional moments of n-quarter maturity yields. The benchmark
model has factors Xt = [gt πt at bt ]> the short rate equation (2), factor dynamics in equation (5), prices
of risk in equation (11), and observation error standard deviations in equation (17) for yields of maturity n
quarters. For the model, we construct the posterior distribution of unconditional moments by computing the
unconditional moments implied from the parameters in each iteration of the Gibbs sampler. We compute the
posterior distribution of the model-implied yields using the generated latent factors in each iteration of the
Gibbs sampler. In Panels A and B, the data standard errors are computed using GMM with robust standard
errors. The sample period is June 1952 to December 2007 and the data frequency is quarterly.




                                                        37
                                Table 2: Constant Taylor Rule Model

           Short Rate Parameters

                      δ0             ā        b̄

                    0.008          0.364     0.609
                   (0.002)        (0.063)   (0.237)

           VAR Parameters

                                               Φ                    Volatility ×1000/Correlation

                   µ × 1000          g         π            f          g          π         f std

           g         0.658         0.904    -0.082     -0.023        0.004      0.018        0
                   (0.267)        (0.025)   (0.027)    (0.017)      (0.000)    (0.067)       –
           π        -0.022         0.062     1.004      -0.015       0.018      0.001        0
                   (0.121)        (0.011)   (0.012)    (0.010)      (0.067)    (0.000)       –
           f std     0.016           0         0         0.940         0          0        0.008
                   (0.185)           –         –       (0.026)         –          –       (0.001)

           Risk Premia Parameters

                                               λ1

                      λ0             g         π           f std

           g         0.243         9.497     7.661     -3.475
                   (0.797)        (23.28)   (18.96)    (29.28)
           π        -3.056        100.89     18.76      -98.69
                   (2.482)        (25.16)   (17.66)    (78.13)
           f std     0.133           0         0       -5.944
                   (0.197)           –         –       (13.71)

           Observation Error Standard Deviation

                    n=1            n=4       n=8       n = 12       n = 16     n = 20

           σun      0.177          0.106     0.052      0.032        0.044      0.058
                   (0.009)        (0.006)   (0.003)    (0.002)      (0.003)    (0.003)


The table lists parameter values for the constant Taylor rule model for the factors Xt = [gt πt ftstd ]> with
the short rate equation (1), factor dynamics in equation (5), prices of risk in equation (11), and observation
error standard deviations in equation (17) for yields of maturity n quarters. Any parameters without standard
errors are not estimated. We report the posterior mean and posterior standard deviation (in parentheses) of
each parameter. In the Volatility/Correlation matrix, we report standard deviations of each factor along the
diagonal multiplied by 1000 and correlations between the factors on the off-diagonal elements. The zero
entries in the λ1 matrix result from the companion form Φ taking the form of equation (6) under both the risk
neutral and the real measure. The sample period is June 1952 to December 2007 and the data frequency is
quarterly.



                                                      38
                                         Table 3: Benchmark Model
Short Rate Parameters

                              ā                            b̄

         δ0         Sample          VAR           Sample          VAR

       0.003         0.356          0.372          1.117          1.154
      (0.001)       (0.063)        (0.186)        (0.115)        (0.503)

VAR Parameters

                                             Φ                                   Volatility ×1000/Correlation

      µ × 1000           g           π              a              b         g           π         a            b

g      0.563         0.911         -0.083          0.000            0       0.004      0.011    -0.038    -0.021
      (0.690)       (0.025)        (0.036)        (0.001)           –      (0.000)    (0.067)   (0.089)   (0.106)
π      0.142         0.064          0.990            0            0.000     0.011      0.001    -0.332    -0.203
      (0.164)       (0.011)        (0.007)           –           (0.000)   (0.067)    (0.000)   (0.077)   (0.075)
a     23.042        -1.114            0            0.937            0      -0.038     -0.332     4.072     0.854
      (11.50)       (0.763)           –           (0.027)           –      (0.089)    (0.077)   (0.994)   (0.056)
b     66.593           0            2.682            0            0.922    -0.021     -0.203     0.854    47.832
      (41.70)          –           (2.595)           –           (0.027)   (0.106)    (0.075)   (0.056)   (14.95)

Risk Premia Parameters

                                             λ1

        λ0               g           π              a              b

g       0.905       18.545         62.700           2.376            0
      (0.360)       (11.83)        (17.63)        (1.152)            –
π      -3.001       31.444         169.53          -0.027         -0.345
      (0.486)       (12.88)        (12.32)        (0.178)        (0.218)
a      -0.632        -6.314        62.881          -0.577         -0.118
      (0.434)       (15.28)        (17.03)        (0.595)        (0.077)
b       0.082       23.948         -9.540           1.175        -0.663
      (0.574)       (23.08)        (29.95)        (0.832)        (0.274)

Observation Error Standard Deviation

       n=1          n=4            n=8            n = 12         n = 16    n = 20

σun    0.168         0.069          0.030          0.021          0.024     0.026
      (0.043)       (0.026)        (0.010)        (0.003)        (0.003)   (0.002)




                                                        39
Note to Table 3
The table lists parameter values for the benchmark model for the factors Xt = [gt πt at bt ]> with the short
rate equation (2), factor dynamics in equation (5), prices of risk in equation (11), and observation error
standard deviations in equation (17) for yields of maturity n quarters. Any parameters without standard
errors are not estimated. We report the posterior mean and posterior standard deviation (in parentheses) of
each parameter. For the short rate parameters, we report two estimated long-run means ā and b̄ for at and bt ,
respectively. The “sample” mean is the posterior mean of the latent factors averaged across the sample. For
the “population” mean we compute the population mean of the latent factors implied by the VAR parameters
in each iteration and report the posterior average. In the Volatility/Correlation matrix, we report standard
deviations of each factor along the diagonal multiplied by 1000 and correlations between the factors on the
off-diagonal elements. The zero entries in the λ1 matrix result from the companion form Φ taking the form
of equation (6) under both the risk neutral and the real measure. The sample period is June 1952 to December
2007 and the data frequency is quarterly.




                                                     40
                    Table 4: Extended Model
Short Rate Parameters

                                  ā                         b̄

           δ0       Sample              VAR        Sample          VAR

         0.003           0.374          0.388       1.075          1.101
        (0.000)         (0.018)        (0.184)     (0.031)        (0.516)

VAR Parameters

                                                     Φ

        µ × 1000          g              π            a              b        f ext

g        0.355           0.907         -0.080       0.001             0      -0.058
        (0.740)         (0.025)        (0.037)     (0.001)            –      (0.048)
π        0.116           0.064          0.989         0            0.000     -0.014
        (0.165)         (0.011)        (0.007)        –           (0.000)    (0.015)
a        21.23          -1.267            0         0.945             0         0
        (11.07)         (0.693)           –        (0.027)            –         –
b        57.74             0            2.952         0            0.925        0
        (36.87)            –           (2.334)        –           ( 0.026)      –
f ext      0               0              0           0               0       0.672
           –               –              –           –               –      (0.107)

                                        Volatility ×1000/Correlation

g                        0.004           0.024      0.006         -0.009        0
                        (0.000)        (0.068)     (0.082)        (0.078)       –
π                        0.024           0.001     -0.359         -0.185        0
                        (0.068)        (0.000)     (0.068)        (0.086)       –
a                        0.006         -0.359       3.413          0.854        0
                        (0.082)        (0.068)     (0.708)        (0.068)       –
b                        -0.009         -0.185      0.854         35.818        0
                        (0.078)        (0.086)     (0.068)        (6.437)       –
f ext                       0              0          0              0        0.007
                            –              –          –              –       (0.001)




                                         41
                                              Table 4 Continued

                   Risk Premia Parameters

                                                                 λ1

                             λ0           g          π             a         b         f ext

                   g        0.711       18.63      65.50          3.130       0      -28.27
                           (0.925)     (11.97)    (18.12)       (0.707)       –      (22.72)
                   g       -3.154       30.15     164.15         -0.076    -0.390     -15.49
                           (0.570)     (11.94)    (12.26)       (0.220)   (0.156)    (15.94)
                   g       -0.896       -8.92      63.33         -0.422    -0.152     -6.031
                           (0.391)     (15.15)    (14.84)       (0.537)   (0.071)    (7.302)
                   g        0.360       27.04     -14.59          0.878    -0.712      3.899
                           (0.609)     (24.48)    (30.25)       (0.997)   (0.335)    (6.053)
                   f ext    0.063         0          0              0         0        79.33
                           (0.072)        –          –              –         –      (52.67)

                   Observation Error Standard Deviation

                           n=1          n=4       n=8           n = 12    n = 16     n = 20

                   σun      0.081       0.038      0.024         0.018     0.022      0.024
                           (0.024)     (0.004)    (0.002)       (0.001)   (0.002)    (0.002)


The table lists parameter values for the benchmark model for the factors Xt = [gt πt at bt ftext ]> with the
short rate equation (4), factor dynamics in equation (5), prices of risk in equation (11), and observation error
standard deviations in equation (17) for yields of maturity n quarters. Any parameters without standard
errors are not estimated. We report the posterior mean and posterior standard deviation (in parentheses) of
each parameter. For the short rate parameters, we report two estimated long-run means ā and b̄ for at and bt ,
respectively. The “sample” mean is the posterior mean of the latent factors averaged across the sample. For
the “population” mean we compute the population mean of the latent factors implied by the VAR parameters
in each iteration and report the posterior average. In the Volatility/Correlation matrix, we report standard
deviations of each factor along the diagonal multiplied by 1000 and correlations between the factors on the
off-diagonal elements. The zero entries in the λ1 matrix result from the companion form Φ taking the form
of equation (6) under both the risk neutral and the real measure. The sample period is June 1952 to December
2007 and the data frequency is quarterly.




                                                      42
                          Table 5: Yield Curve Variance Decompositions

                                n=1       n=4       n=8       n = 12    n = 16     n = 20

                     g          -0.083    -0.132    -0.152     -0.150    -0.140     -0.127
                     π           0.603     0.493     0.388      0.307     0.241      0.191
                     a           0.059     0.116     0.026     -0.089    -0.182     -0.249
                     b           0.170     0.254     0.275      0.247     0.213      0.191
                     g and a    -0.083    -0.046    -0.137     -0.241    -0.320     -0.373
                     π and b     0.913     0.865     0.734      0.590     0.471      0.389


The table reports variance decompositions of yields implied by the benchmark model. The variance decom-
positions are produced by computing
                                                   varθ (ytn )
                                              1−
                                                    var(ytn )
where varθ (ytn ) is the variance of the n-quarter yield implied by the model through the sample computed by
setting the time-varying factor θ equal to its posterior mean and var(ytn ) is the full model-implied variance of
the n-quarter yield through the sample.




                                                      43
                         Figure 1: Output Gap, Inflation, and the Short Rate

                                                    Output Gap
 10

  5

  0

−5

−10
      1955      1960      1965      1970     1975      1980       1985     1990      1995     2000      2005

                                                      Inflation
 12

  9

  6

  3

  0
      1955      1960      1965      1970     1975      1980       1985     1990      1995     2000      2005

                                                    Short Rate
 20

 15

 10

  5

  0
      1955      1960      1965      1970     1975      1980       1985     1990      1995     2000      2005

 We plot the output gap, inflation, and the short rate. The output gap is defined as the proportional difference
 between actual and potential real GDP. Inflation is the year-on-year GDP deflator. The short rate is the three-
 month T-bill yield. We overlay the NBER recession periods in shaded bars. The sample period is from June
 1952 to December 2007 and the data frequency is quarterly. All data is in annualized percentage terms.




                                                      44
                                Figure 2: Components of the Short Rate

                                         Short Rate: Actual vs. Fitted
15
            Actual
                                                                         Correlation = 0.976
            Fitted
10


 5


 0


     1955      1960      1965     1970      1975      1980      1985      1990     1995      2000      2005


                                           Short Rate Components
15
            atgt
            btπt
10


 5


 0


     1955      1960      1965     1970      1975      1980      1985      1990     1995      2000      2005

 The top panel plots the short rate together with the fitted components from the benchmark model, δ0 + at gt +
 bt πt , where the policy factors at and bt are evaluated at their posterior means at each observation from the
 Gibbs sampler. All variables are in annualized units. The bottom panel plots each short rate component
 separately. The sample period is from June 1952 to December 2007 and the data frequency is quarterly.




                                                      45
                              Figure 3: Time-Varying Policy Coefficients

                                             Output Gap Loading
 3

2.5

 2

1.5

 1

0.5

 0
      1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
                           Inflation Loading
 3

2.5

 2

1.5

 1

0.5

 0
      1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
 We plot the posterior mean of the time-varying loadings at and bt in the thick lines together with two posterior
 standard deviation bands in thin lines from the benchmark model. We overlay the NBER recession periods
 in shaded bars. The sample period is from June 1952 to December 2007 and the data frequency is quarterly.




                                                       46
                       Figure 4: Yield Curve Impulse Responses to Factor Shocks

             g→r                            π→r                          a→r                          b→r
 1.5                            1.5                            2                            2

  1                              1                           1.5                          1.5

 0.5                            0.5                            1                            1

  0                              0                           0.5                          0.5

−0.5                           −0.5                            0                            0
       0   20     40      60          0   20    40     60          0   20     40     60         0   20      40     60

            g → y20                        π → y20                      a → y20                      b → y20
  1                              1                             1                            4

                                                                                            3
 0.5                            0.5                          0.5
                                                                                            2
  0                              0                             0
                                                                                            1

−0.5                           −0.5                         −0.5                            0
       0   20     40      60          0   20    40     60          0   20     40     60         0   20      40     60

           g → y20− r                     π → y20− r                   a → y20− r                   b → y20− r
 0.2                            0.5                            0                            2

  0                                                                                       1.5
                                 0
−0.2                                                        −0.5                            1
                               −0.5
−0.4                                                                                      0.5

−0.6                            −1                            −1                            0
       0   20     40      60          0   20    40     60          0   20     40     60         0   20      40     60

 We plot the impulse responses of the short rate, rt , the 20-quarter yield, yt20 , and the yield spread, yt20 − rt ,
 to an unconditional one-standard deviation shock in the output gap and inflation (gt and πt respectively) in
 the first two columns and an unconditional one-standard deviation shock to at and bt in the last two columns.
 We compute impulse responses following the method in Appendix D. Units on the x-axis are in quarters and
 the responses of yields on the y-axis are annualized and in percentages.




                                                         47
                        Figure 5: Term Structure Responses to Factor Shocks

                    a → yn at t=0                                                 b → yn at t=0
3.5                                                          3.5
2.8                                                          2.8
2.1                                                          2.1
1.4                                                          1.4
0.7                                                          0.7
  0                                                            0
      1   4         8         12       16        20                1    4         8         12       16        20
                          n                                                             n
                   a → y at t=10                                                  b → y at t=10
3.5                                                          3.5
2.8                                                          2.8
2.1                                                          2.1
1.4                                                          1.4
0.7                                                          0.7
  0                                                            0
      1   4         8         12       16        20                1    4         8         12       16        20
                          n                                                             n
                   a → y at t=20                                                  b → y at t=20
3.5                                                          3.5
2.8                                                          2.8
2.1                                                          2.1
1.4                                                          1.4
0.7                                                          0.7
  0                                                            0
      1   4         8         12       16        20                1    4         8         12       16        20
                          n                                                             n
                   a → y at t=30                                                  b → y at t=30
3.5                                                          3.5
2.8                                                          2.8
2.1                                                          2.1
1.4                                                          1.4
0.7                                                          0.7
  0                                                            0
      1   4         8         12       16        20                1    4         8         12       16        20

  We plot the impulse responses of an unconditional one-standard deviation shock in the output gap (left col-
  umn) and inflation (right column) on the term structure of yields, ytn . We compute impulse responses follow-
  ing the method in Appendix D. Yield maturities in quarters, n, are on the x-axis and the responses of yields
  on the y-axis are annualized and in percentages. The initial shock occurs at t = 0 and the expected yield
  curve is plotted at various t in quarters after the initial shock in rows. The x-axis is marked as a horizontal
  dotted line.




                                                       48
                        Figure 6: Risk Premia Responses to Factor Shocks

                               n                                                            n
                   g → E [xhpr    ]                                            π → E [xhpr     ]
                          t    t+1                                                    t     t+1
 0.5                                                          1

  0
                                                              0

−0.5
                                                             −1
 −1

                                                             −2
−1.5

 −2                                                          −3
       0          20             40             60                0           20             40             60


                   a → Et[xhprnt+1]                                            b → Et[xhprnt+1]
 0.4                                                          8


 0.2                                                          6


  0                                                           4


−0.2                                                          2


−0.4                                                          0
       0          20             40             60                0           20             40             60

 We plot the impulse responses of an unconditional one-standard deviation shock to the output gap, inflation,
 the inflation loading, and the output gap loading (clockwise from the top-left panel) to the expected excess
                                 n
 holding period return, Et [xhprt+1 ], of the n = 4-quarter bond in the solid line and the n = 20-quarter bond
 in the dashed line. The conditional risk premia are evaluated at the model’s implied unconditional mean.
 Units on the x-axis are in quarters and the responses of risk premia on the y-axis are annualized and in
 percentages.




                                                     49
                       Figure 7: The Price of Risk of Monetary Policy Shifts

                        a shock                                                        a shock
                                                               0.7
 0.8
                                                               0.6
 0.6
                                                               0.5

 0.4
                                                               0.4

 0.2                                                           0.3

  0                                                            0.2
              0.2        0.4               0.6                             0.5          1       1.5          2
                Output Gap Loading                                                Inflation Loading

                        b shock                                                        b shock
0.45                                                           0.7
                                                               0.6
 0.4
                                                               0.5
0.35                                                           0.4
                                                               0.3
 0.3
                                                               0.2

0.25                                                           0.1
                                                                 0
 0.2
              0.2        0.4               0.6                             0.5          1       1.5          2
                Output Gap Loading                                                Inflation Loading

 The figure plots the price of a unit shock to at (first row) and a unit shock to bt (second row) as a function
 of the output gap loading at or inflation loading bt . We denote with vertical lines the steady-state value of
 ā = 0.372 and b̄ = 1.154. When altering at and bt , we set all other factors equal to their expected conditional
 values given the value of at or bt . We plot plus and minus two unconditional standard deviations of at and bt
 on the x-axis.




                                                       50
                                        Figure 8: The Post-2001 Episode

                                                      Short Rate
8


6


4


2


0
2001             2002            2003            2004            2005            2006            2007           2008


                                                5−year Bond Spread

4


2


0

2001             2002            2003           2004           2005          2006                2007           2008
                                          Actual           a and b at 2000 average
                                                            t       t

    The figure plots the short rate (top panel) and the 5-year term spread (bottom panel), which is the 5-year yield
    minus the 3-month T-bill, from the results of a counter-factual experiment. We hold the Fed weight on the
    output gap and inflation constant at its average level over 2000 and allow all other factors to take their sample
    values. The figure plots the effect on the yield curve post-2001 in the dashed lines along with the actual paths
    of the yield curve in the solid lines. Units on the y-axis are annualized and in percentages.




                                                          51
