                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE GREATEST PHOTOGRAPHERS OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

                                         David Galenson

                                       Working Paper 15278
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15278


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2009




¸ The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
 the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by David Galenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Greatest Photographers of the Twentieth Century
David Galenson
NBER Working Paper No. 15278
August 2009
JEL No. Z1,Z11

                                              ABSTRACT

A survey of textbooks reveals that scholars consider Alfred Stieglitz to have been the greatest photographer
of the twentieth century, followed in order by Walker Evans, Cindy Sherman, Man Ray, and Eugène
Atget. Stieglitz, Evans, and Atget were experimental artists, who were committed to realism, whereas
Man Ray and Sherman were conceptual innovators, who constructed images to express ideas. During
much of the twentieth century, photography was dominated by the experimental approach and aesthetic
of Stieglitz and his followers, but late in the century this changed; as photography grew increasingly
central to advanced art in general, it came to be dominated by conceptual innovators. Sherman’s celebrated
creation of artificial scenes is characteristic of the almost exclusively conceptual uses that today’s
advanced artists make of its techniques and images, as technical and aesthetic considerations are generally
subordinated to conceptual concerns.


David Galenson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
galenson@uchicago.edu
                                                 3
Introduction

       In 1960, the critic Siegfried Kracauer began his Theory of Film with a historical analysis

of photography. He observed that:

          Throughout the history of photography there is on the one side a tendency
          toward realism culminating in records of nature, and on the other a
          formative tendency aiming at artistic creations. Often enough, formative
          aspirations clash with the desire to render reality, overwhelming it in the
          process. Photography, then, is the arena of two tendencies which may well
          conflict with each other. 1

Kracauer explained that realists “enhance the camera’s recording and revealing abilities and,

accordingly, consider it their task as photographers to make the ‘best statement of facts.’” These

photographers favor motifs drawn from “unstaged reality,” of which their works become records.

In contrast, formative photographers “work the given raw material into creations of an

expressive rather than reproductive order,” and to this end “they use, and often combine, various

artifices and techniques – among them negatives, photograms, multiple exposure, solarization,

reticulation, etc. – in order to mount pictures which are palpably designed to externalize…‘our

subjective experiences, our personal visions, and the dynamics of our imagination.’” 2

       The division Kracauer referred to is effectively the same one I have identified in a

number of other arts. 3 The photographers he considers realists are experimental innovators, who

have aesthetic goals, whereas formative photographers are conceptual artists, who use their work

to express ideas and emotions. Earlier research has demonstrated that experimental and

conceptual innovators tend to make their greatest contributions at very different stages of their

life cycles. The present study will extend the measurement of creative life cycles to the most

important photographers of the twentieth century.
                                                  4
Ranking Photographers

       Identifying the greatest photographers of the past century can be done with the same

method as for painters, using textbooks that survey the history of photography. The first step was

to select all the photographers who worked in the past century and whose work was illustrated a

total of four or more times in five leading textbooks. 4 There were 20 photographers in this group.

The second step was then to count the total illustrations of the photographs of each of these

artists in all available textbooks, published in 2000 or later, that surveyed the history of

photography throughout the past century. 5 Table 1 ranks the 16 artists whose photographs were

most often reproduced in these books.

       Table 1 demonstrates clearly that historians of photography consider Alfred Stieglitz to

have been the greatest photographer of the twentieth century: the books surveyed contain nearly

40% more illustrations of his photographs than of any other photographer. Stieglitz is followed

in the rankings by a group of very diverse photographers, who are only narrowly separated from

each other in total illustrations. This paper will consider each of the five highest-ranked

photographers in Table 1, in chronological order. For each, we will examine their goals, the

nature of their achievement, and the timing of their greatest contribution.

Eugène Atget (1856-1927)

          I might say that I possess all of Old Paris.
                                                    Eugène Atget, 1920 6

       In 1926, 70-year-old Eugène Atget sold one of his photographs to a group of younger

artists, who intended to put it on the cover of their magazine, La Révolution surréaliste. After

they had agreed on the price, Atget startled the younger men by telling them not to put his name

in their publication. By way of explanation, he remarked that “These are simply documents that I
                                               5
       7
make.” For most of his life, Atget had had no contact with advanced art or artists. As his

comment to the Surrealists implied, he did not consider himself an artist, and he was not part of

Paris’ art world. Most of the details of his life are consequently as obscure as those of most small

tradesmen of his time: John Szarkowski remarked that “It is difficult to name an important artist

of the modern period whose life and intention have been so perfectly withheld from us as those

of Eugène Atget.”8

       After a failed career as an actor, Atget began to make photographs by the age of 32, and

around 1890 he set up a studio in Paris. His initial intention was to sell landscape photographs to

painters, who could use them to save the trouble of seeking subjects in the countryside. Yet by

1900 he had begun to specialize in views of Paris’ historic districts – his calling card described

him as “Creator and Purveyor of a ‘Collection of Photographic Views of Old Paris’” – and his

principal clients were historical libraries and museums, which bought large numbers of his prints

of Paris’ houses, churches, shops, and street life.

       Few statements by Atget about his work survive, but these few are consistent with the

belief that his primary concern was for his subject matter. In a letter of 1912 he wrote to a

curator of the Bibliothèque Historique de la Ville de Paris that his photographs were “made more

for the love of Old Paris than for profit,” and in 1920 he wrote to the Minster of Fine Arts that

“Single-handedly and of my personal initiative I have made…a collection of artistic

documents.”9 Atget spent much of his life recording the old buildings and streets of Paris that

were being replaced by modern construction. Although his photographs of Paris numbered in the

thousands, he was not comprehensive in his approach: so for example he never photographed

such recent landmarks as the Arc de Triomphe (built in 1836), the Opera Garnier (1873), or the

Eiffel Tower (1889).10 He was not interested in the new elegance of Haussmann’s Paris, but in
                                                       6
                                              11
the dark and sooty corners of the old city.        His work was physically demanding, as his old

bellows camera, with its glass plates, and a wooden tripod, weighed more than forty pounds

(Man Ray offered to lend him a little Rolleiflex, but Atget refused, fearing – despite Man Ray’s

explanation – that the new camera would go “too fast”). Atget travelled Paris by bus and metro,

carefully writing in a notebook the name of the subway station nearest each of his clients. 12

       Although Atget’s objectivity and lack of affectation led some to characterize his work as

“styleless,” others have argued that the clarity of his work actually concealed subtle artistic

devices. So for example Geoff Dyer argued that Atget reinforced the message of his images of

ancient subjects by effectively making the passage of time itself a subject of his photographs:

“Atget’s steps rise out of or take us down into the past. Alleys become conduits for the narrow

passage of time. Doorways afford glimpses of almost forgotten memories.” Dyer contended that

it was not only Atget’s choices of motifs, but his composition, that made time a visual factor: “A

key element in Atget’s temporal geometry was the receding vista: a street or alley stretching or

curving its way into the past.”13 Atget preferred to work early in the morning, and his

photographs typically include few pedestrians or vehicles. The old buildings and streets look

deserted, giving many of the images a feeling of silence and timelessness. Atget frequently

returned to earlier motifs, perhaps to replace plates he had sold. But John Szarkowski noted that

when he did this he never appeared to have tried to duplicate his earlier picture, as each time a

new viewpoint created a new composition. 14

       Until late in his life, Atget’s work was not known by other photographers. Their

discovery of him came by chance, as a result of the coincidence that in 1922 Man Ray rented a

studio on Paris’ rue Campagne–Première, next door to Atget’s apartment. Man Ray began

buying Atget’s photographs and praising him to his friends, and soon his work was owned by
                                             7
                                    15
such artists as Picasso and Braque. Most important, however, were the efforts of the American

photographer Berenice Abbott, who was working as Man Ray’s assistant in 1925 when she first

saw Atget’s photographs. She immediately responded to them, as she later wrote that “There was

a sudden flash of recognition – the shock of realism unadorned. The real world, seen with

wonderment and surprise, was mirrored in each print.”16 Abbott took the only known portraits of

Atget in the two years of his life that remained, and for decades after his death she worked

tirelessly to have his photgraphs preserved and exhibited in museums. 17

       The conceptual Man Ray dismissed Atget as a “primitive,” but Abbott was the first of a

number of important experimental photographers who were deeply influenced by both the style

and subject matter of Atget’s art. Thus John Szarkowski observed that whereas Abbott was a

studio photographer before she saw Atget’s work, after seeing his photographs she devoted most

of her efforts of the next two decades to documenting the architecture, street life, and commerce

of New York, as Atget had done for Paris. 18 In a review of a book of Atget’s photographs in

1930, Walker Evans wrote that Atget’s “general note is lyrical understanding of the street,

trained observation of it, special feeling for patina, eye for revealing detail, over all of which is

thrown a poetry,” and more than four decades later, in a lecture given just two days before his

own death, Evans admitted that “I don’t like to look at too much of Atget’s work because I am

too close to that in style myself…It’s a little residue of insecurity and fear of such magnificent

strength and style.” 19 Szarkowski called Evans “Atget’s greatest student,” and observed that “It

seems now that Evans worked his way through Atget’s whole iconographical catalogue, save

only the parks. Evans did the bedrooms and kitchens, the boutiques, the signs, the wheeled

vehicles, the street trades, and the ruins of high ambition.” 20 In another review of the 1930 Atget

book, Ansel Adams wrote that Atget’s work “is a simple revelation of the simplest aspects of his
                                             8
environment. There is no superimposed symbolic motive, no tortured application of design, no

intellectual ax to grind. The Atget prints are direct and emotionally clean records of a rare and

subtle perception, and represent perhaps the earliest expression of true photographic art.” 21 And

when Edward Weston saw the same book, he recorded in his journal that “What I admire most is

the man’s simple honesty. He has no bag of tricks.” 22

        Atget’s humility and persistence, in the service of his goal of recording an external reality,

make him a classic example of an experimental artist. He produced no single famous photograph,

but over the course of decades made thousands of images that together recreate the visual past of

a great city.

Alfred Stieglitz (1864-1946)

             Photography is my passion. The search for Truth my obsession.
                                                   Alfred Stieglitz, 192123

        Alfred Stieglitz fell in love with photography while studying chemistry as a college

student: “The camera was waiting for me by predestination, and I took to it as a musician takes

to the piano or a painter to the canvas.” 24 When he first became a photographer, his interests

were largely technical, as he wrote about his experiments with new developing solutions and

printing techniques, but in time he came to be concerned almost exclusively with artistic issues.

He was by nature a crusader, and one of his lifelong campaigns was to have photography

accepted as an independent art. Thus he contended that “If a photographer has the aesthetic

perception…he can get the spirit of it through the camera as well as the painter can through

paint.” 25

        For Stieglitz, the key to artistic photography was visual. In 1917, he declared that “the

most difficult problem in photography is to learn to see.” 26 In an early article on the new small
                                              9
hand cameras, he urged patience: “choose your subject…and carefully study the lines and

lighting. After having determined upon these watch the passing figures and await the moment in

which everything is in balance; that is, satisfies your eye. This often means hours of patient

waiting.” 27 It was a favorite theme of his that artistic vision was a product of experience:

“Seeing needs practice – just like photography itself.” 28 The critic Lewis Mumford contrasted

Stieglitz’s selectivity with Atget’s inclusive recording: “Stieglitz does not, like his Parisian

contemporary, Atget, range the city from morning to night, deliberately composing a

documentary history of its life, after the fashion of Zola. He not merely observes: he waits, he

eliminates; he selects.” 29

        Stieglitz consistently maintained that “the ability to make a truly artistic photograph is

not acquired offhand, but is the result of an artistic instinct coupled with years of labor.” 30 He

believed that greatness in any art required a combination of innate ability and extended training,

and could not be reduced to a system: “No formula can be drawn up for…an understanding of

what constitutes good composition. To a natural taste must be added a careful and understanding

study of the best accepted work of all forms of art, old and new.” 31 His description of his most

celebrated photograph, The Steerage of 1907, which portrayed passengers on the lower deck of a

ship bound for Europe, stressed the importance of formal composition:

           A round straw hat, the funnel leaning left, the stairway leaning right, the
           white draw-bridge with its railings made of circular chains – white
           suspenders crossing on the back of a man in the steerage below, round
           shapes of iron machinery, a mast cutting into the sky, making a triangular
           shape. I stood spellbound for a while, looking and looking...I saw shapes
           related to each other. I saw a picture of shapes and underlying that the
           feeling I had about life. 32

Visual recording preceded interpretation: “I am interested in putting down an image only of what

I have seen, not what it means to me. It is only after I have put down an equivalent of what has
                                               10
moved me, that I can even begin to think about its meaning.”33

       Stieglitz’s belief that great art required knowledge led him to return to familar motifs –

Georgia O’Keeffe recalled that “I never knew him to make a trip anywhere to photograph. His

eye was in him, and he used it on anything that was nearby.” 34 Stieglitz’s natural tendency was

to work in series, that would effectively produce a composite image. Thus Peter Bunnell noted

that Stieglitz used “what might be called a progressive or process approach, in which he did not

photograph individual, tightly packed views but rather stimulating fragments as he moved

through a region seeking suitable subjects…His approach to photography was as a sort of outing

or hunt, in which similar motifs were photographed repeatedly.”35 One of his most famous series

was his portrayal of O’Keeffe. Between 1917 and 1937, Stieglitz made nearly 500 prints of

O’Keeffe’s face and body that constitute not only one of the most remarkable composite portraits

ever made of an individual, but also one of the most significant serial works ever made by a

modern artist. 36 O’Keeffe explained that Stieglitz’s “idea of a portrait was not just one picture.

His dream was to start with a child at birth and photograph that child in all its activities as it

grew to be a person and on throughout its adult life.” 37 O’Keeffe reflected that Stieglitz’s

portraits of her had increased her knowledge of herself: “I can see myself, and it has helped me

to say what I want to say – in paint.” 38

       Stieglitz’s experimental concern with process equally led him to be more interested in

works of art as evidence of personal development than as independent products. So for example

he wrote in 1910 that “As far as exhibitions are concerned, to me they are only of any meaning

whatever if they are a public demonstration of a positive advance in or a summing up of the

really genuine work that has been done in any field.” 39

       Stieglitz’s style changed over time, but his commitment to a visual goal remained
                                               11
constant. Thus in 1892, at 28, he wrote that “My sole aim in making pictures is to reproduce

what I see,” and more than 30 years later, at 60, he complained, “Could I but photograph what I

see!” Whatever the motif, he considered all his work to represent his “vision of life.” 40 Visual art

was not equivalent to language: “if the artist could explain in words what he has made, he would

not have had to create it.” 41 Yet in true experimental fashion, he did not make a fetish of

consistency: “Asked to explain either his own photographs or art created by others, Stieglitz

referred, with delight, to the Chinese saying that a single picture equals a thousand words,

although he would at times employ some two thousand words to tell why the observation so

pleased him.” 42

       Stieglitz was not modest in his claims for photography. He wanted to raise the ethical

standards of the world by using the aesthetic influence of art in general, and of photography in

particular. Thus in 1908 he told a journalist that “We are looking for the ultimate truth, for the

human being who is so simple in every way that he can look at things objectively, with a purely

analytical point of view. We are striving for freedom of experience and justice in the fullest

sense of the word…[W]e believe that if only people are taught to appreciate the beautiful side of

their daily existence, to be aware of all the beauty which constantly surrounds them, they must

gradually approach this ideal…And we believe the camera is one of the most effective means of

teaching people to distinguish between what is beautiful and what is not.” 43 Stieglitz’s messianic

agenda attracted a considerable following of devoted admirers. In 1927, for example, the

journalist Waldo Frank declared that “Such a photographer as Stieglitz has never been. If you

say Shakespeare is the greatest dramatist who ever lived, someone may dispute you by

mentioning Aeschylus or Sophocles or even the French Racine. But if you say Alfred Stieglitz is

the greatest photographer who ever lived, you’re on sure ground.” 44
                                               12
       Lofty goals notwithstanding, Stieglitz never wavered in his experimental belief in the

importance of hard-won experience: “Everything worthwhile means continuous struggle and

concentration of effort – even in photography.” 45 In a statement written for a major exhibition of

his photographs in 1921, he declared that “My teachers have been life – work – continuous

experiment.” 46

Man Ray (1890-1976)

               I want to be contradictory and irrational.
                                                    Man Ray, 1966 47

       Man Ray’s first love was painting, but as a young artist in New York he began to

photograph his canvases to document them. He quickly became expert at the techniques of

photography, and this ultimately led to his most celebrated contributions as an artist, as he

became not only a great portrait photographer, but also the most important technical

photographic innovator of his time. His innovations stretched the boundaries of photography by

violating traditional practices, with the classic rationale of the conceptual artist:

           Whenever I deviated from orthodox practice it was simply because the
           subject demanded a new approach; I applied or invented techniques for
           emphasis of the points that seemed important. Only superficial critics could
           accuse me of trickiness…Many so-called tricks of today become the truths
           of tomorrow. 48

       One of the key influences on Man Ray was the great conceptual artist Marcel Duchamp.

The two met in New York in 1915, and quickly became close friends. Their friendship lasted

more than 50 years, until Duchamp’s death in 1968, and involved formal collaborations as well

as a continuing informal exchange of ideas. So for example in 1920 Man Ray made a celebrated

photograph of Duchamp’s Large Glass, which was signed by both artists and titled Elevage de

poussière (Dust Breeding). 49
                                             13
       When Man Ray first went to Paris in 1921, Duchamp met him at the Gare Saint–Lazare,

and immediately introduced him to the Dadas, who welcomed him to their group. 50 Within a few

months Man Ray made an innovation that was hailed by the Dadas and the Surrealists as a

breakthrough. In New York, Man Ray had already made “aerographs” – paintings without a

brush, using an airbrush and stencils – and he had found it “thrilling to paint a picture, hardly

touching the surface – a purely cerebral act, as it were.” 51 Now a chance discovery in the

darkroom led him to make photographs without a camera, by direct exposure of objects on

photosensitive paper. This was technically not a new process, for photograms had earlier been

made in this way, but Man Ray obtained novel visual effects by moving the light source and

shifting the objects, to add an illusion of depth and achieve greater variability of tone, and in

honor of this he named the products “Rayographs.” 52 Delighted with the ability of the

Rayograph to distort and manipulate forms, the Dada poet Tristan Tzara applauded the new

technique, declaring that Man Ray had “invented the force of a tender and fresh flash which

exceeded in importance all the constellations destined for our visual pleasures.” 53 The Surrealists

greeted Rayographs as the visual equivalent of automatic writing, for their ability to eliminate

conscious control of images, and the poet André Breton declared that Man Ray had succeeded in

making photography a Surrealist tool: “far from entrusting himself to photography’s avowed

aims and making use, after the event, of the common ground of representation that it proposed,

Man Ray has applied himself vigorously to the task of stripping it of its positive nature, of

forcing it to abandon its arrogant air and pretentious claims.” 54 In less elliptical language, John

Szarkowski explained that with Rayographs “The final image was never precisely predictable:

unexpected gradations in tone created imaginary vistas that were surprising and delightful. For

Man Ray, to whom art was a sublime kind of play, the technique was perfect.” 55
                                            14
       After inventing the Rayograph, Man Ray wrote audaciously to a patron that “I have

finally freed myself from the sticky medium of paint, and am working directly with light itself. I

have found a way of recording it. The subjects were never so near to life itself as in my new

work.”56 Portrait photography provided him with both financial support and celebrity, as Man

Ray became the chief visual chronicler of Paris’ remarkable artistic and literary society of the

1920s. In fact, however, he never fully abandoned painting. In his memoir, Man Ray complained

that he was always annoyed when he was asked if he had given up either painting or

photography: “There was no conflict between the two – why couldn’t people accept the idea that

one might engage in two activities in his lifetime, alternately or simultaneously?” 57 The basis for

the choice was conceptual: “To express what I feel, I use the medium that is best suited to

express that idea.” 58 Critics were equally confused by his frequent changes of style, but Man Ray

echoed his friend Duchamp, explaining that “I have no style. I am afraid of being bored.” 59

       Man Ray’s art has been an important influence on a number of conceptual artists who

have emerged since the 1960s. So for example it was a visit to a 1966 retrospective of Man

Ray’s work that prompted Bruce Nauman to begin to make photographs, and one result was

Nauman’s 1967 photograph, Self-Portrait as a Fountain, a tribute to Marcel Duchamp that has

become one of Nauman’s most celebrated works. 60 Nauman has also cited that exhibition as the

inspiration for his distinctive practice of consciously rejecting the development of a consistent

style: “Man Ray seemed to avoid the idea that every piece had to take on a historical meaning.

What I liked was that there appeared to be no consistency to his thinking, no one style.” 61

       The poet Jean Cocteau called Man Ray “the poet of the darkroom.” 62 Duchamp observed

of his old friend that “it was his achievement to treat the camera as he treated the paint brush, a

mere instrument at the service of the mind.” 63 Man Ray changed photography by bringing to it a
                                                 15
highly conceptual sensibility, and a desire to expand its possibilities. Late in his life, he

summarized his conceptual disregard for artistic conventions by musing that “Perhaps the final

goal desired by the artist is a confusion or merging of all the arts.” 64

Walker Evans (1903-1975)

                It is reality that photography reaches toward.
                                                     Walker Evans, 1969 65

        As a young photographer, Walker Evans rebelled against the attitudes and aesthetic of the

dominant figure in American photography, Alfred Stieglitz. As Evans later wrote of Stieglitz,

“He was undoubtedly the most insistently ‘artistic’ practitioner of all time; with the adverse

effect that it was he who forced ‘art’ into quotation marks and into unwonted earnestness. On the

other hand, Stieglitz’s overstated, self conscious aestheticism engendered a healthy reaction. We

got a school of anti-art photography out of his protestations.” The school in question was of

course that of Evans himself, as he explained that “Stieglitz’s veritably screaming aestheticism,

his personal artiness, veered many young artists to the straight documentary style.” 66 Stieglitz

and his followers, who included Edward Steichen, Edward Weston, and Paul Strand, privileged

the pursuit of beauty, avoiding subjects involving industry and commerce in favor of nature and

idealized settings. Evans replaced this aesthetic with a direct approach that embraced the realities

of the modern world, choosing deliberately ordinary subjects – automobiles, gas stations,

billboards, pedestrians – in order to record the real world of daily life. 67 The critic Andy

Grundberg described Evans as a “connoisseur of the commonplace, both in his choice of what to

photograph and in how he photographed things,” noting that “He avoided anything with

romantic associations, anything that smacked of sentimentality, and anything tinged with syrupy

artiness.”68 John Szarkowski observed that “Evans’s work seemed at first almost the antithesis of
                                                 16
art: It was puritanically economical, precisely measured, frontal, unemotional, dryly textured,

insistently factual, qualities that seemed more appropriate to a bookkeeper’s ledger than to art.”69

       Evans’ achievement lay in his ability to dignify the mundane, and make it appear timeless.

Robert Hirsch observed that Evans’ “deceptively transparent approach – that this is exactly what

the viewer would have been drawn to had he been there himself – uncovers the essence of a

place and allows the unexpected beauty of the everyday to reveal itself…Evans’ self-effacing

style made the relevance of the ordinary understandable. Evans could ordain a moment from the

present as if it was the past.” 70

        A key event in Evans’ development came in 1929, when he first saw photographs by

Atget that Berenice Abbott had brought back from Paris. Evans later recalled that when he first

discovered Atget’s work he was “quite electrified and alarmed;” Evans’ biographer explained

that “There was a shock of recognition. In Atget, it seemed, all of [Evans’] latent instincts were

combined: a straight cataloguing method imbued with an inscrutable melancholy, a long look at

neglected objects, and an unerring eye for the signs of popular culture transition.” 71 In time,

Evans would label his own style “lyric documentary,” to refer to the combination of his

subjective perceptions with the objective recording of fact, and he paid tribute to Atget as the

“supreme lyric documentary photographer.” 72

        Evans had no interest in photographing nature: “I am fascinated by man’s work and the

civilization that he’s built. In fact, I think that’s the interesting thing in the world, what man

makes.” 73 His work was based on instinct: “I used to analyze it, to try to figure out just exactly

what I was doing all the time and that inhibited me, terribly, until I found out that I didn’t need to

go through all that at all. My work is like making love, if you’ll forgive me. It has to spring from

the moment, from what I feel at the moment.” 74 The best photography was visual and instinctive:
                                              17
“The meaning of quality in photography’s best pictures lies written in the language of vision.

That language is learned by chance, not by system.” 75 Experience was the best teacher: “You

learn as you go and do. It is a little slow, but I think that’s the way to work.” 76

        In an analysis of Evans’ work, Peter Galassi wrote of the cumulative importance of

comparison, “a sense that the full power of the art resides not in individual pictures, no matter

how fine, but in an open-ended accumulation that progressively defines both a subject and the

way of looking at it. This definition of photography’s potential challenges the photographer to

develop a consistent outlook through a sum of discrete observations, constantly susceptible to

revision; and it challenges the viewer to discover that outlook by assessing the ways in which the

photographs confirm, question, or otherwise inflect each other.” 77 This principle, which Galassi

considered “fundamental to [Evans’] art as a whole,” is quintessentially experimental, as is

Evans’ emphasis on the primacy of vision and instinct.

        Yet the profile of Evans’ career was not typical of an experimental artist. The textbooks

reveal that his best work was not made over an extended period, nor was it made late in his life:

18 of the 23 total illustrations of his work, or nearly 80%, were of photographs he made in the

two-year span of 1935-36, when he was in his early 30s. These were the years when Evans

worked for the New Deal’s Resettlement Administration, making photographs intended to

illustrate the hardships suffered by tenant farmers during the Depression. In the summer of 1936

Evans travelled to the Deep South with the writer James Agee, with the goal of finding a single

sharecropper family to provide the personal story and images that could stand for the difficulties

of all Southern tenant farmers. They found this in Hale County, Alabama, as Floyd and Allie

Mae Burroughs and their extended family became the central figures in what eventually became

the book Let Us Now Praise Famous Men, coauthored by Agee and Evans. When this was
                                                18
published in 1941, Lionel Trilling declared that it was “the most realistic and the most important

moral effort of our American generation.” 78

       The collaboration with Agee may have added a key dimension to Evans’ art. Agee was

considerably more aggressive and extroverted than the reserved Evans. James Mellow wrote that

“It is part of the legend that grew up around this book that Evans like Agee had stayed with the

[Burroughs] family. But the likelihood is probably that the fastidious Evans may have had a few

meals with the Burroughses but stayed at more restful vermin-free quarters in a nearby hotel.” 79

Yet Agee and Evans were close friends, and clearly worked closely together in Alabama, as

Mellow observed that “what is apparent is that the dialogue between the photographs and Agee’s

text was far more collaborative and persistent than has been recognized, even down to the

scattering of flies on the white sheeting on the bedsteads in the rear bedroom which Floyd and

Allie Mae shared.” 80

       Agee immersed himself in his work – Evans later recalled that he “worked in what

looked like a rush and a rage. In Alabama he was possessed with the business, jamming it all into

the days and nights…He was driven to see all he could of the families’ day.” 81 Agee’s intensity

and charm won over the farmers, as Evans reflected that “it was really largely because they liked

Agee who had a great gift of making people not only like him but love him. They only had to

listen to him a little bit and they took him in. I just sort of followed his lead that way.” 82 Evans’

biographer noted that “Agee began his brief but extraordinary episode as a member of the

Burroughs family, and it was not long before he persuaded Evans to join him there.” 83 The force

of Agee’s personality thus appears not only to have broken down the barriers between him and

his subject, but to have done the same for the more reserved Evans. As Evans himself later

explained, Agee was less restrained in his approach to his art: “I had a much more objective
                                               19
approach to artistic raw material. [Agee] was very subjective. He used to shock me. I have

inhibitions about exposing the personal ego and feelings, and he seems to think that is the

material and that that is one of the functions of an artist – exposing obscure and hidden parts of

the mind.” 84 Agee’s influence is reflected in Evans’ Alabama photographs, as his images of the

family and their home are more intimate than his typical portraits. Agee’s charismatic presence

thus appears to have prompted Evans to overcome the usual distance – psychological as well as

physical – that he placed between himself and his subjects, and in so doing to have added a

greater empathy and power to his characteristically honest photographs. This extraordinary

circumstance may explain why Evans produced his greatest work at the surprisingly early age of

33. In one respect, however, Evans’ work of 1936 retained the mark of his experimental

approach, for no single image from Alabama emerged as emblematic: the 14 images reproduced

by the textbooks from that peak year represent 13 different photographs.

Cindy Sherman (1954-      )

               [T]he one thing I’ve always known is that the camera lies.
                                                Cindy Sherman, 1987 85

       As a child, Cindy Sherman loved to play dress-up, using old clothes she had inherited

from her grandmother.86 She also loved to draw, and she practiced by studying her own face.87

Art was her favorite subject in school, and when she went to college at Buffalo she intended to

become a painter. The BFA curriculum required a photography course, and the first time

Sherman took it she failed, because she “just couldn’t grasp the technical aspects of it: the

exposure, and the aperture, and all that.”88 When she repeated the course, however, she had a

different teacher, who was aware of recent trends in Conceptual art: Sherman recalled that this

teacher “felt that to have an idea was what mattered, and right away that made so much more
                                                  20
                89
sense to me.”        Sherman had become frustrated with painting – “I couldn’t do it anymore, it was

ridiculous, there was nothing more to say…and then I realized that I could just use a camera and

put my time into an idea instead.” 90

       In 1977, the year after she graduated from college, Sherman began to make the series of

69 photographs, collectively called the Untitled Film Stills, that have been recognized as “one of

the landmarks of late-twentieth-century art.” 91 Each photograph portrayed Sherman, alone,

wearing a different costume and makeup, in settings that appeared to be taken from B-movies of

the 1940s, ‘50s, and ‘60s. Sherman specifically “wanted them to seem cheap and tacky,

something you’d find in a novelty store and buy for a quarter. I didn’t want them to look like

art.”92 She intended them as a comment on “the fakeness of role-playing,” and she was bemused

by their success in the art world: “I’m doing one of the most stupid things in the world…dressing

up like a child and posing in front of a camera…And people seem to fall for it.” 93

       Sherman does not consider herself a photographer, but instead describes herself as an

artist whose medium is photography. 94 She has little concern with the distinctive properties of

photography: “I think of myself as using the camera in the same way as someone could be using

a paint brush although it takes a lot less time.” 95 Lisa Phillips explained that Sherman and

several of her contemporaries “have diverted the official course of the history of photography by

rejecting its most revered conventions: the sacredness of the photographic paper, of the camera,

the perfect exposure, and the immaculate print.” 96 Sherman is not concerned with whether she

takes her own photographs or has someone else snap them, and she has no interest in the

technology of photography. 97

       Sherman’s contribution is conceptual. Calvin Tomkins explained that “She has reclaimed

the oldest trick in the book, storytelling, and given it new life in visual art. An amazing number
                                                21
of younger artists have followed her lead; the galleries are full of what has come to be called

setup photography, in which complex and often highly enigmatic scenarios are plotted,

constructed, and photographed, and much of the newer painting and sculpture on view these days

has a strong narrative content.” 98 As Tomkins suggests, Sherman has transcended photography.

In 1989 Peter Schjeldahl predicted that “she may very well emerge in eventual retrospect as the

single most important American artist of the ‘80s,” and a recent survey of textbooks published

since 2000 revealed that art scholars in fact consider her to have been the most important artist of

any nationality to have worked during the last quarter of the twentieth century. 99

Old Masters and Young Geniuses

       Table 2 uses the evidence of the textbook illustrations to assess when in their careers the

five photographers considered above did their best work. The table shows the photographers’

ages not only in the year from which they had the most illustrations, but also from the years of

their earliest and latest illustrated photographs.

       The experimental Atget and Stieglitz both had their single best year after the age of 40,

and both had photographs reproduced that they made after 65. As noted above, Evans’ single

best year occurred relatively early for a great experimental artist, at age 33, but he did have work

illustrated that he made at 71, just a year before his death.

       The conceptual Man Ray’s best year was at age 34. His latest illustrated work was from

age 46, so he had no photographs reproduced from the last 40 years of his life. Sherman’s best

year was by far the youngest among this group, at age 24: this very early peak puts her in the

company of a small group of very precocious modern artists, including Jasper Johns, whose best

year was at 25, and Frank Stella, whose peak was at 23. And remarkably, like Johns and Stella,

Sherman’s peak was also the earliest age from which any of her work was reproduced, so that
                                                22
her first significant work was also her most important. 100

       The evidence for four of the five photographers considered here is thus consistent with

the generalization that conceptual innovators tend to produce their most important work earlier

in their lives then their experimental counterparts. And leaving aside Sherman, whose career is

not yet complete, the evidence for the other four photographers is consistent with the tendency

for experimental innovators to produce significant work over longer periods, and until later in

their lives, than their conceptual peers.

Conclusion

           The substantial distinction, then, is between treating the external world as a
           given, to be altered only through photographic means (point of view,
           framing, printing, etc.) en route to the final image, or rather as raw material,
           to be itself manipulated as much as desired prior to the exposure of the
           negative.
                                                      A.D. Coleman 101

       This examination of the greatest photographers of the twentieth century clearly supports

Siegfried Kracauer’s claim that photography has been the province of two very different, and

conflicting, tendencies. Eugène Atget, Alfred Stieglitz, and Walker Evans were experimental

artists who were dedicated to realism, and to making viewers of their work perceive the world

around them. In sharp contrast, Man Ray and Cindy Sherman are conceptual artists who have

consistently created artificial settings for their own self-expression.

       In 1977, Susan Sontag effectively described the decline of experimental dominance of

photography and its replacement by a conceptual aesthetic:

           For a brief time – say, from Stieglitz through the reign of Weston – it
           appeared that a solid point of view had been erected with which to evaluate
           photographs: impeccable lighting, skill of composition, clarity of subject,
           precision of focus, perfection of print quality. But this position, generally
           thought of as Westonian – essentially technical criteria for what makes a
           photograph good – is now bankrupt…What position has replaced Weston’s?
                                                  23
           A much more inclusive one…The new position aims to liberate
           photography, as art, from the oppressive standards of technical perfection;
           to liberate photography from beauty, too. It opens up the possibility of a
           global taste, in which no subject (or absence of subject), no technique (or
           absence of technique) disqualifies a subject.102

The same year Sontag’s book was published, Cindy Sherman began making the Untitled Film

Stills, which would quickly make her the most influential photographer of her era. Sherman’s

importance in today’s art world is symptomatic of several key features of the role of photography

in contemporary art. It is clear that photography is enormously important for today’s advanced

art. Whether they actually make photographs, like Sherman, Richard Prince, and Jeff Wall, or

make paintings based on photographs, like Gerhard Richter, Jeff Koons, and Damien Hirst, a

large number of today’s most successful artists base their work on photographic images. But it is

also clear that the use these artists make of photography is almost exclusively conceptual.

Sherman and other leading contemporary artists do not use photographs to portray external

reality, but instead to create artificial images, often carefully constructed by the artist. There are

no fixed standards for what constitutes good photography, for technical and aesthetic

considerations are generally strictly subordinated to conceptual concerns. Man Ray would no

doubt be pleased by this state of affairs, for he believed that photography should be a means of

expressing ideas. Alfred Stieglitz, however, would no doubt be much less pleased with the role

of photography in today’s art world. Stieglitz dreamed of establishing photography as an

independent art, whose core values would be beauty and truth. It is difficult to point to prominent

figures in today’s advanced art world who share this dream.
                                                24
Footnotes

1. Siegfried Kracauer, Theory of Film (New York: Oxford University Press, 1960), pp. 11-12.

2. Kracauer, Theory of Film, p. 8, 10, 19-20.

3. David Galenson, Old Masters and Young Geniuses (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2006).

4. See the appendix for a listing.

5. There were 16 such books. See the appendix for a listing.

6. Molly Nesbit, Atget’s Seven Albums (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992), p.219.

7. John Szarkowski and Maria Morris Hambourg, The Work of Atget (New York: Museum of
Modern Art, 1981-85), Vol. 2, pp. 9-31.

8. Szarkowski and Hambourg, The Work of Atget, Vol. 1, p. 7.

9. Szarkowski and Hambourg, The Work of Atget, Vol. 3, p. 9.

10. Szarkowski and Hambourg, The Work of Atget, Vol. 1, p.13.

11. Laure Beaumont-Maillet, Atget Paris (Corte Madera, California: Gingko Press, 1992), p.28.

12. Beaumont-Maillet, Atget Paris, pp.25-26

13. Peter Barberie, Looking at Atget (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2005), p. 8; Geoff
Dyer, The Ongoing Moment (New York: Vintage, 2007), p.225.

14. John Szarkowski, Atget (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2000), p.76.

15. Neil Baldwin, Man Ray (New York: Clarkson N. Potter, 1998), pp. 103,133; Julien Levy,
Memoir of an Art Gallery (New York: G.P. Putman’s Son, 1977), p.92; Susan Laxton, Paris as
Gameboard (New York: Columbia University, 2002).

16. Baldwin, Man Ray, p. 116.

17. Hank O’Neal, Berenice Abbott, American Photographer (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1982),
pp. 11-32.

18. Szarkowski and Hambourg, The Work of Atget, Vol. 4, pp. 16-17.
                                            25
19. Jeff Rosenheim and Douglas Eklund, Unclassified: A Walker Evans Anthology (Zurich:
Scalo, 2000), p. 81; Szarkowski and Hambourg, The Work of Atget, Vol. 4, pp. 18.

20. Szarkowski, Atget, p. 17.

21. Szarkowski and Hambourg, The Work of Atget, Vol. 1, p. 24.

22. Nancy Newhall, ed., The Daybooks of Edward Weston (New York: Aperture, 1981), Vol. 2,
p. 202.

23. Alfred Stieglitz, Stieglitz on Photography (New York: Aperture, 2000), p. 226.

24. Richard Whelan, Alfred Stieglitz (Boston: Little, Brown, 1995), p. 79.

25. Stieglitz, Stieglitz on Photography, p. 229.

26. Stieglitz, Stieglitz on Photography, p. x.

27. Stieglitz, Stieglitz on Photography, p. 68. Italics mine.

28. Stieglitz, Stieglitz on Photography, p. 210.

29. Lewis Mumford, Mumford on Modern Art in the 1930s (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 2007), p. 53.

30. Stieglitz, Stieglitz on Photography, p. 103.

31. Stieglitz, Stieglitz on Photography, p. 184.

32. Stieglitz, Stieglitz on Photography, p. 194-95.

33. Katherine Hoffman, Stieglitz: A Beginning Light (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2004),
p. xvi.

34. Alfred Stieglitz, Georgia O’Keeffe: A Portrait (New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art,
1978), not paginated.

35. Peter Bunnell, Inside the Photograph (New York: Aperture, 2006), p.20.

36. John Coplans, Provocations (London: London Projects, 1996), pp.77-92.

37. Stieglitz, Georgia O’Keeffe, np.

38. Hunter Drohojowska-Philp, Full Bloom (New York: W.W. Norton, 2004), p.161.
                                               26
39. Richard Whelan, Alfred Stieglitz (Boston: Little, Brown, 1995), p. 240.

40. Sarah Greenough and Juan Hamilton, Alfred Stieglitz (Washington, D.C.: National Gallery of
Art, 1983), pp.26-27.

41. Dorothy Norman, Alfred Stieglitz: An American Seer (New York: Random House, 1973),
p.10.

42. Norman, Alfred Stieglitz, p.12.

43. Stieglitz, Stieglitz on Photography, p. 210.

44. Joel Eisinger, Trace and Transformation (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press,
1995), p.64.

45. Stieglitz, Stieglitz on Photography, pp. ix, 210.

46. Stieglitz, Stieglitz on Photography, p. 226.

47. Baldwin, Man Ray, p. 335.

48. Man Ray, Self Portrait (Boston: Little, Brown, 1998), p. 174.

49. Roland Penrose, Man Ray (Boston: New York Graphic Society, 1975), p. 173.

50. Baldwin, Man Ray, pp. 82-83.

51. Man Ray, Self Portrait, p. 67.

52. Baldwin, Man Ray, p. 96.

53. Janus, ed., Man Ray: The Photographic Image (Woodburg, NY: Barron’s, 1980), p. 214.

54. André Breton, Surrealism and Painting (Boston: MFA Publications, 2002), p. 32.

55. John Szarkowski, Looking At Photographs (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1973), p.
82.

56. Baldwin, Man Ray, p. 99.

57. Man Ray, Self Portrait, p. 181.

58. Merry Foresta, et. al., Perpetual Motif (New York: Abbeville Press, 1988), p. 75.

59. Baldwin, Man Ray, p. 352; Pierre Cabanne, Dialogues with Marcel Duchamp (New York:
                                               27
Da Capo, 1987), p. 37.

60. Douglas Fogle, The Last Picture Show (Minneapolis: Walker Art Center, 2003), p. 12; David
Galenson, Artistic Capital (New York: Routledge, 2006), p. 129.

61. Coosje van Bruggen, Bruce Nauman (New York: Rizzoli, 1988), p. 14; Peter Schjeldahl,
Let’s See (New York: Thames and Hudson, 2008), p. 111.

62. Baldwin, Man Ray, p. 139.

63. Michel Sanouillet and Elmer Peterson, eds., The Writings of Marcel Duchamp (New York:
Da Capo, 1989), p. 152.

64. Baldwin, Man Ray, p. xiii.

65. Louis Kronenberger, ed., Quality (New York: Atheneum, 1969), p. 171.

66. Kronenberger, Quality, pp. 206, 170.

67. Peter Galassi, Walker Evans and Company (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2000), pp.
11-12.

68. Andy Grundberg, Crisis of the Real (New York: Aperture, 1999), p. 6.

69. Szarkowski, Looking At Photographs, p. 116.

70. Robert Hirsch, Seizing the Light, second ed. (Boston: McGraw Hill, 2009), p. 236-37.

71. Bunnell, Inside the Photograph, p. 144; Belinda Rathbone, Walker Evans (Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1995), p. 48.

72. John Hill, Walker Evans (Gottingen: Steidl, 2006), pp. 13, 23.

73. James Mellow, Walker Evans (New York: Basic Books, 1999), p. 292.

74. Mellow, Walker Evans, p. 512.

75. Kronenberger, Quality, p. 171.

76. Bunnell, Inside the Photograph, p.139.

77. Galassi, Walker Evans and Company, pp. 19.

78. Mellow, Walker Evans, p. 447.
                                                28
79. Mellow, Walker Evans, p. 322.

80. Mellow, Walker Evans, p. 324.

81. David Madden and Jeffery Folks, eds., Remembering James Agee, second ed. (Athens:
University of Georgia Press, 1997), p.99.

82. Mellow, Walker Evans, p. 313.

83. Rathbone, Walker Evans, p. 129.

84. Bunnell, Inside the Photograph, p.143.

85. Laurie Simmons, Cindy Sherman (Tokyo: Parco, 1987), p. 42.

86. Calvin Tomkins, Lives of the Artists (New York: Henry Holt, 2008), p. 26.

87. Joanne Kesten, ed., The Portraits Speak (New York: A.R.T. Press, 1997), p. 336.

88. Kesten, The Portraits Speak, p. 340.

89. Tomkins, Lives of the Artists, p. 27.

90. Michael Kimmelman, Portraits (New York: Modern Library, 1999), p. 146.

91. Tomkins, Lives of the Artists, p. 31.

92. Tomkins, Lives of the Artists, p. 30.

93. Wendy Slatkin, The Voices of Women Artists (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1993), p.
312; Kristine Stiles and Peter Selz, eds., Theories and Documents of Contemporary Art
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996), p. 791.

94. David Brittain, ed., Creative Camera (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1999),
p.192.

95. Kimmelman, Portraits, p. 148.

96. Peter Schjeldahl and Lisa Phillips, Cindy Sherman (New York: Whitney Museum, 1987), p.
13.

97. Tomkins, Lives of the Artists, p. 31; Slatkin, The Voices of Women Artists, p. 317.

98. Tomkins, Lives of the Artists, p. 25.
                                             29
99. Peter Schjeldahl, The “7 Days” Art Columns, 1988-1990 (Barrington, MA: The Figures,
1990), p. 114; David Galenson, Conceptual Revolutions in Twentieth-Century Art (New York:
Cambridge University Press and NBER, 2009), Chap. 16.

100. Galenson, Artistic Capital, p. 55.

101. A.D. Coleman, Light Readings, second ed. (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press,
1998), pp.251-52.

102. Susan Sontag, On Photography (New York: Picador, 1990), p. 136.
                                                30
Appendix:      The textbooks surveyed for this study are listed below. The five books used to
select the photographers for the study are indicated by asterisks.

1.     Adams, Laurie, Art Across Time, third ed. (Boston: McGraw Hill, 2006).

2.     Arnason, H.H., History of Modern Art, fifth ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson
       Prentice Hall, 2003).

3.     Bell, Julian, Mirror of the World (New York: Thames and Hudson, 2007).

4.     Bouqueret, Christian, Histoire de la Photographie en Images (Paris: Marval, 2001).

5.     *Davies, Penelope, Janson’s History of Art, seventh ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ:
       Pearson Prentice Hall, 2007).

6.     Edwards, Steve, Photography (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005).

7.     *Foster, Hal; Rosalind Krauss; Yve-Alain Bois; and Benjamin Buchloh, Art Since 1900,
       (New York: Thames and Hudson, 2004).

8.     Govignon, Brigitte, ed., The Abrams Encyclopedia of Photography (New York: Harry N.
       Abrams, 2004).

9.     *Hirsch, Robert, Seizing the Light, second ed. (Boston: McGraw Hill, 2009).

10.    Honour, Hugh; and John Fleming, The Visual Arts, sixth ed. (New York: Harry N.
       Abrams, 2002).

11.    *Hunter, Sam; John Jacobus; and Daniel Wheeler, Modern Art, third ed. (New York:
       Vendome Press, 2004).

12.    *Kemp, Martin, The Oxford History of Western Art (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
       2000).

13.    Lenman, Robin, ed., The Oxford Companion to the Photograph (Oxford: Oxford
       University Press, 2005).

14.    Marien, Mary, Photography (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2002).

15.    Shore, Stephen, The Nature of Photographs, second ed. (London: Phaidon Press, 2007).

16.    Walther, Ingo, ed., Art of the 20th Century, 2 vols. (Cologne: Taschen, 2005).
Table 1: Greatest Photographers of the Twentieth Century


Photographer                            Date of   Date of   Country of   N
                                         birth     death      birth
1. Alfred Stieglitz                      1864      1946        US        32
2. Walker Evans                          1903      1975        US        23
3. Cindy Sherman                         1954        --        US        22
4. Man Ray (Emmanuel Radnitsky)          1890      1976        US        21
5. Eugène Atget                          1857      1927      France      18
6. Dorothea Lange                        1895      1965        US        16
7t. August Sander                        1876      1964     Germany      15
7t. Edward Steichen                      1879      1973     Luxemburg    15
7t. Edward Weston                        1886      1958        US        15
10. John Heartfield (John Helmut         1891      1968     Germany      14
Herzfelde)
11t. Alvin Langdon Coburn                1882      1966        US        12
11t. Paul Strand                         1890      1976        US        12
13t. Bernd Becher and                    1931      2007     Germany      11
    Hilla Becher                         1934        --     Germany
13t. Lewis Hine                          1874      1940        US        11
13t. Laszlo Moholy-Nagy                  1895      1946      Hungary     11

Source: see text and appendix.
Table 2: Leading Photographers’ Ages in Years of Earliest, Most, and Latest
Illustrated Photographs

                Earliest           Most            Latest        Age of Death
 Atget             41               44               68               70
 Stieglitz         25               43               67               82
 Man Ray           30               34               46               86
 Evans             28               33               71               72
 Sherman           24               24               38                --

Source: see text and appendix.
