NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HAIRCUTS
Gary B. Gorton
Andrew Metrick
Working Paper 15273
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15273

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2009

Thanks to the many anonymous traders and capital markets participants willing to share their data
and their suggestions. Also, thanks to Roger Ibbotson for comments. We also thank Lei Xie for research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Gary B. Gorton and Andrew Metrick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Haircuts
Gary B. Gorton and Andrew Metrick
NBER Working Paper No. 15273
August 2009
JEL No. G0,G1,G14,G3
ABSTRACT
When "confidence" is lost, "liquidity dries up." We investigate the meaning of "confidence" and "liquidity"
in the context of the current financial crisis. The financial crisis is a manifestation of an age-old problem
with private money creation, banking panics. We explain this and provide some evidence with respect
to the current crisis.

Gary B. Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu
Andrew Metrick
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
metrick@yale.edu

1
1. Introduction
―Liquidity‖ refers to the ability to trade quickly without moving the price. In other words, liquidity is the
ability to trade without the fear of adverse selection on either side of the transaction. If the buyer is wary
that he is buying a lemon, he will want the price to be lower. If the seller is wary that the buyer knows
more than he does, he may want to wait to learn more before selling. Liquid markets are ones in which
there is immediacy without a price impact. The market for sale and repurchase agreements (the ―repo‖
market) is a market of trillions of dollars where there is little or no due diligence.1 It is a very liquid
market, usually. Another very liquid market is the exchange of goods for checks (demand deposits).
Repo and checks are both forms of money. There have always been difficulties creating private money
(like demand deposits) and this time around was no different. Like the banking panics in U.S. history, at
the core of the current financial crisis is a problem with private money creation. In banking crises these
markets fail to function; it is said that ―liquidity dries up‖ because of a ―loss of confidence.‖ In this paper
we investigate what this means in the context of the financial crisis. We explain the problem and provide
some evidence for our explanation.
Traditional banking is centered on taking deposits, which are a form of money. Checks are easily
transferable now because they are insured by the government, so their value is never in question. Prior to
the 1934 adoption of deposit insurance in the U.S., demand deposits were designed to try to privately
create confidence in their value. Demand deposits are a form of debt which allows the depositor the right
to withdraw cash at any time (i.e., they are very short maturity); they are backed by the assets of the bank,
including reserves and loans. The idea was to create a medium of exchange, that is, a security that would
be easily accepted in transactions, without needing to do extensive and costly due diligence on the bank.
If the design was successful, checks would be used with confidence in their value without extensive due
diligence. The traditional problem with demand deposits was that sometimes this confidence disappeared.
There were banking panics, events in which depositors en masse ran to their banks and demanded cash for
their checking accounts. Banks, having lent the money out, had illiquid loans, and could not honor the
demands of their depositors: the banking system was insolvent. This is the problem that deposit insurance
stopped.
The private money that is our focus in this paper is sale and repurchase agreements (―repo‖) which, as we
explain below, are a kind of money for institutional investors and nonfinancial firms which need a way to
safely store cash and earn some interest. In a repo transaction a ―depositor‖ deposits money at a financial
institution and receives collateral, valued at market prices. The transaction is short term, so the depositor
can ―withdraw‖ the money at any time. The deposit is backed by the bonds received as collateral from
the institution where the money is deposited. There may be overcollateralization if the market value of
the bonds received exceeds the deposit. For example, if $90 million is deposited and $100 million of
bonds are received, then there is a ―haircut‖ or initial margin of 10 percent. This is akin to bank capital
or a reserve fund as the 10 percent is junior in seniority to the depositor’s 90 percent claim. So, repo is
similar to demand deposits in important ways, and consequently was counted in the Federal Reserve
System’s monetary aggregate M3 (since discontinued).

1

Terms in bold may be unfamiliar to some readers and are defined in the Glossary at the end.

2
Historically, securities that function as money have certain specific properties. They are debt; they are
short-term, and they are backed by diversified portfolios. Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) and Dang,
Gorton, and Holmström (2009) have described the production of this type of debt as the creation of
information-insensitive securities. ―Information insensitivity‖ means that the securities are immune from
adverse selection when trading. This is what is meant by a liquid market: trading can occur quickly
without loss to insiders. In a liquid market, no agent finds it profitable to produce private information
about these securities. In short, you can trade and not be taken advantage of. However, if an economic
shock is large enough then debt that was information-insensitive becomes information-sensitive. This is
the loss of confidence. When this loss of confidence occurs, fear of adverse selection reduces liquidity. In
this paper we further investigate some of the details of this argument.

2. Panics in U.S. History
In U.S. history periodic banking panics are the norm and this history can offer some useful insights for
understanding the current crisis. For example, during the U.S. National Banking Era, 1863-1913, there
were seven nation-wide banking panics. And, of course, there was the Great Depression in the 1930s. A
banking panic starts at the peak of the business cycle when macroeconomic information signals a coming
recession. The signal or economic shock causes concerns about the value of demand deposits that
previously were thought of as completely safe. Upon learning of the coming downturn depositors ran to
their banks to withdraw cash, concerned that banks would fail in the coming recession. See Gorton
(1988). Faced with massive demands for cash, the banking system is insolvent because it cannot honor
these contractual demands with respect to demand deposits; the money has been lent out and cannot be
recalled and the loans cannot be sold. The banking system is illiquid, and consequently is insolvent when
a panic occurs. There is no private agent capable of buying the assets of the banking system at a price that
allows banks to honor their contractual demands. This is the essence of a systemic event.
The information that depositors received was aggregate information, not specific information about
individual banks. People knew that a recession was coming and that in a recession some banks were likely
to fail, but no one knew which banks. So, it was rational to take the precautionary action of withdrawing
from all banks. The shock threshold was literally large enough to cause a panic.
This is related to the function of money, discussed above. Banks try to produce securities that are useful
for transacting, namely bank debt – demand deposits. But, in a panic, people lose confidence in the value
of bank debt. Bank debt that was previously viewed as ―safe‖ becomes viewed with suspicion. In this
context, ―safe‖ means two, related, things. First, the value of the bank debt does not change much, a ten
dollar check is pretty much always worth ten dollars. And, second, because of this it is not susceptible to
adverse selection when it is used in transactions (traded in markets). That is, it does not pay anyone to
produce private information about the value of the bank debt and speculate on that information.
During the National Banking Era there was no central bank to act as a lender-of-last-resort. So, what
happened during a panic? During the 19th century the banks themselves developed increasingly
sophisticated ways to respond to panics. The response was centered on private bank clearinghouses.
Originally organized to be an efficient way to clear checks, these coalitions or clubs of banks evolved into
much more. Clearinghouses tried to recreate the information-insensitivity of demand deposits by

3
increasing the diversity of the portfolio backing demand deposits. First, in response to a panic, banks
would jointly suspend convertibility of deposits into currency. Coincident with this, clearinghouse
member banks joined together to form a new entity overseen by the Clearinghouse Committee. The
clearinghouse would also cease the publication of individual bank accounting information (which banks
were normally required by the clearinghouse to publish in the newspapers) and would instead only
publish the aggregate information of all the members. Finally, the clearinghouse issued new money
called clearinghouse loan certificates directly to the public in small denominations. See Gorton (1985).
These were liabilities of the clearinghouse members jointly –not liabilities of any individual bank--and
served the purpose of providing a kind of deposit insurance. The clearinghouse loan certificate was a
remarkable innovation, resulting from individual private banks finding a way to essentially become a
single institution, responsible for each other’s obligations during a panic and issuing a hand-to-hand
currency.

3. Securitized Banking and Repo as Money
The limits on deposit insurance make bank accounts inadequate for large depositors, like institutional
investors or firms. But, they have a need for a short-term, safe, interest-bearing place to store money. A
repurchase agreement (or ―repo‖) is a financial contract used by market participants as a financing
method to meet short and long-term liquidity needs. In a repo transaction there are two parties,
essentially the ―bank‖ or ―borrower‖ and another party, the ―depositor‖ or ―lender.‖ The depositor
deposits money and in exchange for the cash the bank provides bonds as collateral to back the deposit.
The depositor earns interest, the repo rate. Repo is typically short-term, often overnight, so the money
can be withdrawn easily by not renewing or ―rolling‖ the repo. There is no government guarantee, but
there is collateral, value at market prices. Depositors take delivery of the collateral, so they have it in
their possession. The bonds that the depositor receives can be ―spent‖ in that they can be used as
collateral in another, unrelated, transaction. For example, the bonds could be posted as collateral against
a derivatives position. The reuse of collateral is called ―rehypothecation.‖
Another important feature of repo, one which will play an important role shortly, concerns the ―haircut.‖
To reiterate, here’s the previous example. A large investor, for example, may deposit $100 million and
receive bonds worth $100 million. This is a case of a zero ―haircut.‖ If the depositor deposits only $90
million and takes $100 million (market value) of bonds as collateral, there is a 10 percent haircut. In that
case, the bank has to finance the other $10 million in some other way, issuing new liabilities.
The similarities between repo and demand deposits are apparent, and indeed the Federal Reserve counted
repo transactions as money in a monetary aggregate called M3. However, the Fed only counted the repo
transactions that were done by the primary security dealers that trade with the Fed, not the entire market.
M3 was discontinued on March 23, 2006.2 See http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h6/discm3.htm .

2

―M3 did not appear to convey any additional information about economic activity that was not already embodied
in M2. Consequently, the Board judged that the costs of collecting the data and publishing M3 outweigh the
benefits.‖ See http://www.ny.frb.org/aboutthefed/fedpoint/fed49.html .

4
While there are no official statistics on the size of the repo market, it is likely to be about $12 trillion,
compared to the total assets in the U.S. banking system of $10 trillion. According to Hördahl and King
(2008), ―the (former) top U.S. investment banks funded roughly half of their assets using repo markets,
with additional exposure due to off-balance sheet financing of their customers‖ (p. 39). Hördahl and King
(2008) also report that repo markets have doubled in size since 2002, ―with gross amounts outstanding at
year-end 2007 of roughly $10 trillion in each of the U.S. and euro markets, and another $1 trillion in the
UK repo market‖ (p. 37). They report that the U.S. repo market exceeded $10 trillion in mid-2008,
including double counting. Also, see King (2008).
An important feature of the repo market is that the collateral was very often securitized bonds. These are
the liabilities of a special purpose vehicle (SPV), which finances a large portfolio of loans (e.g., home
mortgages, auto loans, credit card receivables) by issuing tranches (bonds) in the capital markets. The
tranches are based on seniority, but all tranches are investment-grade. The sponsoring firm, i.e., the
originator of the loans in the underlying portfolio, holds the equity residual, and there may be other credit
enhancements to ensure that the tranches are investment-grade. See Gorton and Souleles (2006). While
the internal structure of these transactions is complicated, the tranches were designed to, in effect, be
information-insensitive. The securitization of non-mortgage loans is called asset-backed securities
(ABS), while portfolios of residential mortgages are residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS).
Similarly, commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) are claims on portfolios of commercial
mortgages.
One of the asset classes that was securitized was subprime mortgages. As explained by Gorton (2008), the
innovation was to structure the mortgage to effectively make the maturity two or three years. This was
accomplished with a fixed initial period interest rate, but then at the ―reset date‖ having the rate rise
significantly, essentially requiring the borrower to refinance the mortgage. With rising home prices,
borrowers would build equity in their homes and would be able to refinance. In the years 2001-2006,
about $2.5 trillion of subprime mortgages were originated.3 In 2005 and 2006, a total of $1.2 trillion of
subprime mortgages were originated, a large portion of which was likely refinancings of previous
mortgages. An important part of the subprime mortgage innovation was how the mortgages were
financed. In 2005 and 2006, about 80 percent of the subprime mortgages were financed via
securitization, that is, the mortgages were sold in residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS), which
involves pooling thousands of mortgages together, selling the pool to a special purpose vehicle which
finance their purchase by issuing securities with different seniority (called ―tranches‖) in the capital
markets.
Securitization is a very important sector of U.S. capital markets, as the figure below shows. Shown are
the issuance amounts, annually, of all U.S. corporate debt (investment-grade and below investment-grade)
and all private securitization issuance. The effects of the crisis are also apparent, a manifestation of the
loss of confidence to be discussed shortly.

3

See Inside Mortgage Finance, The 2007 Mortgage Market Statistical Annual, Key Data (2006), Joint Economic
Committee (October 2007).

5
Figure 1: U.S. Corporate Debt and Securitization Issuance ($ billions)

Source: Thomson Reuters
Gorton and Metrick (2009) label institutions that finance their portfolios of securitized bonds via repo as
securitized banks, to distinguish them from the traditional depository institutions that are regulated. We
now turn to the question of the vulnerability of securitized banks to runs.

4. Repo Haircuts: Trying to Re-Create Information Insensitivity and Hence Liquidity
How could problems with subprime mortgages have caused a global financial crisis? Gorton (2009)
likens subprime to E-coli: there doesn’t have to be a lot of it for everyone to fear eating certain foods and
avoid those foods. The problem with subprime, as with E-coli, was that no one knew where the risks
actually were, so there was no certainty about which counterparties would fail (and unlike food, subprime
mortgages cannot be recalled). Unlike food the subprime mortgage-related assets could not be recalled.
In the pre-Fed era, depositors knew that not all banks were going to fail in the recession. But, they did not
know which banks were more likely to fail, and so they ran on all banks.
In the current crisis repo depositors did not know which securitized banks were most likely to fail (or
whether the Fed would let them fail). More specifically, the concern was not directly about the bank
defaulting, because repo is collateralized, but about being able to recover the collateral value when selling

6
it in the market if the bank did default.4 Gorton (2009) and Gorton and Metrick (2009) argue that the
current financial crisis is a bank run. The run corresponds to repo haircuts increasing, causing massive
deleveraging. The collapse of the repo market is the systemic event.
In this section we provide some evidence on the run on repo. If there is a sufficiently bad economic
shock, then debt cannot be traded without creating adverse selection. This can cause informationinsensitive securities to become information-sensitive. Traders then have an incentive to produce
information. If that happens, then trade is reduced due to a fear of adverse selection. Liquidity dries up.
One way to partially overcome this problem is for traders to re-create information-insensitive securities
by taking a senior tranche of the original bond. In the repo market this concretely corresponds to a
haircut. A haircut means that the bank taking the deposit has to over-collateralize the deposit. And this
implies that the bank must hold more equity in the collateral.
Keep in mind that the collateral offered in repo is valued at market prices. If the bonds become riskier,
and their prices go down, then they would be valued at these lower prices. Furthermore, if there is more
uncertainty about their price in the future, that risk can be addressed with a higher repo rate. Repo rates
can and did go up (see Gorton and Metrick (2009)). Why should repo collateral be haircut? And why
should these haircuts go up? Our answer, following Dang, Gorton, and Holmström (2009), is that a
haircut amounts to a tranching of the collateral to recreate an information-insensitive security so that it is
liquid. The risk that is relevant here is different than the risks we usually think about, which are related to
the payoff on the security. A haircut addresses the risk that if the holder of the bond in repo, the depositor,
has to sell a bond in the market to get the cash bank, he may face a better informed trader resulting in a
loss (relative to the true value of the security). This risk is endogenous to the trading process. It is not the
risk of loss due to default. Consequently, the price cannot adjust to address this risk.
One way to protect against this endogenous adverse selection risk is to require overcollateralization, that
is, an increase in the initial margin or ―haircut.‖ The depositor deposits less than the market value of the
bond, but has the bond as collateral. From the bank’s point of view, the entity funding the bond, this
means that for a bond worth $100, only an amount less than that can be borrowed, perhaps $95, i.e., a
haircut of 5 percent. We test this proposition in the cross section by looking at the haircuts over the
course of the crisis for different categories of structured products. In particular, we examine whether the
―closer‖ the security is to subprime the sooner and the higher the repo haircut on that collateral. The
haircuts should be higher for asset classes that are more prone to be sensitive to subprime mortgage risk.
During the crisis repo haircuts were different for different asset classes, in particular, different categories
of structured products, including asset-backed securities (ABS), residential mortgage-backed securities
(RMBS), commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS), collateralized loan obligations (CLOs), and
collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), are special purpose
vehicles that issue long-dated liabilities in the form of rated tranches in the capital markets and use the

4

Sale and repurchase agreements, like derivatives, have a special status under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code; they are
exempted from the automatic stay. Under the standard documentation the nondefaulting party to a repurchase
agreement is allowed to unilaterally enforce the termination provisions of the agreement as a result of a bankruptcy
filing by the other party and keep the cash or the bond, as the case may be.

7
proceeds to purchase structured products for assets. In particular, ABS (asset-backed securities) CDOs
purchased significant amounts of subprime RMBS bonds. See Gorton (2008).
The data we will examine is the interbank repo haircuts on the following asset classes, further
characterized by their ratings: (1) A-AAA ABS Auto/Credit cards/Student loans; (2) AA-AAA
RMBS/CMBS; (3) < A RMBS/CMBS; (4) AA-AAA CLO; (5) Unpriced ABS/MBS/All Subprime; (6)
AA-AAA CDOs; (7) Unpriced CLOs/CDOs. ―Unpriced‖ means that the collateral does not have public
pricing on Reuters or Bloomberg. Of these categories, those numbered (1) – (4) are not subprime-related;
they do not contain subprime mortgages. We label this group ―Non-Subprime-Related.‖ The RMBS
referred to in categories (2) and (3) are prime mortgages, not subprime. Categories (5) – (7) are either
directly subprime or contain subprime. Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), in particular, contain
some subprime. Also, using all seven categories we also construct an equally-weighted average repo
haircut index for structured bonds.
In the pre-crisis period, harircuts were zero for all the asset classes. This is consistent with the repo
market being based on information-insensitive assets backing ―deposits.‖ The figure below shows the
haircuts for the Non-Subprime-Related Group, the Subprime-Related Group, and the average of all the
categories.
Figure 2: Repo Haircuts on Different Categories of Structured Products

8
The figure confirms that haircuts were higher on subprime-related asset classes. In fact, the haircut
eventually went to 100 percent, that is, these assets were not acceptable as collateral in repo. The nonsubprime-related asset classes reached a maximum of a 20 percent haircut.
To reiterate the argument, if these asset classes simply became riskier in the usual finance sense, then that
would be reflected in their market prices – which are the basis for the collateral to start with. So, that
cannot be an explanation for these haircuts. Instead, the haircuts are consistent with the idea that
depositors want collateral that is ―safe‖ in the very specific sense that it is immune to adverse selection,
and is hence liquid.
The figure is a picture of the securitized-bank ―run on repo.‖ Each ―depositor‖ imposes a haircut to
protect himself against the possible effects of adverse selection. But, for the system as a whole the
implications are devastating. To understand the impact of this run on repo, take the estimate of the size of
the repo market to be $10 trillion, the same size as the total assets in the regulated banking sector.5 If the
average haircut goes from zero (pre-crisis) to, say, an average of 20 percent during the crisis, then $2
trillion is the amount that the securitized banking system needs to find from other sources to fund its
assets. Obviously, if the average haircut goes to 40 percent, then $4 trillion has to be raised. The only
route available for these banks to make up the difference was asset sales, which caused a further
downward movement in the prices of these asset classes, making them less usable as collateral, causing
further sales, and so on. The securitized bank system is then effectively insolvent, as was the banking
system during the pre-Fed panics.
The figure also displays a loss of confidence in the sense that the Non-Subprime-Related Group faced
very significant haircuts even though it has nothing to do with subprime. It is simply also securitized. It
is similar to sales of bagged lettuce dropping when the Food and Drug Administration announces that
there E-coli in bagged spinach. To see this loss of confidence, let’s compare the average haircut on
structured products to the haircut on corporate bonds. This is done in Figure 3.

5

This is the number that most repo traders give as an estimate.

9
Figure 3: The Average Haircut on Structured Products versus Haircuts on Corporate Bonds

All investment-grade corporate bonds were treated the same with regard to haircuts. Corporate bonds are
clearly not claims on portfolios of loans like structured securitized bonds are, so in that sense maybe they
are riskier. But, the point is that there was no contagious affect of subprime on corporate bonds, although
their haircuts did go from zero to a peak of two and half percent.
The discussion above addressed the question of why haircuts should increase. In the context of traditional
finance there is no explanation. Corporate debt is, by definition, a ―haircut‖ on the firm’s assets. In fact,
the idea of creating information-insensitive debt in this way is quite familiar. The distinction drawn
between information-sensitive and information-insensitive has a familiar counterpart, namely, the
distinction between investment-grade debt and below investment-grade debt. While investment-grade
debt is not money, it is well-known that there is a large gap – by many measures (spread, likelihood of
default)—between these two broad rating categories. This has been confirmed empirically. Studies of
corporate bond returns and bond yield changes have mainly concluded that investment-grade bonds
behave like Treasury bonds, reacting to (riskless) interest rate movements, while below investment-grade
bonds (junk bonds) are more sensitive to stock returns, reacting to information about the firm. 6 Corporate
6

Studies of the relation between stock and bond returns at the aggregate level include, e.g., Keim and Stambaugh
(1986) and Fama and French (1989, 1993), and at the portfolio level they include, and firm level e.g., Blume, Keim,
and Patel (1991), and Cornell and Green (1991); at the individual level, see, e.g., Kwan (1996).

10
debt is not money, but the gap between investment-grade and below investment-grade suggests an
important informational line. Senior corporate debt has some features of the kind of debt that is needed
for transactions; it is an intermediate case. Kwan (1996b) writes: ―It appears that AAA-rated bonds may
have so little default risk relative to stocks that they are insensitive to information about the issuing firm.‖
The analysis above suggests that the line between information-insensitive and information-sensitive has
moved due to the subprime shock. Previously information-insensitive tranches are now sensitive. If this
is the case, then we should see the effects in terms of prices or spreads. In other words, the spreads on
some securitized asset class tranches should be much higher and remain higher. We can examine this by
looking at what has happened to the difference in spreads on different levels of seniority for the same
asset class. We will look at the difference between the spread on the BBB tranche and the AAA tranche
of 5-year credit card ABS. We will compare that to the difference in spread between the BBB-rated
industrial firm bond spread and the AAA-rated industrial firm bond spread at the 5-year horizon. The
spread differences are expressed in basis points. (These are on-the-run bonds.) Finally, we will look at
the spread difference between LIBOR and the overnight index swap rate. This last spread difference is
a proxy for counterparty risk in the interbank market. The LIBOR minus OIS spread (LIB-OIS) should
be zero by no arbitrage. See Gorton and Metrick (2009). But, if there is counterparty risk, it can become
positive.
Figure 4: Spread Differences by Asset Class (Basis Points)

The figure shows that the difference between BBB-rated industrial bond spreads and AAA-rated
industrial bond spreads moves with the measure of counterparty risk, coming down when LIB-OIS came
down. But, this is not true for the credit card ABS spread differential between the BBB-rated tranche and

11
the AAA-rated tranche. This suggests – but is clearly not definitive – that there has been a kind of regime
switch whereby (in this example) the BBB-rated tranche of structured products have become permanently
information-sensitive.

5. Discussion
Increases in repo haircut are withdrawals from securitized banks, a bank run. When everyone does this
and the haircuts are high enough, the securitized banking system cannot finance itself and is forced to sell
assets, driving down asset prices. The assets become information-sensitive; liquidity dries up. Like the
panics of the 19th century, the system is insolvent.
Liquidity requires symmetric information, which is easiest to achieve when everyone is ignorant. This
determines many securities’ design including the design of debt and securitization. The idea is to design
securities such that it doesn’t pay to speculate in these bonds. They are information-insensitive. Then
they are easy to trade; they are liquid. This idea (of Dang, Gorton, and Holmström (2009)) is the basis of
our look at some repo haircut data. When the asymmetric information about the location of subprime
risks became pressing, increasing haircuts was a way to re-create, through re-tranching, informationinsensitive debt. This was most true for subprime-related asset classes, but also occurred with nonsubprime-related structured asset classes. The spreads seem to reflect the now information-sensitive status
of formerly investment-grade tranches of ABS.

12
Glossary
Asset-Backed Securities (ABS): An asset-backed security is a bond which is backed by the cash flows
from a pool of specified assets in a special purpose vehicle rather than the general credit of a
corporation. The asset pools may be residential mortgages, in which case it is a residential mortgagebacked security (RMBS), commercial mortgages – a commercial mortgage-backed security (CMBS),
automobile loans, credit card receivables, student loans, aircraft leases, royalty payments, and many other
asset classes.
Basis Point (bp): A basis point is one hundredth of a percentage point (0.01%).
Collateralized Debt Obligations (CDOs): A CDO is a special purpose vehicle, which buys a portfolio of
fixed income assets, and finances the purchase of the portfolio via issuing different tranches of risk in the
capital markets. These tranches are senior tranches, rated Aaa/AAA, mezzanine tranches, rated Aa/AA to
Ba/BB, and equity tranches (unrated). ABS CDOs are CDOs which have underlying portfolios consisting
of asset-backed securities (ABS), including residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) and
commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS).
Collateralized Loan Obligations (CLOs): A CLO is a special purpose vehicle, which buys a portfolio of
bank loans, and finances the purchase of the portfolio via issuing different tranches of risk in the capital
markets. These tranches are senior tranches, rated Aaa/AAA, mezzanine tranches, rated Aa/AA to Ba/BB,
and equity tranches (unrated).
Commercial Mortgage-backed Securities (CMBS): See asset-backed securities, above.
Haircut or initial margin: The percentage by which an asset’s market value is reduced for the purpose of
calculating the amount of overcollateralization of the repo agreement.
LIBOR: The London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) is a series of interest rates, of different maturities
and currencies, at which banks offer to lend fund to each other. These rates are calculated by the British
Bankers’ Association as the averages of quotes contributed by a panel of banks and announced at 11:00
Am local time in England. This is called the rate ―fixing.‖ Quotes are ranked and the top and bottom
quartiles are discarded. LIBOR is fixed for 15 different maturities, from overnight to one year, and in ten
international currencies. Similar fixing arrangements exist in many markets around the world. See
Gyntelberg and Wooldridge (2008).
Overnight Index Swap (OIS): An Overnight Indexed Swap (OIS) is a fixed/floating interest rate swap
where the floating leg of the swap is tied to a published index of a daily overnight rate reference. The
term ranges from one week to two years (sometimes more). At maturity, the two parties agree to
exchange the difference between the interest accrued at the agreed fixed rate and interest accrued through
geometric averaging of the floating index rate on the agreed notional amount. This means that the floating
rate calculation replicates the accrual on an amount (principal plus interest) rolled at the index rate every
business day over the term of the swap. If cash can be borrowed by the swap receiver on the same
maturity as the swap and at the same rate and lent back every day in the market at the index rate, the cash

13
payoff at maturity will exactly match the swap payout: the OIS acts as a perfect hedge for a cash
instrument. Since indices are generally constructed on the basis of the average of actual transactions, the
index is generally achievable by borrowers and lenders. Economically, receiving the fixed rate in an OIS
is like lending cash. Paying the fixed rate in an OIS is like borrowing cash. Settlement occurs net on the
earliest practical date. There is no exchange of principal. The index rate used is typically the weighted
average rate for overnight transactions as published by the central bank (e.g., the effective fed funds rate).
Rehypothecation: ―Hypothecate‖ means to pledge collateral. Rehypothecation is the practice of re-using
(or re-pledging) collateral received in one transaction with an unrelated third party in an unrelated
transaction. See Singh and Aitken (2009) and Johnson (1997).
Residential Mortgage-backed Security (RMBS): See asset-backed securities, above.
Sale and Repurchase Agreements (repo): A sale and repurchase agreement, known as a ―repo‖ for
short, is a sale of a security combined with an agreement to repurchase the same security at a specified
price at the end of the contract. Economically, a repo is a secured or collateralized loan, that is, a loan of
cash against a security as collateral. From the point of view of the borrower of the cash (who is putting
up the security as collateral), it is a reverse repurchase agreement, or ―reverse repo.‖ The collateral
pledged by borrowers towards the repo sometimes has a ―haircut‖ or ―initial margin‖ applied, which
means the collateral is valued at slightly less than market value. This haircut reflects the perceived
underlying risk of the collateral and protects the lender against a change in its value. Haircuts are different
for different asset classes and ratings.
Securitization: The process of financing by segregating specified cash flows, from loans originated by a
firm (the ―sponsor‖) and selling claims specifically linked to these specified cash flows. This is
accomplished by setting up another company, called a special purpose vehicle (SPV) or special purpose
entity, and then selling the specified cash flows to this company, which purchases the rights to the cash
flows by issuing (rated) securities into the capital market. The sponsor services the cash flows, that is,
makes sure that the cash flows are arriving, etc.
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV): An SPV or special purpose entity (SPE) is a legal entity which has been
set up for a specific, limited, purpose by another entity, the sponsoring firm. An SPV can take the form of
a corporation, trust, partnership, or a limited liability company. The SPV may be a subsidiary of the
sponsoring firm, or it may be an ―orphan‖ SPV, one that is not consolidated with the sponsoring firm for
tax, accounting, or legal purposes (or may be consolidated for some purposes but not others). An SPV
can only carry out some specific purpose, or circumscribed activity, or a series of such transactions. The
SPV is not an operating company in the usual sense. It is more of a robot company in that it is a set of
rules. It has no employees or physical location. An essential feature of an SPV is that it be ―bankruptcy
remote,‖ that is, that the SPV never be able to become legally bankrupt. The most straightforward way to
achieve this would be for the SPV to waive its right to file a voluntary bankruptcy petition, but this is
legally unenforceable. The only way to completely eliminate the risk of either voluntary or involuntary
bankruptcy is to create the SPV in a legal form that is ineligible to be a debtor under the U.S. Bankruptcy
Code.

14
References
Blume, Marshall E., Donald B. Keim, and Sandeep A. Patel (1991), ―Returns and Volatility of Low-grade
Bonds: 1977-1989,‖ Journal of Finance 46, 49-74.
Cornell, Bradford, and Kevin Green (1991), ―The Investment Performance of Low-grade Bond Funds,‖
Journal of Finance 46, 29-48.
Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström (2009), ―Opacity and the Optimality of Debt for
Liquidity Provision,‖ working paper.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French (1989), ―Business Conditions and Expected Returns on Stocks
and Bonds,‖ Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23-49.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French (1993), ―Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stock and
Bonds,‖ Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Gorton, Gary (2009), ―Slapped in the Face by the Invisible Hand: Banking and the panic of 2007,‖ paper
prepared for the 2009 Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Jekyll Island Conference.
Gorton, Gary (2008), ―The Panic of 2007,‖ in Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System,
Proceedings of the 2008 Jackson Hole Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2008.
Gorton, Gary (1985), "Clearinghouses and the Origin of Central Banking in the U.S.," Journal of Economic
History, Vol. 45, No. 2, 277-83.
Gorton, Gary (1988), "Banking Panics and Business Cycles," Oxford Economic Papers 40 (December),
751-81.
Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick (2009), ―Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo,‖ Working paper,
Yale School of Management.
Gorton, Gary and George Pennacchi (1990), "Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation," Journal of
Finance 45:1 (March): 49-72.
Gyntelberg, Jacob and Philip Wooldridge (2008), ―Interbank Rate Fixings During the Recent Turmoil,‖
Bank for International Settlements Quarterly Review (March), 59-72.
Hördahl, Peter and Michael King (2008), ―Developments in Repo Markets During the Financial Turmoil,‖
Bank for International Settlements Quarterly Review (December), 37-53.
Johnson, Christian (1997), ―Derivatives and Rehypothecation Failure: It’s 3:00 p.m., Do You Know Where
Your Collateral Is?,‖ Arizona Law Review 30(949).
King, Matt (2008), ―Are the Brokers Broken?,‖ Citibank Global Markets Group.

15
Kwan, Simon H. (1996a), ―Firm-specific Information and the Correlation between Individual Stocks and
Bonds,‖ Journal of Financial Economics 40, 63-80.
Kwan, Simon (1996b), ―On the Relation between Stocks and Bonds—Part II,‖ Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco, Economic Letter 96-20 (July 5, 1996).
Singh, Manmohan and James Aitken (2009), ―Deleveraging after Lehman—Evidence from Reduced
Rehypothecation,‖ International Monetary Fund, Working paper WP/09/42.

