                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      PLAYING THE ADMISSIONS GAME:
           STUDENT REACTIONS TO INCREASING COLLEGE COMPETITION

                                          John Bound
                                        Brad Hershbein
                                       Bridget Terry Long

                                       Working Paper 15272
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15272


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2009




We are grateful to Arline Geronimus, Dan Silverman and Sarah Turner for helpful discussions; to
Jesse Rothstein, DeForest McDuff and Amanda Pallais for providing tabulations from SAT and ACT
data on score sending behavior, and Sarah Turner for providing tabulations of the Survey of Earned
Doctorates. This work was started while Bound was a fellow at that Center for Advanced Study in
the Behavioral Science, Stanford University. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by John Bound, Brad Hershbein, and Bridget Terry Long. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Playing the Admissions Game: Student Reactions to Increasing College Competition
John Bound, Brad Hershbein, and Bridget Terry Long
NBER Working Paper No. 15272
August 2009
JEL No. I2,J24

                                             ABSTRACT

Gaining entrance to a four-year college or university, particularly a selective institution, has become
increasingly competitive over the last several decades. We document this phenomenon and show how
it has varied across different parts of the student ability distribution and across region, with the most
pronounced increases in competition being found among higher-ability students and in the Northeast.
Additionally, we explore how the college preparatory behavior of high school seniors has changed
in response to the growth in competition. We also discuss the theoretical implications of increased
competition on longer-term measures of learning and achievement and attempt to test them empirically;
the evidence and related literature, while limited, suggests little long-term benefit.


John Bound                                          Bridget Terry Long
Department of Economics                             Harvard University
University of Michigan                              Graduate School of Education
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                            Gutman Library 465
and NBER                                            6 Appian Way
jbound@umich.edu                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                    and NBER
Brad Hershbein                                      longbr@gse.harvard.edu
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
bjhersh@umich.edu
I.      INTRODUCTION

        During the last several decades, it has become increasingly difficult to gain entry into an

American four-year college or university. Growing numbers of students fight for admission to such

schools as the number of applicants has doubled since the early 1970s while school sizes have

changed little. This increase is due both to the increasing fraction of high school graduates applying

for college and more recently to the increase in the size of the college-aged cohorts. Using data from

the Digest of Education Statistics and various National Center for Education Statistics (NCES)

surveys, we summarize these trends in Table 1. The table shows that while the application rate to

four-year colleges has steadily increased over the last several decades, the decline in cohort size

between 1982 and 1992 left the number of applicants practically unchanged between the two years.

From 1992 to 2004, on the other hand, the number of applicants to four-year colleges grew from 1.19

million to 1.71 million students, an increase of 44 percent, as rising application rates and growing

cohort size reinforced each other. The pattern was slightly different for selective private and public

colleges, which saw the number of applicants rise by 10 to 15 percent over the 1980s despite

declining cohort size. While there was a slight dip in the application rate to selective privates

between 1992 and 2004, this trend belies the fact that the number of applicants grew by 30,000, or 18

percent, due to growing cohort size.

        Much of the increase in applications has been driven by female students. In 1972, the female

ratio of first-year students at four-year schools was just under parity, but by 2004, the female share of

students had risen to 55 percent. From 1972 to 1992, the growth in the number attending four-year

colleges and universities came almost entirely from women as the number of men remained basically

stable; since 1992, the growth in female applicants has continued to outpace male applicants. Overall,

according to our calculations using data from the Digest of Education Statistics, the number of

women applying to four-year colleges doubled between 1972 and 2004 while it increased by only 50

percent for men. The change in the female ratio of first-year students was even larger at selective

private schools, where the share jumped from 42 percent to 52 percent over 30 years, with the fastest

growth occurring since the 1980s. Not surprisingly, these trends are reflected in application patterns.



                                                                                                       1
At selective colleges and universities, applications from women nearly doubled while they increased

by only 38 percent for men. At selective private and public schools, the number of men attending

increased by less than 20 percent, while the number of women has risen by two-thirds.

        In the face of growing demand, the supply of admission slots at four-year colleges did not

keep pace. According to our calculations using data from the Annual Survey of Colleges, a near-

census of four-year postsecondary institutions in the United States conducted by the College Board,

the top 20 private universities and top 20 liberal arts colleges saw only a 0.7 percent change in

average undergraduate enrollment from 1986 to 2003. Those ranked 21 to 50 also experienced

relatively little growth (4.9 percent and 6.8 percent at private universities and liberal arts colleges,

respectively). In contrast, other private four-year institutions grew nearly 16 percent during the

period. There was more expansion at public institutions during this period with enrollments

increasing 15.2 percent at the top 20 public universities, 10.5 percent at public universities ranked 21

to 47, and 12.8 percent at other public institutions. This increase in enrollment at the most selective

public institutions appears largely driven by transfer students, many assumed to be from public two-

year colleges. However, when focusing on the sizes of the incoming freshmen classes, the change in

enrollment at public institutions has been much smaller. Because fewer than 500,000 slots were

added in total at four-year schools from 1992 to 2004, supply did not keep pace with demand, and so

college selectivity increased. High school seniors today are subject to more competition than at any

time in the recent past.

        The increased overall demand for a college education, presumably, can largely be explained

by the dramatic increases in the value of such an education since the 1970s (Heckman, Lochner and

Todd, 2006; Goldin and Katz, 2008). The increased demand for admission to selective schools in

particular is plausibly related to the fact that the particular institution a student attends has become

increasingly important. Since 1970, income distribution has widened among college-educated

workers, and Hoxby and Long (1998) find that nearly half of the explained growth in this dispersion

is due to the increasing concentration of peer and financial resources at more selective colleges and

universities relative to other institutions. Other work has also documented this increasing



                                                                                                      2
segmentation within higher education (Hoxby, 1997, 2009; Bound, Lovenheim and Turner, 2008).

The spread of information through the advent of the U.S. News and World Report (USNWR) and

other rankings systems have also given students, their families, and society more data with which to

evaluate college quality. As emphasized by Hoxby in this volume, the college market has shifted

from one that is regional in focus to one that is national. It is also possible that as more workers are

college educated, employers view the average college-educated worker as less productive than in the

past. Under this signaling type of framework, a degree from an elite college becomes more valuable.

All of these factors likely play a role in increasing the number of high school graduates who consider

elite colleges.

        This paper begins by documenting the trends of increasing competition in higher education,

including how these increases have varied across certain groups, from the perspective of both

institutions and students. It then explores the ways in which this phenomenon has influenced student

behavior, in terms of academic preparation and high school activities, standardized test-taking, and

college application behavior. Evidence from multiple sources suggests that a significant fraction of

students are increasingly searching for ways to maximize their likelihood of admittance into a

selective institution. As theory would predict, students have been driven to invest more in signals of

ability and to raise their qualifications with the hope of increasing their chances of gaining entry into

a selective institution. It has also driven students to alter their approaches to the college application.

The extent of student reactions has differed along the ability distribution and by region, as the returns

to such investments and changes in application approaches also vary by student. Finally, the paper

explores whether such student reactions to growing competition have translated into longer-term

effects on the amount that students learn. From a theoretical point of view, the increased competition

could have induced high school students to work harder and learn more, or, alternatively, could have

lead to the reverse by prompting investments in non-productive signals. Credible evidence on the net

effect of increased competition is, needless to say, difficult to find. However, comparisons across

regions of the country where competition is more versus less severe provides little evidence that




                                                                                                        3
increased competition has had positive effects on what students learn, and some suggestive evidence

that the reverse might even be true.




II.     INCREASING COLLEGE SELECTIVITY

Institutional-level Indicators

        Changes in the percentage of applicants accepted by colleges represent one readily available,

though not completely reliable indicator of increased selectivity. Table 2 displays how the percentage

of students accepted has changed from 1986 to 2003 using data from the American Survey of

Colleges (ASC), which contains detailed information on institutional classification, enrollment,

applications, student body profiles, and expenditures. The results are broken down by sector and by

the ranking of the institution.1

        Three patterns are clear from Table 2. First, all categories—indeed, all individual schools in

the sample—reduced the percentage of applicants they accepted during the period. Second, the most

dramatic changes occurred among the more highly-ranked institutions; for example, the top 20

private and top 20 public universities both saw the percentage of applicants accepted fall by about a

quarter over this time. Third, in terms of timing, the most dramatic reductions in the percentage

accepted happened late in this time period, at about the same time cohort size began to grow.

        Trends in college selectivity also differed by region. In 1986, four-year institutions in New

England and the Middle Atlantic states accepted the smallest percentage of applicants in comparison

to other regions (67.5 and 69.3 percent, respectively). By 2003, they remained the regions with the

lowest acceptance rates: only about 64 percent of applicants were accepted on average at institutions

in these regions. To some extent, this reflects differences in the mix of colleges across regions, with

many of the most selective schools located in the Northeast. But the declines in acceptance rates

within region and public/private status are still notable. During the period, the average percentage

1
 See the Data Appendix for details on the ASC dataset and institutional rankings, including a list of the schools.
The bottom row reflects the number of institutions represented by the data. As reflected in the numbers, the ASC is




                                                                                                                 4
accepted by private four-year institutions in New England fell 9 percent (from 64.8 to 59.0 percent),

while in the Middle Atlantic States, most of the decline happened among public four-year institutions

(from 64.3 to 55.7 percent, or a 13.5 percent change). The West also became much more competitive

during the last several decades as only 68.9 percent of applicants were accepted by institutions within

the region in 2003 (a 5.2 percent change from 1986).

        These trends highlight that competitiveness in higher education has become particularly

heightened in the northeastern United States and in California. The South, Midwest, and Southwest

also experienced reductions in the percentage of students accepted by four-year colleges and

universities during this time, but even in 2003, more than seven out of ten students were accepted on

average at institutions within their borders. The most notable changes during the time period

occurred in the Southwest for both public and private institutions (a 12.4 percent decline to 74.3

percent being accepted in 2003), among public institutions in the South (a 9.4 percent decline to 66.4

percent in 2003), and within private institutions in the Midwest (a 8.7 percent decline to 74.1 percent

in 2003). Since most college-going students still attend a college in their home region, these numbers

suggest that the difficulty of getting into college for a typical applicant varies geographically.

        The ACS also reports information on the distribution of college entrance exam test scores for

entering classes. These data show quite clearly that incoming students have higher scores on college

entrance exams than they used to. Figure 1 displays trends in the 75th percentile math SAT score of

schools' student bodies; the results are broken down by institutional sector and ranking. Again, all

schools in the sample experienced increases in student body test scores at the 75th percentile, but the

largest changes occurred among the top ranked schools. The growth from 1986 to 2003 was

particularly large among public universities in the top 20 (52 points on the SAT, or an 8.1 percent

change). Among the private institutions, the top 20 universities and liberal arts colleges experienced




not a complete census of institutions, and so the sample does not include all of the top-ranked schools. The sample
of "Other Public Four-years" includes public colleges (as opposed to only universities).


                                                                                                                 5
an average increase of 41 points to 749, a score much higher than that found at other schools. The

trends for math SAT scores are similar to those also found for verbal SAT scores and for the ACT.2



Student-Level Indicators of College Acceptance

         A caveat about the institutional-level acceptance rates above is that the composition of

applicants, as well as the number of applications per student, may be changing, and so a lower share

of acceptances may only be partially revealing about increased selectivity. Thus it also important to

look at the student perspective, and another measure of selectivity is whether students are able to

attend their first-choice college. According to data from surveys of college freshmen done by the

Cooperative Institutional Research Program (CIRP) at the University of California, Los Angeles’s

Higher Education Research Institute (HERI), about 22 percent of students report that they were not

able to attend their first choice for college in 1974, while 33 percent reported in 2006 that they were

not able to do so. This result is not surprising given, as pointed out in the introduction, the

availability of slots has remained relatively fixed or increased very slowly, particularly at the most

highly-ranked schools.

         More detail is available by analyzing data from the National Center of Education Statistics

(NCES), which allow us to track application behavior and acceptances over time by student

background. The results are weighted to be nationally representative. Four longitudinal surveys from

the NCES provide data on secondary students who would have graduated high school in 1972 (the

National Longitudinal Study of the High School Class of 1972 or NLS72), 1982 (the High School

and Beyond or HSB82), 1992 (the National Educational Longitudinal Survey or NELS92), and 2004

(the Educational Longitudinal Survey or ELS04). Table 3 displays the percentage of students who




2
  If anything, these measures understate the increased selectivity of top ranked schools. Given that the number of
highly qualified students applying to selective colleges has increased dramatically over the last few decades, the
odds that an applicant in the top quartile of selective colleges test score distributions is admitted has declined.
McDuff (2007) calculates that, as of the 1990s, less than 40 percent of applicants to Princeton with SAT scores in
the top 25 percent of the Princeton college class actually end up attending Princeton.


                                                                                                                      6
applied to a four-year institution by cohort and sector.3 Reading across the cohorts, it is clear that the

percentage of students applying to a four-year institution has increased over time, from 29 percent

among the 1972 high school graduates to 53 percent in 2004. The percentage applying to selective

public institutions has also grown to 12.8 percent for the high school class of 2004. A smaller share

of students apply to selective private four-year schools (6.2 percent in 2004), and recently there has

been a small decline in the percentage (from 6.7 percent in 1992). Given the falling institutional-level

acceptance rates seen in Table 2, it is worth noting that this decline would have been even greater had

the application rate at selective privates held steady or even risen.

        Not surprisingly, higher ability students were more likely to apply to selective institutions,

with 20.4 and 30.1 percent of the fifth, or top, quintile of the 2004 graduating class applying to a

selective private or public institution, respectively. However, Table 3 also emphasizes increasing

proportions of students at all ability levels applying to four-year institutions, including selective

schools. This has affected the overall ability composition of applicants to different types of colleges

over time. As Bound, Lovenheim, and Turner (2007, 2008) have documented, the average quality of

applicants to four-year colleges declined between 1972 and 2004, with most of the decline

concentrated between 1982 and 1992. Using aggregate numbers available from the Department of

Education and our calculations based on NCES longitudinal student surveys, we compare how the

number of applicants from each ability quintile has changed over time at different types of schools.

The share of applicants from the top two quintiles of the ability distribution, for instance, fell from

69.4 percent in 1972, to 67.5 percent in 1982, 60.0 percent in 1992, and 57.7 percent in 2004. Stated

another way, 750,000 more students applied to a four-year college in 2004 than in 1972, and half of

these came from the third and fourth ability quintiles. The average applicant quality also declined at

selective private and public schools. The share of applicants to selective private schools from the top

ability quintile fell from 71 percent in 1982 to 66 percent by 2004; for applicants to public selective

publics, the equivalent share has fell from 53 percent to 47 percent. Declining cohort sizes forced


3
  The numbers in Table 3 do not accord perfectly with those in Table 1 because the latter are conditional on the
respondent having graduated from high school, whereas the numbers in Table 3 are conditional on the respondent
being a senior in high school. The basic trends between the two tables, however, are the same.


                                                                                                                   7
colleges to accept more students from lower in the ability distribution in 1992, but with the rapid rise

in cohort size over the next decade, schools were able to be much more selective by the early 2000s,

as observed in Table 2.

        The propensity to apply to a four-year institution, particularly a selective one, also differed by

region. Students from New England were by far the most likely to apply to a selective private school,

although this proportion dropped from 19.4 percent in 1992 to 14.4 percent in 2004. Students from

the Middle Atlantic States are the second most likely, and this region shows a drop-off similar to

New England. At the selective public four-years, students from the Midwest are the most active,

followed closely by students in the South and New England. Notably, students in the West

increasingly applied to both selective publics and privates, with the proportion increasing throughout

the 32-year period.

        These changes in application rates over time and by ability and region make analysis of

acceptance rates difficult. Ideally, we would like to observe how the same student who applied to

college in 1972 or 1982 would fare if she applied in 1992 or 2004, instead. Because this is not

possible, we instead construct a counterfactual acceptance rate that controls for the changes in

applicants by ability and region that we observe in Table 3. These acceptance rates, shown in Table

4, are fitted probabilities from logistic regressions that use the 1972 high school graduating class as

the baseline but allow coefficients to be survey-wave specific. Each number thus represents the mean

conditional probability that a student from 1972 in a given cell would have been admitted to a given

college type during the respective survey year. Generally speaking, the likelihood of being accepted

by a four-year college has declined. While acceptance rates increased slightly from 1972 to 1982, this

trend was reversed thereafter. From 1972 to 2004, the likelihood fell nearly 9 percent.4 The sharpest

reductions occurred for low ability students. Those among the first and second quintiles saw the

likelihood of being accepted by a four-year institution fall by 42.5 and 23.3 percent, respectively.




4
  The assertion that students with a given level of qualifications have had a tougher time getting into college is
confirmed by more detailed regression analysis that controls for many additional covariates. This is presented in
Appendix Table 3.


                                                                                                                8
        Taking a broad perspective across the entire horizon of 1972 to 2004, the counterfactual

conditional acceptance rate at selective private schools fell by 22.5 percent, more than twice the

decline at selective publics (10.7 percent) or at the typical four-year school (8.8 percent). Among

students in the highest test quintile, the reduction in the likelihood of being accepted was relatively

small at selective publics and the average four-year school (4.8 and 4.0 percent, respectively) but not

at the selective privates (17.0 percent). Other studies also emphasize this point. For example, McDuff

(2007) finds evidence that someone with a combined SAT score of 1500 would have less than a 50

percent chance of getting into a very selective college. Students of median ability (i.e., the third

quintile) also experienced a substantial decline in the likelihood of being accepted by a private

selective institution (a 47.8 percent reduction). The pattern of declining acceptances at selective

private institutions also holds looking across regions. While most of the regions experience a decline

of roughly similar magnitude (except for the Midwest), it is worth noting that the greater share of

students applying to selective private schools from New England and the Middle Atlantic states

(Table 3) implies a greater number of students would be rejected from these regions under the

counterfactual exercise.5

        In light of the steep reductions in acceptance rates as shown in Table 4, particularly among

selective private schools, and the findings of Hoxby (1997) regarding an increasingly national (and

international) college market, we used data from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data

System (IPEDS) to examine the fraction of first-year students coming from a different region of the

country than the school they attend, as well as the fraction coming from a different country entirely.

(The IPEDS is an annual census of postsecondary institutions in the United States collected by the

National Center of Education Statistics.) For the period between 1992 and 2004 among selective

private schools, the share of first-year students from a different region than their school rose only

slightly, from 47.9 percent to 49.0 percent. The fraction of international students increased even less,



5
  This assumes student characteristics and behaviors do not change. In the appendix, once holding constant
additional students traits, the conditional acceptance rates are much smaller for New England, the Middle Atlantic,
and the Western states than the counterfactual rates shown in Table 4 in 1992 and 2004. This suggests students did
have a behavioral response (i.e., their characteristics changed), which we explore in the next section.


                                                                                                                 9
from 4.2 percent to 4.5 percent.6 These numbers are too small for interregional and foreign students

to be playing a significant role in rising college selectivity, at least over this period.7

        It seems quite likely that college applicants (and their parents) from the Northeast (i.e., New

England and the Middle Atlantic states) may be bearing the brunt of this increasingly competitive

environment. Much of this has to do with the distribution of schools across the country, with far more

selective private colleges than selective public colleges located in the Northeast. As a consequence, a

typical talented student from the Northeast is more likely to apply to a selective private school than a

typical talented student from, say, the Midwest. As we documented earlier, while the supply of slots

has expanded only slightly at all selective schools, this growth has been greater at selective publics

than selective privates. Additionally, a far greater share of students at selective private schools comes

from out of state or out of region than at selective publics (49 percent versus 10.5 percent). All these

reasons suggest that “high-ability” students in the Northeast are competing for fewer slots than their

peers elsewhere in the country. From Table 3 we know that although the share of students from the

New England and Middle Atlantic States applying to college overall has risen, the share applying

from these regions to selective schools has declined since 1992, which suggests that students from

this region are not finding the same level of access to selective schools as before. Thus, behaviors

that result from the more competitive college admissions environment should tend to be more

pronounced among families in the Northeast.




III.    STUDENT RESPONSES TO GROWING COLLEGE COMPETITION

        In light of the increasing difficulty of getting into a selective institution, stories abound

concerning the pressure that students face to take on activities that will impress university and

college admission officers. For example, Williams (2006) reported in the New York Times: “Once,

summer for teenagers meant a season of menial jobs and lazy days at the local pool. But for a small

6
 Only at the most selective schools (the Ivy League and MIT) did the international share rise notably, from 5.6
percent to 8.2 percent, but this translates to very few slots (about 380).




                                                                                                            10
but growing number of college-bound students … summer has become a time of résumé-building

academic work and all-consuming, often exotic projects to change the world… There is a growing

sense among college-bound seniors and their parents that downtime is wasted time, said Stacy

Harvey, the college counselor at Santa Monica High School in California.”

        In what follows, we evaluate the available quantitative evidence to examine whether this

story is indicative of student responses to growing competition. As the return to attending and

graduating from a more selective school increased while entry into such schools became more

competitive, one would expect to see students invest more heavily in behaviors that would increase

their chances of acceptance. Such investments could include better academic preparation, such as

taking more challenging courses or being more involved in activities looked upon fondly by

admissions committees. It could also include investing in signals of ability, such as focusing on

improving college examination test scores. Changes in application behavior, such as the number of

applications submitted or where test scores are sent, might also increase the likelihood of being

accepted into a top school. Because the increase in selectivity has varied both across different ability

levels of students and regions of the country, one might expect to see changes in student behavior

also vary by student test score and geography. We note, however, that we cannot impart a causal

interpretation to the change in student behavior, as we are unable to separate the effects of other,

secular changes that are unrelated with growing competition.8 The results presented here should thus

be viewed as suggestive.



Academic Preparation and High School Activities

        Students have had increasing incentive to improve their academic preparation. Table 5

reports three indicators of college-preparatory high school behavior — taking calculus, taking an AP

exam, and time spent on homework. Although not all indicators are available for each cohort, they

7
  Hoxby finds convincing evidence of increased college integration over a longer horizon; from our data, it would
appear that much of the integration occurred before 1992.
8
  For example, the release of the seminal report A Nation at Risk in 1983 almost certainly led to major curricular
changes at the high school level that had little to do with already tightening college admission standards (Peabody




                                                                                                                11
are measured consistently when available. The tabulations are done to represent the national average

of all high school seniors at that time, as well as separately by test battery quintile, geography, and

(non-exclusive) college application status.

         Overall, high school students in 2004 engaged in significantly more behavior associated with

college preparation, on average, than did their counterparts from 10 and 20 years before. The share

taking at least a semester of calculus in high school rose from 9.2 percent to 15.2 percent between

1982 and 2004. In just the 12 years from 1992 to 2004, the fraction of seniors having taken at least

one Advanced Placement (AP) exam nearly doubled, from 16.5 to 30.9 percent. Finally, while one in

20 high school seniors spent 10 or more hours on homework per week in 1972, this ratio had reached

one in four by 1992. However, the share with at least 10 hours of homework did drop off from 1992

to 2004.

         The recent fall in homework time is somewhat mystifying as theory predicts that, at least to

the extent that homework time is positively correlated with college acceptance, homework time

should increase as competition intensifies.9 Yet the trend appears otherwise. CIRP data from The

American Freshman annual survey finds a similar pattern. In that data, ,the percentage of college

freshmen who reported spending six or more hours per week on homework during their senior year

of high school declined between the early 1990s and 2004. In their data it appears that the drop in

homework time was well underway by the late 1980s, more or less continuing to the present day. The

sharp rise in the percentage spending more than 10 hours a week on homework between the 1982 and

1992 NCES cohorts thus likely masks an even more dramatic spike that occurred in the mid 1980s.10

         As seen by the example of homework time, this overview of trends in academic preparation

can hide subtleties in the timing of the changes, particularly with regard to certain groups of students.

Journal of Education, 2004). However, it may have affected college demand if it increased the number of students
prepared for higher education.
9
   In fact, in our own exploratory work we have found that the partial correlation between homework time and
conditional college acceptance is stronger in 2004 than in 1992, whether it is for any four-year college or the
selective privates or selective publics.
10
    We suspect this spike is due in large part to curricular reform brought about by the release of the A Nation At Risk
report in 1983. Unfortunately, data limitations do not allow us to test our suspicion, but it would be a worthy topic
for future research. It may also be the case that changes in the availability of alternative activities, such as online




                                                                                                                     12
Separating the analysis by test quintile shows that the increases in college-preparatory behavior are

widespread throughout the ability distribution. This pattern may reflect that much of the rise in

anticipated college-going over the past 30 years stems from higher college application rates from

those in the lower quintiles (as shown earlier in Table 3). Nonetheless, looking strictly at the changes

between 1992 and 2004, when increasing competition was the most evident, the top ability quintile

shows consistently the most positive movement across each of the behavior measures. This finding is

largely corroborated by students applying to selective four-year private institutions, who

overwhelmingly come from the top ability quintile. Between 1992 and 2004, the decline in

homework time is smaller and the growth in calculus-taking is larger for students applying to

selective private institutions than those applying to baccalaureate institutions more generally.

        Examining the time trends by region shows that New England and the Middle Atlantic States,

and to a somewhat lesser extent the West (especially California), tend to be early leaders among the

college preparatory measures, but that the remaining regions tend to exhibit faster growth, if not

entire convergence, over time. For instance, although the time spent on homework is fairly uniform

across the country in 1972, ten years later, the Northeast and the West have clearly broken away from

the rest of the country.

        Other data provide further support of a trend toward increasing academic preparation. Data

from the College Board gives a more detailed account of the growth of the AP program. Begun at a

few pilot secondary schools in the mid 1950s as a way for superior students to earn college credit

while still in high school, by 2007 some 1.4 million students at over 13,000 high schools throughout

the country took 2.5 million exams in over 30 subjects. On a per-capita basis, fewer than 2 out of a

100 18-year-olds took an AP exam in 1977; 30 years later, this ratio had reached 34 out of a 100.

While the growth has been remarkably stable—since 1970, both the number of takers and the number

of exams have increased at roughly 10 percent per year—it has not been even throughout the nation.

        Administrative data from the College Board, which is shown in Figure 2, suggest that AP

program participation was relatively rare from the 1970s into the early 1980s: among the early

pursuits and video games, may contribute to the decline in homework time from 1992 to 2004, but research is



                                                                                                        13
leaders of New England, the Middle States, and the West (mostly California), the participation rate

was roughly 5 percent, while in the South, Southwest, and Midwest, it was scarcely half that. Over

the next 25 years, while all regions exhibited rapid growth, the South and Southwest experienced a

meteoric rise, particularly since 1998, allowing them to converge with the early leaders, and in the

case of the Southwest, surpass them. As of 2007, only the AP participation rate in the Midwest, a

region that has not shown particularly sharp increases in competitive pressure, noticeably lags the

other regions. This pattern is also illustrated using the NCES data by the middle columns of Table 5.

         Of course, the AP program has at two main purposes: it allows for earning college credit

while still in high school, reducing the costs of college attendance, and it can also serve as a signal of

academic ability to prospective colleges. As college costs and competitive pressures have risen, both

reasons are likely to have grown more compelling. Additionally, the rising importance of signaling

through taking AP exams can be seen by looking at the correlation in the change in participation rates

and the change in passing rates. Each AP exam is scored on a 1 through 5 scale; scores of 3 or higher

are considered “passing” and are the minimum that most colleges require for credit. Using state-level

data for the period 1996 through 2007, this correlation is strong and negative; the point estimate from

the regression implies that a 10 percent increase in the participation rate is associated with a 2.6

percentage point decline in the pass rate. This finding is consistent with much of the recent growth in

participation coming from marginal students who would not have taken an AP exam in the past but

have an increased desire to signal ability.

         Involvement in extracurricular activities may also affect chances for college admission. As

displayed in Figure 3, data from CIRP's Freshman Survey shows that the percentage of college

freshmen who regularly volunteered during their senior year of high school increased rapidly from

about 45 percent in 1987 and 1988 up to about 70 percent by 2000, where it has roughly remained

since. Similar increases are reported across institutions of different selectivity, although those at

highly selective institutions consistently report volunteering at higher rates (77 percent in 2004) than

do those at institutions of medium or low selectivity (72 percent and 68 percent, respectively, in


needed to explore this hypothesis.


                                                                                                       14
2004). However, other data suggest that participation in school clubs has decreased in recent years.

The percentage of students reporting having spent at least six hours per week in a school club fell

from 18 percent in the early 1990s to about 14 percent by the mid 2000s. Interestingly, the drop off is

most pronounced among students attending the most selective colleges. This result, like the

homework results, deserves further investigation to better understand how time use among students

has changed in recent years.

        Taking this evidence together, we find mixed evidence in support of the hypothesis that high

school students are undertaking rational behavioral responses to increased college selectivity. Over

the entire period from the early 1970s through the early 2000s, high school seniors increased the time

spent on homework and became more likely to take advanced classes like calculus and AP exams.

Furthermore, the parts of the country that we identified in the preceding section as having

experienced the earliest and most pronounced growth in college admission competition—primarily

New England and the Middle States—also exhibited earlier and more significant growth in

homework time and calculus course-taking. The same pattern holds for students applying to selective

private schools, and, to a lesser extent, those at the top of the ability distribution. Within the last 15

years, when competitive pressures were growing the most quickly, AP exam taking and time spent

volunteering rose. However, this growth was stronger in the parts of the country outside the

Northeast, for students below the top ability quintile, and for those not applying to private selective

schools—in other words, the segment of the student population that experienced lesser increases in

college competition. Moreover, time spent on homework and on extracurricular and leadership

positions actually declined in this period. Perhaps students have substituted some of their time away

from homework and extracurriculars and toward AP exams and volunteer time. The magnitude of

how different factors affect college admissions for students in different positions, and whether such

substitution makes sense, remains to be investigated.



Standardized Test-taking and Test Preparation




                                                                                                       15
         The share of high school seniors taking either or both the primary college entrance

examinations, the SAT and the ACT, has risen in recent decades. The SAT, or the Scholastic

Aptitude Test, is the older examination and is more popular on the east and west coasts. The rival

ACT is broader in its coverage of material, more popular in the middle of the country, and has grown

in popularity in the last 25 years.

         The first set of columns of Table 6 show the fraction of high school seniors, by cohort, that

took either of these college entrance examinations. While this proportion has increased moderately

from 56.1 to 64.6 percent between 1982 and 2004, this increase has not been uniform. As has been

documented earlier, much of the growth has come from marginal students lower in the ability

distribution, with the concomitant slowdown being driven by the plateau among the higher ability

quintiles. In fact, the share of students applying to selective schools or coming from the competitive

New England and Middle Atlantic regions who took a college entrance exam actually declined from

1992 to 2004. This counterintuitive trend may in part be a backlash against the stress associated with

increased competition: many colleges and universities, including several selective ones no longer

require either test for admission (Bruno, 2006).11

         Of course, the numbers in Table 6 may mask differences between the SAT and ACT.

Students in both New England and the Middle Atlantic States use the SAT more heavily; nearly three

out of five 18-year-olds have taken the test in these regions in recent years, nearly twice the rate of

the rest of the country, based on our tabulations of the NCES surveys. Nonetheless, every region of

the country except for the Midwest, where the ACT is most prevalent, has shown a sizable increase

in the SAT-taking rate over the past 35 years, with this increase accelerating within the past 10 years.

The fastest growth has come from the Southwest and West regions, where participation rates have

increased nearly 75 percent since 1972, and over 20 percent just since 1997.

         Considering that most colleges require at least one of the entrance examinations but generally

accept either, it is useful to look at patterns of students taking both the SAT and ACT. In some cases,


11
  For a nice treatment of the selection and signaling decisions of students under a test-optional policy at a selective
college, see Robinson and Monks (2004). Fairtest, an organization critical of standardized testing, maintains a list of
“SAT/ACT-optional” schools on its website at <http://www.fairtest.org/university/optional>.


                                                                                                                    16
students perform better on one than on the other, and the mitigation of risk from taking both tests

may exceed the financial and psychic costs. Using the NCES panels to construct snapshots of

combined test-taking, about one in eight college-bound seniors took both tests in 1972, and by 2004

this ratio had increased to one in five. Among those applying to private, selective schools, however,

both the levels and rate of increase are greater: about 15 percent of these students took both in 1972,

and 35 percent took both by 2004. Unfortunately, the NCES data are not able to pinpoint the timing

of this increase precisely. Examining aggregate ACT participation rates in predominantly SAT

states,12 although a crude proxy, provides higher frequency data. In just the six years between 2001

and 2007, the New England and Middle Atlantic regions have seen their ACT participation rates

nearly double, from about 6 percent to 11 percent. As SAT participation rates have also increased

during this period, it seems plausible that the rate of combined test-taking in these areas has increased

considerably in recent years.

            With the growing importance of the SAT and ACT in admissions, students have had

increasing incentive to invest in test preparation services. Table 6 also displays trends in private

classes or tutoring and any form of test preparation for the 1992 and 2004 cohorts. Using some kind

of test preparation service is more common among those who are higher ability and those who

applied to a four-year institution, particularly a selective private school. Within each type of

preparation, there has been an increase in the percentage of students reporting formal help. The

increases in test preparation are most pronounced for higher ability students.13 The large increase in

the South mirrors the rise discussed earlier in the region’s SAT/ACT participation and in other

preparatory measures.

            Retaking the test is another way in which students may respond to competitive pressure.

According to a College Board report, of the 1.1 million students of the class of 1997 who took the

SAT, just under half took the test more than once (Camara and Nathan, 1998). Vigdor and Clotfelter

(2003), using a special sample of complete SAT score reports for the applicants to three private,

12
     This set of states is quite consistent over time. See the Data Appendix for a list.




                                                                                                      17
selective schools in the South, find that the policy at many colleges to look at only the highest

submitted score provides powerful incentives for test retaking, and this policy disadvantages those

with high costs of test-taking. We suspect that retaking of the SAT, as well as the ACT, for which

there is even less data, has risen considerably in recent years, but without better data we are unable to

test our hypothesis.

        Finally, some students (or their parents) might seek an advantage by obtaining special

accommodations during the test, such as additional time or a less-crowded room.14 Abrams (2005)

provides suggestive but compelling evidence that the College Board’s decision in 2003 to end

“flagging” of tests given under non-standard conditions resulted in benefitting the savvy and well-to-

do, with unprecedented score gains for non-standard-condition test takers in Washington D.C. and

wealthy communities in California. We extend Abrams’ analysis slightly by examining the fraction

of SAT takers under non-standard conditions in selected (SAT) states in 2003 and 2004, the years

bracketing the policy change. In states where the SAT is prevalent and competitive pressures have

risen sharply— New York, Massachusetts, Connecticut, New Hampshire, New Jersey, and

Maryland—the share of those taking the SAT under nonstandard conditions ranged from 3.4 to 5.2

percent. In a selection of five states six states where the SAT is also prevalent but competitive

pressures have risen less—Indiana, South Carolina, North Carolina, Georgia, and Oregon— the share

of those taking the SAT under nonstandard conditions ranged from 0.8 to 2.4 percent.



College Application and Score-Sending Behavior

        Applying to a different or larger set of schools may feel to many students and their parents

like a relatively easy and inexpensive way to increase the chance of college acceptance. In the mid-

1970s, the Common Application began as a near-unified college application form among a

consortium of selective, private schools. Membership in the consortium has grown considerably

13
   Non-response to the test preparation questions in the 2004 survey is high (approximately 25 percent) and is
strongly negatively correlated with socioeconomic status (income or parental education). The inference should thus
be treated cautiously.




                                                                                                               18
since then: by 2007, nearly 300 institutions participated. Moreover, Internet-based applications began

in 1998, and public institutions were invited to join in 2001.15 These innovations, which obviate

having to write multiple essays and fill out multiple forms by hand, have almost certainly reduced the

cost of applying to a wider variety and greater number of colleges even further.

         Figure 4 investigates the trend in the number of college applications with data drawn from

the CIRP Freshman Survey. Like the earlier Freshman Survey figure, the series exist for successful

matriculants at baccalaureate-granting institutions from the late 1960s through 2006, as well by

institutional selectivity for selected years. While 25 percent of students had applied to four or more

schools in 1972, more than half had by 2004. Figure 4 shows that the percentage of students applying

to seven or more schools rose from about 3 percent in 1972 to 18 percent in 2004. This implies that

more than half of the increase among those applying to four or more schools is driven by those

applying to seven or more schools; within the last ten years, more than three quarters of the increase

is from those applying to seven or more schools. The increase in application rates has been

widespread throughout the selectivity distribution, with students at highly selective institutions not

only sending more applications on average, but also increasing the number of applications sent at a

faster pace earlier on.

         Another proxy for college application behavior is the number of SAT score reports sent to

various colleges.16 When taking the SAT, students are allowed to send up to four score reports at no

additional marginal cost. However, in recent years, students have been sending far more score

reports. As shown in the three panels of Figure 5, the number of scores sent (and the likelihood of

sending more than four) rises dramatically with the student's score. For those with scores above 1400

(around the 97th percentile), the median number of reports sent is around eight, which suggests that

even students with very high scores do not feel that they can rely on being accepted into a top school.


14
   Non-standard conditions may include (i) presentation enhancement (large print/audio-magnification of materials),
ii) alternative response (e.g., via a tape recorder instead of pencil, (iii) extended time, or (iv) alternative setting (e.g.,
private room).
15
   For more information, including a complete membership list, see <http://www.commonapp.org>.
16
   This is true for ACT reports, as well. We use SAT score reports here because they have a much higher topcode on
the number of scores sent (15) than do the corresponding ACT data (six), allowing a finer and more detailed
analysis.


                                                                                                                          19
Table 7 illustrates how the number of reports sent varies with score. About three out of 10 students

with barely above-average SAT scores, in the 1000 to 1090 range, send six or more score reports; 1

out of 8 in this range of test scores sends eight or more. Throughout the table, the fraction of students

sending a given number of reports rises with the test score.




IV.     HAS GREATER COMPETITION INCREASED LEARNING?

        The increasingly competitive environment in higher education has increased the level of

anxiety that many high school students and their families experience (Lombardi, 2007; Kaufman,

2008). Beyond this, it is natural to wonder whether the increasingly competitive environment has

made the typical high school student experience more productive. On one hand, an increasingly

competitive environment could induce students to work harder at school and, as a result, to learn

more during their high school years; on the other hand, certain mechanisms might lead to the

opposite outcome. For example, capable students may spend time on activities that will enhance the

chance they obtain admission to selective colleges at the expense of spending time on other activities

that might be more productive; Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991) represent the classic formal model of

this general phenomenon.

        Raising the possibility that increasing competition in higher education may be

counterproductive takes us into some profound and difficult questions of education policy. For

example, to what extent will an increase in students taking SAT tests or AP exams increase learning?

Time spent in an SAT test preparation classes, focusing on strategies for more efficient time use or

guessing during the exam, may accomplish relatively little to enhance learning. In contrast, one could

imagine that students do learn some history or biology while taking high school courses to prepare

for the AP tests in these areas. However, the AP tests put a heavy emphasis on memorization of

detailed facts because such knowledge is easier to test and to measure. Some students might learn

more about softer aspects of various subjects (say, history) and about how to pursue these interests on

their own if they were taking classes not focused on the AP exam. One prominent study



                                                                                                      20
commissioned by the National Science Foundation and the U.S. Department of Education concluded

that AP courses crammed in too much material at the expense of understanding, and that many were

taught by teachers who did not have sufficient background in the field (National Research Council,

2002). As a result of these kinds of issues, some highly prestigious private and public high schools

are abandoning AP classes (Hu, 2008).

       Another major question of education policy is the balance between intrinsic and extrinsic

motivation. Kreps (1997) and many others have emphasized that a key value of education is to build

an intrinsic motivation for learning. However, the current increasingly competitive high school

environment seems to put more emphasis on the extrinsic rewards associated with study, which can

result in several problems. For example, even capable students may learn less when under heavy

pressure (Ariely et. al., 2008). This would be true if capable students spent a great deal of time

worrying about getting into the college of their choice rather than simply focusing on their studies. At

the other end of the ability spectrum, less capable students may effectively give up trying either

because they know their chances of getting into a selective school are small or because they do not

want to subject themselves to possible humiliation. Moreover, the experimental literature has found

evidence that in certain settings extrinsic motivations and rewards can reduce the pressure of intrinsic

motivation (Heyman and Ariely, 2004; Gneezy and Rustichini, 2000a, 2000b). Readers who doubt

that many students are intrinsically motivated are likely to imagine increased competition causing

students to work harder, while those who think that many students are internally motivated will more

likely think that increased competition and external pressure will take time away from more

productive activities. But many educators would express some trepidation if they believed that

colleges are showing an increasing tendency to select those who are externally motivated at the

expense of those that are internally motivated.

       The efforts that students and their families make to increase their attractiveness to colleges

also have a number of undesirable consequences for equity and efficiency. If some families are in a

better position than others to invest in valuable signals, either because they are more aware of what

colleges are looking for, or because they have more resources to make the appropriate investments,



                                                                                                     21
these families will have an advantage over other families, with negative consequences for both the

efficiency and equity of college selection (Leonhardt, 2004). For instance, when some students take

SAT prep courses and others do not, the information value of SAT scores is reduced. The high stakes

(or perceived high stakes) involved in college admissions naturally leads parents at least partly to

game the system. Such behavior is naturally reinforcing. If everyone else in your school is managing

to figure out ways to take the SAT untimed, it would seem foolish not to do so oneself. To the extent

the admission process is seen as a process that can be manipulated, students learn that the appropriate

strategy to make the most of any advantage they may be able to obtain (Rabin, 1993).

       Taking all the factors together, has the increased competitive environment for higher

education improved the learning of high school students or has it been counterproductive? Persuasive

evidence as to which view is right is exceedingly hard to come by. Various authors have found

evidence that many U.S. college students are not particularly hard-working or motivated (for

example, Sabot and Wakeman-Linn, 1991; Hersch and Marrow, 2005; Nathan, 2006). However, this

research does not make comparisons across time, nor does it offer a way to gauge the importance of

the increasingly competitive nature of college admission on the outcomes observed.

       We attempt to fill this gap by comparing trends across states in outcomes that we believe are

valuable metrics of social welfare. In particular, we examine four indicators: the percentage of 19-

year-olds enrolled in college, the percentage of 25-year-olds with at least some college, the

percentage of 25-year-olds with at a bachelor’s degree, and real annual labor earnings of 25-year-olds

who were employed and not attending school. Using the Integrated Public-Use Microdata (IPUMS)

data for the 1980 Census and the 2005-2007 American Community Surveys, we constructed state-

level averages of the above variables. The 1980 values capture high school experiences of the 1970s,

well before the period of increased competitive pressure to get into college. The 2006 values, on the

other hand, correspond to high school during the late 1990s and early 2000s, when we have seen

pressure to be much higher.

       If increased competition leads high school students to become more engaged in their studies,

it seems plausible that its effects could also show up in the number of students pursuing advanced



                                                                                                    22
education. Thus, we also examine per-capita Ph.D. production. Using data from the Survey of Earned

Doctorates (SED), an annual census of Ph.D.s earned in the U.S. that contains state and year of high

school graduation, and limiting ourselves to those who graduated from high school in the U.S., we

constructed the number of Ph.D.s awarded for each state and high school graduating class from 1972

through 1995.17 In addition to total Ph.D.s, we also generated counts for Ph.D.s earned at the top 15

research universities in the country, science and engineering Ph.D.s, and science and engineering

Ph.D.s from the top 15 research universities.18

        In order to compare trends across more and less competitive states, of course, one must

delineate which states are in which group. At first, we constructed a binary measure of competition

based on a reading of the popular press, our own intuition based on the data, and geographic

simplicity. We coded as competitive states all of New England, the Middle Atlantic States (New

York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, and Washington, D.C.), and California.

However, because this measure is ad hoc and possibly prone to error, we also created a composite

index of competitive pressure for each of the 50 states plus the District of Columbia. This index is

calculated as the sum of the fractions of students who engaged in each of the following behaviors in

1992: took the PSAT, took an AP exam, spent 10+ hours on homework per week, used private test

preparation services, and applied to five or more colleges. Reassuringly, the top six states from this

index, New Jersey, Rhode Island, D.C., Connecticut, Massachusetts, and New York, match quite

closely with the ad hoc measure above (see Appendix Table 5 for the full, rank-ordered list). There

appears to be a natural gap between the states ranked sixth and seventh, so we group these first six

together. We then matched our competitive index to the SED and Census data (for the latter, we



17
   Our SED data run through 2005, but because of the significant time lag from high school graduation to PhD
receipt (Hoffer and Welch, 2006), we limit the sample to those who graduated high school in or before 1995.
18
   Graduate programs are ranked by field, not university. However, top departments tend to be concentrated at a
relatively select group of universities. Using the U.S. News and World Report rankings of graduate departments in
the sciences, social sciences, and humanities, we looked for universities with many departments listed among the top
ten. We found ten private universities (Cal Tech, Columbia, Cornell, Harvard, Johns Hopkins, MIT, Princeton,
Stanford, University of Chicago, and Yale) and four public Universities (UC Berkeley, UCLA, UC San Diego
including Scripps Institute, and U Michigan) that included many top 10 departments. During the period in questions
these universities granted just under 20 percent of all Ph.D.s granted to graduates of U.S. high schools who went on
to get Ph.D.s in the U.S.


                                                                                                                 23
used an individual’s state of birth as a proxy for state of high school attendance).19 For ease of

interpretation, we created dummy variables for whether a state was among the six most, or eleven

most, competitive. Summary statistics for all of the indicators, broken down by competitive state

grouping, can be found in Appendix Table 6.

        Table 8 presents estimates of the outcome variables as a function of the competitive state

dummy, a linear time trend, and their interaction. In Panel A, we employed OLS on the Census

measures expressed in natural logarithms. Because the Ph.D. measures in Panel B are count data, we

used a Poisson model that also included a control for the natural logarithm of the state’s population,

the coefficient of which was constrained to be equal to 1.20 For the sake of brevity, only the

coefficient from the interaction term, which captures the differential time trend of the competitive

states, is shown, although the full estimates are available upon request. Given the specifications used,

the coefficients shown can be interpreted as the percent difference in the growth rates between the

competitive and less competitive states. Each coefficient is from a separate regression, either in terms

of the outcome (by columns) or in terms of the competitive state grouping (by rows). If competitive

pressure has a positive effect on learning outcomes, then we would expect the interaction coefficient

to be positive.

        The estimates of Panel A, however, show that this is not the case; the point estimates are

always negative, often statistically significantly. For example, the coefficient in the upper left shows

that the fraction of 19-year-olds enrolled in college in the six most competitive states grew 0.23

percent more slowly than did this fraction for the less competitive states, and this difference is

statistically significantly different from zero at the 1 percent level. Because enrollment rates were

initially higher in the competitive states (see Appendix Table 6 and Figures 6a-6d) the results show

that over the quarter century between 1980 and 2006, the gap between the competitive states and less

competitive states in the share of 19-year-olds attending college has narrowed substantially. This


19
   According to the NLSY79, about 78 percent of respondents who graduated high school did so in their state of
birth. However, by age 25, only 64 percent of high school graduates were living in the same state from which they
graduated.
20
   Relaxing this constraint has virtually no effect on results. We chose to report the results that impose this
constraint because these specifications are closer in spirit to the “rate” regressions in panel A.


                                                                                                              24
pattern is evident for each of the education measures as well as real earnings (adjusted for current

state of residence, sex, education, and the interaction of sex and education) whether we restrict our

definition of competitive states to the top six or the top ten. The Ph.D. estimates in panel B evince the

same story. The trend for competitive state per-capita Ph.D. production in the sciences is 0.94 percent

slower than for less competitive states, and it 0.8 percent slower for Ph.D.s from top schools. The

differential among science and engineering Ph.D.s is even wider.

        While we stop short of inferring that competition has had negative effects on these outcomes,

we find no support that it has produced positive effects. In conjunction with the psychological and

informational costs associated with competitive pressure that we discuss above, these results should

raise doubts that the increased competition for college admission has had a net positive effect on

what and how students learn.




V.      CONCLUSION

        Higher education in the United States has changed dramatically over the past 30 to 40 years.

The overall demand for a college education amongst high school graduates has grown, and this has

resulted in increasingly fierce competition for admission to the more selective colleges. While, as we

have seen, this increase in competition has been particularly large for students who, had they finished

high school in an earlier period, would have had a reasonable chance for admission to one of the

more selective colleges in the country, we have also seen that the effects of the increased competition

has been quite pervasive. Even students of more average ability have been affected by the changes.

In terms of regional differences, competition has grown the most in the Northeast and California,

although other regions have also faced increases. The increased competition that currently exists for

admission to a more selective college might have real benefits if it were to increase learning amongst

high school students. However, our analysis suggests that there are reasons to be suspicious that this

congenial outcome might not hold true. Moreover, the increased resources parents and students are

able to use to improve their odds of admission at top colleges put low-income students at a



                                                                                                      25
disadvantage. Students who attend high schools that typically do not send their graduates to top

schools as well as the children of parents who did not attend selective institutions are also at a

disadvantage (Roderick, Nagaoka, and Allensworth, 2006).

        Interventions to reduce the selectivity of institutions seem neither practical nor sensible.

However, the difference in resources per student in private and public schools may be worth

addressing. Using the same categorization of schools as is utilized here, Bound, Lovenheim and

Turner (2008) estimate that typical per student expenditures are four times as large at selective

private colleges and universities than they are at relatively open-access public four-year schools.

Winston (2000) reports even larger differences. The resources provided to students attending elite

private colleges have been increasing dramatically, while the resources provided to students

attending non-flagship public colleges and universities have declined significantly (Hoxby, 1997;

Bound, Lovenheim and Turner, 2008). Policies designed to reduce the gap in resources available to

students attending selective private schools versus those attending relatively open-access institutions

might reduce the disparities in terms of college experience between those who do and those who do

not obtain admission to these schools, and thus also reduce both some of the pressure students and

their families feel to obtain access to a more selective college or university. The huge gap in

resources available to students at selective relative to less selective schools seems too large to be

justifiable on grounds of either efficiency or equity.




                                                                                                    26
REFERENCES

Abrams, Samuel J. 2005. “Unflagged SATs.” Education Next 5(3).

Ariely, Dan, Uri Gneezy, George Loewenstein, and Nina Mazar. Forthcoming. “Large Stakes and
        Big Mistakes.” Review of Economic Studies.

Bound, John, Michael Lovenheim, and Sarah E. Turner. 2007. “Understanding the Decrease in
      College Completion Rates and the Increased Time to the Baccalaureate Degree.” Population
      Studies center Research Report 07-626, University of Michigan.

Bound, John, Michael F. Lovenheim, and Sarah Turner, 2008, “Why Have College Completion Rates
       Declined? The Effects of Changes in Students and Changes in Colleges” unpublished
       manuscript.

Bruno, Laura. 2006. “More universities are going SAT-optional.” USA Today. April 4.

Camara, Wayne, and Julie S. Nathan. 1998. “Score Change When Retaking the SAT I: Reasoning
      Test.” College Board Research Notes 5 September. 1–12. Washington, D.C. The College
      Board.

College Board. 2008. Trends in College Pricing. Washington, D.C. The College Board.

College Board. 2008. Trends in College Pricing. Washington, D.C. The College Board.

Courant, Paul N., Michael McPherson and Alexandra M. Resch. 2006. “The Public Role in Higher
       Education,” National Tax Journal, LVIV, 291-318.

Finder, Alan. 2006. “In New Twist on College Search, a First Choice, and 20 Backups.” New York
        Times. March 21.

Gamerman, Ellen, Juliet Chung, Sungha Park, and Candace Jackson. 2007. “How the Schools Stack
      Up.”             Wall           Street          Journal.         December           28.
      http://online.wsj.com/public/resources/documents/info-COLLEGE0711-sort.html

Gneezy, Uri, and Aldo Rustichini. 2000a. “Pay Enough or Don’t Pay at All.” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics 115: 791–810.

Gneezy, Uri, and Aldo Rustichini. 2000b. “A Fine is a Price.” Journal of Legal Studies 29: 1–18.

Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race Between Education and Technology.
       Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Heckman, James, Lance Lochner, and Petra Todd. 2006. “Earnings Functions, Rates of Return and
      Treatment Effects: The Mincer Equation and Beyond.” In Handbook of the Economics of
      Education, Volume 1. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Hersch, Richard, and John Merrow. 2005. Declining by Degrees: Higher Education at Risk. New
       York: Palgrave Macmillan.



                                                                                                   27
Heyman, James, and Dan Ariely. 2004. “Effort for Payment: A Tale of Two Markets.” Psychological
     Science 15(11) November: 787–793.

Hoffer, Thomas B., and Vincent Welch. 2006. “Time to Degree of U.S. Research Doctorate
       Recipients.”      National           Science       Foundation        InfoBrief 06-312.
       http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/infbrief/nsf06312/. Accessed 1/8/2009.

Holmstrom, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom. 1991. “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive
       Contracts, Asset Ownership and Job Design.” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization
       7: 24–52.

Hoxby, Caroline M. 1997. “How the Changing Market Structure of U.S. Higher Education Explains
       College Tuition.” NBER Working Paper WP # 6323.

Hoxby, Caroline M. and B. T. Long. 1998. “Explaining Rising Income and Wage Inequality among
      the College-Educated.” NBER Working Paper No. 6873.

Hoxby, Caroline M. 2009. “The Changing Selectivity of American Colleges.”Journal of Economic
      Perspectives

Hu, Winnie. 2008. “Scarsdale Adjusts to Life Without Advanced Placement Courses.” New York
      Times. December 6.

Kaufman, Jonathan. 2008. “High School's Worst Year? For Ambitious Teens, 11th Grade Becomes a
      Marathon Of Tests, Stress and Sleepless Nights.” Wall Street Journal. May 24.

Kreps, David. 1997. “Intrinsic Motivation and Extrinsic Incentives.” American Economic Review 87:
       359–364.

Leonhardt, David. 2004. “As Wealthy Fill Top Colleges, Concerns Grow Over Fairness.” New York
      Times. April 22.

Lombardi, Kate Stone. 2007. “High Anxiety of Getting Into College.” New York Times. April 8.

McDuff, DeForest. 2007. “Quality, Tuition, and Applications to In-state Public Colleges.”
      Economics of Education Review 26(4).

Nathan, Rebekah. 2006. My Freshman Year: What a Professor Learned by Becoming a Student.
       Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

National Research Council. 2002. Learning and Understanding: Improving Advanced Study of
       Mathematics and Science in U.S. High Schools, National Academy Press, Washington, DC.

Pryor, John, Sylvia Hurtado, Victor B Saenz, Jose Luis Santos, and William S. Korn. 2007. The
        American Freshman: Forty Year Trends. Los Angeles: Higher Education Research Institute,
        UCLA.

Rabin, Matthew. 1993. “Incorporating Fairness Into Game Theory and Economics.” American
       Economic Review 83: 1281–1302.



                                                                                               28
Robinson, Michael, and James Monks. 2004. “Making SAT scores optional in selective college
       admissions: A case study.” Economics of Education Review 24: 393–405.

Roderick, Melissa, Jenny Nagaoka, and Elaine M. Allensworth. (2006) From High School to the
       Future: A first look at Chicago Public School graduates’ college enrollment, college
       preparation, and graduation from four-year colleges. Chicago: Consortium on Chicago
       School Research at the University Of Chicago, Chicago Postsecondary Transition Project.
       Accessed June 18, 2009, from: http://ccsr.uchicago.edu/publications/Postsecondary.pdf.

Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia
       Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. 2008. Integrated Public Use Microdata
       Series: Version 4.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population
       Center. http://usa.ipums.org/usa/

Sabot, Richard, and John Wakeman-Linn. 1991. “Grade Inflation and Course Choice.” Journal of
       Economic Perspectives 5(1): 159–170.

Snyder, T.D., Dillow, S.A., and Hoffman, C.M. (2009). Digest of Education Statistics 2008 (NCES
       2009-020). National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S.
       Department of Education. Washington, DC.

U.S. News and World Report. 2007. “Gold Medal Schools.” U.S. News and World Report.
      November 29. http://www.usnews.com/articles/education/high-schools/2007/11/29/gold-
      medal-schools.html

Vigdor, Jacob, and Charles Clotfelter. 2003. “Retaking the SAT.” Journal of Human Resources
       38(1): 1–33.

Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education. 1998. Knocking at the College Door:
       Projections of High School Graduates by State and Race/Ethnicity, 1996 – 2012 (6th edition).

Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education. 2008. Knocking at the College Door:
       Projections of High School Graduates by State and Race/Ethnicity, 1992 – 2022 (7th edition).

Williams, Alex. 2006. “The Lost Summer.” New York Times. June 4.

Winston, Gordon C. 1999. “Subsidies, Hierarchy and Peers: The Awkward Economics of Higher
      Education,” The Journal of Economics Perspectives, Vol. 13, No. 1 (Winter), pp. 13-36.

Winston, Gordon C. 2000. “Economic Stratification and Hierarchy in U.S. Colleges and
      Universities,” Williams Project on the Economics of Higher Education
      http://www.williams.edu/wpehe/research.html..

Wong, Kenneth, James Guthrie, and Douglas Harris (eds). 2004. “A Nation at Risk: A 20-Year
      Reappraisal.” Peabody Journal of Education 79(1) (Special Issue).




                                                                                                29
Figure 1: Math SAT 75th Percentile by Sector and Institution Ranking
                             775



                             725
  Math SAT 75th Percentile




                             675



                             625



                             575



                             525
                                 86

                                        87

                                               88

                                                      89

                                                             90

                                                                    91

                                                                           92

                                                                                  93

                                                                                         94

                                                                                                95

                                                                                                       96

                                                                                                              97

                                                                                                                     98

                                                                                                                            99

                                                                                                                                   00

                                                                                                                                          01

                                                                                                                                                 02

                                                                                                                                                        03
                               19

                                      19

                                             19

                                                    19

                                                           19

                                                                  19

                                                                         19

                                                                                19

                                                                                       19

                                                                                              19

                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                        20

                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                      20
                                      Top 20 Privates                            Top 21-50 Pvt Univ                         Top 21-50 Pvt Lib Arts
                                      Other Privates                             Top 20 Publics                             Top 21-50 Publics
                                      Other Publics

Source: American Survey of Colleges, The College Board, 1986-87 to 2003-04.
Notes: The Top 20 Private Institutions includes the top 20 private universities and top 20 liberal arts colleges. To be
included in the sample, institutions must have had at least 16 of the 18 possible years of data.




                                                                                                                                                             30
Figure 2: Advanced Placement Takers per 100 18-year-olds, By Region and Year

    40




    35




    30
                                                                                                                                        South

    25




    20


                                                                                                     West
    15

                                                                                                                         Midwest

    10

                                       New England
                   Middle States
     5

                                                                           Southwest

     0
         1970   1972   1974   1976   1978   1980   1982   1984   1986   1988   1990   1992   1994   1996   1998   2000   2002   2004   2006




Sources: The AP data is from the College Board. The 18-year-old population data is from the National Cancer
Institute.
Notes: See the Data Appendix for the regional definitions.




                                                                                                                                                31
Figure 3: Percentage of Students Reporting having Spent Positive Time per Week
Volunteering Last Year



       80



       75
                                                                                      High selectivity


       70



       65
                                                                                                            Medium selectivity

                   All Baccalaureate Institutions
       60
                                                                         Low selectivity

       55



       50



       45



       40
            1987   1988 1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995    1996   1997 1998   1999   2000 2001   2002   2003 2004   2005   2006




Source: The American Freshman, Cooperative Institutional Research Program (CIRP), various years.
Notes: CIRP attempts to make its sample nationally representative by stratifying participating schools by control,
highest degree awarded, and selectivity, and then weighting responses to population totals from the IPEDS system.
The selectivity metric used is time-varying and based on mean composite SAT score (or ACT equivalent). As a rule
of thumb, high selectivity is fairly similar to our combined select private and select publics.




                                                                                                                                          32
Figure 4: Percentage of Students Reporting having Applied to 7+ Schools


       30




       25



                                                                     High selectivity
       20




       15




       10



                                                                       Mediumselectivity
       5
                                                                                           Low selectivity

                      All Baccalaureate Institutions
       0
            1967 1969 1971 1973    1975 1977 1979 1981   1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995     1997 1999 2001 2003 2005




 Source: The American Freshman, Cooperative Institutional Research Program (CIRP), various years.
Notes: CIRP attempts to make its sample nationally representative by stratifying participating schools by control,
highest degree awarded, and selectivity, and then weighting responses to population totals from the IPEDS system.
The selectivity metric used is time-varying and based on mean composite SAT score (or ACT equivalent). As a rule
of thumb, high selectivity is fairly similar to our combined select private and select publics.




                                                                                                                           33
Figure 5: Number of SAT Score Reports Sent, 1996-2001

                             A. National Sample and SAT States Sample




                           B. Students Combined SAT scores of 1200-1390




                        C. Students Combined SAT scores of 1400 or above




Source: The College Board (SAT data).
Notes: The SAT data cover all SAT I tests taken in the period 1996 through 2001. The test allows up to four score
reports to be sent at no charge beyond the test fee. See Data Appendix for definition of SAT states.




                                                                                                              34
Figure 6a: The Effects of Competition on College Enrollment




Source: IPUMS data for the 1980 Census and the 2005-2007 American Community Surveys.
Notes: The index of competitive pressure is defined as the sum of the fraction of students who engaged in each of
the following in 1992: took the PSAT, took an AP exam, spent 10+ hours on homework per week, used private test
preparation services, and applied to five or more colleges. The top six states are NJ, RI, DC, CT, MA, and NY.
States seven through eleven are DE, VA, CA, CO, and GA.


Figure 6b: The Effects of Competition on Some College Attainment




See the source information and notes to Figure 6a.


                                                                                                              35
Figure 6c: The Effects of Competition on Share with a Bachelor's Degree




See the source information and notes to Figure 6a.



Figure 6d: The Effects of Competition on Annual Earnings




See the source information and notes to Figure 6a.




                                                                          36
Table 1: Supply and Demand Trends in College-Going (thousands)
                                                                              Year
                                                 1972                1982                 1992             2004
18-year-olds                                     3945                4122                 3347             4124

High school graduates                            3002                2995                 2478             3064

       …who apply to four-year
                                                   949               1184                 1187             1705
   colleges
       …who attend four-year
                                                   910                  920                965             1428
   colleges in the Fall

      …who apply to selective four-
                                                   129                  149                172               203
   year private colleges
      …who attend selective four-
                                                    74                   77                 86               100
   year private colleges in the Fall

      …who apply to selective four-
                                                   254                  271                304               419
   year public colleges
      …who attend selective four-
                                                   165                  132                150               232
   year public colleges in the Fall
Sources: The number of 18-year-olds is from the National Cancer Institute, and the number of high school graduates
is from the 2008 Digest of Education Statistics (Table 104). These latter numbers were multiplied by the
percentages of high school graduates who met each benchmark according to the authors’ calculations using data
from the NCES longitudinal surveys.
Notes: Data availability limits application behavior to the top two school choices of respondents; while this measure
is consistent across years, it is does not capture a complete profile of application behavior.



Table 2: Percentage Accepted by Sector and Institution Ranking
                             PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS                                    PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS
                  Top 20       Top 21-50       Top 21-48 Other Private           Top 20     Top 21-47 Other Public
                  Privates     Universities   Liberal Arts Four-years          Universities Universities Four-years
1986               38.58          62.46          59.75          78.13             63.15          75.59         73.75
1991               38.39          67.39          57.95          76.82             56.78          73.47         68.49
1996               37.55          62.41          61.85          78.73             58.98          76.53         72.96
2001               31.49          51.30          52.68          77.41             50.55          71.92         71.85
2002               30.72          49.51          51.26          75.58             48.81          71.23         71.07
2003               29.85          52.35          47.88          74.35             47.72          70.56         69.19
Percentage
                  -22.63%       -16.19%        -19.87%         -4.84%           -24.43%          -6.65%        -6.18%
  Change
Num. Schools         38            26             28             419                 17            21            208
Source: American Survey of Colleges, College Board, 1986-87 to 2003-04.
Notes: The Top 20 Private Institutions includes the top 20 private universities and top 20 liberal arts colleges. To be
included in the sample, institutions must have had at least 16 of the 18 possible years of data.




                                                                                                                    37
Table 3: Percentage who Applied to Four-Year Institutions, by Cohort and Sector
                          Percentage who Applied to a                    Percentage who Applied to a Private               Percentage who Applied to a Public
                             Four-year Institution                          Selective Four-year Institution                  Selective Four-year Institution
HS Cohort              1972    1982      1992      2004                  1972       1982     1992        2004              1972      1982     1992       2004
U.S. average            28.8       38.2        46.5        53.2           3.9         4.8         6.7         6.2            7.5         8.8       11.9       12.8
Test Quintile
  First                  7.9       12.3        18.2        23.8            0.4        0.1         0.7        0.7            0.7         0.7        1.7        2.5
  Second                14.6       19.5        32.9        37.8           0.8         0.8         1.7        1.8            2.2         2.2        5.3         4.5
  Third                 24.7       31.0        47.1        53.9           1.4         1.7         3.2        2.7            4.4         5.3        8.8        9.5
  Fourth                38.4       51.9        64.3        67.6           3.8         4.1         7.2        5.8             9.6        12.6       16.0       18.1
  Fifth                 60.7       77.8        81.7        84.8           13.6        17.0        22.8       20.4           21.3        23.8       29.3       30.1
Region
  New England           33.1       46.7        59.5        62.9           8.3         13.9        19.9       14.4            7.9        9.0        12.5       12.3
  Middle Atlantic       32.4       40.5        55.9        59.9           7.2          9.5        14.9       10.4            6.8        7.1        12.9       12.0
  South                 27.3       35.4        46.0        55.2           3.4         2.1         4.3        5.4             6.2        7.5        10.6       12.7
  Midwest               27.9       40.2        48.7        55.9           1.6         1.9         3.2         4.2            8.9        11.2       13.9       16.7
  Southwest             32.2       37.4        39.1        49.2           2.6         1.6         3.1        2.4             5.5        6.8         8.7        7.6
  West                  24.0       31.6        36.7        42.5           3.1         5.1         5.8        6.0             7.6        9.2        11.3       11.1
Source: National Center for Education Statistics, National Longitudinal Study of the High School Class of 1972 (NLS72), High School and Beyond (HSB82),
National Educational Longitudinal Survey (NELS92), and Educational Longitudinal Survey (ELS04). The cohort year refers to the year on-time students would
have graduated high school.
Notes: Data are representative of high school seniors for the cohorts indicated. Application behavior is based on the top two school choices of respondents.
Geography is according to the high school of the student. The test quintile comes from a survey-specific cognitive test battery given to the respondents of each
survey during the spring of their senior year; by construction, it is normalized by cohort. (The test batteries are similar but not identical across surveys.) See the
Data Appendix for the definitions of selective schools and the regional breakdowns.




                                                                                                                                                                   38
Table 4: Counterfactual College Acceptance, Conditional on Applying
                                                       Percentage who Applied               Percentage who Applied
                 Percentage who Applied to a
                                                         to a Private Selective               to a Public Selective
                    Four-year Institution
                                                         Four-year Institution                Four-year Institution
Cohort          1972    1982     1992    2004        1972 1982 1992 2004                  1972 1982 1992 2004
U.S. average    94.2     97.6    90.7    85.9        82.5    78.5     71.3    63.9        88.4    87.9     84.9    78.9

Test Quintile
  First         86.4     95.9    69.4    49.7         —       —        —       —           —       —        —       —
  Second        88.9     96.6    80.9    68.2         —       —        —       —          71.2    71.3     68.5    50.8
  Third         91.3     97.7    89.4    83.2        76.1    69.2     59.6    39.7        81.7    85.6     78.1    73.1
  Fourth        93.9     98.3    93.2    89.5        73.2    87.9     67.6    59.8        88.2    86.3     78.8    73.3
  Fifth         97.9     97.6    94.8    94.0        86.1    78.9     74.7    71.5        92.0    91.7     92.6    87.6

Region
   New Eng.       94.7     97.6    91.8     87.8       83.0    78.8     72.6     65.4       88.9    87.5   85.6     80.0
   Mid. Atlan. 94.8        97.7    91.7     87.7       82.3    78.6     70.7     64.1       88.7    88.9   85.9     80.2
   South          93.1     97.4    88.7     82.2       80.9    76.9     69.2     59.2       87.6    87.3   83.8     77.6
   Midwest        94.1     97.5    90.8     86.2       84.7    80.3     73.2     69.2       88.0    87.6   84.4     78.1
   Southwest 93.4          97.5    89.1     83.2       81.2    76.3     68.4     59.7       89.9    88.5   84.5     79.3
   West           94.6     97.6    91.2     86.8       83.1    79.3     73.2     63.7       89.1    88.1   85.6     79.8
Source: National Center for Education Statistics, various longitudinal surveys described in the text.
Notes: Data represent mean fitted probabilities from logistic regressions using the NLS72 data but allowing
coefficients to be survey-wave specific. Each number thus represents the mean conditional probability that a student
from 1972 in a given cell is admitted to a given college type during the respective survey wave. The covariates used
for the regression include only test decile dummies and regional dummies; a version based on a more thorough set of
covariates is available in the appendix. Application behavior is based on the top two school choices of respondents.
Geography is according to the high school of the student. The test quintile comes from a survey-specific cognitive
test battery given to the respondents of each survey during the spring of their senior year; by construction, it is
normalized by cohort. (The test batteries are similar but not identical across surveys.) See the Data Appendix for the
definitions of selective schools and the regional breakdowns.
Table 5: Studying, Course-Taking, and AP Exam-taking Behavior (percentages)
                          Took High School              Took an AP
                                                                             Homework time: 10+ hours/week
                              Calculus                     exam
HS Cohort               1982   1992    2004            1992    2004           1972      1982      1992      2004
U.S. average             9.2      10.3     15.2        16.5      30.9          5.5      10.2      26.7      20.4

Test Quintile
  First                   2.0      0.3      4.0         3.4      13.7          2.7       4.6      15.1      10.3
  Second                  1.8      1.2      3.8         6.2      14.6          2.9       5.3      20.0      15.4
  Third                  2.4       3.7      5.5         8.6      24.6          4.2       7.5      22.5      17.8
  Fourth                 7.9      10.1     13.2        16.9      36.6         6.5       11.9      30.1      23.1
  Fifth                  31.5     38.7     49.9        49.0      66.2         11.6      21.3      39.4      35.9

Application Status
  Four-year school       19.7     19.2     23.3        27.5      44.8         10.0      18.4      34.7      27.4
  Selective Private      43.9     43.6     52.3        60.0      77.9         17.6      38.7      49.5      45.2
  Selective Public       26.6     29.4     36.8        39.7      60.8         13.2      22.7      40.0      33.7

Region
  New England            15.4     15.8     19.3        19.0      31.6          6.3      16.8      35.8      23.7
  Middle Atlantic        13.8     13.8     18.2        20.6      31.7          6.0      12.1      25.8      18.6
  South                  6.4      9.5      15.2        17.4      32.9          6.0      7.5       25.4      17.7
  Midwest                8.2       8.9     14.8        13.0      26.9          5.2       9.6      25.2      19.4
  Southwest              4.6      10.3     13.2        10.8      31.7          4.0      5.3       23.3      16.1
  West                   8.0      9.1      13.3        19.5      32.6          5.5      12.4      30.8      26.7
Source: National Center for Education Statistics, longitudinal surveys (NLS72, HSB82, NELS92, ELS04). The
cohort year refers to the year on-time students would have graduated high school.
Notes: The universe is high school seniors in the year designated for each cohort, and all figures are weighted to
match the population universe. The test quintile comes from a survey-specific cognitive test battery given to the
respondents of each survey during the spring of their senior year; by construction, it is normalized by cohort. (The
test batteries are similar but not identical across surveys.) See the Data Appendix for the definitions of selective
schools and the regional breakdowns. Application status refers to the types of colleges to which the respondent
applied, and it is non-exclusive. Calculus and AP taking are based on students’ self reports in the survey.
Homework time is also based on self reports with categorical answers; the categories can consistently be aggregated
across survey cohorts to construct a 10+ hour per week measure.
Table 6: College Exam Test-Taking and Preparation (percentages)
                                                                 Test Prep: Private           Test Preparation:
                               Took SAT or ACT
                                                                   Class/Tutoring                 Any form
HS Cohort               1972     1982     1992     2004          1992        2004              1992      2004
U.S. average            47.7     56.1     61.0     64.6           14.1        18.1             59.7      62.6

Test Quintile
  First                 13.5     29.2      25.2     34.3          18.4          19.2            48.2       48.2
  Second                30.4     38.4      46.3     51.1          11.7          16.0            58.7       58.1
  Third                 48.4     50.8      65.6     69.5          12.5          16.7            62.4       66.8
  Fourth                64.8     70.7      80.3     80.3          11.7          18.0            66.9       68.1
  Fifth                 82.0     90.5      89.5     88.8          15.2          20.3            65.9       69.7

Application Status
  Four-year school      85.8     91.7      89.8     87.4          17.7          23.1            72.7       76.5
  Selective Private     96.5     98.1      95.2     90.0          32.8          36.4            80.4       83.0
  Selective Public      89.6     95.9      92.9     88.6          18.0          27.0            74.0       76.8

Region
  New England           57.9     63.7      74.1     68.2          19.1          19.4            60.5       58.7
  Middle Atlantic       58.3     57.3      70.0     66.6          19.4          20.9            64.4       67.6
  South                 41.9     54.6      59.2     68.7          14.2          21.4            61.9       69.3
  Midwest               46.3     57.2      64.9     71.1           8.7          13.9            55.0       59.7
  Southwest             49.3     54.7      51.9     63.6          17.6          17.2            63.9       62.6
  West                  36.9     51.4      51.9     50.7          13.4          17.4            57.4       55.0
Source: National Center for Education Statistics, longitudinal surveys (NLS72, HSB82, NELS92, ELS04). The
cohort year refers to the year on-time students would have graduated high school.
Notes: The universe is high school seniors in the year designated for each cohort, and all figures are weighted to
match the population universe. The test quintile comes from a survey-specific cognitive test battery given to the
respondents of each survey during the spring of their senior year; by construction, it is normalized by cohort. (The
test batteries are similar but not identical across surveys.) See the Data Appendix for the definitions of selective
schools and the regional breakdowns. Application status refers to the types of colleges to which the respondent
applied, and it is non-exclusive. SAT/ACT test taking are (each) based on students’ self reports, as are the test
preparation questions; “any form” of test preparation includes private classes/tutoring, classes offered by the high
school, and self study using books, video, or computer software.
Table 7: Fraction of Students who Sent at least 6, 8, 10 or 15 SAT Scores Reports by Score
                                                     SAT SCORE RANGE
                     900-         1000-          1100-     1200-   1300-                    1400-          1500-
                      990           1090           1190      1290    1390                     1490           1600
 6+ Scores          0.244         0.295          0.370         0.461          0.570         0.680          0.783

 8+ Scores          0.095         0.128          0.178         0.251          0.343         0.450          0.560

 10+ Scores         0.032         0.048          0.076         0.117          0.177         0.247          0.318

 15+ Scores         0.003         0.004          0.008         0.014          0.023         0.035          0.045
Source: Tabulations by Jesse Rothstein of College Board microdata of SAT takers.
Notes: The sample is restricted to states in which students primarily take the SAT. (See Data Appendix for a
definition and list of SAT states) The data cover SAT I tests taken in the period 1996 through 2001. The test allows
up to four score reports to be sent at no charge beyond the test fee.
Table 8: Effects of Competitive Pressure on Social Outcomes
                                 College                                       Bachelor’s
                                                      Some college                                    Real earnings
Panel A: (in logs)              enrollment                                      degree
                                                        age 25                                           age 25
                                  age 19                                        age 25
                                    (1)                     (2)                   (3)                       (4)
Differential trend               -0.23***                -0.25***                 -0.00                   -0.14*
(x100), Top 6 states              (0.08)                  (0.09)                  (0.15)                  (0.08)

Differential trend                -0.15*                 -0.23***                 -0.16                   -0.05
(x100), Top 11 states             (0.08)                  (0.08)                  (0.16)                  (0.07)
Observations                        102                    102                     102                    102
                                                      All science &                                    Science &
                                                                            Ph.D.s from top
Panel B:                        All Ph.D.s             engineering                                 engineering Ph.D.s
                                                                                schools
                                                          Ph.D.s                                    from top schools
                                    (5)                     (6)                     (7)                    (8)
Differential trend                 -0.28                 -0.94***                 -0.83                   -1.11*
(x100), Top 6 states               (0.32)                 (0.34)                  (0.56)                  (0.66)
Differential trend                 -0.34                 -0.91***                -0.92**                 -1.11***
(x100), Top 10 states              (0.25)                 (0.30)                  (0.33)                  (0.38)
Observations                       1217                    1224                    1224                    1224
* Significant at 10 percent ** significant at 5 percent *** significant at 1 percent
Notes: Panel A: Each column and row is from a separate OLS regression where the dependent variable is the natural
logarithm of a state-level average in 1980 and 2006. Each of the regressions also includes as independent variables a
dummy for competitive state group, a linearized time trend, and a constant; these are suppressed for brevity. The
coefficient estimates shown can be interpreted as the differential time trend between competitive states and non-
competitive states, expressed in percentages. The first row defines competitive states as being in the top 6 of the
competitive state index (see text for construction of the index), while the second row uses inclusion in the top 11.
For columns (1) through (3), the dependent variable is the percentage of the specified population enrolled or with at
least a certain level of education. For column (4), the dependent variable is real annual earnings for those working
and not in school, and this specification also includes controls for sex, education, their interactions, and current state
of residence (to adjust for price effects). Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered by state of birth (a
proxy for state of high school) are in parentheses. Data are from the 1980 Census and 2005-2007 American
Community Surveys. Full results are available upon request from the authors.
Panel B: Each column and row is from a separate Poisson regression where the dependent variable is the number of
degrees awarded in a given state and year. Each of the regressions also includes as independent variables a dummy
for competitive state group, a linearized time trend, and a constant. They further include the logarithm of age-
specific state population, whose coefficient is constrained to be unity (the null hypothesis of a unity coefficient
could not be rejected in any specification). The coefficient estimates shown can be interpreted as the differential
time trend between competitive states and non-competitive states, expressed in percentages. The first row defines
competitive states as being in the top 6 of the competitive state index (see text for construction of the index), while
the second row uses inclusion in the top 11. Top schools are drawn from U.S. News and World Report rankings of
graduate departments; see text for details. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered by state of birth
(a proxy for state of high school) are in parentheses. Sample size is smaller for column (1) due to missing data. Data
are from the Survey of Earned Doctorates for the high school graduation cohorts of 1972 through 1995, and measure
all Ph.D. receipt through 2005.
DATA APPENDIX
        In this article, we draw upon several data sources, including student-level surveys from the
National Center of Education Statistics (NCES), institution-level data from the Integrated
Postsecondary Educational Database System (IPEDS) and the Annual Survey of Colleges (ASC), and
other data on college entrance examinations and degree attainment. In this data appendix, we
describe these datasets in more detail and discuss issues of sample restrictions, dataset comparability,
and important variable definitions.

Institutional Data: American Survey of Colleges
         The American Survey of Colleges (ASC) is a near-census of four-year postsecondary
educational institutions in the United States, conducted by the College Board. Containing detailed
data on institutional classification, enrollment, applications, student body profiles, expenditures, and
sources of funding, the ASC is ideal for examining trends in characteristics among different types of
institutions. Our data run from 1986 through 2003. Missing data prevented us from using more recent
years. Summary statistics for our sample are available in Appendix Table 1.

College Ranking Measure
        In constructing our selectivity measures, we generally follow the methodology of Bound,
Lovenheim, and Turner (2007), who in turn employ the rankings from the 2005 edition of U.S. News
and World Report’s Best Colleges. Selective private schools include the top 50 private research
universities as well as the top 49 liberal arts colleges. Selective public schools include the top 47
public universities. These schools are listed in Appendix Table 2.

Student Data: National Center of Education Statistics Longitudinal Student Datasets
        The National Center of Education Statistics (NCES) has conducted four nationally-
representative, large-scale, longitudinal surveys of secondary students since 1972. Each of these
surveys originally sampled between 12,000 and 16,000 students in a given grade cohort, with follow-
up survey waves over the next several years. Designed to shed light on the school-to-work transition,
the surveys ask questions about demographic background, school experiences, education and work
expectations, and labor market outcomes. Additionally, each survey cohort was administered a
cognitive test battery. In many cases, the data variables are directly comparable across the four
different surveys.
These data allow us to construct measures of high school behavior, such as course-taking, test
preparation, extracurriculars, and time spent on homework. Using the restricted-access versions of
these datasets, we can also identify the top two choices of schools to which students applied and
whether they were accepted. We condition our sample using inverse probability sampling weights to
be nationally representative of the relevant high school senior classes.21 Summary statistics for each
cohort are provided in Appendix Table 4.

•    National Longitudinal Study of the High School Class of 1972 (NLS)
     The first NCES student panel study, the NLS surveyed approximately 17,000 high school seniors
     in the spring of 1972, with follow-up waves in 1973, 1974, 1979, and 1986. We use the initial




21
  Because the NCES surveys initially sample the cohorts at different ages, we use the provided flags and probability
weights that are meant to represent the universe of U.S. high school seniors. These flags and weights are described
below.
     and 1973 waves.22 The weight variable is W4, and the universe is already high school seniors, so
     no additional sample flag is necessary.

•    High School and Beyond (HSB)
     The second longitudinal study originally surveyed both 10th and 12th graders in 1980
     (approximately 14,000 of each), with follow-ups in 1982, 1984, and 1986. Due to the richer high
     school data available for the sophomore cohort, we restrict our sample from the HSB to the
     sophomore cohort and use the 1982 and 1984 waves. The weight variable used is FU2WT, and
     the conditioning flags are FU1PART and FU2PART.

•    National Educational Longitudinal Survey (NELS)
     The third NCES panel study surveyed approximately 25,000 8th graders in 1988, with follow-up
     waves in 1990, 1992, 1994, and 2000. Using the 1992 and 1994 waves , the weight variable
     F3QWTG12, and the conditioning flag G12COHRT, our NELS sample is representative of the
     high school senior class of 1992.

•    Educational Longitudinal Survey (ELS)
     The fourth and newest longitudinal student survey, the ELS, initially surveyed approximately
     15,000 10th graders in 2002 and has since conducted follow-ups in 2004 and 2006. Using the
     2004 and 2006 waves, the weight variable F1QWT, and the conditioning flag F1UNIV2B, our
     ELS sample is representative of the high school class of 2004.

        In general, item non-response in the NCES surveys for the measures used in this article was
minor, often less than 5 percent of the sample. The main exception is for the cognitive test battery, a
variable used for stratification of the other indicators, in the NELS92 survey. Rather than item non-
response, per se, missing test battery scores result from students who were not administered the test
battery (generally because they were not in school when the battery was administered and
arrangements could not be made to re-test them). In the NELS, 20.6 percent of the eligible sample is
missing a test battery score.23 However, a simple OLS regression showed almost no correlation
between socioeconomic status and the likelihood of missing a test battery score. While this does not
obviate the possibility of other latent correlates, it suggests bias in the results by test quintile is
probably small. Consequently, Tables 2 through 5 treat this problem as ignorable.

HERI CIRP Freshman Survey
        The Cooperative Institutional Research Program (CIRP) at the University of California, Los
Angeles’s Higher Education Research Institute (HERI) has conducted an annual, large-scale survey
of college freshmen since the mid 1960s. The survey is administered to approximately 400,000
students at 300 to 400 participating schools each year and asks about many student characteristics,
including demographic background, secondary school achievement and activities, educational and
career plans, and college application behavior. We use aggregated, annual data that are weighted to
be nationally representative of all first-year students at four-year colleges and universities, as
published in selected editions of The American Freshman (1991, 1996, 2000, and 2004) and The
American Freshman: Forty Year Trends. As individual institution-level identifiers are not available,

22
   As in all of the NCES surveys here, new individuals were often added in some of the later waves. We focus on
individuals who were in the waves that coincide with the senior year of high school and the wave immediately
following.
23
   In the NLS, 4.9 percent of the sample is missing a score; in the HSB, 1.3 percent is missing a score; and in the
ELS, 0 percent is missing a score.
we use the selectivity measures provided in the survey (which are based on mean SAT scores or
equivalents of the entering class), aggregated across institution type. For more information about the
Freshman Survey, see: http://www.gseis.ucla.edu/heri/cirpoverview.php

SAT and AP Exam Data
         The College Board provides the number of SAT tests and AP exams taken each year by the
students of each state.24 With population data at the state, single-year-of-age level from the National
Cancer Institute’s Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) program
(http://seer.cancer.gov/popdata/), we construct the test-taking rates. The data on score sending by
SAT and ACT score band were kindly provided by Jesse Rothstein and Amanda Pallais, respectively.

SAT states
        As mentioned in the text, the SAT is prevalent in some states, while the ACT is prevalent in
others. We define an SAT state to be one in which the SAT participation rate weakly exceeds the
national average in 2007 (43.7 percent).25 The resulting set of SAT states comprises: Alaska,
California, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Indiana, Maine, Maryland,
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Oregon, Pennsylvania,
Rhode Island, South Carolina, Texas, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, and the District of Columbia.

Geographical Definitions
      The geographic regions we use in this article are based on the classification used in the
American Survey of Colleges (ASC). They are defined as follows:
•  New England: Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Vermont.
•  Middle Atlantic States: Delaware, Maryland, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, and
   Washington, D.C.
•  South: Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South
   Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia.
•  Midwest: Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North
   Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, West Virginia, and Wisconsin
•  Southwest: Arkansas, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas.
•  West: Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Oregon, Utah,
   Washington, and Wyoming.




24
   The SAT data are for the high school graduating class of the specified year, while the AP data are for all exams
administered in the specified year, regardless of cohort. See http://professionals.collegeboard.com/data-reports-
research/sat/cb-seniors-2008 and http://professionals.collegeboard.com/data-reports-research/ap/nation for more
information.
25
   The SAT participation rate in turn is constructed by dividing the number of test takers by state and cohort, as
provided by the College Board, by the estimated number of high school graduates, as provided by WICHE (1998,
2008). The set of SAT states is not sensitive to using a different year cutoff.
Appendix Table 1: American Survey of Colleges – Summary Statistics for Four-Year
Institutions
                                   Private Institutions  Public Institutions
                   Full Sample    Top 50          Other Top 50          Other
                                                   Schools          Schools         Schools         Schools
Percent Public                    32.55                 0.00            0.00         100.00           100.00
Percent Private                   67.45              100.00          100.00             0.00            0.00
New England                       13.86               26.31            12.24            7.08           12.93
Middle States                     25.23               33.56            25.52           10.62           23.66
South                             18.95               14.25            17.42           26.55           22.71
Midwest                           27.56               13.15            32.96           31.86           22.24
Southwest                          4.18                 0.00            4.47            5.31            5.21
West                              10.20               12.73             7.39           18.58           13.25
1986 Mean Characteristics
                                 $3970              $7753           $4964            $862            $896
    In-State Tuition
                                 (3455)             (4278)          (2772)           (855)           (713)

    Undergraduate                 4603               4086            1667           20980            7852
    Enrollment                   (6093)             (3978)          (1526)          (9567)          (5679)

    Percent Minority              11.46              12.04           9.85            11.65           14.31
2003 Mean Characteristics
                                $14,347            $25,719         $18,048          $4918           $3685
    In-State Tuition
                                 (8747)             (6419)          (4643)          (1570)          (1635)
    Undergraduate                 4982               4374            1898           20,188           9025
    Enrollment                   (6118)             (4418)          (1442)          (6471)          (6568)

    Percent Minority              20.85              25.61           18.17           24.11           23.29

Schools                            766                91              425             38              212
Observations                     13,770              1642            7646             678            3804
Source: American Survey of Colleges, College Board, 1986-87 to 2003-04.
Notes: The Top 50 Private Institutions includes the top 50 private universities and top 49 liberal arts colleges. To be
included in the sample, institutions must have had at least 16 of the 18 possible years of data. The regional statistics
are percentages.
Appendix Table 2: Most Selective Four-year Colleges and Universities
    Top 50 Private Universities     Top 49 Private Liberal Arts Colleges      Top 47 Public Universities
      American                           Amherst                                   Auburn Univ.
      Baylor                             Bard                                      Clemson Univ.
      Boston College                     Barnard                                   Coll. of William and Mary
      Boston Univ.                       Bates                                     Georgia Tech
      Brandeis                           Bowdoin                                   Indiana Univ., Bloomington
      Brigham Young                      Bryn Mawr                                 Iowa State Univ.
      Brown                              Bucknell                                  Miami Univ.
      Cal Tech                           Carleton                                  Michigan State Univ.
      Carnegie Mellon                    Centre                                    N. Carolina State Univ.
      Case Western Reserve               Claremont McKenna                         Ohio State Univ.
      Clark                              Colby                                     Ohio Univ.
      Columbia                           Colgate                                   Pennsylvania State Univ.
      Cornell                            Colorado Coll.                            Purdue Univ.
      Dartmouth                          Connecticut Coll.                         Rutgers, New Brunswick
      Duke                               Davidson                                  SUNY, Binghamton
      Emory                              DePauw                                    Texas A&M
      Fordham                            Dickinson                                 Univ. of California, San Diego
      George Washington                  Franklin and Marshall                     Univ. of Arizona
      Georgetown                         Furman                                    Univ. of California, Berkeley
      Harvard                            Gettysburg                                Univ. of California, Davis
      Howard                             Grinnell                                  Univ. of California, Irvine
      Johns Hopkins                      Hamilton Coll.                            Univ. of California, Los Angeles
      Lehigh                             Harvey Mudd                               Univ. of California, Riverside
      MIT                                Haverford                                 Univ. of California, Santa Barbara
      New York Univ.                     Holy Cross                                Univ. of California, Santa Cruz
      Northwestern                       Kenyon                                    Univ. of Colorado, Boulder
      Notre Dame                         Lafayette Coll.                           Univ. of Connecticut
      Pepperdine                         Macalester                                Univ. of Delaware
      Princeton                          Middlebury                                Univ. of Florida
      Rensselaer Polytechnic             Mount Holyoke                             Univ. of Georgia
      Rice                               Oberlin                                   Univ. of IL, Urbana-Champaign
      Southern Methodist                 Occidental                                Univ. of Iowa
      St. Louis University               Pitzer                                    Univ. of Kansas
      Stanford                           Pomona                                    Univ. of Maryland, College Park
      Stevens Inst. of Technology        Rhodes Coll.                              Univ. of Massachusetts, Amherst
      Syracuse                           Richmond                                  Univ. of Michigan
      Tufts                              Scripps                                   Univ. of Minnesota, Twin Cities
      Tulane                             Sewanee                                   Univ. of Missouri, Columbia
      Univ. of Chicago                   Skidmore                                  Univ. of N. Carolina, Chapel Hill
      Univ. of Miami                     Smith                                     Univ. of Nebraska, Lincoln
      Univ. of Pennsylvania              Swarthmore                                Univ. of New Hampshire
      Univ. of Pittsburgh                Trinity Coll.                             Univ. of Tennessee
      Univ. of Rochester                 Union                                     Univ. of Texas, Austin
      Univ. of Southern California       Vassar                                    Univ. of Vermont
      Vanderbilt                         Washington and Lee                        Univ. of Virginia
      Wake Forest                        Wellesley                                 Univ. of Washington
      Washington Univ. (St. Louis )      Wesleyan                                  Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison
      Worcester Polytechnic              Whitman
      Yale                               Williams
      Yeshiva
Source: Bound, Lovenheim, and Turner (2007) who in turn employ the rankings from the 2005 edition of U.S. News
and World Report’s Best Colleges.
Appendix Table 3: Counterfactual College Acceptance, Conditional on Applying
                                                          Percentage who Applied                                        Percentage who Applied
                    Percentage who Applied to a
                                                            to a Private Selective                                       to a Public Selective
                       Four-year Institution
                                                            Four-year Institution                                        Four-year Institution
HS Cohort       1972      1982     1992       2004    1972      1982     1992      2004                            1972     1982      1992     2004
U.S. average     94.7     98.0      91.3      88.8    84.1      81.4      71.6     62.7                             88.4       86.3        86.3        82.6
Test Quintile
  First               88.5       94.9        75.0       64.3            —         —         —          —             —          —           —           —
  Second              88.0       95.4        81.8       73.8            —         —         —          —            70.9       63.1        65.4        61.7
  Third               92.1       98.2        89.4       84.6           78.0      65.7      52.5       53.7          83.8       83.4        78.3        78.6
  Fourth              94.2       98.7        92.9       90.2           74.6      87.3      64.5       52.9          87.4       88.1        79.7        74.2
  Fifth               97.8       98.2        94.1       94.3           87.6      81.5      75.7       68.9          91.8       89.1        93.3        89.7
Region
  New England         85.5       97.3        95.5       89.0           76.1      78.8      72.1       62.6          79.7       68.9        89.6        86.0
  Mid. Atlantic       92.7       97.2        90.0       90.1           87.4      78.3      68.1       62.0          84.8       78.1        81.5        83.2
  South               97.2       97.5        91.3       86.5           85.7      87.9      75.9       62.4          82.5       91.8        83.8        74.0
  Midwest             98.1       99.4        94.6       90.9           86.2      81.8      73.3       71.3          94.4       91.9        88.3        86.9
  Southwest           95.3       99.6        86.7       83.7           79.0      89.0      81.0       67.7          88.2       93.7        79.6        88.2
  West                94.0       96.7        86.7       86.6           78.1      84.1      73.2       55.3          89.0       86.0        89.6        76.5
Source: National Center for Education Statistics, longitudinal surveys (NLS72, HSB82, NELS92, ELS04). The cohort year refers to the year on-time students
would have graduated high school.
Notes: Data represent mean fitted probabilities from logistic regressions using the NLS72 data but allowing coefficients to be survey-wave specific. Each number
thus represents the mean conditional probability that a student from 1972 in a given cell is admitted to a given college type during the respective survey wave.
Application behavior is based on the top two school choices of respondents. Geography is according to the high school of the student. The test quintile comes
from a survey-specific cognitive test battery given to the respondents of each survey during the spring of their senior year; by construction, it is normalized by
cohort. (The test batteries are similar but not identical across surveys.) See the Data Appendix for the definitions of selective schools and the regional
breakdowns. The covariates used for the regression include class rank decile dummy variables (GPA for 2004); categorical homework time dummy variables;
region dummy variables; test quintile dummy variables; high school semesters each of English, math, social studies, science, and foreign languages; and
participation dummy variables for each of sports, music/debate/drama, newspaper/yearbook, and student government.
Appendix Table 4: NCES Longitudinal Student Datasets
                    NLS72               HSB82                                NELS92                     ELS04
                      Un-                      Un-                       Un-                       Un-
                                 Weighted                 Weighted                  Weighted                  Weighted
                    Weighted                 Weighted                  Weighted                  Weighted
Female               51.0%        50.1%        51.9%       51.1%        51.3%        50.0%        50.5%        50.2%

Black                12.6%        8.5%         13.1%       11.8%        10.0%        11.5%        12.4%        13.3%

Hispanic              4.5%        3.3%         21.4%       12.2%        12.6%         9.9%        13.7%        15.1%

Asian                 1.2%        0.9%         3.4%         1.4%         8.3%         4.5%        10.5%         4.5%

Native American       1.1%        1.0%         1.9%         1.1%         1.1%         1.1%         0.8%         0.9%

White                77.8%        83.4%        60.1%       73.2%        67.9%        73.0%        58.2%        62.2%

Mom: HS degree       69.6%        72.8%        81.2%       80.2%        85.2%        86.8%        89.0%        88.7%
Mom: College
                     10.7%        10.6%        14.1%       15.6%        26.1%        26.0%        29.7%        26.9%
  degree
Dad: HS degree       64.9%        68.7%        76.9%       77.1%        84.0%        85.8%        88.4%        87.9%
Dad: College
                     17.2%        16.8%        24.1%       22.5%        32.5%        32.6%        34.4%        31.2%
  degree
New England           5.3%        6.9%         5.7%         6.9%         4.3%         4.7%         4.4%         5.2%

Middle States        19.3%        22.3%        22.4%       20.2%        16.4%        17.1%        16.3%        15.6%

South                21.9%        16.4%        16.7%       18.5%        21.4%        22.1%        25.3%        23.3%

Midwest              28.3%        31.3%        28.1%       29.5%        27.2%        26.7%        26.0%        25.2%

Southwest             8.9%        6.9%         9.8%         9.4%        11.1%        10.7%         8.4%         9.1%

West                 16.3%        16.3%        17.4%       15.5%        19.5%        18.7%        19.7%        21.6%

Observations         15,635     3,043,599     11,189      3,161,622     12,312     2,502,578      13,370     2,983,515
Sources: NCES surveys, described in appendix text.
Notes: Numbers are percentages. Categories may not sum to 100 due to rounding and, for race, an omitted “other”
category. Observations with zero or invalid (missing) weights were dropped. Race categories in ELS04 exclude the
multiracial (about 4 percent of the student population). Education categories in HSB82 and NELS92 exclude those
who report that they don’t know their parents’ education.
Appendix Table 5: Composite Index of Competitive Pressure
  Rank             State        Index            Rank                              State             Index
    1          New Jersey       1.763             27                              Indiana            0.876
    2         Rhode Island      1.736             28                            Wyoming              0.847
    3      District of Columbia 1.708             29                             Alabama             0.835
    4          Connecticut      1.608             30                          South Carolina         0.826
    5         Massachusetts     1.551             31                            Tennessee            0.824
    6           New York        1.512             32                            Wisconsin            0.822
    7            Delaware       1.284             33                            Minnesota            0.818
    8            Virginia       1.240             34                             Nebraska            0.813
    9           California      1.204             35                               Maine             0.800
   10            Colorado       1.160             36                               Ohio              0.796
   11             Georgia       1.157             37                             Nevada              0.794
   12            Maryland       1.055             38                            Washington           0.766
   13             Illinois      1.045             39                            Oklahoma             0.761
   14             Florida       1.034             40                              Kansas             0.753
   15        New Hampshire      1.032             41                            Louisiana            0.732
   16        North Carolina     0.993             42                             Montana             0.727
   17             Alaska        0.987             43                            Mississippi          0.702
   18               Utah        0.984             44                               Idaho             0.676
   19             Hawaii        0.962             45                               Iowa              0.673
   20             Oregon        0.955             46                          North Dakota           0.671
   21         Pennsylvania      0.944             47                           New Mexico            0.663
   22            Kentucky       0.939             48                             Missouri            0.658
   23            Vermont        0.929             49                          West Virginia          0.624
   24              Texas        0.902             50                             Arkansas            0.482
   25            Michigan       0.893             51                           South Dakota          0.398
   26             Arizona       0.884
Notes: The competitiveness index is the sum of the fractions of students doing each of the following five indicators
in 1992: taking the PSAT, taking an AP exam, spending 10+ hours on homework per week, using private test
preparation services, and sending 5+ college applications. Each indicator is taken from authors’ calculations of
NCES data, except for AP exam participation, which is from the College Board.
Appendix Table 6: Sample summary statistics for Table 8
                               College                                            Bachelor’s
                                              Some college,                                         Real earnings,
Panel A:                     enrollment,                                           degree,
                                                 age 25                                                age 25
                               age 19                                              age 25
Mean, top 6 states, 1980                    54.4%               62.1%                29.5%               22,648
Mean, top 6 states, 2006                    74.8%               72.1%                39.7%               16,570
Mean, other states, 1980                    45.0%               53.4%                21.1%               22,235
Mean, other states, 2006                    65.6%               65.9%                28.7%               16,870

Mean, top 11 states, 1980                   50.8%               58.6%                26.5%               22,152
Mean, top 11 states, 2006                   71.2%               68.5%                34.7%               16,542
Mean, other states, 1980                    44.8%               53.2%                20.9%               22,320
Mean, other states, 2006                    65.5%               66.1%                28.7%               16,914

Difference-in-difference, top 6               -0.2                -2.5                2.6                 -713
Difference-in-difference, top 11              -0.3                -3.0                0.4                 -204
                                                                                                      Science &
                                                            All science &
                                                                                PhDs from top        engineering
Panel B: (per 1000 people)                 All PhDs          engineering
                                                                                   schools          PhDs from top
                                                                PhDs
                                                                                                       schools
Mean, top 6 states, 1972                      8.3                 3.9                 1.7                  0.9
Mean, top 6 states, 1995                      1.1                 0.8                 0.4                  0.3
Mean, other states, 1972                      5.6                 2.4                 0.7                  0.4
Mean, other states, 1995                      0.6                 0.5                 0.2                  0.1

Mean, top 11 states, 1972                     7.7                 3.7                 1.4                  0.8
Mean, top 11 states, 1995                     1.0                 0.7                 0.7                  0.3
Mean, other states, 1972                      5.5                 2.3                 0.3                  0.3
Mean, other states, 1995                      0.6                 0.5                 0.1                  0.1

Difference-in-difference, top 6               -2.2                -1.2                -0.8                -0.3
Difference-in-difference, top 11              -1.8                -1.2                -0.5                -0.3
Note: Real earnings in Panel A are for current workers not enrolled in school and have been adjusted for sex,
education, their interaction, and current state of residence. The 1995 values in Panel B are subject to data truncation
(i.e., many people from the 1995 high school cohort have yet to earn a PhD).
