NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE RUG RAT RACE
Garey Ramey
Valerie A. Ramey
Working Paper 15284
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15284

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2009

Valerie Ramey gratefully acknowledges financial support from National Science Foundation grant
SES-0617219 through the NBER. We thank Tarek Harchaoui for helping us gain access to microdata
files on Canadian time use and John Robinson for providing his 1995 U.S. time use data. We thank
Julie Cullen, Nora Gordon, Daniel Hamermesh, David Schkade, Joel Sobel, Randy Wright, and participants
in seminars at UCSD, Washington University, St. Louis, Statistics Canada, the University of Maryland
ATUS conference, and the NBER Children’s program for helpful comments. Chris Nekarda and Ben
Backes provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Garey Ramey and Valerie A. Ramey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Rug Rat Race
Garey Ramey and Valerie A. Ramey
NBER Working Paper No. 15284
August 2009
JEL No. J13,J24
ABSTRACT
After three decades of decline, the amount of time spent by parents on childcare in the U.S. began
to rise dramatically in the mid-1990s. Moreover, the rise in childcare time was particularly pronounced
among college-educated parents. Why would highly educated parents increase the amount of time
they allocate to childcare at the same time that their own market returns have skyrocketed? After finding
no empirical support for standard explanations, such as selection or income effects, we offer a new
explanation. We argue that increased competition for college admissions may be an important source
of these trends. The number of college-bound students has surged in recent years, coincident with
the rise in time spent on childcare. The resulting “cohort crowding” has led parents to compete more
aggressively for college slots by spending increasing amounts of time on college preparation. Our
theoretical model shows that, since college-educated parents have a comparative advantage in college
preparation, rivalry leads them to increase preparation time by a greater amount than less-educated
parents. We provide empirical support for our explanation with a comparison of trends between the
U.S. and Canada, and a comparison across racial groups in the U.S.

Garey Ramey
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
gramey@ucsd.edu
Valerie A. Ramey
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
VRAMEY@UCSD.EDU

“The already crazed competition for admission to the nation’s most prestigious
universities and colleges became even more intense this year, with many logging record
low acceptance rates.” (New York Times, April 1, 2008)
“Attending the local public university is no longer a birthright. An explosion in
applications has allowed the schools to reject students in record numbers.”
(CollegeJournal from the Wall Street Journal, November 14, 2006)
“Middle- and upper-income families became engaged in an arms race with their
neighbors to prepare their children for college (Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, July 22,
2006)

I. Introduction
One of the most surprising findings from the recent research on time use concerns trends
in time spent with children in the United States. Despite shrinking families and dramatic
increases in women’s time spent in the workforce, the amount of time parents spent with children
rose over the last several decades (Sayer, Bianchi, and Robinson (2004); Bianchi, Robinson, and
Milkie (2006)). In contrast, the amount of time spent on other types of “home production”
activities, such as cleaning house and cooking, fell significantly (e.g. Robinson and Godbey
(1999), Bianchi, et al. (2006), Aguiar and Hurst (2007)).
This paper takes a closer look at trends in childcare. Linking twelve time use surveys
between 1965 and 2007, we show that the increase in time spent with children occurred starting
in the mid-1990s. We also show that the increase in childcare has been twice as great for
college-educated parents. This differential trend is particularly puzzling in view of the dramatic
increases in wages of college-educated individuals. We also show that the most important
components of the increase in childcare time was time spent on older children, and in
particularly on coordinating and transporting them to their activities.
The literature has offered several explanations, both for why childcare time increased and
why educated parents spent more time with their children (e.g., Bianchi, et al. (2006, p. 87),

1

Aguiar and Hurst (2007), Guryan, Hurst, and Kearney (2008)). These explanations include
selection effects, income effects, safety concerns, enjoyment, and more flexible work schedules.
We test each of them and find that they are not consistent with the data.
The inability of existing explanations to account for the evidence leads us to offer a new
explanation for the upward trends. We argue that the increase in time spent in childcare,
particularly among the college educated, may be a response to an increase in the perceived return
to attending a good college, coupled with an increase in competition in college admissions.
Importantly, the size of college-bound cohorts rose dramatically beginning in the early 1990s,
coincident with the increase in time spent on childcare. Bound and Turner (2007) have provided
evidence that larger cohorts are associated with increasingly severe cohort crowding at quality
schools. Increased scarcity of college slots appears to have induced heightened rivalry among
parents, taking the form of more hours spent on college preparatory activities. In other words,
the rise in childcare time resulted from a “rug rat race” for admission to good colleges.
In order to clarify the mechanics of this explanation, we develop a simple theoretical
model in which college admission depends on parents’ choice of college preparation time.
College-educated parents are assumed to have a comparative advantage in preparation time.
When slots at good colleges are relatively plentiful, the marginal slots are filled by children of
less-educated parents. Competition among these parents determines the preparation required for
admissions. When good slots become relatively scarce, rivalry for the marginal slots shifts to the
college-educated parents, who are better able to compete. A rug rat race emerges among these
parents, driving up both admissions requirements and the time spent on childcare.
Our model also accounts for the observed increase in childcare time among less-educated
parents. Since a rising wage premium raises the returns to a college education, these parents

2

raise their preparation time in order to secure the higher returns for their children. It is also true
that the opportunity costs of preparation for college-educated parents rise along with the wage
premium. Nevertheless, as long as the college-educated parents have an overall comparative
advantage in preparation, rivalry for scarce slots drives their efforts upward relative to those of
the less-educated parents. Thus, both groups invest more time in childcare, but the investments
of the college-educated rise by a greater amount.
We provide support for this explanation using two comparisons. First, we compare
childcare trends in the U.S. to those in Canada. The U.S. and Canada are similar in many
respects, but differ in two ways that are key to our explanation: the Canadian system lacks a
steep prestige hierarchy among institutions, so that Canadians do not experience the intense
rivalry to gain admission into higher rated colleges; and the returns to a college degree have
increased much less in Canada. Thus, our theory predicts that we should not see the same
increase in time spent in childcare there, particularly among the more educated. Employing
time-use data from Canada’s General Social Survey, we show that time spent in childcare by
educated parents in Canada changed very little over this period, corroborating our theory.
Second, we show that college-educated underrepresented minority parents in the U.S., who
would be expected to face less competition for college, spend less time on childcare than collegeeducated white parents. Moreover, the difference across educational levels is much greater for
white parents than for underrepresented minority parents.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section II documents trends in childcare over the 19652007 period. The standard explanations are evaluated in Section III. Section IV presents
evidence showing increased competition for college over this period, and develops our new
explanation along with the empirical support. Section V concludes.

3

II. Trends in Time Spent in Childcare
Trends in time spent in care of children have been the subject of many studies in
sociology (e.g. Bryant and Zick (1996), Robinson and Godbey (1999), Sayer, Bianchi, and
(2004)). It has long been noted that college-educated mothers devote more time to child rearing
than less educated mothers (e.g. USDA (1944), Leibowitz (1974), Bianchi, et al. (2006), Guryan,
Hurst, and Kearney (2008)). Here, we document that since the mid 1990s there has been a
widening of the gap between college-educated and less-educated parents.

A. Data Description
To document trends, we use information from twelve nationally representative surveys
from 1965, 1975, 1985, 1992-94, 1995, 1998, 2000 and 2003-2007. All of the surveys are based
on time diary information, which is considered to be the most reliable measure of how
individuals spend their time. Table A1 of the data appendix provides details about the surveys.
We use the American Heritage Time Use Study (AHTUS) versions of the 1965, 1975, 1985, and
1992-94 surveys (Fisher, Egerton and Gershuny (2006)), and the original versions of the other
surveys.
The key measurement issue is the extent to which the studies give consistent measures
over time. The potentially problematic surveys are the 1992-94 survey and the BLS surveys
starting in 2003. Many childcare researchers believe that the 1992-94 survey undercounts
primary childcare activities (Robinson and Godbey (1999), Bianchi, Cohen, Raley and
Nomaguchi (2004), Bianchi et al (2006)). Using results from other time use studies that are not
part of the AHTUS, but are considered comparable to the earlier studies, Allard, Bianchi, Stewart

4

and Wight (2007, footnote 19) argue that the 1992-94 study is not comparable. The 1992-94
survey suggests that time spent in childcare was one hour per week lower in the early 1990s
(compared to 1985), whereas the 1995 survey suggest that it was one hour per week higher.
Thus, any drops in childcare time between 1985 and 1992-94 may be due to problems with the
1992-94 survey. Another important drawback of the 1992-94 study is the lack of information on
key controls, such as marital status.
Concerns have also been expressed about the comparability of the 2003-2007 BLS
surveys with the earlier surveys. For example, recently some researchers have questioned
whether the significant increase in childcare recorded in the 2003 BLS survey is due to a change
in the types of questions asked (e.g. Egerton et al (2005), Aguiar and Hurst (2007)). Allard, et al.
(2007) compare the 2003 BLS survey to the 2000 Survey Research Center survey of parents and
finds very similar estimates of primary time spent in childcare (though not secondary time spent
in childcare). The 2000 survey was designed to be comparable to the earlier surveys, so it
appears that the increase in time spent on childcare in the BLS surveys relative to earlier surveys
is real rather than due to methodological differences in the survey.
Fortunately, the 1965, 1975, 1985, 1995, 1998, and 2000 surveys all involved John
Robinson as a principal investigator. As a result, the coding of activities is very similar across
surveys. Because these studies span the time period in which childcare began trending upward,
we feel confident that the trends we find in time spent in childcare reflect actual trends rather
than changes in activity classification.
We use a comprehensive measure of childcare that includes care of infants, older
children, medical care of children, playing with children, helping with homework, reading to and

5

talking with children, dealing with childcare providers, and travel related to childcare. The data
appendix gives details of the activity codes used.

B. Trends in Total Childcare
To study changes in childcare over time, we regress individual-level time spent on
childcare on various sets of controls. Most of our results are based on the following simple
descriptive model:
CH it = X it β + ε it ,
where CHit is the number of hours per week spent on childcare for person i in year t, Xit is a set
of controls, and ε it captures omitted other factors affecting childcare time. Our sample consists
of parents aged 18 to 64 who are not students, where “parent” is defined as having a child under
18 years in the household.1

We use the recommended weights from the various studies,

normalized so that a representative individual in 1965 has the same weight as a representative
individual in 2007. In addition to the year of the survey, Xit may also include dummy variables
for the age group of the individual (ages 18-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, and 55-64), whether or not
the individual has a college degree, the interaction of the college degree dummy with year,
marital status, the number of children, the number of children squared, category variables for the
age of the youngest child (age <= 1, age = 2, 3-5, 6-9, 10-13, and 14-17), and the number of
children under age 5.
We first consider time spent in childcare for mothers between the ages of 18 to 64. In
our benchmark specification we do not condition on any choice variables that may be correlated
1

We use this definition because most of the earlier time use studies did not specifically identify parents. In 20032007, the difference in average time spent in childcare by actual mothers versus all women who lived in a household
with children present was only 27 minutes per week. One of the reasons we omitted students from all of our
samples was to avoid recording a college student living at home with younger siblings as a parent.

6

with educational level; thus, the only control variables used are the five age categories of the
women, as defined above. The omitted dummy variables are 1975, less-than-college education,
and ages 25-34.2
Column 1 of Table 1 shows the results from this estimation. The levels effects for the
year indicators show that the amount of time spent in childcare decreased from 1965 to 1975,
and again in 1985 and 1992-94 (“1993” for short). Recall, though, that many believe that the
1992-94 survey undercounted childcare, so this estimate may not indicate an actual decrease.
Childcare time in 1995 was 1.76 hours more per week than in 1975, and by 2000 it had risen to
nearly four hours more. From 2003 through 2007, less-educated mothers spent over four hours
more per week in childcare activities than they did in 1975.
Of interest to this study are the coefficients on the interactions between year and college
education. After a trough in the early 1990s, the coefficients on this interaction began to grow in
the late 1990s. These estimates show that from 1965 to 1995, college-educated mothers spent
between 0.06 and 2.1 more hours per week on childcare than did non-college-educated mothers.
Beginning in 1998, however, this differential underwent a dramatic increase: college-educated
mothers spent over three hours more per week in 1998, roughly five hours more in 2000 and
2003, and over six hours more in 2004 and 2005.

Between 1998 and 2007, the college

differential in every year was at least double the highest differential observed between 1965 and
1995.
These trends are depicted graphically in panel A of Figure 1, which is based on the
estimates from column 1 of Table 1; these numbers indicate the time spent in childcare by
mothers in the 25-34 age group. For both education groups, time spent in childcare rose

2

We use 1975 as the omitted year because we will later be comparing 2000 and later studies to 1975 with the more
complete set of controls that are available for those studies, but not for other years.

7

beginning in 1995, but after 1998 the upward movement was much sharper among collegeeducated mothers. As discussed earlier, problems with the 1992-1994 study make it likely that
the true 1993 value was somewhat higher.
Column 2 of Table 1 compares childcare by mothers in 1975, 2000, and 2003-2007 using
the more complete set of controls that are available for these seven years. In addition to the age
category of the mother, we also control for marital status, the number of children (using a
quadratic), and the five dummy variables for the age category of the youngest discussed above.
These additional controls have substantial explanatory power. In this specification, we are
seeking to compare mothers with similar numbers and ages of children across education levels
for the seven years. The results are similar to those without the complete controls. The amount
of time spent on childcare by less-educated mothers rose by four hours per week from 1975 to
the 2000s, and time spent by college-educated mothers rose by more than eight hours per week.
Thus, even with the more complete sets of controls, we find that college-educated mothers
increased the amount of time spent in childcare by double the amount of less-educated mothers.
Is the same true for men? Column 3 of Table 1 and panel B of Figure 1 show the results
of our benchmark specification for fathers. While fathers on average spent much less time on
childcare, the time spent on childcare for men also rose sharply in the late 1990s. The final
column of Table 1 compares childcare of fathers in 1975 to later years and includes the full set of
controls. The results are similar to those without the additional controls. We conclude that time
spent on childcare by both mothers and fathers increased beginning in 1995, and that this
increase was significantly steeper among the college educated. 3

3

Our results differ from Bianchi, Cohen, Raley and Nomaguchi (2004). They do not find a statistically significant
increase in the differential between college-educated parents and less educated parents from 1975 to 2000. On the
other hand, a recent paper by Chalasani (2007) that studies married parents finds results similar to ours: a larger
increase in childcare time among the college-educated between 1985 and 2003.

8

Corroborating evidence for these trends is provided by time use studies of children. For
example, Sandberg and Hofferth (2005) link time diary studies of children in 1981 and 1997 to
determine trends in time spent with parents. They find that children between the ages of 3 to 12
spent 18 more hours per week with one or both parents in 1997 as compared to 1981. Thus,
children’s time diaries corroborate the trends found using parents’ time diaries.

C. Trends in Categories of Childcare
We now break down the trends into particular categories of childcare. To produce
consistent estimates of trends over time, we limited the sample to 1965, 1975, 1985, 1995, 1998,
and 2000 because these six surveys (i) had the same activity codes for subsets of childcare; (ii)
distinguished between basic care of young children versus care of older or mixed age children;
and (iii) included key variables we could use as controls.4 The controls included age categories
of parents, marital status, a quadratic in the number of children, and the number of young
children.5 We construct five subcategories of childcare: (1) general care of young children; (2)
general care of older children or mixed age children; (3) playing with children; (4) teaching
children, which involves reading, helping with homework, disciplining and conversing; and (5)
travel related to childcare, coordinating children’s activities, and picking up and dropping off
children.6
Figure 2 shows the various categories for mothers and Figure 3 shows the various
categories for fathers. The estimates have been normalized to be zero in 1975. As the figures

4

The reason we could not construct these categories for the BLS data is that they do not distinguish between basic
care of younger children and older children.
5
The definition of “young children” changed slightly across surveys. In 1965, it was “under 4 years of age,” in
1998 it was “under 7 years of age,” and in the rest it was “under 5 years of age.”
6
We omit medical care in order to make the graph clearer. There was no noticeable trend in time spent in medical
care for any group.

9

reveal, time spent in basic care of younger children fell for all four gender-education groups,
although it recovered after the mid-1990s for college-educated mothers. The childcare category
with the greatest increase for all four gender-education groups is general care of older children.
Time spent in this category increased by four hours for college-educated mothers and by three
hours for college-educated fathers.

The second most important category was travel and

children’s extracurricular activities.
The BLS surveys offer further evidence concerning differences in childcare time
allocation between college- and less-educated parents during the post-2003 period. Although
these surveys do not distinguish time spent with younger children versus older children, they do
contain other detailed categories of interest. We examined the following categories for 2007: (1)
physical care of children and supervision; (2) educating and teaching children, including reading,
helping with homework, meeting with teachers, and associated travel; (3) playing with children,
including sports and arts and crafts; (4) health care, including associated travel; (5) organizing
activities and attending child’s events; and (6) chauffeuring, which includes dropping off/picking
up, waiting, and other travel (excluding travel associated with education or health).
Figure 4 shows time spent by parents whose youngest child is less than five years old.
The bulk of time spent by mothers is physical care and supervision, followed by playing.
College-educated mothers spend substantially more time on these two categories than lesseducated mothers, almost 12 hours in physical care and supervision and seven hours in playing.
The other categories for this age group are much lower, two hours or less per week. The time
spent by education level does not differ much for the other categories, with the exception of
educational activities where college-educated mothers spend more time. The story is similar for

10

fathers, but at lower levels of hours.

College-educated fathers spend more time in both

categories than less-educated fathers.
Figure 5 shows time spent by parents whose youngest child is five years or older. Note
that the scale is different on this graph: time spent in physical care and supervision has shrunk to
3.5 hours per week for college-educated mothers. The second most important category for
mothers with older children is chauffeuring, with college-educated mothers spending an hour
more in childcare-related travel than less-educated mothers.

This category excludes travel

associated with education and health. Activities and travel associated with education constitute
the third most important category for college-educated mothers. Also important are organizing
and attending extracurricular activities. Fathers spend less time than mothers in all categories
except playing. The three most important categories for fathers are physical care, traveling, and
playing. Overall, college-educated parents spend more time in each category except for health
care. The most important sources of the extra time spent by college-educated parents, however,
are in chauffeuring, education- and activity-related categories.7
The patterns highlighted in Figure 5 mirror the differences highlighted in other research.
For example, Mahoney, Harris, and Eccles (2006) used pooled data from the 1997 and 2002
Child Development Survey of the PSID to show that children of college-educated parents spend
at least three more hours per week on organized activities than children of less-educated parents.
Hofferth (2008) found an increase in time spent in academic activities from 1997 to 2003.
Lareau’s (2003) ethnographic study, Unequal Childhoods, documents the dramatic differences in
how educated parents raise their children compared to less educated parents. The children of
less-educated parents spend most of their free time playing with friends and relatives in their

7

One should not infer from these results that pure travel time accounts for most of the increase in childcare time.
Total travel time associated with childcare increased by approximately one hour from 1975 to the 2000s.

11

neighborhood, unsupervised by adults. Lareau calls this the “natural development” approach.
On the other hand, more-educated parents take a “concerted cultivation” approach, which
requires significant commitments of parental time:
Children’s activities create substantial work for their parents. Parents fill out enrollment
forms, write checks, call to arrange car pools, wash uniforms, drive children to events,
and make refreshments…. Simply getting ready for an activity – collecting the
equipment, organizing the children, loading the car – can be exhausting…, in addition to
the labor of preparing, there is the labor of watching. (page 47)
In sum, it appears that college-educated parents with children age 5 or over spend a good deal of
their time on education and children’s activities.

D. Trends in Overall Time Use of Mothers
Figure 6 sheds light on the source of the extra time devoted to children by mothers. We
have categorized other time expenditures into “work,” “chores,” and “free and personal care
time.” “Chores” include housekeeping, cooking, and shopping. “Free and personal care time”
includes any time not included in the other categories, such as sleeping, personal care time, and
leisure activities. All time use surveys are used and the only controls are the age category. We
have subtracted 65 hours from personal and free care time so that magnitudes are similar.
Work time of less-educated mothers increased until the late 1990s, and then fell
somewhat. Work time of college-educated mothers increased between 1985 and the mid-1990s,
and then flattened out. Time spent on “Chores” fell steadily over the entire sample for both
education levels. “Free time” for both types of mothers fell starting in the mid-1990s. For
college-educated mothers, free time in 2007 was 10 hours less per week than in 1975 and 1985.
Thus, the decline in free time makes up for all of the increase in childcare time.

12

In sum, the evidence suggests that all time spent in childcare has increased since 1975,
but it increased much more for higher educated parents. Moreover, with the caveats about the
1993 study in mind, it appears that these increases began in the mid 1990s, and a substantial
proportion of the rising college differential was due to travel and activities of older children. The
trends we highlight are consistent with descriptions from popular books, such as Judith Warner’s
Perfect Madness: Motherhood in the Age of Anxiety (2005). The key question is, why have
educated parents decided to spend their time in this way? The next section will evaluate various
possible explanations.

III.

Conventional Explanations
As discussed in the Introduction, Bianchi, et al. (2006, p. 87) and others have offered

several potential explanations that could explain the rise in time spent on childcare. We find,
however, that none of these explanations is consistent with the evidence.

A. Selection Effects
One possible explanation for this time reallocation involves the declining incidence of
parenthood over this time period. Since fewer individuals choose to be parents, those who do
choose to be parents might be those persons who enjoy childcare more. This selection effect
could account for the observed trends in childcare hours per week spent by parents.
To test this argument, we obtained a new set of estimates using an expanded sample that
included all adults aged 18-64 who were not students. Results are presented in column 1 of
Table 2, and panel A of Figure 7. The trends in total childcare and the college differential are
clearly present among the general population of women; in particular, the rise in childcare

13

beginning in 1995 continues to be much steeper for college-education women.

Thus, our

findings are not an artifact of selection into motherhood.

B. Income Effects
A second possible explanation for the increase in childcare time pertains to income
effects. If childcare is a normal good, then increases in income should raise the time spent in
childcare. Since the incomes of households with college-educated adults have grown much
faster since the early 1980s than incomes of households with less-educated adults (owing to the
increase in the skill premium), this explanation could also potentially explain the widening gap
in childcare time across education levels.
To investigate this possibility, we analyze the cross section relationship between time
spent on childcare and income and then use the estimates to determine whether they can explain
the time series trends. According to our time use surveys, average real household income in
households with children rose by $21,300 from about $70,000 in 1975 to $91,300 in 2007 (in
$2007). Thus, real income rose by about 30 percent from 1975 to 2007.
We pooled the BLS surveys from 2003-2007 and focused on parents. We used real
household income in thousands of 2007 dollars. See the data appendix for how we constructed
income. In the regressions, we controlled for year fixed effects, age category dummy variables,
dummy variables for education (high school dropouts, college graduates, and those with a
graduate degree), the full set of dummy variables for the age of youngest child, a quadratic in the
number of children, and marital status.
Table 3 shows the effects of income for numerous specifications, Panel A for mothers
and Panel B for fathers. We considered both a quadratic in income and the logarithm of income.

14

Because household income is related to hours of work, and hours of work are probably
negatively related to time spent in childcare, in some specifications we also included controls for
usual hours of work of the respondent as well as the spouse. Also, in order to try to estimate the
pure income effect of childcare, we show results where the sample was limited to just
nonworking mothers.
Table 3 shows that while a number of the income coefficients are statistically different
from zero, all of them are miniscule in terms of economic impact. The fourth column uses the
estimated cross-sectional coefficients combined with the actual change in income from 1975 to
2007 to see how much of the increase in childcare could have been induced by an increase in real
income. Every number in the column is a mere fraction of an hour. Thus, income cannot
explain the increase in childcare.8

C. Safety Concerns
Bianchi, Robinson, and Milkie (2006) suggest that heightened concerns about safety may
induce parents to accompany their children in their activities and to substitute structured
activities for the free, unaccompanied play on neighborhood streets that was the norm in earlier
times. This explanation is problematic for two reasons. First, the violent crime rate rose from
200 (per 100,000 population) in 1965 to a peak of 758 in 1991, and then began declining again
(Statistical Abstract, Historical Statistics, HS-23). Thus, the violent crime rate moves negatively
with time spent in childcare, which is contrary to the hypothesis of a positive crime-childcare
link. Second, educated parents tend to live in safer neighborhoods than less educated parents.

8

The results are even weaker if we instead use the 1975 survey. Most of the income coefficients are not statistically
significant, and all are near zero. We find similarly small coefficients if we instead use earnings as Kimmel and
Connelly (2007) and Guryan, Hurst, and Kearney (2008) did.

15

Thus, if this explanation were important, then we would expect the educated parents to spend
less time on childcare, which is inconsistent with the evidence.
Of course, what matters is parents’ perceptions of safety.

However, the evidence

suggests that parents now worry less about numerous safety issues. Safe Kids USA (2008)
reported the results of Harris polls in 1987 and 2007, which asked parents about their major
concerns about raising kids. Among the categories were concerns about children being involved
in accidents, kidnapped by strangers, influenced adversely by friends, and exposed to street
drugs. In every case, parents were significantly less concerned in 2007 than they were in 1987
(Safe Kids USA (2008), page 9). Thus, trends in safety perceptions cannot be the source of
trends in time spent in childcare.

D. Enjoyment
A fourth possible explanation is that parents now experience greater enjoyment from
childcare. However, measures of enjoyment do not indicate rising enjoyment of most types of
childcare. Robinson and Godbey (1999) report enjoyment ratings for various activities from the
1985 survey. In this survey, which covered both men and women, basic childcare ranked below
work and cooking, but above housework. Krueger, Kahneman, Schkade, Schwarz, and Stone
(2007) report measures of enjoyment of various activities by women in 2004 and 2005.
According to their Table 8.3, basic childcare ranked below both cooking and housework. Thus,
there is no evidence that basic childcare has become more pleasant.
One caveat is that playing with children has always ranked highly in terms of enjoyment.
We have followed the standard practice of including these activities in our measure of childcare
because they are considered to be crucial activities for investment in children’s human capital.

16

However, it might alter the interpretation of the results if one believes that the increase in
childcare time is simply a redirection of time from one high enjoyment activity to another.
To investigate this possibility, we re-estimated the regressions for the subsample of
parents, excluding time spent playing with children from our measure of childcare.

Only

parents’ ages are used as controls. The results for mothers are shown in the first two columns of
Table 4. Column 1 reproduces the first column of Table 1, while column 2 gives the results
using the restricted childcare variable. By comparing the columns, one can see that omitting
playing with children reduces the amount of the increase by about one hour for less-educated
mothers, and by about three hours for college-educated mothers. Nevertheless, most of the
increase over time and across education levels remains even when playing with children is
omitted. The results are similar for fathers, as seen in columns 3 and 4.

E. More Flexible Work Schedules
Yet another possible explanation is that parents now have more flexible work schedules,
and can thus reallocate their time in a way that allows them to spend more time with their
children even when they are working. Unfortunately, we do not have measures of work schedule
flexibility, either in our time use data or to gauge aggregate trends. However, one implication of
this hypothesis is that the biggest increases in childcare time should be among working mothers
rather than stay-at-home mothers.
To test this implication, we split the sample by work status and re-ran our basic
regressions. We found that the increase in childcare is much greater for those mothers who do
not work, and that the gap is much greater across educational levels. One might worry about
selection effects since the labor force participation rate of mothers has increased since 1975,

17

which is our usual comparison year. However, even when we compare to 1985, a year when the
labor force participation rate for college-educated mothers was about the same as in 2007, we
find that the increase in childcare time among college-educated nonworking mothers was around
15 hours per week as compared to an increase around 8 hours per week for college-educated
working mothers.

Thus, some other factor must have been at play to lead even nonworking

mothers to increase their childcare time so much.

IV. A New Explanation: The Rug Rat Race
We now offer a new explanation for the trends in time spent in childcare, tied to
increased competition for college admissions, particularly among the college educated. Our
claim is that increased competition was driven by a steep rise in demand for college admissions
together with a relatively constant number of slots in the more attractive colleges. The resulting
“cohort crowding” for college admissions gave rise to heightened competition among parents for
attractive slots, manifesting itself in greater time spent on college preparation of their children.
This expenditure of childcare time in dissipative rivalry may be dubbed the “rug rat race.”

A. Evidence on the Increase in College Competition and its Effects
Empirical trends in demand for college have displayed a remarkable agreement with
trends in time spent on childcare. The top panel of Figure 8 shows the number of high school
graduates each year since 1965.9 The initial large hump is due to the large size of the baby boom
generation. The number of high school graduates fell to a low around 1990, and have since
spiked up as a result of the “baby boomlet.” The number of high school graduates is expected to
peak in 2009 before decreasing again.
9

These data are from the 2007 Digest of Education Statistics, Table 191.

18

The second panel of Figure 8 indicates the number of recent high school graduates who
have enrolled in college. This graph shows a somewhat different pattern because of the long-run
upward trend in the propensity for high school graduates to go to college. As the figure reveals,
after declining from 1980 to 1990, this number increased dramatically during the 1990s and,
while fluctuating from year to year, has stayed high through the present. Observe that the jump
in college enrollment occurs at the same time as the rise in childcare time that we estimated
previously.
An additional reason for the increased demand for college slots is the dramatic increase in
the college wage premium over the last three decades. Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2008) update
the trends first highlighted by Katz and Murphy (1992), documenting that the college/high
school wage premium for full-time workers has increased by 25 percentage points since 1980.
Thus, the rise in the demand for college entrance can be viewed as a response to the dramatic
changes in the returns to going to college.
Of course, the rise in the college premium also means that the opportunity cost of time
for college-educated parents has grown at the same time that these parents have increased the
amount of time spent on childcare. Other things equal, this rise in opportunity cost should have
led to a smaller increase for these parents. We argue, however, that college-educated parents
have had a lower overall marginal disutility of devoting time to childcare, even after accounting
for the opportunity cost of work. In the next section we present a theoretical model that
rationalizes these various factors.
Turning to the supply side, the number of slots at the more attractive colleges has not
expanded commensurately with demand. Between 1990 and 2005, total enrollment in college by
recent high school completers increased by 30 percent. In contrast, the number of full-time

19

enrolled freshman increased only 13 percent at the ten elite universities of “The Ivy Plus” and by
only 10 percent at the top 25 liberal arts colleges.10 Bound and Turner (2007) show that this
“cohort crowding” extends to public institutions as well. Using variation in cohort size across
states, they show that the elasticity of undergraduate enrollment with respect to the age 18
population is well below unity. According to Table 4 of their paper, two-year community
colleges have the highest elasticity of 0.8, followed by non-flagship public universities with 0.56,
and flagship public universities with an elasticity of only 0.2. This evidence indicates that the
number of slots becomes much less responsive to enrollment pressure as the quality of the
institution increases.
For the last several years, the popular press has been filled with stories of unprecedented
competition for college. Some of the perceived increase in competition is simply a statistical
mirage: the average student now applies to more colleges, both because of the increased ease of
filling out applications and the perceived greater uncertainty about getting into a given college.
However, there is ample evidence that part of the increase in competition is real. Bound,
Hershbein, and Long (2009) document many facets of the increase in competition. For example,
they show that test scores of entering students are higher now, particularly at the top ranked
schools. They also show that the percentage of high school graduates applying to a four-year
institution has increased over time. Moreover, they show that the probability of acceptance to a
four-year college for a student of a given ability has declined significantly since 1982.
Although there are still many colleges that will accept most applicants, there is evidence
to suggest that parents and children have increased the emphasis that they put on selective
colleges. Hoxby (1997) documents that the market for higher education has changed from a

10

These numbers are based on our calculations using data extracted from Integrated Postsecondary Education Data
System.

20

collection of local markets to a nationally integrated market. According to the International
Herald Tribune (May 16, 2007), “the preoccupation with the top universities, once primarily a
phenomenon in the Northeastern United States, has become a more countrywide obsession.”
Observers note that college admissions anxiety has spread to the Midwest and Sun Belt, where
enrollment in SAT/ACT prep classes has grown more than seven times the overall national
growth rate over the last five years (Justin Pope (AP) October 22, 2006). In its annual report,
State of College Admission, the National Association for College Admission Counseling (2008)
documents that the group of 257 four-year colleges that accept fewer than 50 percent of
applicants receive 31 percent of all applications (Table 6, page 18).
Developmental psychologists and pediatricians have drawn an explicit link between
competition for college slots and the increase in time devoted to academics and extracurricular
activities. For example, Luthar and Becker (2002) and Lareau (2004) argue that many middleand upper middle-class parents see building up their children’s “after-school resumes” as
absolutely necessary because of the competition for college admission. The American Academy
of Pediatrics (Ginsburg (2007)) cites the increase in competition in college admissions as a key
reason for the decrease in free play time and increase in scheduled activities among children
nationwide.11 Our evidence on trends in childcare time, which shows a sharp increase in time for
this class of activities, is entirely consistent with this picture. Bound, Hershbein, and Long
(2009) document the various ways that high school students are changing their behavior in
response to the increase in competition. For example, they show that the fraction of seniors who
have taken at least one Advanced Placement exam increased from 16.5 to 30.9 percent from
1992 to 2004, and that time spent in extra curricular activities rose. Surprisingly though, they
11

An ongoing debate among child development experts asks whether the dramatic increase in extracurricular
activities helps or hurts children. See, for example, Rosenfeld, Wise, and Coles (2001) and Mahoney, Harris and
Eccles (2006).

21

find that while time spent in homework is now higher than in the early 1980s, the upward trend
reversed somewhat during recent years.
Another factor that might explain the increase in extracurricular activities is the increase
in college tuition. There is a good deal of anecdotal evidence that many parents hope that
investing time in developing their children’s sports and music abilities might result in a college
scholarship.

However, there is also evidence that parents over-estimate the number of

scholarships that are available (e.g. The Washington Post, February 13, 2003).

B. Theoretical Model of the Rug Rat Race
To clarify our ideas about childcare time and competition for college slots, we develop a
simple theoretical model in which parents compete for slots by investing in their children’s
college preparation. Each parent is assumed to have a single child. Parent’s schooling may be
either college- or less-educated, represented by c and l, respectively. The numbers of collegeand less-educated parents are denoted by mc and ml , respectively, and m = mc + ml gives the
total number of parents.
We assume that a child’s college preparation depends on her parent’s time spent in
childcare, denoted by h. A less-educated parent incurs a disutility of d l (h) from choosing h,
while a college-educated parent incurs wd c (h) , where w > 1 reflects a wage premium. The
disutility functions satisfy, for s = l , c , d s′ , d s′′ > 0 , d s (0) = d s′ (0) = 0

and d s′ (∞) = ∞ .

Moreover, we assume that college-educated parents incur lower marginal disutility in the
absence of a wage premium, i.e., d c′ (h) < d l′ (h) .
A child’s ultimate wealth is given by wqh , where q reflects the quality of the college
attended by the child. This is meant to capture both pecuniary and psychic benefits from college
22

attendance. For example, parents may value the prestige of sending their children to more elite
institutions. Parents choose h to maximize their children’s wealth net of their own disutility.
Thus, the objective function of a less-educated parent is wqh − d l (h) .

In the absence of

constraints on college attendance, the optimal preparation level, hl* (q) , is determined by

d l′ (hl* (q)) = qw .
For a college-educated parent, the objective function is wqh − wd c (h) , and the optimal
preparation level, hc* (q) , satisfies
d c′ (hc* (q)) = q .
The effect of parent’s schooling on optimal preparation time is considered in Figure 9.
For less-educated parents, the optimal decision occurs at point A, where the marginal return wq
equals the marginal disutility d l′ . A parent’s college education shifts the marginal disutility
locus down to d c′ .

This captures a productivity effect in preparing children for college.

Countering this is an opportunity cost effect, whereby a given quantity of time commands a
higher market wage.

The marginal return to preparation, adjusted for opportunity cost, drops to

q, and the optimal decision occurs at point B. We assume that the productivity effect dominates

the opportunity cost effect, so that hc* (q) > hl* (q ) holds for every level of q. Thus, collegeeducated parents have a comparative advantage in investing in college preparation.
College attendance is restricted by the availability of slots. Suppose there are k1 slots
available at first-tier colleges, and k 2 m slots available at second-tier colleges, where k1 + k 2 m <
m . Thus, while college slots are scarce overall, the first-tier slots become relatively scarcer as

the college-eligible population expands. Wealth obtained from attending a first-tier college is

23

wq1 h , while wealth from a second-tier college is wq 2 h , where q1 > q 2 > 0 . If a child does not

attend college, then wealth is q 0 h , where q 2 > q 0 > 0 .
Parents simultaneously choose h, and colleges observe the values of h for each child.
The colleges then fill their slots in descending order of h.

This acceptance rule may be

rationalized in a number of ways. For example, children may contribute a proportion of their
wealth to their alma maters, and admissions decisions may be made in order to maximize total
contributions. Since first-tier slots are most valuable, they will be filled first. In equilibrium, a
threshold h1 will exist such that children with h ≥ h1 are accepted to first-tier colleges, and there
are exactly k1 such children. The second-tier slots are filled next: there is a threshold h2 such
that children with h ∈ [h2 , h1 ) , numbering k 2 m , are accepted to second-tier colleges. Finally, the
remaining m − k1 − k 2 m children with h < h2 do not attend college.
We first consider the case in which mc is small, in the sense that there are sufficiently
many first-tier slots to accommodate the children of college-educated parents. Proposition 1 of
the Theoretical Appendix characterizes the outcome for the case of mc < k1 . In equilibrium,
college-educated parents exploit their comparative advantage in college preparation to get their
children into first-tier colleges. The children of less-educated parents take up the remaining firsttier slots along with all of the second-tier slots. The acceptance thresholds h1 and h2 make the
latter parents just indifferent between first-tier, second-tier and no college. The thresholds are
distorted upwards relative to the corresponding unconstrained optimal preparation levels hl* (q1 )
and hl* (q 2 ) , reflecting rivalry among these parents for scarce slots.
Now suppose that mc rises to the point where there are too few first-tier slots for the
children of college-educated parents. As shown in Proposition 2 of the Theoretical Appendix,

24

once mc > k1 the focus of rivalry shifts from less-educated to college-educated parents. The
children of the less-educated are driven completely from the first tier, as the acceptance threshold
h1 jumps to a level that makes the college-educated parents indifferent between the first and

second tiers. This new level is distorted upwards relative to unconstrained optimal preparation,
hc* (q1 ) .

Figure 10 illustrates the time paths of college preparation choices when m and mc rise
gradually, with mc = k1 occurring at time T. We interpret T as corresponding to a point of time
in the mid 1990s. The wage premium w is also assumed to rise over time, leading to steadily
increasing paths of h1 and h2 . Prior to T, the growth of mc gradually squeezes the children of
less-educated parents out of the first-tier colleges, shifting their parents’ preparation choices
from h1 to h2 . The average level nevertheless increases if the growth of w is sufficiently rapid.
The preparation choices of college-educated parents also rise if h1 > hc* (q1 ) . At time T the latter
parents jump to a discretely higher level of college preparation, while the choices of the lesseducated continue to rise with h2 .
The model shows how a combination of increasing rewards for college attendance and
rivalry for ever-scarcer slots can fuel a rug rat race among parents. Rivalry is manifested in
higher college preparation requirements, and in order to secure slots for their children all parents
must devote increasingly large amounts of time to childcare. Once the first tier slots become
sufficiently scarce, rivalry among the college-educated parents intensifies greatly, driving up
their time spent in childcare relative to that of the non-college-educated.

25

C. Tests of the Theory

In the next two subsections, we test our theory by comparing time spent in childcare
across groups with differing competitive pressures for college. The first section compares time
use trends by educational attainment in Canada to the U.S. The second section compares time
use across whites and underrepresented minorities in the U.S.

1. A Comparison of Trends in the U.S. and Canada

As a test of our theory, we compare trends in childcare in the U.S. and Canada. The
comparison of these two countries is ideal for our purposes. Because of geographic proximity
and similarity of language and culture, we would expect that changes in childcare time caused by
knowledge diffusion or fads to affect both countries similarly.

However, these two countries

differ significantly in two key ingredients of our theory: trends in the college wage premium and
the competition to get into college.
Consider first the college wage premium. Boudarbat, Lemieux, and Riddell (2006) show
that between 1980 and 2000 the wage premium of a college degree relative to just a high school
degree in Canada rose by about 10 percentage points for men and 5 percentage points for
women. This contrasts with an average rise over both sexes of 25 percentage points in the U.S.
during the same period (Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2008)). Thus, the returns to college have
increased much more in the U.S.
A second key difference between the U.S. and Canada is the nature of competition in
higher education. Davies and Hammack (2005) document the similarities and differences in
higher education between the U.S. and Canada. The countries are similar in that just over 60
percent of high school graduates in both countries pursue a postsecondary education. Both

26

higher education systems have decentralized governance and both are experiencing rises in
enrollments and increased competition. However, as Davies and Hammack document, the nature
of the competition in the two countries is very different. They argue that while the Canadian
system consists of formally equal public universities, the U.S. system is distinguished by a steep
prestige hierarchy of higher education, and that this hierarchy leads to a distinctive form of
competition that has increased over the last decade. The effects of this competition have been
felt at all lower levels of education. In contrast, competition in Canada occurs within the postsecondary system itself and takes the form of competition to enter lucrative majors. Davies and
Hammack argue “Where one studies is seen as more important in the U.S., while what one
studies dominates in Canada.” In fact, many Canadian college students who cannot get into their
desired programs at 4-year colleges often transfer to community colleges in order to pursue their
desired field. Moreover, Canadians are much less likely to go to college outside their home
province than American students.
The more muted increase in the college premium, along with the lower competition to get
into the hierarchy of colleges, suggests that there should be less pressure on educated Canadian
parents to invest time in preparing their children to get into college. We test this prediction by
studying trends in childcare in Canada.
To this end, we use microdata from the 1986 (cycle 2), 1992 (cycle 7), 1998 (cycle 12)
and 2005 (cycle 19) of the Time Use Survey from Canada’s General Social Survey (Statistics
Canada) to construct trends in childcare time by education level.12 However, there was a
significant break in a definition between the two earlier surveys and the two later surveys. In

12

We used the Statistics Canada microdata file of the 4 cycles, which contain anonymized data. All computations
on these microdata were prepared by Nova Scotia Department of Finance and the responsibility for the use and
interpretation of these data is entirely that of the authors. We are deeply grateful to Tarek Harchaoui for obtaining
access to the data for us.

27

particular, the two earlier surveys counted as childcare any care of children between the ages of 0
and 18. In the two later surveys, it counted as childcare any care of children between the ages of
0 and 14. Using the standard childcare variables would therefore bias down the trends over time.
We use total family care (children and adults) as the most consistent measure.

The data

appendix shows that the change implied by this measure lies between the lower bound using the
available childcare variable and the upper bound based on some imputations we made.
Otherwise, we analyze the data similarly to the way we analyzed the U.S. data. We
estimate the same baseline regressions as before, controlling for the age group of the parent and
interacted year and education variables.13
Figure 11 and Table 5 show the results. Columns (1) and (3) of Table 5 show the results
with baseline controls whereas columns (2) and (4) show the results in which controls for marital
status and the age group of the youngest child. Figure 11 plots the results for the baseline
regressions. We have normalized the hours to be zero in the base year in each country, 1985 in
the U.S. and 1986 in Canada.
Figure 11 shows that time spent in childcare by less educated parents increased by about
the same amount in both countries, about four to five hours per week for mothers and about three
hours per week for fathers since the mid-1980s. The contrast is in time spent by collegeeducated parents. Whereas time spent by college-educated mothers rose by nine hours per week
in the U.S., it rose by only one hour per week in Canada. For college-educated fathers, the
increase in the U.S. was six hours per week and the increase in Canada was two hours per week.
Thus, Canada did not mirror the big increases in time by educated parents.

In fact, the

educational gap in childcare time grew in the U.S., but shrank in the Canada.

13

Because of data limitations in some of the years, the youngest age category includes those ages 20-24 rather than
18-24 as in the U.S. data.

28

Our findings are broadly consistent with other analyses of trends in the Canadian data.
Pronovost (2007) finds that the amount of time that parents spent in the presence of their children
fell from 1986 to 2005. Turcotte (2008) similarly finds a decrease in time spent with family
members over the period 1986 to 2005.

2. A Comparison across Racial and Ethnic Groups in the U.S

As an additional test of our theory, we compare childcare time across race and ethnic
groups. One group in the U.S. that should not have felt as much increased competition to enter
college is underrepresented minorities.14

Despite the overall increase in applicants, most

colleges are still eager to admit underrepresented minorities. One exception is public universities
in states that banned affirmative action in the late 1990s, namely California, Florida, Texas, and
Washington.
Ideally, we would compare trends by race and education group over time. Unfortunately,
the surveys before 2003 are too small to provide information for underrepresented minorities by
educated level. For example, the largest of the pre-2003 surveys includes 202 black parents, but
only 34 college-educated black parents, and no Hispanic parents.15
On the other hand, the sample sizes of the BLS surveys from 2003 to 2007 are
sufficiently large to provide some cross-sectional information, particularly if we pool the
surveys. The problem with cross-sectional comparisons is that there may be other reasons that
particular racial or ethnic groups spend more or less time on childcare. Thus, we will focus on
differences by education level and state of residence (i.e. “difference-in-difference” effects)

14
15

We are indebted to Daniel Hamermesh for suggesting this test to us.
For the same reason, it is not possible to relate time use trends across states to state-level cohort crowding.

29

According to our theory, underrepresented minorities should feel less competitive
pressure in applying for college, particularly in states that allow affirmative action in their public
universities. Thus, we would expect underrepresented minorities to spend less time in childcare
than white parents, and the college differential in time spent to be less within the group of
minority parents. We compare time spent in childcare by underrepresented minorities to whites,
distinguishing by education level and by whether they reside in the four states that banned
affirmative action in university admissions before 2003.
We re-estimate our baseline specification with two modifications.

First, we allow

interaction terms between race, education, and whether the state bans affirmative action. Our
underrepresented minority group consists of “black only” and Hispanic. Second, because the
underrepresented minorities tend to be less educated within our two broad educational
categories, we include additional controls for high school dropouts and those with a graduate
degree.
Table 6 shows the estimates for the pooled samples from 2003 to 2007. All of the
numbers shown are differentials relative to blacks and Hispanics with less than a college degree
living in states that allow affirmative action. Consider first the results for mothers. Within each
educational group, white mothers spend significantly more time on childcare than
underrepresented minorities. Moreover, the within-race educational differential is lowest for
underrepresented minorities in states that allow affirmative action and highest among whites. A
college-educated minority mother in a state that allows affirmative action spends less time on
childcare than a less-educated white parent in either type of state. All of these results are
consistent with our theory that competition for college drives up time spent in childcare.

30

Another interesting finding is that all groups spend more time on childcare in states that ban
affirmative action than in states that do not.
The bottom panel of Table 6 shows the results for fathers. Although white fathers with a
college degree spend more time than minority fathers with a college degree, the within-group
educational differential is greatest for minority fathers in states that allow affirmative action but
smallest for minority fathers in states that ban affirmative action. Thus, some of the results for
fathers are consistent with our theory, but the estimate for one key group is not.
To summarize, the results for mothers are consistent with our theory, with the groups
least likely to face increased competition spending the least time on childcare. The results for
fathers are mixed, with some rankings consistent with our theory but other rankings inconsistent
with our theory.

V. Conclusion

This paper has documented a dramatic increase in time spent in childcare by collegeeducated parents since the early 1990s. While time spent in childcare rose for all parents, the
rise was far more pronounced for college-educated parents. Since the early 1990s, collegeeducation mothers have reallocated more than nine hours per week from leisure time to childcare
time. This reallocation occurred at the same time that competition to get into college intensified,
as a combination of demographic forces and the increase in the college premium led to a surge in
the demand for college slots. In contrast, time spent in childcare by educated parents in Canada
changed very little over this period.
We have explained these trends using a model in which the rise in time devoted to
childcare is the optimal response to the increase in rivalry for scarce college slots. We postulate

31

that college-educated parents have a comparative advantage in preparing their children for
college, which they exploit to get their children into the most attractive colleges. When slots are
plentiful relative to demand, the required amount of child preparation is relatively low.
However, when demand rises, rivalry among the college-educated parents drives the required
preparation upwards. Less-educated parents also raise their childcare effort, but to a lesser
extent.
In this paper we have focused on explaining observed trends in time use, but our results
also have implications for socially efficient time allocation. To the extent that the private costs
and benefits of college preparation reflect social costs and benefits, the rivalry for college slots
implies wasteful overinvestment in preparation. Overinvestment may be mitigated by expanding
the number of slots, or by modifying college acceptance rules to place greater emphasis on
criteria that cannot be directly influenced by parents. In a broader context, however, parents may
not fully internalize the social benefits of preparing their children, which raises the possibility
that the rug rat race provides a useful stimulus to human capital investment. These issues
warrant closer investigation in future work.

32

Data Appendix
Table A1. U.S. Time Use Surveys
Study Title and Survey Organization

Time
Period

Sample
Parents,
18-64, not
students
1,196

“1965-66 Americans’ Use of Time” *
Survey Research Center †

Fall 1965 –
Spring 1966

“1975-76 Time Use in Economic and Social
Accounts”*
Survey Research Center †

Fall 1975 –
Summer
1976

3,354

“1985 Americans’ Use of Time” *
Survey Research Center †

Jan. 1985 –
Dec. 1985

928

“National Human Activity Pattern Survey” *
Survey Research Center †

Fall 1992 –
Summer
1994
Jan. 1995 –
Dec. 1995

1,629

Mar. 1998 –
Dec. 1999

456

May 1999 –
Jun 2000
Jan. 2003 –
Dec. 2007

974

“1995 Electric Power Research Institute
Study”
EPRI †
“Family Interaction, Social Capital, and
Trends in Time Use”
Survey Research Center †
“National Survey of Parents”
Survey Research Center †
“American Time Use Survey”
Bureau of Labor Statistics

Some
oversampling
Panel aspect

Methodology led
to undercount of
childcare

478

03: 7,771
04: 5,082
05: 5,335
06: 5,264
07: 4,859
* indicates that the study is part of the American Heritage Time Use Study.
† indicates that John Robinson was a principal investigator for the survey.

33

Notes

Includes only
parents
Activity codes are
different from
earlier codes

U.S. Activity Codes
A. Total Childcare
AHTUS (1965, 1975, 1985, 1992-94)
1995, 1998, 2000
ATHUS (2003-2007)

B. Work
AHTUS (1965, 1975, 1985, 1992-94)
1995, 1998, 2000
ATHUS (2003-2007)

C. Chores
AHTUS (1965, 1975, 1985, 1992-94)

1995, 1998, 2000
ATHUS (2003-2007)

tmain33 - tmain39, tmain65, tmain96
act20 – act27, act29
0301, 0302, 0303, 0399, 0401, 0402, 0403, 0499, 0801,
160107,170301, 170401, 170801,180301, 180302,
180303, 180401, 180402, 180403

tmain10-tmain12, tmain92, tmain93
act0, act1, act3, act5, act9
0501, 0503, 1705, 1805

tmain120-tmain27, tmain30-tmain32, tmain40, tmain6768, tmain95
act10-act19, act30, act31, act34-act39, act42
02, 0304, 0404, 07, 0802, 0803, 0806-0899, 0901-0999,
10, 160104-160106, 160108, 1702, 170302, 170402,
170802, 170803, 170806, 170807, 170901-170999,
1710, 1802, 180304, 180305, 180404, 180405, 1807,
180802, 180803, 180806, 180807, 180907, 1809, 1810

D. Subcategories of Childcare for 1965-2000
Care of younger children
Care of older children, or mixed age
Educational activities
Play
Travel, activities
Medical care

tmain33 (act20)
tmain34 (act21)
tmain37, tmain38 (act22, act23)
tmain36, tmain65 (act24, act25)
tmain39, tmain96 (act27,act29)
tmain35 (act26)

E. Subcategories of Childcare for 2007
Physical care and supervision
030101,030106,030109, 040101,040106,040109
Education and related travel
030102,030107,0302,040102,040107,0402,180302,180402
Play
030103,030104,030105,040103,040104,040105
Health and related travel
0304,0403,180303,180403
Organizing & attending activities
030108,030110,040108,040110
Chauffering (travel, picking up,
030111,030112,040111,040112,180301,180401
waiting, etc.)

34

Construction of household income

The household income variable was “hufaminc” in the CPS data set. The CPS variable gives
ranges of income, with a top code of $150,000 and above. We used the midpoints of the ranges.
For the top-coded category, we used information from Saez’s (2008) annual U.S. distribution of
income for families, including realized capital gains, to compute the average income for the top
category. We converted income to 2007 dollars using the Consumer Price Index.
Race/ethnic group definitions: “White” is ATUS-CPS variable ptdtrace = 1 and pehspnon~=1.
“Minority” is ptdtrace = 2 or pehspnon = 1.

Canadian Time Use Data

We use microdata from 1986 (cycle 2), 1992 (cycle 7), 1998 (cycle 12) and 2005 (cycle
19) of the Time Use Survey from Canada’s General Social Survey. There were three ways in
which the sample of parents differed from the U.S. data. First, the definition of a “parent” in
Canada is someone whose own child ages 0 to 18 is in the household, whereas in the U.S. it is
someone who lives in a household with a child ages 0 to 18. Second, in Canada all childcare
refers to household children; in the U.S. it refers to both household and nonhousehold children.
Third, because of data limitations, the adults in the Canadian data are ages 20 to 64, compared to
18 to 64 in the U.S. data. To preserve cultural comparability with the U.S., we limited the
sample to Canadians for whom English was one of the main languages spoken at home.
A key complication arose in constructing a consistent series of childcare across time.
Time spent in childcare in 1986 and 1992 referred to children ages 0 to 18, whereas time spent in
childcare in 1998 and 2005 referred to children ages 0 to 14. Using this definition would bias the
time trends down.
To create a consistent variable over time, we used all childcare and adult care time. For
1986, this was variable DVCHILDC, plus variables DURAC_41 and DURAC_42. DVCHILDC
included only childcare time in 1986, so we added in the two adult care variables. For 1992,
1998, and 2005, DVCHILDC included both childcare and adult care. (See the table in Appendix
J of the documentation of the GSS 2005 for more details.)
We also compared this series to a constructed childcare series that we expect to give an
upward bias in the trend. In particular, we constructed this series by linking several series over
time. For 1986 and 1992, we used the available childcare series that covered care of children
ages 0 to 18 (DVCHILDC in 1986 and CHLDDOMS in 1992). Because the childcare series in
1998 and 2005 omitted care of children ages 15 to 18, we attempted to augment the series in the
cases where we thought that child of this age was present. In particular, in 1998 and 2005, we
substituted total family care time for childcare time in those households that had a nonzero
probability of having a child ages 15 to 18. We determined that probability as follows:
1998 survey: The variable CHR1518C indicated the number of children ages 15 to 18. If this
variable was positive, we substituted total family care time for childcare time.
2005 survey: This survey did not contain the variable CHR1518C. We had to use other
variables to indicate a probability of a child between the ages of 15 to 18. These cases were:

35

(1) The respondent had a child below the age of 19 (CHRTIME6=1) and no children ages 0 to 14
(CHR0014C=0) in the household.
(2) The respondent likely had a child between the ages of 12 and 18 in the household
(CHRTIME6=4, 5, or 6), the number of respondent’s children of any age in the household
(CHRINHSDC) was greater than the number of respondent’s children ages 0 to 14 (CHR0014C),
and the respondent had a child ages 0 to 24 in the household (LIVARR12 = 3 or 4).
The table below gives the change in each measure for all parents from 1986 to 2005
Measure
1. Childcare of ages 0-14 in 2005 and childcare of ages 018 in 1986
2. Total family care (children and adults)

Change (in hours per week)
2.39

3. Constructed childcare variable that substitutes total
family care in some households in 2005

2.84

2.45

We know that Measure 1 will bias the estimate of the change downward because of the change in
definition. We know that Measure 3 will bias the estimate of the change upward because of the
substitution of total family care in some households in 2005. The change in total family care, the
consistent measure, lies between the upper and lower bound.

36

Theoretical Appendix
Proposition 1. If mc < k1 , then the equilibrium acceptance threshold h1 is uniquely determined

by h1 = h1A > hl* (q 0 ) and
wq1 h1A − d l (h1A ) = hl* (q0 ) − d l (hl* (q 0 )) ,

and the equilibrium threshold h2 is uniquely determined by h2 > hl* (q 2 ) and
wq 2 h2 − d l (h2 ) = hl* (q 0 ) − d l (hl* (q 0 )) .

Moreover, h1A > h2 , and:
•

College-educated parents choose h = max{hc* (q1 ), h1A } ;

•

Less-educated parents divide themselves between h = h1A , h = h2 and h = hl* (q 0 ) ,
where hl* (q 0 ) is the optimal preparation choice when a child does not attend college.

Proof.

Let Gl (h | q) = wqh − d n (h) and Gc (h | q) = wqh − wd c (h) represent the objective

functions of less- and college-educated mothers, respectively. Under our assumptions, these
functions are strictly concave in h and decrease without bound as h approaches infinity. Since
Gl (hl* (q1 ) | q1 ) > Gl (hl* (q 0 ) | q 0 / w) , there is a unique point
Gl (h1A | q1 ) = Gl (hl* (q 0 ) | q 0 / w) .

h1A >

hl* (q1 )

satisfying

Similarly, Gl (hl* (q 2 ) | q 2 ) > Gl (hl* (q0 ) | q 0 / w) implies that

there is a unique point h2 > hl* (q 2 ) satisfying Gl (h2 | q 2 ) = Gl (hl* (q0 ) | q 0 / w) . Furthermore,
Gl (h2 | q1 ) > Gl (h2 | q 2 ) = Gl (hl* (q 0 ) | q0 / w) implies h2 < h1A .

Consider the h choices of college-educated mothers when hc* (q1 ) ≥ h1A . Clearly, hc* (q1 )
is optimal among h ≥ h1A . Moreover, for all h ∈ [h2 , h1A ) , Gc (hc* (q1 ) | q1 ) > Gc (hc* (q 2 ) | q 2 ) ≥

37

Gc (h | q 2 ) , and for all h < h2 , Gc (hc* (q1 ) | q1 ) > Gc (hc* (q 0 ) | q 0 / w) ≥ Gc (h | q 0 / w) .

Thus,

hc* (q1 ) is strictly preferred to any other h.

Next suppose h1A > hc* (q1 ) . Let hˆ = max{hc* (q 2 ), h2 } . Note that hc* (q 2 ) < hc* (q1 ) and
h2 < h1A imply hˆ < h1A . Moreover, hˆ ≥ h2 implies Gl (hˆ | q 2 ) ≤ Gl (hl* (q 0 ) | q 0 / w) . Thus,
0 ≥ Gl (hˆ | q 2 ) − G n (hl* (q 0 ) | q 0 / w) = Gl (hˆ | q 2 ) − Gl ( p1A | q1 )
h A1

h A1

h

h

= wq 2 hˆ − wq1 h1A + ∫ˆ d l′ (h)dh > wq 2 hˆ − wq1 h1A + ∫ˆ wd c′ (h)dh
= Gc (hˆ | q 2 ) − Gc (h1A | q1 ) ,

where the strict inequality comes from the fact that hc* (q) > hl* (q ) for all q implies
wd c′ (q) < d l′ (q ) for all q.

Thus, Gc (h1A | q1 ) > Gc (hˆ | q 2 ) , and it follows that Gc (h1A | q 2 )

> Gc (h | q 2 ) for all h ∈ [h2 , h1A ) since ĥ maximizes Gc (h | q 2 ) over this range of h. Finally,

consider h < h2 .

If hˆ = hc* (q 2 ) , then Gc (hˆ | q 2 ) > Gc (hc* (q 0 ) | q 0 / w) ≥ Gc (h | q 0 / w) for all

h < h2 , whereas hˆ = h2 implies hˆ > hc* (q 0 ) and
0 = Gl (hl* (q 0 ) | q 0 ) − Gl (hˆ | q 2 ) > Gl (hc* (q 0 ) | q 2 ) − Gl (hˆ | q 2 )
hˆ

= hc* (q 0 ) − wq 2 hˆ + ∫ *

ψ l′ (h)dh > hc* (q 0 ) − wq 2 hˆ + ∫

hˆ

hc* ( q0 )

hc ( q0 )

wd c′ (h)dh

= Gc (hc* (q 0 ) | q 0 / w) − Gc (hˆ | q 2 ) ,

whence Gc (hˆ | q 2 ) > Gc (h | q 0 / w) for all h < h2
Now consider the h choices of the less-educated mothers. Because of strict concavity and
h1A > hl* (q1 ) , Gl (h | q1 ) < Gl (h1A | q1 ) for all q > q1A . Similarly, Gl (q | q 2 ) < Gn (h2 | q 2 ) for all
h ∈ [h2 , h1A ) .

Since hl* (q 0 ) < h2 and hl* (q 0 ) maximizes Gl (h | q 0 / w) , it follows that

38

Gl (h | q 0 ) < Gl (hl* (q 0 ) | q 0 / w) for all h < h2 , h ≠ hl* (q 0 ) . Thus, the choices h1A , h2 and hl* (q0 )

are strictly preferred to any others, and by construction these three are equally preferred. Q.E.D.

Proposition 2. If k1 < mc , then the equilibrium acceptance threshold h1 is uniquely determined

by h1 = h1B > hc* (q1 ) and
wq1 h1B − wd c (h1B ) = q 0 hˆ − wq 0 d c (hˆ) ,

(1)

where hˆ = max{hc* (q 0 ), h2 } , and h2 is determined as in Proposition 1. Moreover, h1B > h1A , and
•

College-educated parents divide themselves between h = h1B and h = hˆ ;

•

Less-educated parents divide themselves between h = h2 and h = hl* (q 0 ) .

Equation

Proof.

(1)

can

be

expressed

as

Gc (h1B | q1 ) = Gc (hˆ | q 2 ) .

Moreover,

Gc (hc* (q1 ) | q1 ) > Gc (hc* (q 2 ) | q 2 ) ≥ Gc (hˆ | q 2 ) . Since h1B > hc* (q1 ) , it follows that h1B is uniquely

defined, and Gc (hˆ | q1 ) > Gc (hˆ | q 2 ) implies h1B > hˆ .
We now verify that h1B > h1A .
B

h1
0 = Gc (hˆ | q 2 ) − Gc (h1B | q1 ) = wq 2 hˆ − wq1 h1B + ∫ˆ wd c′ (h)dh
h

B

h1
< wq 2 hˆ − wq1 h1B + ∫ˆ d l′ (h)dh = Gl (hˆ | q 2 ) − Gl (h1B | q1 ) .
h

This implies Gl (h1B | q1 ) < Gl (hˆ | q 2 ) ≤ Gl (h2 | q 2 ) , and comparison with (1) and (2) shows that
h1B > h1A .

Consider the h choices of college-educated mothers. Since h1B > hc* (q1 ) , Gc (h | q1 ) <
Gc (h1B | q1 ) for all h > h1B .

If hc* (q 2 ) ≥ h2 , then hc* (q 2 ) is strictly preferred to any other
39

h ∈ [h2 , h1B ) , while if h2 > hc* (q 2 ) , then Gc (h | q 2 ) < Gc (h2 |, q 2 ) for all h ∈ (h2 , h1B ) . Thus,
Gc (hˆ | q 2 ) maximizes Gc (h | q 2 ) over h ∈ [h2 , h1B ) . The argument from the proof of Proposition

1 shows that Gc (hˆ | q 2 ) > Gc (h | q 0 / w) for all h < h2 . Thus, the choices h1B and ĥ are strictly
preferred to any others, and they are equally preferred by construction.
As for the non-college-educated mothers, h ≥ h1B implies Gl (h | q1 ) ≤ Gl (h1B | q1 ) <
Gl (h2 | q 2 ) , so h2 is strictly preferred to any such h.

The arguments from the proof of

Proposition 1 establish that h2 and hn* (1) are strictly preferred to any other h < h1B , and they are
equally preferred by construction. Q.E.D.

40

References

Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, “Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time Over Five
Decades,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (2007): 969-1006.
Allard, Mary Dorinda, Suzanne Bianchi, Jay Stewart and Vanessa R. Wight, “Comparing
Childcare Measures in the ATUS and Earlier Time Use Studies,” Monthly Labor Review,
May 2007, pp. 27-36.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney, “Trends in US Wage Inequality:
Revising the Revisionists,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (May 2008):
300 – 323.
Becker, Gary S., A Treatise on the Family, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981.
Bianchi, Suzanne, Philip N. Cohen, Sara Raley and Kei Nomaguchi, “Inequality in Parental
Investment in Child-Rearing: Expenditures, Time, and Health,” in Social Inequality, ed.
by Kathryn M. Neckerman, New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2004.
Bianchi, Suzanne M., John P. Robinson, and Melissa A. Milkie, Changing Rhythms of American
Family Life, New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2006.
Bound, John and Sarah Turner, “Cohort Crowding: How Resources Affect Collegiate
Attainment,” Journal of Public Economics 91 (2007): 877-899.
Bound, John, Hershbein, Brad, and Bridget Terry Long, “Playing the Admissions Game: Student
Reactions to Increasing College Competition,” June 2009 manuscript.
Boudarbat, Brahim, Thomás Lemieux, and Craig Riddell, “Recent Trends in Wage Inequality
and the Wage Structure in Canada,” in Dimensions of Inequality in Canada, D. Green
and J. Kesselman, eds. UBC Press, 2006.
Bryant, W. Keith and Cathleen D. Zick, “Are We Investing Less in the Next Generation?
Historical Trends in Time Spent Caring for Children,” Journal of Family and Economic
Issues 17(3/4) (1996): 365-92.
Chalasani, Satvika, “The Changing Relationship between Parents’ Education and their Time with
Children,” International Journal of Time Use Research, 4 (September 2007): 93-117.
Davies, Scott and Floyd M. Hammack, “The Channeling of Student Competition in Higher
Education: Comparing Canada and the U.S.,” Journal of Higher Education, 76
(January/February 2005): 89-106.
Eckstein, Zvi and Eva Nagypal, “The Evolution of U.S. Earnings Inequality: 1961 – 2002,”
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 28 (December 2004), pp. 10-29.

41

Egerton, Muriel, Kimberly Fisher, and Jonathan Gershuny, “American Time Use 1965-2003:
The Construction of a Historical Comparative File, and Consideration of its Usefulness in
the Construction of Extended National Accounts for the USA,” Institute for Social and
Economic Research, Working Paper 2005-28.
Fisher, Kimberly, Muriel Egerton and Jonathan Gershuny. 2006. American Heritage Time Use
Survey. http://www.timeuse.org/ahtus/ .
Ginsburg, Kenneth R., “The Importance of Play in Promoting Healthy Child Development and
Maintaining Strong Parent-Child Bonds,” American Academy of Pediatrics Report, 2007.
Guryan, Jon, Erik Hurst, and Melissa Kearney, “Parental Education and Parental Time With
Children,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2008: 23-46.
Hofferth, Sandra L., “Changes in American Childrens’ Time, 1997 to 2003,” manuscript,
University of Maryland School of Public Health, October 2008.
Hoxby, Caroline, “How the Changing Market Structure of U.S. Higher Education Explains
College Tuition,” NBER Working Paper 6323, December 1997.
Krueger, Alan B., Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, Norbert Schwarz, and Arthur A. Stone,
“National Time Accounting: The Currency of Life,” 2007 manuscript.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy, “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (February 1992): 35-78.
Kimmel, Jean and Rachel Connelly, “Mothers’ Time Choices: Caregiving, Leisure, Home
Production, and Paid Work,” Journal of Human Resources, Summer 2007: 643-681.
Lareau, Annette, Unequal Childhoods, Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003.
Leibowitz, Arleen, “Home Investments in Children,” Journal of Political Economy 82(2): S111S131.
Luthar, Suniya S. and Bronwyn E. Becker, “Privileged But Pressured: A Study of Affluent
Young,” Child Development, 73 (2002): 1593-1610.
Mahoney, Joseph L., Angel L. Harris, and Jacquelynne S. Eccles, “Organized Activity
Participation, Positive Youth Development, and the Over-Scheduling Hypothesis,” Social
Policy Report, 10 (2006): 3-31.
National Association of College Counseling, State of College Admission, author Melissa E.
Clinedinst, editor David Hawkins. Arlington, VA: NCAC, 2008.
Pronovost, Gilles, “Le temps dans tous ses états: temps de travail, temps de loisir et temps pour
le famille à l’aube du XXIe siècle,” Enjeux Public IRPP, Février 2007.

42

Robinson, John P. and Geoffrey Godbey, Time for Life: The Surprising Ways Americans Use
their Time, University Park, Pennsylvania: The Pennsylvania State University Press,
1999, 2nd edition.
Rosenfeld, Alvin, Nicole Wise, and Robert Coles, The Overscheduled Child: Avoiding the
Hyperparenting Trap, St. Martin’s Griffin, 2001.
Saez, Emmanuel, “Tables and Figures Updated to 2006,” July 2008.
http://elsa.berkeley.edu/~saez/ .

Available at:

Safe Kids USA, “Report to the Nation: Trends in Unintentional Childhood Injury Mortality and
Parental Views on Child Safety,” April 2008
http://sk.convio.net/site/DocServer/STUDY-SKWK-08-LRApril26.pdf?docID=9561
Sandberg, John F. and Sandra L. Hofferth, “Changes in Childrens’ Time with Parents: A
Correction, Demography 42 (May 2005): 391-395.
Sayer, Liana C., Suzanne M. Bianchi, and John P. Robinson, “Are Parents Investing Less in
Childcare? Trends in Mothers’ and Fathers’ Time with Children,” American Journal of
Sociology 110 (July 2004): 1-43.
Statistics Canada, General Social Survey, Cycles 2, 7, 12, and 19.
Turcotte, Martin, “Time Spent with Family During a Typical Workday, 1986-2005,” Canadian
Social Trends, Statistics Canada Catalogue No. 11-008.
United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Administration, Bureau of
Human Nutrition and Home Economics, The Time Costs of Homemaking – A Study of
1,500 Rural and Urban Households, 1944 manuscript.
Warner, Judith, Perfect Madness: Motherhood in the Age of Anxiety, New York: Riverhead
Books, 2005.

43

Table 1. Trends in Weekly Hours Spent on Childcare by Parents
1965
1985
1993
1995
1998
2000
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
college
(1965)*college
(1985)*college
(1993)*college
(1995)*college
(1998)*college
(2000)*college
(2003)*college
(2004)*college
(2005)*college
(2006)*college
(2007)*college
Constant
Observations
R-squared

(1)
Mothers
1.654
(0.616)**
-0.349
(0.690)
-1.033
(0.546)
1.760
(0.888)*
1.860
(0.939)*
3.943
(0.623)**
4.709
(0.400)**
4.103
(0.437)**
4.002
(0.438)**
4.337
(0.445)**
4.241
(0.454)**
0.063
(0.905)
2.014
(2.188)
1.849
(1.682)
1.053
(1.255)
0.725
(2.167)
3.095
(2.065)
4.850
(1.449)**
4.964
(1.021)**
6.316
(1.069)**
6.026
(1.080)**
4.065
(1.079)**
5.266
(1.080)**
11.599
(0.346)**
21,535
0.09

(2)
Mothers

3.901
(0.588)**
4.527
(0.383)**
4.021
(0.416)**
3.559
(0.417)**
4.057
(0.424)**
3.832
(0.432)**
-0.666
(0.856)

4.132
(1.360)**
3.937
(0.963)**
5.477
(1.008)**
5.302
(1.018)**
2.986
(1.017)**
4.457
(1.018)**
-3.619
(0.551)**
18,793
0.22

(Notes to Table 1 on next page.)

44

(3)
Fathers
0.291
(0.499)
0.006
(0.569)
0.117
(0.488)
1.231
(0.801)
3.103
(0.835)**
4.531
(0.547)**
3.191
(0.331)**
3.481
(0.358)**
3.329
(0.363)**
3.106
(0.366)**
3.278
(0.368)**
0.886
(0.562)
0.070
(1.198)
-0.347
(1.114)
-0.349
(0.927)
1.778
(1.602)
2.039
(1.619)
-0.441
(1.038)
1.907
(0.669)**
1.371
(0.713)
2.497
(0.726)**
2.284
(0.721)**
2.121
(0.735)**
3.508
(0.296)**
15,791
0.06

(4)
Fathers

4.443
(0.558)**
3.398
(0.345)**
3.455
(0.371)**
3.467
(0.376)**
3.239
(0.379)**
3.353
(0.382)**
0.876
(0.574)

-0.592
(1.054)
1.115
(0.683)
0.861
(0.726)
2.029
(0.739)**
1.677
(0.734)*
1.466
(0.749)
-2.925
(0.508)**
13,754
0.10

Notes to Table 1:
This table shows the regression of weekly hours spent on total
the variables of interest. Columns (1) and (2) report results
mothers 18-64 who are not students; columns (3) and (4) report
fathers 18-64 who are not students. “Mother” and “father” are
having a child under the age of 18 in the house.

childcare on
for all
results for
defined as

The omitted year is 1975.
Controls for parents’ ages (dummies for 18-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64)
are included in columns (1) and (3). The omitted category is age 25-34.
Columns (2) and (4) also include marital status, a quadratic in the number of
children, dummies for the youngest child in each of the following age
categories: (i) age ≤ 1; (ii) age = 2; (iii) 2 < age < 6; (iv) 6 ≤ age < 10;
(v) 10 ≤ age < 14.
Standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.

45

Table 2. Trends in Weekly Hours Spent on Childcare by All Adults
Variables
Constant
1965
1985
1993
1995
1998
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007

(1)
All Women

(2)
All Men

9.396
(0.243)**
1.123
(0.424)**
-0.835
(0.421)*
-1.624
(0.318)**
0.598
(0.597)
1.172
(0.630)
2.376
(0.265)**
2.250
(0.287)**
1.991
(0.289)**
2.273
(0.293)**
1.950
(0.296)**

2.205
(0.184)**
0.223
(0.318)
-0.063
(0.319)
-0.412
(0.244)
0.223
(0.441)
1.668
(0.463)**
1.344
(0.198)**
1.436
(0.211)**
1.518
(0.214)**
1.253
(0.213)**
1.318
(0.215)**

(1)
All Women

(2)
All Men

Observations

-1.204
(0.621)
0.117
(1.301)
0.728
(0.984)
-0.569
(0.749)
0.481
(1.401)
1.569
(1.383)
1.639
(0.683)*
2.183
(0.711)**
2.436
(0.716)**
1.068
(0.715)
2.510
(0.718)**
38,340

0.398
(0.350)
0.009
(0.778)
-0.645
(0.620)
-0.630
(0.464)
0.560
(0.889)
-0.187
(0.885)
0.585
(0.402)
0.361
(0.423)
0.429
(0.426)
0.963
(0.428)*
0.649
(0.433)
30,938

R-squared

0.09

0.04

Variables
(continued)
college
(1965)*college
(1985)*college
(1993)*college
(1995)*college
(1998)*college
(2003)*college
(2004)*college
(2005)*college
(2006)*college
(2007)*college

This table reports the results of regressing total childcare on the variables
of interest for the sample of all men and women 18-64 who are not students.
The omitted year is 1975.
Controls for individuals’ ages (dummies for 18-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 5564) are included in all columns.
Standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.

46

Table 3. The Relationship between Childcare and Income
Regressions of Weekly Hours of Childcare on Household Income
A. Mothers
Row

Income

Income
squared

1

0.0088
(0.0057)
0.0273
(0.007)**
0.0387
(0.012)**

-0.000013
(0.000013)
-0.000057
(0.000016)**
-0.000082
(0.000027)**

2
3
4

Log
income

6

Sample

Usual
hours of
work
included?

All

No

All

Yes

Homemakers
All

No
No

All

Yes

Homemakers

No

Sample

Usual
hours of
work
included?

All

No

All

Yes

All

No

All

Yes

0.14
0.39
0.54
0.224
(0.156)
0.881
(0.220)*
*
0.820
(0.292)*
*

5

Incomeinduced
increase in
childcare
from 1975 to
2007

0.07

0.26
0.25

B. Fathers
Row

Income

Income
squared

1

0.0019
(0.005)**
0.020
(0.007)**

-0.000038
(0.000011)**
-0.000039
(0.000015)**

2
3
4

Log
income

Incomeinduced
increase in
childcare
from 1975 to
2007
0.28
0.30

0.482
(0.147)**
0.763
(0.213)**

0.14
0.23

The income variable is in thousands of 2007 dollars. The income-induced
increase in childcare is calculated by applying the cross-sectional income
coefficients to the actual changes in average family income from 1975 to
2007. Quantities are in hours per week.
The sample consists of BLS surveys from 2003-2007. All regressions include
controls for year, age categories of parents, full controls for children’s
ages and numbers, marital status, and dummy variables for high school
dropouts, college-educated and post-college degree.

47

Table 4. Trends in Weekly Hours Spent on Childcare
(1)

1965
1985
1993
1995
1998
2000
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
college
(1965)*college
(1985)*college
(1993)*college
(1995)*college
(1998)*college
(2000)*college
(2003)*college
(2004)*college
(2005)*college
(2006)*college
(2007)*college
Constant
Observations
R-squared

Total
1.654
(0.616)**
-0.349
(0.690)
-1.033
(0.546)
1.760
(0.888)*
1.860
(0.939)*
3.943
(0.623)**
4.709
(0.400)**
4.103
(0.437)**
4.002
(0.438)**
4.337
(0.445)**
4.241
(0.454)**
0.063
(0.905)
2.014
(2.188)
1.849
(1.682)
1.053
(1.255)
0.725
(2.167)
3.095
(2.065)
4.850
(1.449)**
4.964
(1.021)**
6.316
(1.069)**
6.026
(1.080)**
4.065
(1.079)**
5.266
(1.080)**
11.599
(0.346)**
21,535
0.09

(2)
Mothers
Excl. play
1.938
(0.540)**
-0.424
(0.605)
-1.245
(0.479)**
0.789
(0.779)
1.200
(0.823)
3.509
(0.546)**
3.617
(0.351)**
3.044
(0.383)**
3.125
(0.384)**
2.892
(0.390)**
2.987
(0.398)**
0.220
(0.794)
1.101
(1.918)
1.467
(1.474)
0.160
(1.100)
-0.039
(1.900)
1.688
(1.810)
3.824
(1.270)**
3.758
(0.895)**
4.087
(0.937)**
4.177
(0.947)**
2.929
(0.946)**
3.175
(0.947)**
9.760
(0.303)**
21,535
0.07

48

(3)
Total
0.291
(0.499)
0.006
(0.569)
0.117
(0.488)
1.231
(0.801)
3.103
(0.835)**
4.531
(0.547)**
3.191
(0.331)**
3.481
(0.358)**
3.329
(0.363)**
3.106
(0.366)**
3.278
(0.368)**
0.886
(0.562)
0.070
(1.198)
-0.347
(1.114)
-0.349
(0.927)
1.778
(1.602)
2.039
(1.619)
-0.441
(1.038)
1.907
(0.669)**
1.371
(0.713)
2.497
(0.726)**
2.284
(0.721)**
2.121
(0.735)**
3.508
(0.296)**
15,791
0.06

(4)
Fathers
Excl. play
-0.185
(0.403)
-0.146
(0.460)
-0.196
(0.395)
0.443
(0.648)
2.149
(0.676)**
3.450
(0.442)**
2.249
(0.268)**
2.343
(0.289)**
2.475
(0.293)**
1.987
(0.296)**
2.168
(0.298)**
0.731
(0.455)
0.003
(0.969)
-0.393
(0.901)
-0.379
(0.750)
1.384
(1.296)
1.908
(1.309)
0.147
(0.839)
1.341
(0.541)*
0.780
(0.577)
1.062
(0.587)
1.634
(0.583)**
1.040
(0.595)
2.245
(0.239)**
15,791
0.05

Notes to Table 4:
Columns (1)
(1) and (3)
column(3).
is excluded

and (2) report results mothers, (3) and (4) for fathers. Columns
reproduce results for all childcare from Tables 1 and 2,
Columns (2) and (4) show the results when playing with children
from the childcare measure.

The omitted year is 1975.

Dummy variables for parents’ age are also included (dummies for 18-24, 25-34,
35-44, 45-54, 55-64). The omitted category is age 25-34.
Standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.

49

Table 5. Trends in Weekly Hours Spent in Family Care
by English-Speaking Parents in Canada

1992
1998
2005
college
(1992)*college
(1998)*college
(2005)*college
Constant
Controls for
marital status and
age of youngest
child?
Observations
R-squared

(1)
Mothers
2.235
(0.606)**
3.652
(0.5491)**
5.050
(0.533)**
7.307
(1.151)**
-3.669
(1.585)**
-3.141
(1.536)*
-4.229
(1.307)**
14.209
(0.464)**

(2)
Mothers
1.967
(0.561)**
3.404
(0.547)**
4.894
(0.501)**
3.037
(1.068)**
-1.346
(1.463)
-2.099
(1.417)
-2.091
(1.206)
-2.836
(1.110)**

(3)
Fathers
1.258
(0.509)*
3.183
(0.508)**
2.453
(0.442)**
2.736
(0.841)**
-0.712
(1.180)
-0.784
(1.117)
-0.553
(0.974)
6.508
(0.407)**

(4)
Fathers
1.020
(0.491)*
3.134
(0.491)**
2.476
(0.435)**
1.758
(0.807)*
-0.397
(1.130)
-0.993
(1.070)
-0.278
(0.933)
-4.215
(1.155)**

No
6548
0.12

Yes
6548
0.25

No
4671
0.06

Yes
4671
0.14

This table shows the regression of weekly hours spent on family care on the
variables of interest. Columns (1) and (2) report results for all mothers
ages 20-64; columns (3) and (4) report results for fathers ages 20-64.
“Mother” and “father” are defined as having one’s own child under the age of
19 in the house.
The omitted year is 1986.
Controls for parents’ ages (dummies for 20-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64)
are included in all columns. The omitted category is age 25-34. Columns (2)
and (4) also include marital status and a dummy for (i) the youngest child
under the age of 5; (ii) the youngest child between the ages of 5 and 9; and
(iii) the youngest child between the ages 10 and 14 .
Standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.

50

Table 6. Weekly Hours Spent in Childcare, 2003-2007
Differentials across Race/Ethnic Group and Type of State
A.

Mothers
Less than
college

College Degree

Educational
Differential

0

1.84
(0.79) **

1.84 †

0.91
(0.43) *

3.77
(0.97) **

2.86 †

2.26
(0.35) **

6.98
(0.44) **

4.72 †

3.02
(0.51)**

7.74
(0.65) **

4.72 †

Less than
college

College Degree

Educational
Differential

0

3.23
(0.72) **

3.23 †

0.73
(0.46) *

1.27
(0.84)

0.54

2.03
(0.30) **

4.22
(0.47) **

2.19 †

1.91
(0.44)**

3.91
(0.51) **

2.00 †

Black or Hispanic
State allows
affirmative action
Black or Hispanic
State bans
affirmative action
Nonhispanic white
State allows
affirmative action
Nonhispanic white
State bans
affirmative action

B. Fathers

Black or Hispanic
State allows
affirmative action
Black or Hispanic
State bans
affirmative action
Nonhispanic white
State allows
affirmative action
Nonhispanic white
State bans
affirmative action

This table shows the difference in weekly hours spent in childcare relative
to black or hispanic parents in states that allow affirmative action. The
sample is the pooled BLS surveys from 2003-2007. Controls for parents’ ages
(dummies for 18-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64) are included.
The states
that banned affirmative action in university admissions before 2003 were
California, Florida, Texas, and Washington.
Standard errors in parentheses. * indicates that the differential is
significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
† indicates that the within-race, within-state educational differential is
significant at 5%;

51

Figure 1. Weekly Hours Spent in Childcare
(Based on estimates from Table 1, columns (1) and (3))

10

12

hours per week
14 16 18 20

22

A. Mothers, Ages 25-34

1965

1975

1985
year

college-educated

1995

2005

less than college

4

hours per week
6
8

10

B. Fathers, Ages 25-34

1965

1975

1985
year

college-educated

52

1995

2005

less than college

Figure 2. Trends in Time Spent by Mothers: Categories of Childcare, 1965-2000
(Each category normalized to 0 in 1975)

-4

hours per week
-2
0
2

4

A. Less than College

1965

1975

1985
year

care of young children
education
travel, activities

1995
care of older children
play

-4

hours per week
-2
0
2

4

B. College-Educated

1965

1975

1985
year

care of young children
education
travel, activities

53

1995
care of older children
play

Figure 3. Trends in Time Spent by Fathers: Categories of Childcare, 1965-2000
(Each category normalized to 0 in 1975)

-2

hours per week
-1
0
1
2

3

A. Less than College

1965

1975

1985
year

care of young children
education
travel, activities

1995
care of older children
play

-2

hours per week
-1 0
1
2

3

B. College-Educated

1965

1975

1985
year

care of young children
education
travel, activities

54

1995
care of older children
play

Figure 4. Time Spent Types of Childcare in 2007
(Parents with youngest child less than 5 years of age)

A. Mothers with children under 5 years of age
Physical care, supervising
Educating (incl. travel)
Playing
Health care (incl. travel)
Organizing & attending activities
Chauffering

0

2

4

6
8
hours per w eek

less than college

10

12

college-educated

B. Fathers with children under 5 years of age

Physical care, supervising
Educating (incl. travel)
Playing
Health care (incl. travel)
Organizing & attending activities
Chauffering

0

2

4

6
8
hours per w eek

less than college

55

10

12

college-educated

Figure 5. Time Spent Types of Childcare in 2007
(Parents with youngest child 5 years of age or older)

A. Mothers with children 5 years or older

Physical care, supervising
Educating (incl. travel)
Playing
Health care (incl. travel)
Organizing & attending activities
Chauffering

0

.5

1

1.5
2
2.5
hours per w eek

less than college

3

3.5

college-educated

B. Fathers with children 5 years or older

Physical care, supervising
Educating (incl. travel)
Playing
Health care (incl. travel)
Organizing & attending activities
Chauffering

0

.5

1

1.5
2
2.5
hours per w eek

less than college

56

3

3.5

college-educated

Figure 6. Time Use of Mothers, ages 25-34

hours per week
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45

A. Less than College

1965

1975

1985
year

childcare
work

1995

2005

chores
free time less 65 hours

hours per week
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45

B. College-Educated

1965

1975

1985
year

childcare
work

1995

2005

chores
free time less 65 hours

57

Figure 7. Weekly Hours Spent in Childcare
(Based on estimates from Table 2, columns (1) and (3))

6

hours per week
8
10

12

A. All Women, Ages 25-34

1965

1975

1985
year

college-educated

1995

2005

less than college

1

2

hours per week
3
4

5

B. All Men, Ages 25-34

1965

1975

1985
year

college-educated

58

1995

2005

less than college

Figure 8. High School Graduates and College Enrollment

2200

2400

thousands
2600 2800

3000

3200

A. High School Graduates

1965

1975

1985
year

1995

2005

1300

1450

thousands
1600
1750

1900

B. Recent High School Graduates Enrolled in College

1965

1975

1985
year

59

1995

2005

Figure 9: Choice of College Preparation

d l′ (h)

A
qw
d c′ (h)

B

q

hl* ( qw)

60

hc* ( q )

h

Figure 10: Time Paths of College Preparation

h

h1B

h1A

h2
T

61

time

Less-Educated Mothers

1985

1990

1995 2000
year

Canada

hours per week
0 2 4 6 8

hours per week
0 2 4 6 8

Figure 11. Change in Weekly Hours Spent in Childcare: Canada vs. US
(Based on estimates from Table 1 and Table 5, columns (1) and (3))
(Hours are normalized to 0 for each group in the initial year.)

2005

College-Educated Mothers

1985

US

1990

1995 2000
year

Canada

US

College-Educated Fathers
hours per week
0 2 4 6

hours per week
0 2 4 6

Less-Educated Fathers

2005

1985

1990

1995 2000
year

Canada

2005

1985

US

1990

1995 2000
year

Canada

62

2005
US

