                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       MEANS-TESTED MORTGAGE MODIFICATION:
                        HOMES SAVED OR INCOME DESTROYED?

                                         Casey B. Mulligan

                                        Working Paper 15281
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15281


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2009




I appreciate comments by Gary Becker, Kevin Murphy, a number of University of Chicago students,
and conference participants at the University of Illinois Chicago Campus. I will provide updates on
this work on my blog www.panic2008.net. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Means-Tested Mortgage Modification: Homes Saved or Income Destroyed?
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 15281
August 2009
JEL No. E24,H21,L11

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper uses the theories of price discrimination and optimal taxation to investigate effects of underwater
mortgages on foreclosures and the incentives to earn income, and the degree to which those effects
are shaped by public policy. I find that the federal government’s means-tested mortgage modification
plan creates a massive implicit tax that may be significant even from a macroeconomic perspective.
 An alternative of modifying mortgages to maximize lender collections would also feature means tests,
but with less effort distortion and perhaps fewer foreclosures. The paper also considers the consequences
of a public policy that left mortgage modification to lenders, subject to a requirement that modification
would not be conditioned on borrower income.


Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu
         By some measures, U.S. average housing prices have fallen by a third since 2006
and some forecast them to fall further. Prices have fallen more than fifty percent in Las
Vegas and Phoenix, and nearly as much in Detroit, Miami and much of California.2 As a
result, almost 14 million home mortgages nationwide were “underwater” in early 2009:
the amount owed exceeded the market value of the collateral.3 About one third of home
mortgages in Arizona, California, Florida, and Michigan, and more than one half of home
mortgages in Nevada, were underwater.
         At the same time, U.S. employment has plummeted, especially in states that had
large housing price increases prior to 2006.4 Many factors – too many to be considered
in a single paper – caused the 2008-9 recession, but the housing price cycle and its legacy
of underwater mortgages is likely among them. This paper investigates some effects of
underwater mortgages on foreclosures and the incentives to earn income, and the degree
to which those effects are shaped by public policy.




2
  National and city-level housing price changes in this paragraph are for the Case-Shiller composite home
price index.
3
  http://www.nytimes.com/2009/05/04/opinion/04mon2.html,
http://www.reuters.com/article/bondsNews/idUSN2832609020090528. About one in four homes with
mortgages were under water by 2009 Q2 (Levy, 2009).
4
  For example, employment from January 2006 to June 2009 fell by 6.9 (6.1) percent in Florida (Arizona)
where housing prices had previously risen 96 (74) percent 2000-2005, as compared to the U.S. aggregate
employment decline of 2.4 percent and prior housing price boom of 46 percent. State-level employment
data is total nonfarm payrolls from www.bls.gov. Housing price changes cited in this footnote are
calculated from the OFHEO index, which is available state-by-state, but tend to be less than changes in the
Case-Shiller index.
Foreclosures as a Consequence of Negative Equity
         A homeowner always has the option to stop paying his mortgage. Although state
laws are somewhat different, to a good approximation the worst case scenario for a
homeowner who stops paying is that he can no longer own or occupy the house, and may
suffer a reduction in his credit rating that might raise his costs of future borrowing. But if
the combined value of the house and these costs were less than the present value of his
promised mortgage payments, then he could do better than paying in full.                             That’s
probably an important reason why, as of early 2009, more than five million homes were
already either in foreclosure (lenders were seizing the collateral as a consequence of lack
of payment) or their owners were delinquent on their mortgage payments.5
         When foreclosures are motivated by low home values rather than the quality of
the match between a homeowner and his home, a foreclosure is inefficient because it
requires the homeowner to live elsewhere.                  The anticipation of foreclosure of an
underwater mortgage probably also creates moral hazard in maintaining the house,
because the occupant prior to foreclosure has no stake in the home’s value. These are
some of the reasons why public policy seeks to reduce foreclosures.
         In principle, lenders could create many of the proper incentives even without
government intervention, by having homeowners be a claimant on the home’s value at
the margin. One conceptually simple way to achieve this is to write down the value of
the mortgage so that it is less than or equal to the home’s market value and the mortgage
is no longer underwater. Once the mortgage was written down, the homeowner would
have an incentive to continue paying the (written down) mortgage, or at least sell his
home for maximum value in the marketplace to fully repay his (written down) mortgage.




5
  Note that “inability to pay” is probably not enough by itself to create a foreclosure (Foote et al, 2009,
footnote 3), because a homeowner unable to pay but with positive home equity may want to sell his home
to pay the loan (and thereby retain his home equity) rather than invite foreclosure. Liebowitz (2009) finds
that negative equity was a more important factor than unemployment in causing the foreclosures that
occurred in the second half of 2008. Geanakopolos and Koniak (2009) find that foreclosures are
“stunningly sensitive” to the amount of home equity.


                                                                                                              2
        Lenders have modified the terms of some of their mortgages or otherwise
modified payments associated with mortgages in order to avoid foreclosure, both in this
recession and previous recessions.6 However, some mortgage industry participants have
complained that too few mortgage modifications occur because of the excessive
transaction costs in dealing with individual homeowner situations and dealing with
investors who have varied stakes in the mortgage payments.7


Public Sector Modification Formulas Feature Marginal Tax Rates in Excess of 100%
        The Bush Administration took steps to streamline the consideration of individual
homeowner circumstances. In 2008, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC),
Federal National Mortgage Association, and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation all announced debt forgiveness or “loan modification” formulas.                           The
Obama Administration continued this work with its “Homeowner Affordability and
Stability Plan” (HASP) by offering subsidies to mortgage servicers and brokers who
participate in mortgage modifications.
        The FDIC’s early plan said “Modifications would be designed to achieve
sustainable payments at a 38 percent debt-to-income ratio of principal, interest, taxes, and
insurance.” (FDIC, 2008) Several major mortgage servicers such as Bank of America,
JPMorgan Chase and Citigroup used those formulas for some of their delinquent
borrowers. For example, Citigroup and the U.S. Treasury announced November 24th,
2008:
       “Citigroup will modify mortgages to help people avoid foreclosure along the lines
of an FDIC plan that was put into effect at IndyMac Bank… struggling home borrowers
pay interest rates of about three percent for five years. Rates are reduced so that
borrowers aren't paying more than 38 percent of their pretax income on housing.”
(Aversa, 2008)



6
  Sichelman (2001) discusses modifications during the 2001 recession. In their study of 32 million
mortgages, the Office of Thrift Supervision (2009) found that about three percent were either modified or
put on a payment plan during 2008, although the three percent double-counts mortgages that received
multiple home retention actions during the year. Modification have occurred at a higher rate in 2009, and
the Obama administration intends to modify several million of them.
7
  Eggert (2007), Geanakoplos and Koniak (2008). Nevertheless, most servicers are permitted to modify
loans (Foote et al, 2009). Foote et al (2009) even find that the propensity to modify mortgages is
uncorrelated with whether the mortgages are owned by the servicer.


                                                                                                            3
The Obama Administration has proposed essentially the same formula, except that
housing costs would be limited to 31 (rather than 38) percent of pretax income.
Hereafter, I refer to these two plans collectively as FDIC-HASP.
           The FDIC-HASP plan massively distorts the supply of income-earning efforts,
because its mortgage modification is large and means-tested: its formula implies that an
action taken by a borrower to increase his income would increase his housing payment
obligation by 31 percent of the income increment.8 If the affordable payment (i.e., the
payment that would comprise 31 percent of income) were re-evaluated monthly, this
would amount to a 31 percent marginal tax rate in each month that a modification could
occur.
           Standard practice determines an affordable payment based on the most recent
year’s income, and puts that payment in place for five years (recall the Citigroup practice
cited above). Thus, a marginal dollar earned in the base year raises mortgage payment
obligations by 31 cents in each of the following five years. If, say, 2009 income were
used to calculate an affordable payment for the years 2010-14 and the interest rate were
zero, then the marginal tax rate would be 155 percent for 2009 (5 times the formula’s
0.31 limit on the payment to income ratio) and zero thereafter. Hereafter I assume an
annual interest rate of 6 percent, which means that the marginal tax rate would be 131
percent for 2009.9 Moreover, underwater mortgages are ubiquitous enough that FDIC-
HASP mortgage modification could produce distortions that are large enough to be
visible in the national employment data, or at least visible in the employment data of the




8
  It is well known that the common practice of collecting college tuition according to ability to pay creates
work disincentives. Dick and Edlin (1997) estimated that college tuitions with annual list prices in the
range $5,000 - $10,000 created marginal income tax rates in the range of 2 – 16 percent. As ratios to
potential income, these amounts are small compared to the amounts mortgage lenders have to collect today.
Thus, it should be no surprise that underwater mortgage debt collection creates large marginal tax rates.
                                                                     t
                                                          5
                                                               ⎛ 1 ⎞
9
    Expressed as a percentage, the marginal tax rate is 31∑ ⎜         ⎟ = 131 . To the extent that payment
                                                          t =1 ⎝ 1.06 ⎠
reductions last more than five years – U.S. Treasury (2009, pp. 2-3) has said “[the] lower interest rate must
be kept in place for five years, after which it could gradually be stepped up to the conforming loan rate in
place at the time of the modification.” – the marginal tax rate would be even larger. The personal income
tax treatment of mortgage modification could also affect a modification’s implicit marginal tax rate. For
the purpose of this paper, the finding that the rate exceeds 100 percent is more critical than its magnitude.


                                                                                                             4
worse hit states. Means-tested mortgage modification has created a massive implicit tax
that is significant even from a macroeconomic perspective.10


Related Literature and Outline of this Paper
         The purpose of this paper is to determine the degree to which it is in lenders’ and
the public’s interest to adopt collection policies that create moral hazard in the labor
market in order to reduce foreclosures in the housing market. The paper compares
housing and labor market outcomes under three collection policies: (a) FDIC-HASP’s
means-tests, (b) the policy that maximizes collections, and (c) the policy that maximizes
collections subject to the “non-discrimination” constraint that modifications are not
conditioned on borrower income. The first two collection policies create, to varying
degrees, moral hazard in the labor market, whereas the last does not.
         The collection-maximizing policy is characterized by posing the collection
problem as an optimal price discrimination program, and using the tools of optimal tax
theory to characterize the solution.11 It is quite possible that the means-tested mortgage
modification policy that maximizes lender objectives would – relative to a world where
mortgage modification is not conditioned on borrower income – harm the public interest
and have little impact on foreclosures.12 Moreover, marginal tax rates on the order of 130
percent – present in the FDIC-HASP plan – are beyond those that maximize collections,
and further harm the public interest. The FDIC-HASP plan in many cases creates more
foreclosures than do the policies that maximize collections, with or without means tests.


10
   Foote et al (2008, p. 243 and footnote 29) point out that “modification leads to a serious moral hazard
problem” and that even homeowners who are not certain that modification will be available may still react
to the possible means-test by not working, because the modification rewards for low income are so large.
          Some affected borrowers may not have anticipated that they would face a marginal tax rate in
excess of 100%. However, if borrowers generally understand that creditors will sometimes modify
according to ability-to-pay but do not know exactly when a modification formula will apply, then some
borrowers may behave ex ante as if they faced a high marginal tax rate even though ex poste they received
no forgiveness.
11
   Grochulski (2008) models personal bankruptcy negotiations as a mechanism design problem akin to
Mirrlees (1971), but Grochulski’s study is “not designed to replicate any particular set of facts about the
structure of actual credit markets or bankruptcy laws,” (p. 29). Mulligan (2008) uses a Mirrlees approach
(with two types) to relate unsecured debt collection to employment 1929-33 and 2008. Neither of these
papers report results related to the tradeoff between foreclosures and moral hazard in the labor market, and
how public policies affect those tradeoffs.
12
   This result is reminiscent of Chiang and Spatt’s (1982) finding that third-degree price discrimination can
result in less welfare than no discrimination, although they find this possibility because (unlike here) they


                                                                                                            5
           Kahn and Yavas (1994) is an early paper modeling foreclosures as the “outside
option” in a mortgage renegotiation. This aspect of renegotiation was studied further by
Livshits et al (2007), White and Zhu (2008), but still considering borrower income as an
exogenous characteristic – and therefore not studying the tradeoff between foreclosures
and moral hazard in the labor market. Han and Li (2007) consider the combined wealth
and substitution effects of mortgage modification on labor supply, but do not attempt to
separate them or calculate a labor market deadweight cost of modifications. Given that
the “wealth” effect of writing down a mortgage is a transfer from lenders to borrowers,
netting out the wealth effect is important even for positive analysis of the aggregate
effects.
           Fisher (1933), Mishkin (1978), Bernanke and Gertler (1983), Kroszner (1999) and
others have noted that household balance sheets seem to be correlated with the business
cycle and have offered theoretical interpretations of this correlation. However, their
models operate on an investment or intertemporal margin, whereas my model operates on
the consumption-effort margin. They model a problem with the intermediation of new
loans, whereas I model a problem with settling the old ones.
           Section I begins by deriving the budget set facing borrowers who might be
eligible for mortgage modification according to the FDIC-HASP formula. The budget set
vividly illustrates how means-tested modification can destroy income-earning incentives.
Section II models the economic environment, and shows how the collection-maximizing
modification policy is a special case of mechanism design or optimal tax theory. The
supplies of income earning effort under the three collection policies are derived and
compared in Section III. Section IV derives and compares foreclosure rates under the
three collection policies. Section V concludes.




have two dimensions of unobserved heterogeneity: price discrimination correlated with one dimension can
harm sorting in the other.


                                                                                                      6
     I. The Budget Set of a Borrower Facing the FDIC-HASP Modification Formula
         In order to see more precisely how means-tested mortgage modification affects
incentives, it helps to consider the shape of borrower budget sets with and without
means-tested mortgage modification. Let time t = 0 be the period (some time after the
loan was granted) during which income is measured for the purpose of modification,
which modifies loan payments in periods t = 1, 2, …. At times t = 0, 1, …, the borrower
consumes ct at and expends effort nt. Effort nt produces taxable income – that is, income
that can be observed by the lender13 – in the amount ntwt. The entire commodity space is
{c0,n0,c1,n1,c2,n2, …}, but analysis of it can be simplified by assuming a present value
budget constraint and considering the tradeoff between effort at time zero (hereafter, n)
and the present value of all other expenditure (hereafter, c). a denotes the amount that
could be consumed if period zero income were zero and home equity were zero.


I.A. Foreclosure Costs
         Consider three scenarios for the borrower: (i) payments are made in full
(according to the loan’s original terms), (ii) he walks away from the home and mortgage,
or (iii) the bank unconditionally writes down his mortgage so that it is no longer
underwater.14       Each scenario by itself presents the borrower with a linear budget
constraint with slope –1 (see Figure 1, in which borrow income nw is shown increasing
from right to left), but the scenarios differ in terms of the budget constraint’s intercept.
Because the mortgage is underwater, the full payment scenario (i) has intercept closer to




13
   In practice, lenders consider borrower personal income tax returns, which means that the income concept
relevant for mortgage modification is similar in character and timing to the taxable income relevant for
income tax policy analysis. Thus, effort includes not only hours worked but also truthful reporting to the
IRS, occupational choice, etc. (Feldstein, 1999)
14
   In practice, mortgages are modified by some or all of the following: (i) reduced interest rate, (ii) reduced
principal, postponement (without interest) of delinquent principal and interest payments, (iv) extended
amortization (Sichelman, 2001; U.S. Treasury, February 2009). For my purposes – analysis of the
consequences of a presumably permanent housing price crash -- all of these can be summarized in terms of
the present value of payments to be made after the loan is modified (Kahn and Yavas, 1994, also take this
approach). Modifications that result from temporary shocks could have different effects depending on
whether principal or interest is modified (Foote et al, 2009).


                                                                                                              7
the origin than the write-down scenario (iii). Under the foreclosure scenario15 (ii), the
homeowner surrenders the house, has his mortgage erased, and incurs foreclosure costs.
         Foreclosure costs include moving costs, the moral hazard related to maintenance
(created when a home’s occupant is not its owner), and lost access to credit markets.16
The c-intercept of the foreclosure scenario (ii) is closer to the origin than the write-down
scenario (iii) by the amount of foreclosure costs, but its position relative to the full
payment scenario depends on the relative comparison of the amount underwater and the
amount of foreclosure costs. If all borrowers had foreclosure costs that exceeded the
amount underwater, then all borrowers would prefer to pay in full than to be foreclosed.
The interesting cases have a significant number of borrowers for whom the amount
underwater is greater than the foreclosure cost: in terms of Figure 1, the foreclosure
scenario has intercept in between those of the other two scenarios.


I.B. Means-tests
         Figure 2 shows how means-tested modification presents the borrower with a
budget constraint in the [-nw, c] plane that is in between the solid line and the outside
dashed line in Figure 1 (the straight solid and dashed lines are identical in the two
figures). Consider first the allocation X in which the borrower puts forth no effort (in
period zero) and consumes the amount a – b while making full mortgage payments. At
the allocation Z, the borrower also puts forth no effort, but makes no payments and is
foreclosed. At the allocation Z0, the mortgage is written down so that it is no longer
underwater; the distance between X and Z0 is the amount underwater, b.




15
   Because the mortgage is assumed to be under water, I do not distinguish between foreclosure, “walking
away,” and “deed in lieu of foreclosure.” I refer to all three as “foreclosure” and assume that they result in
the payment of deadweight “foreclosure costs.”
16
   I model foreclosure costs as if they are entirely paid by borrowers. This is just a normalization, achieved
by defining the amount of negative equity b to be the par value of the mortgage minus the value of the
home to the bank in the case of foreclosure.


                                                                                                             8
         At allocation X, (period 0) income is zero and mortgage payments are made in
full, which means that mortgage payments are more than 31 percent of income. The
allocation Y indicates the amount of effort that must be supplied in order for the borrower
to have income that equals yY ≡ (full housing payments)/0.31 (that is, full housing
payments are equal to 31 percent of income). Thus, under the FDIC-HASP modification,
no allocation to the left of Y would be eligible for modification. The budget constraint
for underwater borrowers therefore includes the segment OY.
         The borrower’s budget set has to include the allocation Z, because foreclosure and
not working are among his options. Even without knowing the exact location of the
budget set’s boundary between allocation Y and Z, we know that (unlike the segment OY)
its average slope has to be less than one in magnitude. This on-average flattening of the
budget constraint’s slope is the fundamental reason why means-tested mortgage
modification reduces incentives to earn the income that would be used in the
modification formula.
         As noted above, at point Y, the present value of mortgage payments falls $1.31 for
each dollar that income is reduced. Because consumption is income minus mortgage
payments, consumption therefore increases $0.31 for each dollar that income falls.17 The
31% mortgage modification formula therefore creates an upward sloping budget
constraint slope, at least for incomes near and below the income corresponding to
allocation Y.


I.C. The Minimum Income Threshold
         The Bush and Obama Administrations have not provided modification formula
details for incomes far below the income corresponding to allocation Y, but a few things
are clear. First, the upward slope rarely continues to the point where income is zero,
because that would involve eliminating all mortgage payments for five years, which in
most cases would cause the present value of the modified mortgage’s payments to be




17
  It is coincidence and rounding error that the slope of the budget constraint is equal to the percentage used
in the mortgage modification rule. For example, a percentage of 38 (as under the Bush Administration)
implies an implicit tax rate of 160% and budget constraint slope of +0.6.


                                                                                                            9
significantly less than the home’s market value.18 Given that allocations above and to the
right of the outside dashed line would make the lender worse off than would foreclosure,
it is unlikely that mortgage modification would present borrowers with a budget
constraint that included such allocations. A good guess is that there is a threshold income
yW with two properties: (i) underwater mortgages are eligible for modification if and only
the borrower’s income is in between yW and yY, and (ii) the amount paid by borrowers
with exactly income yW is at least equal to the market value of the house.19
         Figure 2 draws the case in which borrowers earning at the lower income threshold
pay exactly the market value of the house; the allocation W0 indicates the allocation
where the income earned is such that exactly b must be written down in order for
mortgage payments to be reduced enough that housing payments are 31 percent of
income.20 The complete budget constraint is OYW0WZ.
         Section WW0Z of the budget constraint depends on the foreclosure cost, and
therefore may vary across borrowers, even among borrowers with the same b. The length
of segment W0W is equal to the amount of the foreclosure cost.


I.D. Borrower Reactions to FDIC-HASP
         Assuming that borrower indifference curves slope down in the plane shown in
Figure 2 (and ignoring optimization error), the distribution of repayments net of home
values induced by budget constraint is OYW0WZ is degenerate, with all of its mass at two
points: 0 and b. Some of the borrowers repaying zero would have the unsecured part of
their mortgages written down by b, the others would choose the foreclosure option. The
induced income distribution would also have a mass point (corresponding to the lower
income threshold), and would have holes both to the right and left of that mass point.




18
   A mortgage with 25 years remaining and rate fixed at six percent has about one third of the present value
of its remaining payments come due during the first five years.
19
   I have seen press reports that some borrowers are being denied modification because their incomes are
too low. More recently, the press has also reported (Rucker, 2009) that the Obama Administration may
propose to allow unemployed people to become renters in their own home. If those people had an
underwater mortgage, that would be represented in Figure 2 as including the allocation Z0 as part of the
budget set.
20
   A larger amount for the lower income threshold would shorten the segment YW0 so that it ends below the
outer dashed line.


                                                                                                         10
         As compared to a world with no mortgage modification (lenders foreclose on
anyone paying less than the full amount of the loan), the FDIC-HASP plan reduces
foreclosures by inducing some of those with m < b to choose the point W0, rather than
foreclosure, which would be an allocation somewhere on the linear extension of the
segment WZ in Figure 2. However, the FDIC-HASP plan does not necessarily eliminate
foreclosures, because some borrowers may prefer an allocation on the segment WZ to the
point W0.
         With the exception of point W0, any utility-maximizing choice on the segments
YW0 or W0W is socially inefficient because it does not equate w to the marginal rate of
substitution between c and n. Even at W0, the marginal rate of substitution would equal
one only by an unlikely coincidence: many other marginal rates of substitution are also
consistent with an optimal choice W0.
         FDIC-HASP will likely induce too little effort, because (as noted above) the
average slope is less than one in magnitude on the section YW0WZ. However, depending
on the relative size of the foreclosure costs and the amount underwater, as compared to
the slopes of indifference curves, it is possible that some borrowers would increase their
effort in order to earn above the minimum threshold and thereby be eligible for
modification. This outcome is impossible if the allocation W0 is on the segment XZ0, or if
the threshold income associated with W0 is enough higher than shown in Figure 2 (so that
the allocation W0 is at or below the dashed line).21




     II. A Simple Model of Foreclosure, Debt Forgiveness and Effort Distortions
I.A. Setup and Outcomes without Means-tests
         Each individual of a group of ex ante identical borrowers obtains a collateralized
loan. Initially, the value of the collateral exceeds the amount lent. Some time after the
beginning of the loan, but before its final payment, the borrowers experience a common
change in their collateral value. Of particular interest is the case in which collateral
values fall short of the amount owed. I let b denote the amount of negative home equity,

21
  The income associated with allocation W is less than the income associated with Y. Allocation Y is
associated with a house payment-income ratio of 0.31, which itself is greater than the actual ratio for most
borrowers. Thus, section OYW0 is more relevant for most borrowers choices than is segment W0W.


                                                                                                          11
which is sometimes referred to as the “amount underwater” or the “unsecured part of the
mortgage.”
           In addition, each borrower has received an idiosyncratic shock to his privately
observed labor productivity w. Distribution of productivities resulting from those shocks
is F, with density f and support [wL,wH]. I assume that F’s inverse Mills ratio has an
elasticity greater than minus one.22
           Each individual produces the product of his effort n and his productivity w. Each
individual has a utility function u(c,n) defined over consumption c and work effort n.
Following much of the literature on the optimal taxation of heterogeneous agents, I
assume that u(c,n) is additively separable and satisfies the Spence-Mirrlees condition.23
Some of that literature also assumes that the function is quasilinear in c – an assumption
that is even more realistic here because c is a broad composite of many goods, including
leisure time at future dates.24 I therefore use the function:
                                                                     n1+φ
                                               u (c, n ) = c − γ φ                                              (1)
                                                                     1+ φ


where γ > 0 and φ ≥ 0 are constants. 1/φ is often interpreted as the inverse of the
elasticity of effort supply n with respect to productivity w: the efficient effort supply is
n*(w) = w1/φ/γ. Given that φ ≥ 0, the Spence-Mirrlees condition is necessarily satisfied.
Note that I do not restrict the magnitude of the effort supply elasticity, except that it be
positive.25
           Without means tests, borrowers have simply the choice of foreclosure or paying
the amount x ≤ b requested by their lender. Such a borrower i has budget constraint:



                                               d ⎡    f ( w) ⎤
22
     This weak restriction is equivalent to                      > 0 . It is satisfied, for example, by the logistic
                                              dw ⎣ 1 − F ( w) ⎥⎦
                                                 ⎢ w

distribution and the uniform distribution.
23
   See Salanié (2003, pp. 87-88), including an analysis of the Spence-Mirrlees condition for the quasilinear
case.
24
   See, for example, Mulligan (2001), Ljungqvist and Sargent (2007), and Chetty and Saez (2009). A utility
function that recognized wealth effects on effort would find them from transfers between borrowers and
lenders, which would be exaggerated relative to a more realistic (and complicated) setup in which
borrowers owned shares in the banks that were doing the lending.
25
   In particular, I do not assume that means tests necessarily have a large effort effect. Moreover, a small
effort effects can have large deadweight costs.


                                                                                                                 12
                                      ci = ai + wi ni − min{mi , x}                                     (2)


where a represents sources of full income other than effort during the period in question
and mi > 0 denotes borrow i’s foreclosure cost (“m” is for “moving”).26 The cross-
sectional distribution of foreclosure costs is denoted G.
          The borrower’s choice to repay x or incur mi has efficiency consequences. mi is a
deadweight cost, whereas x is a transfer from borrower to lender. Reduction in the
amount x to be repaid is one way that borrowers could be induced to repay rather than
choose foreclosure: fraction of borrowers who prefer repaying x rather than foreclosure is
1-G(x).
          In other words, lenders face a tradeoff between the unsecured amount x to be
repaid and the fraction 1-G(x) of borrowers who repay.                      As shown by Figure 3’s
monotone curve, the mirror image of the foreclosure cost CDF illustrates the tradeoff
because it maps payment amounts on the vertical axis to the fraction of borrowers on the
horizontal axis who would prefer that payment amount to their foreclosure cost. In other
words, the lender’s choice of repayment amount is a choice of a point on that “demand
curve.” Unsecured debt collection therefore has a lot of analytics in common with the
standard model of monopoly pricing where a monopolist faces a tradeoff between the
amount sold and the profit obtained from each unit sold.
          Assuming that the constraint x ≤ b does not bind, the single unsecured repayment
amount maximizing lender-collections is x0, where x0 (not shown in Figure 3) satisfies a
familiar unit-elastic condition:27


                                              G′( x0 ) x0
                                                           ≡1                                           (3)
                                              1 − G ( x0 )


Without discriminating, the collection maximizing foreclosure rate is G(x0).




26
   I assume that foreclosure costs are nonnegative. If some borrowers had a negative foreclosure cost, than
foreclosure would be efficient for them.
27
   The possible corner solutions for x0 are b and the lower support of the distribution G.


                                                                                                         13
         The non-discrimination outcome has two interesting properties. First, a lender
                                                                                G′(b)b
chooses to write down everyone’s debt (that is, set x0 < b) when                         < 1 . Second, for
                                                                               1 − G (b)
those lenders that choose to write down everyone’s debt, the preferred amount of
foreclosure depends on the shape of the foreclosure cost distribution G, and not the
amount b that mortgages are unsecured.                  These results are used below to compare
collection-maximizing outcomes to outcomes under FDIC-HASP.


I.B. Debt Forgiveness as Mechanism Design
         Because each borrower has the choice of foreclosure and making the payment x
requested by the lender, and borrowers are different, lenders could benefit (relative to the
non-discrimination outcome above) by determining which borrowers have the high
foreclosure costs and asking them to repay more. The foreclosure rate is zero in this case
because the lender is better off collecting mi > 0 from borrower i than foreclosing. This
“perfect discrimination” case proves that it is possible for a discriminating debt collection
policy to reduce foreclosures from what they would be without discrimination.
         To the degree that foreclosure costs are private information, perfect
discrimination may not be feasible. This makes the lender’s collection-maximization
problem a case of optimal third-degree price discrimination, or more generally a case of
optimal mechanism design. Here I consider the environment – familiar from the optimal
tax literature – in which each borrower’s effort n and foreclosure cost m are private
information, but his income wn is public. Henceforth, I also assume that the private
information is one-dimensional: foreclosure costs are a monotone, increasing, and
continuous function m(w) of productivity.28 In determining the required payments to
avoid foreclosure, lenders can discriminate among borrowers on the basis of the amount
of home equity -b and the amount of their income wn.
         For each group of borrowers with the same home equity, the amount of revenue
collected on the unsecured part of their mortgages is:


28
  To the degree that foreclosure costs are costs of nonmarket time and hassle, they would increase with
market productivity w. It is also possible that higher productivity individuals place a greater absolute value
on future credit market access, because they expect their future credit market transactions to be of greater
dollar amounts.


                                                                                                           14
                                        ∞

                                        ∫ x( y)dH ( y)
                                         0
                                                                                         (4)



where y is income, x(y) is the payment schedule, and H is the income distribution. As is
well known in the mechanism design literature, this statement of the lender’s collection
problem is pretty intractable because the income distribution H depends on the payment
schedule. The revelation principle permits an equivalent statement of the problem in the
space of productivities. In this version, each type w is assigned an amount of effort n(w)
and an amount to repay x(w). Total collections are the aggregate of the collections from
each type:


                                       wH

                                       ∫ x(w) f (w)dw
                                       wL
                                                                                         (5)



       Participation constraints (6) say that each w of those making a payment prefers his
allocation {n(w),x(w)} to both foreclosure and paying in full:


                             u (a + wn( w) − x( w), n( w)) ≥ u ( w)

                                                                                         (6)
               u ( w) ≡ max u ( a + wn − min {m( w), b} , n ) given m( w), a, b
                         n


where u is the utility function (1). As indicated, the outside option depends on the cost of
foreclosure m(w) and the par value b of the unsecured part of the loan.
       A series (7) of incentive constraints require that each borrower prefer his
allocation (which is his choice between the modification and effort assigned to him, or
paying in full, or foreclosure) to earning the income associated with some other modified
payment:




                                                                                         15
                             max {u (a + wn( w) − x( w), n( w)), u ( w)} ≥


                                max                       u (a + ω n(ω ) − x(ω ), ω n(ω ) / w)      (7)
               ω ∈ { z ∈ [ wL , wH ] | u ( z ) > u ( z )}
                                            all w ∈ [ wL , wH ]


The constraints (7) are of the same form as in the classic Mirrlees (1971) optimal tax
problem, and represent the means-tests that may enhance collections. Any borrower w
has to earn income ωn(ω) in order to be eligible for the payment amount x(ω). The
incentive constraint requires that the payment amount x(ω) not be so low that type w
would choose to earn ωn(ω) rather than wn(w).
        Lenders cannot ask borrowers to pay more than b or supply less than zero effort:


                                           x( w) ≤ b , n( w) ≥ 0                                    (8)


Lenders choose effort and repayment profiles n(w) and x(w), respectively, to maximize
(5) subject to the constraints (6), (7), and (8).
        Given a solution to the collection-maximization program, equilibrium effort
profiles n(w) and income profiles y(w) are calculated from the program for those types
receiving modified payments, and as the efficient effort for those types foreclosed or
paying in full. A collection schedule x(y) supporting the equilibrium is calculated by
inverting the income profile y(w) and substituting it into the payment profile x(w).29
        The first step in finding a solution the collection-maximization program is to
guess as to which of the many incentive constraints bind. As in the classic Mirrlees
problem, there may be an interval [w2,w3] of the productivity distribution over which only
the local incentive constraints bind, and in the downward direction. In other words, each
type w ∈ [w2,w3] will be indifferent between his own income and repayment
(wn(w),x(w)) and the income and repayment assigned by the lender to someone with
marginally less productivity. He will strictly prefer his income and repayment to the
29
  I refer to mappings from productivity to outcomes as “profiles” and mappings from incomes to outcomes
as “schedules.” As shown below, the optimal income profile will be invertible, except over ranges in
which the payment profile x is constant.


                                                                                                    16
income and repayment assigned to all other types. On this interval, the binding incentive
constraints have a differential form:


                              du ( wn( w) − x( w), n( w))                 n( w)
                                                          ≥ −un ( n( w) )                            (9)
                                          dw                               w

where un denotes the marginal disutility of effort, which depends on the level of effort.
The integral form is:

                                                                   w
                                                                                    n( z )
u ( wn( w) − x( w), n( w)) − u ( w2 n( w2 ) − x( w2 ), n( w2 )) + ∫ un ( n( z ) )          dz ≥ 0
                                                                   w2
                                                                                     z              (10)
w ∈ [ w2 , w3 ]


Over intervals of the productivity distribution in which payments are independent of
income – such as those in which foreclosures occur or full payments are made – the local
incentive constraints do not bind.
         The participation constraint is less familiar from the optimal tax literature, but
may create an interval over which the local incentive constraints above do not bind and
global constraints do. For example, it may be optimal to induce a mass point in the
income distribution: a range of productivities all assigned the same income and
repayment. An income mass point is especially likely for the productivities on the
margin of foreclosure because those choosing foreclosure are on a portion of the budget
constraint with slope w in the [n,c] plane (slope 1 in the [y,c] plane) whereas those
making payments may face a lesser slope due to the means test. In this case, the binding
incentive constraints can be represented as:


                                     wn( w) ≤ w2 n( w2 ) , w ∈ [ w1 , w2 ]                          (11)


         Although the FDIC-HASP plan may not obtain the maximum lender collections,
the allocation it induces does help illustrate some of the incentive and participation
constraints that restrict collections.            FDIC-HASP induces an allocation that can be
described by partitions of the productivity distribution at two points w1 > w2. Those with
productivity in bottom interval [wL,w1] repay none of the (unsecured part of) their


                                                                                                     17
mortgage and are foreclosed; they choose allocations on the segment WZ in Figure 2.
The participation constraint binds on this interval. Those in the interval [w1,w2] all earn
the same income and repay the same amount to the lender; they choose the allocation W0
in Figure 2. The incentive constraints (11) bind on this interval. Participation constraints
bind on the interval [w2,wH], where the borrowers repay in full.
         None of the local incentive constraints bind under the FDIC-HASP, which by
itself suggests that it is not maximizing collections. Figure 3 illustrates this result with its
“demand curve” analogy. The FDIC-HASP collection profile (not shown in the Figure)
would simply be two horizontal lines: one at the left at vertical position b, and a second in
the middle horizontally, and at vertical position corresponding to the minimum payment
xmin on the unsecured part of the mortgage that is accepted by FDIC-HASP.30 Figure 3’s
red curve also includes two horizontal lines, but potentially enhances revenue by having a
gradual transition from full payment b to the minimum payment amount.31
         The collection-maximizing mechanism may include as many as four productivity
intervals partitioned by w1 > w2 > w3. Three of those intervals are qualitatively the same
as under FDIC-HASP: [wL,w1], [w1,w2], and [w3,wH].32 But the collection-maximum may
also involve an interval absent from FDIC-HASP: the interval [w2,w3] with a gradually-
sloping repayment profile and binding local incentive constraints (9).
         The participation constraints are automatically satisfied on the interval [wL,w1],
because those types are foreclosed. If a participation constraint were binding in the
interval [w1,w2], then it can only bind at w1 because (among those in the interval) that
type supplies the most effort.33 The utility surplus relative to foreclosure could either rise
or fall with productivity on the interval [w2,w3], depending on the foreclosure cost
gradient on that interval and the marginal tax rates that satisfy the first order conditions.


30
   Recall that Figure 2 is drawn with the assumption that FDIC-HASP would (depending on borrower
income) accept as little as zero payment on the unsecured part of the mortgage.
31
   With perfect information the collection-maximizing repayment profile would follow the foreclosure cost
distribution. Otherwise, the incentive and participation constraints require that Figure 3’s red repayment
curve be below the “demand curve” and slope downward sufficiently slowly.
32
   The collection-maximizing numerical values for w1 and w2 do not necessarily coincide with those from
the FDIC-HASP plan. It is also possible that some of the intervals [wL,w1], [w1,w2], [w2,w3], or [w3,wH]
must be degenerate in order to maximize collections.
33
   The utility surplus relative to foreclosure also rises with productivity on the interval [w3,wH] because all
types are paying the same x3 and have undistorted effort whereas foreclosure costs are rising with
productivity.


                                                                                                             18
         Suppose the participation constraint were binding at w1. Even if the surplus were
lower at w3 than at w2 (where it would be strictly positive), it might still be positive at w3.
Thus, I proceed by assuming that participation binds only at w1 and then confirm that the
proposed solution satisfies the participation constraint at w3, in which case the
participation constraint would be satisfied everywhere.34 Income cannot jump down at
w1,35 and foreclosure does not distort the supply of effort, so the participation constraint is
simply x1 = min{m(w1),b}.
         Assuming for the moment that the participation constraint does not bind at w3 and
that m(w1) < b, maximizing collections is equivalent to maximizing the Lagrangian:


                           w2                    w3                    wH

                      L=   ∫ m(w ) f (w)dw + ∫ x(w) f (w)dw + ∫ x
                           w1
                                  1
                                                 w2                    w3
                                                                            3   f ( w)dw

                           w3
                             ⎧                                               φ n( w) ⎫
                        + ∫ ⎨[u ( w) − u ( w2 ) ] q ( w) − Q ( w) ( γ n( w) )        ⎬ dw              (12)
                          w2 ⎩
                                                                                w ⎭
                                                      n( w)1+φ
                                                                                wH

                     u ( w) ≡ wn( w) − x( w) − γ φ
                                                       1+ φ
                                                               , Q( w) ≡        ∫ q( z )dz
                                                                                w




The choice variables are x(•) ≤ b, n(•) ≥ 0, x3 ≤ b, w1∈ [wL,wH] and w3 ∈ [wL,wH]. Given
w1 and w3, w2 is inferred from smooth pasting (i.e., that w2n(w2) is the same regardless of
whether it is calculated from above or below).
         The Lagrangian’s first three terms are repayments in three intervals of
productivity in which borrowers make some repayment, imposing the participation
constraint x1 = m(w1) and the (global) incentive constraints x(w) = x1 for all w ∈ [w1,w2].
The Lagrangian’s last term combines the various local incentive constraints that bind in
the interval [w2,w3]; each local constraint has multiplier q(w).36



34
   Because the shape of the foreclosure cost function m(w) affects the solution proposed below only at w1, a
proposed solution could be made to satisfy the participation constraint at w3 merely by assuming that the
foreclosure cost function were steep enough on (w1,w3].
35
   If income jumped down at w1, constraint (11) would be violated: some of those with productivity less
than w1 would prefer to earn the same as a person with productivity greater than w1 because doing so takes
less effort and makes them eligible for modification.
36
   The multipliers are q(w) = 0 on (w3,wH].


                                                                                                         19
        Substitution for the utility surplus on [w2,w3] changes the Lagrangian from (12)
to:
         L = m( w1 ) [ F ( w2 ) − F ( w1 ) ] + [1 − F ( w3 ) ] x3

              ⎪⎧                           1 ⎛ w1 ⎞ ⎤ ⎫⎪
                                                     1+φ
                         w1(1+φ )/φ   ⎡
            + ⎨m( w1 ) −              ⎢1 −     ⎜ ⎟ ⎥ ⎬ [Q ( w2 ) − Q( w3 ) ]                                 (13)
               ⎪⎩            γ        ⎢⎣ 1 + φ ⎝ w2 ⎠ ⎥⎦ ⎪⎭
                                                                     1+φ
                 ⎧                                                                     1+ φ        ⎤⎫
              w3
                                                              φ n( w)      ⎡
            + ∫ ⎨ x( w) f ( w) + [ wn( w) − x( w) ] q( w) − γ              ⎢⎣ q ( w) +      Q ( w) ⎥⎦ ⎬ dw
              w2 ⎩
                                                                 1+ φ                   w             ⎭


The Lagrangian (13) is rising in x3, unless w3 = wH, which proves


Proposition 1 The collection-maximizing payment profile x(w) either forgives all
borrowers (x(w) < b for all w) or requires full payment b from an interval of borrowers
[w3,wH].


        From the first order condition with respect to x(w), w ∈ [w2,w3], the multiplier on
their local incentive constraint must be q(w) = f(w). It follows that the co-state variable
Q(w) is F(w3) – F(w).
        The first order conditions with respect to effort n(w) help describe the effects of
unsecured debt collection on the labor market. The conditions with respect to w1 and w3
help describe the effects of unsecured debt collection on foreclosures.




      III. The Labor Market with Maximum Collections, FDIC-HASP, and No
             Discrimination


        Effort supply is efficient (n(w) = w1/φ/γ) on [wL,w1] and [w3,wH]. On the interval
[w1,w2], all borrowers have the same income, so n(w) = n(w1)w1/w.                                 Collection-
maximizing effort on [w2,w3] is found from the first order condition with respect to n(w),
so the collection-maximizing effort profile is:




                                                                                                              20
                            ⎧            w1/ φ                  if w ∈ [ wL , w1 ]
                            ⎪
                            ⎪        w1(1+φ ) /φ / w            if w ∈ [ w1 , w2 ]
                            ⎪                            1/ φ
                            ⎪⎡                          ⎤
                  γ n( w) = ⎨ ⎢          w              ⎥                                         (14)
                            ⎪ ⎢ 1 + φ F ( w ) − F ( w) ⎥        if w ∈ [ w2 , w3 ]
                            ⎪ ⎢1 +             3       ⎥
                            ⎪ ⎣⎢   w            f ( w) ⎦⎥
                            ⎪               1/ φ
                                                                if w ∈ [ w3 , wH ]
                            ⎩            w

Another way to describe the collection-maximizing effort profile is in terms of the
marginal tax rate: the percentage gap between productivity and the marginal rate of
substitution associated with the collection-maximizing effort allocation:


                          ⎧                 0             if       w ∈ [ wL , w1 ]
                          ⎪
                                    1 − ( w1 / w )
                                                  1+φ
                          ⎪                                if      w ∈ [ w1 , w2 ]
                          ⎪
                 τ ( w) = ⎨ ⎡ 1 + φ F ( w ) − F ( w) ⎤ −1                                         (15)
                          ⎪1 − ⎢1 +                                w ∈ [ w2 , w3 ]
                                               3
                                                f ( w) ⎥  if
                          ⎪ ⎣        w                 ⎦
                          ⎪                 0                      w ∈ [ w3 , wH ]
                          ⎩                               if


The collection-maximizing marginal tax rate profile is shown in Figure 4. It is zero on
[wL,w1] and [w3,wH], rising on [w1,w2], and falling on [w2,w3].                      Not surprisingly,
collection-maximizing marginal tax rates fall with the elasticity 1/φ of effort supply with
respect to productivity. The formula (15) proves:


Proposition 2 The collection-maximizing marginal tax rate is always less than 100
percent.


       There exists a payment schedule x(y), with x′(y) ≤ 0 and x(y) ≤ b that supports the
collection-maximizing allocation described above. In other words, this payment schedule
represents a series of means-tests: lesser payments are required from borrowers with
lesser incomes, and only those (if any) with the highest incomes are required to pay in
full. When enough of the mortgage is unsecured (b > m(wL)), collections are maximized
by modifying the mortgages, with means-tested conditions for modification.



                                                                                                   21
           The collection-maximizing payment schedule x(y) can be calculated from the
results above by integrating the marginal tax rates in the space of incomes. The integral
does not generally have a closed form solution, but we know that it is constant over
productivity intervals in which the marginal tax rate is zero and incomes are rising,
constant over the interval [w1,w2], and falling less than one-for-one over the interval
[w2,w3]. This means that the budget constraint induced by the collection-maximizing
policy has a shape like in Figure 5: sloping downward throughout, linear for the highest
and lowest incomes, and concave in the middle.37
          Compare Figures 2 and 5. Both plans induce budget constraints that have a kink
like the one at point W. The FDIC-HASP plan presents borrowers with marginal tax rates
that are either zero or 100 percent (or more).38                 The collection-maximizing policy
presents borrowers with a range of marginal tax rates that includes zero and excludes 100
percent. Both plans induce an inefficient amount of effort by at least some of the
borrowers.
          If lenders were constrained to maximize collections without discriminating – that
is, demanding a single payment amount x from all borrowers with the same b – then the
supply of effort would be efficient at all points in the productivity distribution, although
collections would not be maximized. Assuming that the constraint x ≤ b does not bind,
lender-collections are maximized (conditional on non-discrimination) by reducing
mortgage debt from b to x0, where x0 satisfies a familiar unit-elastic condition:


     G′( x0 ) x0
1=
     1 − G ( x0 )


where G is the distribution of foreclosure costs, which is G(x) ≡ F(m-1(x)) when
foreclosure costs are simply m(w). All borrowers with m(w) < x0 choose not to pay x0 and



37
   All borrowers are presented with the same modification schedule, so the budget constraint is the same for
incomes above the minimum threshold yW. Below yW, the constraint depends on the foreclosure cost, which
varies across borrowers; Figure 5 graphs the case of a borrower with productivity greater than w1.
38
   Assuming that effort is a bad and consumption a good (and ignoring optimization error), any behavior
induced by budget set with tax rates in excess of 100% can also be induced by a budget set with 100%
marginal tax rates.


                                                                                                         22
are foreclosed; the collection-maximizing foreclosure rate without discrimination is
F(m-1(x0)).
       When lenders can discriminate, more is collected and effort is distorted.
Collections are just a transfer from borrowers to lenders, so means-tests have a
deadweight cost in the form of inefficient effort supply.           Foreclosures are also a
deadweight cost, so the next question to address is whether means-tests reduce
foreclosures at all, and enough to offset the effort distortions.




   IV. Foreclosures and Deadweight Costs Under the Three Policies
       Because the FDIC-HASP plan modifies some of the mortgages, it creates fewer
foreclosures (and more effort distortion) than a collection policy that demanded payment
in full. However, that full-payment counterfactual is of limited relevance because it is
likely not in lenders’ interest. The purpose of this section is to quantify the relative
foreclosures and deadweight costs under three collection policies: FDIC-HASP,
collection-maximizing      with      discrimination,   and   collection-maximizing   without
discrimination. The results depend on the amount b of negative equity, so the results are
stated conditional on a particular value – or range of values – for b, and summarized in
Table 1.


IV.A. Collection-Maximizing Foreclosures, without Discrimination
       Recall that the number r0 of foreclosures consistent with the non-discriminatory
collection-maximizing policy is r0 = F(m-1(min{x0,b})), where x0 is the payment
satisfying the unit elasticity condition (3) and F(m-1(·)) is the distribution function for
foreclosure costs. Even if lenders could not discriminate, they would likely modify
mortgages because their gain from reducing foreclosures may exceed the lost revenue
from those willing to pay in full.
       For b ≤ m(wL), the foreclosure rate is zero because all borrowers prefer paying in
full to foreclosure. For b ∈ [m(wL),x0], r0 = F(m-1(b)), which rises with b. For b > x0, r0 =
F(m-1(x0)). Figure 6’s dotted line graphs the (non-discriminatory) collection-maximizing
foreclosure rate as a function of b.


                                                                                          23
IV.B. Foreclosures and Home Values under FDIC-HASP
          FDIC-HASP modifies mortgages only for borrowers with incomes in an interval
[yW,yY]. Borrowers outside that interval either pay in full or invite foreclosure. If FDIC-
HASP were fully enforced, foreclosures (if any) would result only from households that
earn less than the minimum income threshold, which likely falls with the amount
underwater. Recall from Figure 2 that the minimum annual income threshold yW is:


                                               h − (b − xmin ) / R
                                        yW =                                                        (16)
                                                      0.31


where h is the annual housing payment, b is the amount underwater, xmin is the minimum
payment (e.g., Figure 2 displays the case of xmin = 0) required from those receiving
modification, and R the present value of one dollar paid for each of the next five years.39
The term in parentheses is the maximum amount that loans will be modified under FDIC-
HASP. The minimum income threshold yW can be as large as h/0.31, which I assume to
be large enough that it exceeds the income efficiently supplied by a borrower with
productivity wL.
          For b ≤ m(wL), the foreclosure rate is zero because all borrowers (including those
earning less than yW) prefer paying in full to foreclosure. The foreclosure rate could also
be zero because the income threshold is so low. Otherwise, as b rises above m(wL), the
lowest productivity borrowers are foreclosed because that is better for them than full
payment, and they prefer not to earn as much as yW. The foreclosure rate in this case is
F(m-1(b)), as it is when collections are maximized without discrimination. The Appendix
proves:




39
   I assume that xmin is no larger than the minimum payment m(wL) required by collection maximizers when
b is close to zero, so that slightly underwater mortgages are eligible for modification under FDIC-HASP.
Eligibility requirements articulated by the Administration’s internet site (www.makinghomeaffordable.gov;
see also www.mtgprofessor.com) suggest that modification or refinancing terms (more generous than
available in the market) are available even for mortgages that are slightly under water.



                                                                                                      24
Proposition 3 If the minimum foreclosure cost m(wL) is small enough relative to the full
annual housing payment h that type wL prefers foreclosure to earning enough to be
eligible for the minimum modified payment required by FDIC-HASP, then, for an
interval of b including 0 and m(wL), (i) FDIC-HASP results in a foreclosure rate that is at
least as great as the non-discrimination foreclosure rate and (ii) effort is distorted by
FDIC-HASP.


The condition of the proposition holds when either m(wL) or the effort supply elasticity
1/φ are sufficiently small, and must hold if the foreclosure rate under FDIC-HASP were
known to be positive.
          For b small, but larger than xmin, FDIC-HASP offers means-tested modification
and thereby distorts the supply of effort. Both collection policies result in the same
foreclosure rate (see also the “FDIC” and “Non-disc” curves in Figure 6), which may be
positive or zero depending on how b compares to m(wL). Thus, in this range, FDIC-
HASP distorts effort without “saving homes,” as compared to the debt collection policy
that would maximize collections without discrimination.
          For larger b, FDIC-HASP always distorts effort, but the effect of FDIC-HASP on
the foreclosure rate relative to the non-discrimination policy can be positive or negative
depending on the sizes of the minimum income threshold yW and the maximum
foreclosure rate F(m-1(x0)) under no-discrimination. When the amount of negative equity
gets large enough, FDIC-HASP not only distorts the supply of effort in order to avoid
modifying mortgages for high income borrowers, but it also distorts the supply of effort
in order to reduce foreclosures below what they would be at smaller amounts of negative
equity.    All else equal, a reduction in home values in this range will increase the
likelihood that an already underwater mortgage will avoid foreclosure via FDIC-HASP
modification because the income threshold yW falls with home values and is binding for
borrowers on the margin of foreclosure.40 This is shown in Figure 6 as downward
sloping sections of the “FDIC” and “FDIC′” curves.

40
   A reduction in home values will also increase the fraction of borrowers who are under water, which by
itself increases foreclosures. Empirically, home values will be correlated with other determinants of
foreclosures, which means that the correlation between home values and foreclosures could be negative
even while the causal effect of home values on foreclosures through FDIC-HASP is positive.


                                                                                                           25
       Depending on the elasticity properties of the foreclosure cost distribution
F(m-1(x)), the FDIC curve could begin to slope down at b greater than x0 (as with Figure
6’s “FDIC” curve), or less than x0 (as with Figure 6’s “FDIC′” curve). In the former
case, FDIC-HASP induces a greater foreclosure rate than would maximizing collections
without discrimination.


IV.C. Foreclosures with Collection-Maximizing Means-Tests
       The first order conditions with respect to w1 and w3, and the smooth pasting
condition, determine the collection-maximizing w1, w2, and w3.                       The collection-
maximizing foreclosure rate is F(w1). When the constraint x3 ≤ b binds (that is, at least
some borrowers pay in full), the conditions are:


              1+φ
        ⎛ w2 ⎞             1 + φ F ( w3 ) − F ( w2 )
        ⎜ ⎟         = 1+
        ⎝ w1 ⎠              w2         f ( w2 )
                                                                                         1+φ
                 F ( w3 ) − F ( w1 )             F ( w3 ) − F ( w2 ) 1 + φ w11/φ ⎡ ⎛ w1 ⎞ ⎤
        m′( w1 )                     − m( w1 ) −                                 ⎢1 − ⎜ ⎟ ⎥ = 0   (17)
                      f ( w1 )                         f ( w1 )        φ γ ⎢ ⎝ w2 ⎠ ⎥
                                                                                 ⎣           ⎦
                                                  1+φ
                       w(1+φ )/φ ⎡      1 ⎛ w1 ⎞ ⎤ w3(1+φ )/φ φ
        b − m( w1 ) + 1          ⎢1 −      ⎜ ⎟ ⎥=
                           γ ⎢ 1 + φ ⎝ w2 ⎠ ⎥                   γ 1+ φ
                                 ⎣                    ⎦


The first condition requires that effort and incomes are continuous functions of w at w =
w2. The second condition and third conditions require that, at the optimum, w1 and w3
have zero marginal effects on collections, respectively. The Appendix proves


Lemma            If b ≤ m(wL), the optimum is w1 = w2 = w3 = wL.


       Proposition 4 uses these conditions to show that the discrimination that
maximizes collections can reduce foreclosures, but the discrimination associated with
FDIC-HASP does not.




                                                                                                   26
Proposition 4 Over a range for b that begins at, but does not include, b = m(wL),
foreclosures are zero for the collection-maximizing policy with discrimination, but
strictly positive for the non-discrimination allocation. If the minimum foreclosure cost
m(wL) is small enough relative to the full annual housing payment h that type wL prefers
foreclosure to earning enough to be eligible for the minimum modified payment required
by FDIC-HASP, then FDIC-HASP foreclosures are also strictly positive.


Proof             The strictly positive foreclosure rates under FDIC-HASP and non-
discrimination are shown in Proposition 3. The last condition (17) above is the first order
condition with respect to w3, which is exactly zero at w1 = w2 = w3 = wL and b = m(wL).
The middle condition is the derivative of the Lagrangian (13) with respect to w1, divided
by f(w1), and is equal to –b at w1 = w2 = w3 = wL and b = m(wL). Thus, a marginal
increase in b in the neighborhood of b = m(wL) will marginally increase w2 = w3, but w1
will remain equal to wL.


         The proposition has a lot in common with a familiar proposition in public finance:
the deadweight cost of the first dollar of income taxation is zero. To see this, note that
lenders can collect b without any distortions when b ≤ m(wL), because all borrowers
would rather pay in full than pay their foreclosure cost. When b exceeds m(wL) > 0,
lenders can collect more than m(wL) only by distorting on one margin or another.
Assuming that the unit elasticity condition (3) does not hold at x = m(wL), the marginal
deadweight cost of raising revenue by increasing foreclosures (and thereby inducing
other borrowers to pay more) is strictly positive, whereas the marginal deadweight cost of
distorting incentives (and thereby raising the amount that high income borrowers pay) is
zero. Thus, lenders who can discriminate do not use foreclosures to collect the first
amounts of revenue.41



41
  Because the deadweight costs of means-tests are convex in the amount collected, efficient revenue
collection requires that the mix of foreclosures and means tests shift toward foreclosures as the unsecured
amount owed b increases. FDIC-HASP does the opposite when b rises: it increases the fraction of
borrowers at point W0 in Figure 2 not only to obtain more revenue for lenders, but also to reduce
foreclosures. Given that FDIC-HASP is less efficient than non-discrimination at small b, its inefficient mix
of foreclosures and means-tests tends to makes its relative efficiency even worse at large b.


                                                                                                         27
       Figure 6’s “C-max” curve displays the comparative statics of the collection-
maximizing foreclosure rate with respect to b, and shows how they compare to the
comparative statics under the two other collection policies. Table 1 displays further
comparative statics for small amounts b of negative equity. The collection-maximizing
policy has the least foreclosures, and collects the most. The non-discrimination policy
collects the least. FDIC-HASP has the greatest overall deadweight cost, and does not
reduce foreclosures relative to either alternative. The Appendix proves:


Proposition 5 Maximizing collections with discrimination results in more collections,
but not necessarily less deadweight cost than maximizing collections without
discrimination.




   V. Conclusions
       The Bush administration advocated a mortgage modification plan authored by the
FDIC, which has been tweaked and further promoted by the Obama administration’s
Homeowner Affordability and Stability Plan. This paper considers the consequences of
this FDIC-HASP plan for the supply of effort and the incidence of foreclosures, and
compares those consequences to those that would occur under a plan that maximizes
lender collections, and a plan that maximizes lender collections without means-testing.
       All three plans reduce foreclosures as compared to leaving the mortgages
unmodified. Although the unmodified-mortgage benchmark aids understanding of the
economics of mortgage modification, we cannot assume that underwater mortgages
would go modified absent the FDIC-HASP plan and its means-tests. Rather, we might
expect lenders to modify mortgages in a way that enhances their collections.              As
compared to the collection-maximizing benchmark, the marginal tax rates implicit in the
FDIC-HASP plan – well over 100 percent – are excessive. Moreover, FDIC-HASP
needlessly distorts the supply of effort for borrowers with slightly negative home equity,
because foreclosure rates among those borrowers would be low (if not zero) under the
collection-maximizing plans.




                                                                                          28
       For some relatively small amounts of negative equity, FDIC-HASP may result in
more foreclosures and overall deadweight costs than would a plan that maximizes
collections. The collection-maximizing plan uses means tests rather than foreclosures to
obtain small collections from the high income borrowers, based on the fact that (from the
perspective of a lender and his borrowers) the marginal deadweight costs of mean-tests
are initially zero whereas the marginal deadweight costs of foreclosures are positive.
       At first glance, small amounts of negative equity would seem irrelevant today
because housing prices have fallen so much.           However, even in Nevada where
underwater mortgages are the most prevalent, “only” half of mortgages are underwater,
which means that half are not underwater and presumably many are only slightly
underwater. The fact that recent declines in home values have coincided with increases
in the fraction of U.S. mortgages underwater shows that many mortgages are slightly
underwater.    Thus, even if FDIC-HASP enhanced efficiency for deep underwater
mortgages (it does not), my result that it harms efficiency for the numerous slightly
underwater mortgages means that its aggregate efficiency impact could well be negative.
       I have confined my analysis to mortgages, with a basic setup in which one party
(a “lender”) attempts to collect from a heterogeneous group (“borrowers”), using a threat
of punishment (“foreclosure”) for nonpayment.          With the housing crash and the
recession, the unsecured amount to be collected has suddenly increased, and the
punishment may have lost some of its pain. As a result, full collections are not made, but
rather forgiven for those who appear to have the least ability to pay. This basic setup
probably has a lot in common with revenue collection efforts elsewhere in the economy,
such as the collection of trade debts, tax debts, student loans, or tuition payments.
Indeed, during the writing of this paper, the federal government began to modify student
loans, with the borrowers who earn less receiving more loan forgiveness (Glater, 2009).
Thus, while millions of workers have seen massive increases in their marginal tax rates
during this recession as a result of mortgage modification, additional workers and
businesses may also have seen significant increases in their marginal tax rates due to
these other collection efforts.
       Federal mortgage modification programs create excessive marginal tax rates, but
the use of means-tests in the mortgage modification process would occur even without



                                                                                         29
government intervention because means-tests are in the collectors’ interests. Positive
marginal tax rates are thereby created in the private sector, on top of the various income
taxes and means-tested benefits perennially administered by federal, state, and local
governments. These alternative sources of “taxation” were not explicitly considered in
my model,42 but a prior economics literature has already shown how tax rates are
excessive when multiple collectors have access to the same tax base (Olson, 2000).
Thus, it is ironic that the federal government has raised the implicit marginal tax rates
associated with mortgage modification, when it would enhance efficiency and its own tax
collections by unconditionally repudiating some of the private debts, or at least pushing
private collectors to rely less on means-tests than would be in the collectors’ interest.
        Prohibiting means-tested mortgage modification is not the same as prohibiting
modification: it’s just that mortgages would have to be modified without means tests. In
other words, those borrowers with significantly negative equity would be forgiven
regardless of whether they were “able” to pay. In theory, lenders could find it optimal
(given that they were not permitted to means test) to write down underwater mortgages so
much that foreclosure rates would ultimately be quite low. Of course, a large and across-
the-board mortgage write-down would dramatically reduce lender collections, but the
objectives of efficiency and lender collections are quite different.




42
 One approach would be to interpret my “productivity” variable w as a wage rate after various (non-
mortgage) taxes.


                                                                                                      30
     VI. Appendix: Proofs of Lemma and Remaining Propositions


Proposition 3 If the minimum foreclosure cost m(wL) is small enough relative to the full
annual housing payment h that type wL prefers foreclosure to earning enough to be
eligible for the minimum modified payment required by FDIC-HASP, then, for an
interval of b including 0 and m(wL), (i) FDIC-HASP results in a foreclosure rate that is at
least as great as the non-discrimination foreclosure rate and (ii) effort is distorted by
FDIC-HASP.
Proof          Under the condition of the proposition, there is a range of productivities
that includes wL for which the borrowers prefer foreclosure to the allocation W0 (see, for
Figure 2), and all other borrowers prefer an allocation on the section OYW0 of the budget
constraint. Thus, the borrowers foreclosed by FDIC-HASP are limited to those that are
both in the aforementioned range of productivities and have foreclosure cost less than b;
the FDIC-HASP foreclosure rate is F(m-1(b)). The non-discrimination foreclosure rate is
F(m-1(min{b,x0})), which coincides with F(m-1(b)) for an interval of b including 0 and
m(wL). FDIC-HASP’s distorts effort for any b > m(wL) because the distribution of
productivities is continuous and the point W0 in Figure 2 is strictly preferred to the point
W.

Lemma          If b ≤ m(wL), the optimum is w1 = w2 = w3 = wL.
Proof          At the proposed solution w1 = w2 = w3 = wL, the top condition of (17) is
satisfied because both right and left sides of the equation are one. The middle condition
is the derivative of the Lagrangian (13) with respect to w1, divided by f(w1), and is equal
to –m(wL) at w1 = w2 = w3 = wL. Thus, the proposed solution maximizes the Lagrangian
with respect to w1∈ [wL,wH]. By the same reasoning (see the bottom condition of (17)),
the proposed solution maximizes the Lagrangian with respect to w3 ∈ [wL,wH] because b-
m(wL) ≤ 0.




                                                                                         31
Proposition 5 Maximizing collections with discrimination results in more collections,
but not necessarily less deadweight cost than maximizing collections without
discrimination.
Proof          Maximizing collections with discrimination results in more collections by
definition. If x0 ≤ wL, then maximizing collections without discrimination has zero
deadweight cost (zero foreclosures and no effort distortion) for all values of b.
Maximizing collections with discrimination has strictly positive deadweight costs as long
as that discrimination distorts effort for some of the borrowers.




                                                                                      32
Table 1. Efficiency and Revenue Effects of Three Collection Policies
Small Amounts of Negative Equity
The Table ranks three different debt collection policies by the foreclosure rate, efficiency
distortions, total deadweight costs, and revenue collected

                                     b ∈ (0,m (w L )]                 b ∈ (m (w L ),x 0]

Foreclosure Rate                     all policies = 0           0 ≤ c-max < non-disc < FDIC
Effort Distortions            0 = non-disc = c-max < FDIC       0 = non-disc < c-max < FDIC
Total Deadweight Costs        0 = non-disc = c-max < FDIC        0 < non-disc, c-max < FDIC
Revenue Collected                    all policies = b           non-disc < FDIC < c-max ≤ b

Notes: "c-max" = Collection-maximization with means-tests
       "non-disc" = Collection-maximization without means-tests
       "FDIC" = FDIC-HASP modification rules
       b = amount of negative equity
       m (w L ) = minimum foreclosure cost among borrowers
        x 0 = colleciton-maximizing common payment
                          Fig 1. Three Mortgage Payment Scenarios
        The Figure displays borrower budget sets for three mortgage payment scenarios: pay in full, foreclosure,
and pay only up to the home value. The relative magnitudes of these payments are assumed for the purpose of illustration.
          The horizontal axis measures borrower income during the benchmark period, from highest to lowest.

                 all other
                 goods




                                              wr
                                                ite
                                                    do
                                                      wn
                                                          to
                                                              ho
                                          wa




                                                                 m
                                            lk




                                                                  e
                                              aw




                                                                    va
                                                ay




                                                                      lu
                                                                        e
                                                   / fo
                                                       re
                                                          c
                                                          lo
                                                             su
                                           pa




                                                               re
                                              y
                                              in
                                                  fu
                                                     ll                             foreclosure cost


                                                                                b




                            0                                                                -1*(income in
                      -1*(full income)                                      0              benchmark period)
                    Fig 2. Budget Set Induced by FDIC-HASP Means-Tests
The horizontal axis measures borrower income during the benchmark period, from highest to lowest. a denotes the present value of
  income available for all other goods, absent: payment b for the unsecured part of the mortgage and benchmark period income.


                      all other
                      goods


                                O

                                                                    W0

                                                                             Z0
                                                      Y
                                                                  W

        full mortgage payment                                            Z
                                                                                  b
                 0.31



                                                                         X

                                                                                  a −b

                                0                                                           -1*(income in
                           -1*(full income)                                  0            benchmark period)
Fig 3. Borrowers’ “Demand” for Repayment, Compared with a Means‐Tested Collection Policy
  The monotone curve graphs the foreclosure cost inverse CDF, from highest cost to lowest.. The other (red) curve shows the
              amounts collected by the collection-maximizing policy that discriminates on the basis of income.

  Foreclosure cost,
 repayment amount




                                 G −1 (1 − fraction of borrowers)
              pay in full
      b




  m( w1 )

 m( wL )
                                                                                                 Fraction of borrowers
                                                                                                   with greater cost
          0         1 − F ( w3 )         1 − F ( w2 )          1 − F ( w1 ) 1
            Fig 4. The Profile of Collection‐Maximizing Marginal Tax Rates
             The collection-maximizing marginal tax rate is graphed as a function of borrower productivity.
                The range of borrowers [wL,w1] and [w3,wH] are foreclosed or pay in full, respectively.


100%




                                                                                                     pay in
                                                                                                      full
                  foreclosures
 0%
       wL                                     w1                 w2                             w3            wH
       Fig 5. Budget Set Induced by Collection-maximizing Means-Tests
                The budget curve is convex for the range of incomes in which the mortgage is modified.
For the purposes of illustration, the segment nearest zero income is shown for a borrower that is more productive than w1.


                  all other
                  goods




                                              wr
                                                ite
                                                  do
                                                      wn
                                                           to
                                                            ho
                                                               m
                                                                e
                                                                va
                                                                    lu
                                                                      e
                                                pa                                foreclosure cost of type w1
                                                   y
                                                      in
                                                       fu
                                                          ll
                                                                              b




                            0                                                              -1*(income in
                    -1*(full income)                                      0              benchmark period)
                               Fig 6. Foreclosure Rate Comparative Statics
                      with respect to collection plan and amount of negative equity
  "c-max" = Collection-maximization with means-tests, "non-disc" = Collection-maximization without means-tests, "FDIC" = FDIC-
HASP modification rules. Two versions of FDIC are shown, depending on whether its foreclosure rate peaks (with respect to b) lower
                                                or higher than does “non-disc”.
         Foreclosure
             rate

       100%



                                                                             FDIC




F ( m −1 ( x0 ) )
                                                                                               Non-disc



                                                                             C-max




                                                                                    FDIC′
                                                                                                          b ≡ amount of
          0%
                 0          m( wL )                        x0                                             negative equity
   VII.    References



Aversa, Jeannine. “Government Plans Massive Citigroup Rescue Effort.” Associated
       Press. November 24, 2008.
Bernanke, Ben S.      “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of
       the Great Depression.” American Economic Review. 73(3), June 1983: 257-276.
Chetty, Raj and Emmanuel Saez.          “Optimal Taxation and Social Insurance with
       Endogenous Private Insurance.” Manuscript, University of California Berkeley,
       July 2009.
Chiang, Raymond and Chester S. Spatt. “Imperfect Price Discrimination and Welfare.”
       Review of Economic Studies. 49(2), April 1982: 155-181.
Dick, Andrew W. and Aaron S. Edlin. “The Implicit Taxes from College Financial Aid.”
       Journal of Public Economics. 65(3), September 1997: 295-322.
Edlin, Aaron S. “Is College Financial Aid Equitable and Efficient?” Journal of Economic
       Perspectives. 7(2), December 1993: 143-158.
Eggert, Kurt. “Comment on Stegman et al's Preventive Servicing.” Housing Policy Debate.
       18(2), 2007.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. “Loan Modification Program for Distressed
       Indymac          Mortgage       Loans.”              August       20,      2008.
       http://www.fdic.gov/consumers/loans/modification/indymac.html
Feldstein, Martin.    “Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax.”
       Review of Economics and Statistics. 81(4), November 1999; 674-680.
Fisher, Irving.     “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions.” Econometrica.
       1(4), October 1933: 337-357.
Foote, Christopher, Gerardi, Kristopher and Paul Willen. “Negative Equity and
       Foreclosure: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Urban Economics. 64, 2008:
       345-245.
Foote, Christopher, Gerardi, Kristopher, Lorenz Goette, and Paul Willen. “Reducing
       Foreclosures: No Easy Answers.” NBER working paper #15063, June 2009.



                                                                                     33
Geanakopolos, John D. and Susan P. Koniak. “Mortgage Justice is Blind.” New York
       Times. October 30, 2008.
Geanakoplos, John D. and Susan P. Koniak. “Matters of Principal.” New York Times.
       March 4, 2009.
Glater, Jonathan D. “New Plan Ties Reduced College Loan Payments to Income.” New
       York Times. June 29, 2009.
Grochulski, Borys.   “Optimal Personal Bankruptcy Design: A Mirrlees Approach.”
       Richmond Federal Reserve Working paper No. 08-5, September 2008.
Han, Song and Wenli Li. “Fresh Start or Head Start: The Effects of Filing for Personal
       Bankruptcy on Work Effort.” Journal of Financial Services Research. 31, 2007:
       123-152.
Kahn, Charles and Abdullah Yavas. “The Economic Role of Foreclosures.” Journal of
       Real Estate Finance and Economics. 8, 1994: 35-51.
Kroszner, Randall S. “Is it Better to Forgive than to Receive? Repudiation of the Gold
       Indexation Clause in Long-Term Debt During the Great Depression.” University of
       Chicago CRSP working paper 481, April 1999.
Leibowitz, Stan. “New Evidence on the Foreclosure Crisis.” Wall Street Journal. July 3,
       2009, page A13.
Levy, Dan. “U.S. Underwater Mortgages May Reach 30 percent, Zillow Says.” August 11,
       2009. http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601103&sid=a2p_zMYkFQFg
Livshits, Igor, James McGee and Michele Tertilt. “Consumer bankruptcy: a fresh start.”
       American Economic Review. 97(1), March 2007: 402-418.
Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent. “Understanding European Unemployment with
       a Representative Family Model.”       Journal of Monetary Economics.      54(8),
       November 2007: 2180-2204.
Mirrlees, James A. “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation.” Review of
       Economic Studies. 38(114), April 1971: 175-208.
Mishkin, Frederic S. “The Household Balance Sheet and the Great Depression.” Journal of
       Economic History. 38(4), December 1978: 918-937.
Mulligan, Casey B.       “Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor.”   Advances in
       Macroeconomics. 1(1), 2001: Article 4.



                                                                                    34
Mulligan, Casey B. “A Depressing Scenario: Mortgage Debt Becomes Unemployment
       Insurance.” NBER working paper no. 14514, November 2008.
Office of Thrift Supervision. “OCC and OTS Mortgage Metrics Report. Fourth Quarter
       2008.” April 2009.
Olson, Mancur. Power and Prosperity. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Rucker, Patrick. “Obama Mulls Rental Option for Homeowners.” Reuters. July 14,
       2009.
       http://www.reuters.com/article/euRegulatoryNews/idUSN1429055220090714
Salanié, Bernard. The Economics of Taxation. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 2003.
Sichelman, Lew. “Compassionate Servicing.” Mortgage Banking. February 2001.
United States Department of Treasury. “Homeowner Affordability and Stability Plan:
       Executive Summary.” February 2009.
White, Michelle and Ning Zhu. “Saving Your Home in Chapter 13 Bankruptcy.” NBER
       Working Paper no. 14179, July 2008.




                                                                                  35
