                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ON SCIENTISTS' PRODUCTIVITY,
                 QUALITY AND COLLABORATION PATTERNS

                                          Waverly W. Ding
                                          Sharon G. Levin
                                          Paula E. Stephan
                                          Anne E. Winkler

                                        Working Paper 15285
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15285


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2009




¸˛Ding acknowledges support from the Haas School of Business, Lester Center for Entrepreneurship
  and Innovation, and the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, Kansas City, MO. Levin, Stephan and
  Winkler acknowledge support from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, NY. We thank Kelly Wilken
  for data assistance and Fiona Murray for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those
  of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Waverly W. Ding, Sharon G. Levin, Paula E. Stephan, and Anne E. Winkler. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Information Technology on Scientists' Productivity, Quality and Collaboration
Patterns
Waverly W. Ding, Sharon G. Levin, Paula E. Stephan, and Anne E. Winkler
NBER Working Paper No. 15285
August 2009
JEL No. J16,J44,O33

                                                 ABSTRACT

This study advances the prior literature concerning the impact of information technology on productivity
in academe in two important ways. First, it utilizes a dataset that combines information on the diffusion
of two noteworthy and early innovations in IT -- BITNET and the Domain Name System (DNS) --
with career history data on research-active life scientists. This research design allows for proper identification
of the availability of access to IT as well as a means to directly identify causal effects. Second, the
fine-grained nature of the data set allows for an investigation of three publishing outcomes: counts,
quality, and co-authorship. Our analysis of a random sample of 3,771 research-active life scientists
from 430 U.S. institutions over a 25-year period supports the hypothesis of a differential return to
IT across subgroups of the scientific labor force. Women scientists, early-to-mid-career scientists,
and those employed by mid-to-lower-tier institutions benefit from access to IT in terms of overall research
output and an increase in the number of new co-authors they work with. Early-career scientists and
those in top-tier institutions gain in terms of research quality when IT becomes available at their campuses.


Waverly W. Ding                                         Paula E. Stephan
Haas School of Business                                 Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley                      Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900                                 Georgia State University
wding@haas.berkeley.edu                                 Box 3992
                                                        Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
Sharon G. Levin                                         and NBER
University of Missouri-St. Louis                        pstephan@gsu.edu
St. Louis, MO 63121
slevin@umsl.edu                                         Anne E. Winkler
                                                        University of Missouri-St. Louis
                                                        St. Louis, MO 63121
                                                        awinkler@umsl.edu
I. Introduction

        The Internet and other advancements in information technology (IT) have changed the

workplace (e.g., Brynjolfsson 1993, 1998, Kelley 1998, Dewan and Kraemer 2000). The impact

of such changes is of particular importance to the production of knowledge given that scientific

inquiry is highly dependent on collaboration and access to information. However, up to now we

have only limited knowledge concerning how advancements in IT have affected the research

patterns of scientists over time. One drawback to previous studies is that they typically compare

research patterns before and after an IT-innovation became widespread, attributing differences to

the new technology without knowing when (and sometimes whether) the new technology

actually was available to the individual scientist (e.g., Hamermesh and Oster 2002, Rosenblat

and Mobius 2004, Kim, Morse and Zingales 2006, Wuchty, Jones and Uzzi 2007, Butler, Butler

and Rich 2008). An important exception is Agrawal and Goldfarb (2008). A further limitation of

such studies, which applies to the latter paper as well, is that they rely on aggregated data at the

journal article or institutional level, making it difficult to accurately estimate the effect of IT

diffusion on an individual scientist’s knowledge production process.


        The few studies that have investigated the impact of IT on productivity and collaboration

patterns of individual scientists (Hesse, Sproull, Kiesler and Walsh 1993, Cohen 1996, Barjak

2006, Winkler, Levin and Stephan forthcoming) have, with the exception of Winkler et al., relied

on self-reported data on IT usage. A weakness of this approach is that it is almost impossible to

accurately date the initial adoption of the information technologies investigated in the studies.

Winkler et al. overcome this difficulty by appending information on the date of institutional

adoption of IT to individual-level data on scientists. Nevertheless, a limitation of all of these




                                                   1
studies is that they use cross-sectional data to identify the impact of IT, which raises concerns

about proper identification of causal effects.


       This study advances the prior literature in two important ways. First, it utilizes a dataset

that combines information on the diffusion of two noteworthy and early innovations in IT --

BITNET and the Domain Name System (DNS) -- with career history data on research-active life

scientists. This research design allows for proper identification of the availability of access to IT

as well as a means to directly identify causal effects. Second, the data set is extremely rich,

allowing for an investigation of three publishing outcomes: counts, quality, and co-authorship.


        Our research design permits us to test whether the adoption of IT by an institution

enhances the research of three specific subgroups of the scientific labor force: (1) female faculty

members, who often face greater mobility constraints than their male colleagues; (2) faculty

early in their careers, who are likely more willing and able to take advantage of the new

technology than more established scientists; and (3) faculty at lower-tier institutions, who are

more likely to have fewer in-house colleagues and resources than faculty at top-research

universities. Implicit in our analysis is the assumption that faculty members take advantage of

the latest and best technology, especially when they have more to gain than others from the new

technology.


       Our empirical work largely supports the three hypotheses. First, we find that women

scientists benefitted more than their male colleagues from the availability of IT in terms of

overall output and an increase in the number of new co-authors they acquire. Second, while

later-career stage scientists did not benefit from the adoption of IT by their institutions, early-to-

mid-career stage scientists did. Finally, where one works mediates the effects: the availability




                                                  2
of IT increased productivity of scientists at mid-tier (and in some instances at lower-tier)

institutions.


         The plan of this paper is as follows. In Section II we review the literature concerning the

effect of information technology on scientists’ research patterns. Section III summarizes our

research design. Section IV introduces BITNET and DNS, two IT innovations that have had an

impact on scientists’ research and in which we are interested. Section V describes our data,

variables and models. Section VI presents the results. Conclusions are drawn in Section VII.


II. Literature

         Our three hypotheses regarding the impact of IT on the productivity of scientists have

received some previous attention. Specifically, research has looked at how advancements in IT

enhance scientists’ productivity and connectivity regardless of their “location” in the profession1

and the extent to which IT enhances the productivity and connectivity of some subgroups (e.g.,

women, junior faculty members, or those employed by lower-tier institutions) more than others.

Below, we review prior findings regarding the IT-research productivity relationship and the IT-

collaboration relationship.


IT and Research Productivity


         Investigations of the relationship between IT and research productivity generally find

support for the view that IT enhances productivity. Hesse et al. (1993) surveyed oceanographers

and found a positive relationship between oceanographers’ use of computer networks and their

publication counts as well as professional recognitions. In a survey of scientists from four

1
  “Location” here refers to the geographical location of a scientist’s employment setting as well as social standing in
the academic labor force. For example, women scientists are reported to occupy a more disadvantaged position in
science. Junior faculty members and those employed by lower-tier institutions also have relatively less resources to
support their work.


                                                           3
disciplines--chemistry, philosophy, political science and sociology--and 26 institutions, Cohen

(1996) similarly found that scientists who reported using computer-mediated communication

tools reported higher numbers of publications and more professional recognition. Winkler et al.

(forthcoming) found limited evidence of a positive IT-productivity relationship, using

information on life scientists from the Survey of Doctorate Recipients (SDR) and institutional-

level information on adoption of various indicators of IT. Evidence of a positive IT-productivity

relationship is also reported in Kaminer and Braunstein (1998), Walsh, Kucker and Gabby

(2000), and Barjak (2006).


       The hypothesis of differential IT effects has been tested along three dimensions:

institutional status, professional age and gender. Hesse and colleagues (1993) used geographical

location to proxy for institutional status because the more prestigious departments in

oceanography tend to be located closer to the coasts and the less prestigious ones more inland.

They found that geographically-disadvantaged scientists receive a higher productivity gain from

IT. Cohen’s (1996) study of scientists from a broader set of disciplines found no support for the

hypothesis of disproportionate benefits for scientists employed at lower-tiered institutions, and

Winkler et al. (forthcoming) found limited support for this hypothesis is their study of life

scientists. With regard to seniority, Hesse et al. (1993) reported that junior researchers gained

more professional recognition than did their senior colleagues when they engaged in more

intensive use of IT. Winkler et al. (forthcoming) examined whether IT access benefits women

relative to men, but they found no support for this hypothesis.

       Overall, these studies provide mixed empirical evidence with regard to the view that IT

differentially affects subsets of the scientific labor force. The data or methodology employed in

these studies, however, is sufficiently problematic to lead one to conclude that IT has weak or


                                                4
mixed effects. What is needed is a dataset such as the one examined here – one that combines

longitudinal data on career scientists with institutional-level variables reflecting timing of IT

adoption – to provide more compelling evidence about the presence and magnitude of causal

effects.

IT and Research Collaborations

           In recent years, there has also been growing research interest in how IT affects the

collaborations of scientists. This research interest has been prompted by the increase in the

number of co-authored papers by individuals at different academic institutions and in different

countries, as well as in the number of co-authors per paper. An analysis of approximately 13

million published papers in science and engineering from 1955 to 2000, for example, found an

increase in team size in all but one of the 172 subfields studied and average team size was found

to have nearly doubled, going from 1.9 to 3.5 authors per paper (Wuchty, Jones and Uzzi 2006).

Team size even increased in mathematics, generally seen as the domain of individuals working

alone and the field least dependent on capital equipment. Adams et al. (2005) found similar

results for the top 110-research universities in the United States, reporting that the average

number of authors per paper in the sciences grew by 53.4%, rising from 2.77 to 4.24 over the

period 1981-1999.


           Growth in the numbers of authors on a paper is due not only to a rise in collaboration

within a university—and an increase in lab size—but more importantly to an increase in the

number of institutions collaborating on a research project. A study of 662 U.S. institutions

which had received NSF funding one or more times found that collaboration across these

institutions in science and engineering, which was rare in 1975, grew in each and every year

between 1975-2005, reaching approximately 40 percent by 2005 (Jones, Wuchty and Uzzi 2008).


                                                    5
Collaboration has increased internationally as well. Levin, Glanzel, Stephan and Winkler’s

(2009) study of authorship patterns across a wide array of four-year colleges and universities in

the U.S. found that the percent of papers with one or more international authors went from 6.6%

in 1991 to 19.2% in 2007.


       The coincidence of the increase in collaboration since the 1990s with the diffusion of

several innovations in information technologies has not gone unobserved. For example,

Hamermesh and Oster (2002) compared publishing activity in three economics journals over the

period 1970-1979 with that in the same journals over the period 1992-1996. They found almost

20% of authors of jointly-produced articles to be located at distant locations in the more recent

period compared to 5% in the earlier period. Adams et al. (2005) also identified a growing mean

distance between coauthors in their analysis of 2.4 million scientific papers, going from 77.7

miles in 1981 to 159.4 miles in 1999. Both studies noted that the rate of increase in collaboration

distance was greatest during a period of rapid diffusion of e-mail and an associated drop in

communication costs. A recent survey of U.S.-trained doctorates further points out the

importance of e-mail to international collaboration: 98% of all scientists and engineers in the

2006 Survey of Doctorate Recipients who reported having an international collaborator used

either the phone or e-mail to collaborate with their co-author(s) (National Science Board,

forthcoming).


       While the research, as outlined above, provides compelling evidence that IT enhances

collaboration, empirical findings are more mixed with regard to which subgroup(s) of scientists

benefit relatively more from the expansion of collaboration networks. Agrawal and Goldfarb

(2008) found that faculty at medium-ranked research universities benefitted the most from the

adoption of BITNET in the form of increased collaborations in the field of electrical engineering.


                                                 6
Butler et al. (2008) studied the impact of IT on collaboration in economics and political science

using publication data from the top three journals in each field. In their paper they measure the

availability of IT based on a review of NBER working papers published during the 1990s. They

find that prior to January 1997, an e-mail address was never included; since January 1999,

almost all papers had an e-mail address. Using this as an indicator of IT access, they find that

collaboration increased, especially at lower-ranked institutions. With regard to differential effects

of IT by gender on collaboration, Walsh et al. (2000) find limited evidence and Butler et al.

(2008) find no significant differences. None of the three studies examine whether effects vary

with professional age.


        The mixed findings of these studies are due in part to the empirical approaches taken. As

noted, with the exception of Agrawal and Goldfarb (2008), prior studies of the IT-collaboration

relationship infer the role of IT rather than explicitly measure the presence of IT. Without the

actual date or year of institutional or individual adoption of IT innovations, such an estimation

strategy cannot account for the variations in the timing of IT adoptions across institutions or

individuals. Moreover, such studies look at collaboration at the journal or institutional level.

While these types of analyses are useful in identifying the increasing trend in collaboration, they

are not suitable for estimating the effect of IT on an individual scientist’s collaboration network,

lacking adequate controls for possible confounding factors (e.g., Ph.D. cohort, career stage,

gender and institutional prestige, etc.).


III. Research Design


        We investigate the effects of IT on productivity and collaboration patterns of research-

active academic life scientists. We also include in our analysis a measure of the quality of




                                                 7
scientists’ research. Our goal is to assess whether specific subgroups of the scientific labor force

gain more than others in terms of productivity, quality and collaborative patterns after an IT

innovation is made available to them. Again, following prior literature, we group the scientific

labor force along three dimensions: gender, professional age and employer prestige.


       Compared with previous work, our empirical design has three advantages. First, we used

a dataset of a random sample of approximately 4,000 scientists. These scientists are drawn from

multiple scientific disciplines and a wide range of academic institutions with different levels of

institutional prestige and span a 25-year period. Detailed career history information as well as

research productivity, quality and collaboration information on these scientists is collected from

archival data sources. The advantage of such a dataset is that it allows for thorough analysis of

each individual scientist’s research patterns and adequate control for possible confounding

factors. Because the data are fine-grained at an individual level, it is possible for us to

hypothesize about and test whether and how the impact of IT is contingent on scientists’

individual characteristics. Second, instead of inferring the effect of IT from differences in

outcome variables across periods, we directly measure the time that the scientist’s employing

institution adopted IT innovations. Because we know the initial date when an IT innovation is

available to a scientist, we can thus take advantage of the longitudinal nature of our dataset and

use a proper lag structure to better establish the effect of IT on research outcomes. Third, prior

literature has examined changes in the quantity of scientists’ research publications after a change

in available IT, but none has investigated the impact of IT on the quality of research. We include

a measure for the quality of scientists’ research as one of our outcome measures. We believe

attention to both the quantity and quality of research allows us to conduct a more comprehensive

assessment of the effect of IT on scientists’ research.



                                                   8
IV. IT Innovations: BITNET and DNS

         This study analyzes the research impact of two indicators of IT connectivity: date of

institutional adoption of BITNET and date of institutional adoption of a domain name (DNS).2

Previous work by Agrawal and Goldfarb (2008) used BITNET data and work by Winkler et al.

(forthcoming) examined both indicators.


         Although the IT revolution can be dated to the creation of ARPANET by the Department

of Defense in 1969, restricted access to ARPANET led others to develop their own networks

(NSF 2009). Among these, BITNET was an early leader in electronic communications across a

range of scientific disciplines and universities. Conceptualized by the Vice Chancellor of

University Systems at the City University of New York (CUNY), BITNET’s first adopters were

CUNY and Yale in May 1981 (Bitnet history). At its peak in 1991-1992, BITNET connected

about 1,400 organizations (almost 700 academic institutions) in 49 countries (CREN). By the

mid-1990s BITNET was eclipsed by the Internet as we know it today and began to fade away.3


         An early and essential development in the Internet’s evolution that contributed to its

growth was the development of the Domain Name System (DNS) in 1984. This system, which

became the industry standard, classified addresses initially according to whether the host

computer connecting to the network was an educational (edu), commercial (com), governmental

(gov), military (mil), or other (org) institution; it also provided for a series of country codes. No

longer did every host on the Internet need to know the exact name and IP-address of every other



2
  Data for these indicators were initially collected for a set of 1,348 four-year colleges, universities and medical
schools in the United States that had been in existence since 1980. See Levin et al. (In process).
3
 By 1992-1993, the number of academic organizations connected to the Internet actually exceeded the number
participating in BITNET, and by 1993, the number connected to BITNET began to fall. See Bitnet History available
at www.livinginternet.com/u/ui_bitnet.htm).


                                                           9
system on the network, nor would it need to continuously update the file containing this

information as the number of hosts on the Internet grew exponentially.


        Figure 1 shows the diffusion of BITNET over the period 1981-1990 and the diffusion of

DNS over the period 1985-1993 at the 430 academic institutions where the research-active life

scientists in our study are located.4 Both figures exhibit the typical S-curve associated with

diffusion of an innovation over time (Rogers 2003)—especially among the non-top institutions;

adoption first rises at an increasing rate and then levels off.


        Diffusion patterns very considerably by tier. Among the top 25 research institutions,

BITNET and DNS diffused rapidly; in the case of DNS approximately all the top institutions had

adopted the technology within a span of two years. The diffusion of BITNET was a bit slower,

but among the top institutions, approximately all had access within five years. Diffusion was

somewhat slower among the mid-tier institutions and considerably slower among those

institutions outside the top 50. Indeed, by the end of the period, only 50% of these institutions

had access to BITNET and approximately 60% had access to DNS.


V. Data, Variables and Model

Data

        To determine whether the adoption by institutions of BITNET and DNS led to systematic

differences in scientists’ research outcomes, we begin with a random sample of 12,000 life

scientists in the U.S., drawn from the UMI Proquest Dissertations database.5 We restrict our

4
  Data on the adoption dates of BITNET beyond 1990 are not available. See Atlas of cyberspaces, available at
wwwlib.umi.com/dissertations.
5
  The 12,000 scientists’ names are randomly drawn from UMI’s Proquest Dissertations Database. The fields and
degree years sampled were chosen in proportions that matched the distribution of Ph.D. fields and graduation years
for faculty serving on the Scientific Advisory Board (SAB) of biotechnology companies that made initial public
offerings between the years 1970 and 2002. The sampling frame was structured in this way because the initial


                                                        10
sample to those who earned Ph.D.s between 1967 and 1990 to isolate the effects of the first two

major information technologies, BITNET and DNS, on research productivity. We use the Web

of Science’s Science Citation Index to collect the publications, co-authors, and employment

affiliations. Because our interest lies in the research outcomes of academic scientists, we retain

only individuals who have publishing experience in academic institutions after receiving the

doctorate, creating a dataset of scientist-year observations from 1969 to 1993 with annually

updated covariates for the individual and the employer institution.6


        Each scientist begins in the data the year he or she receives a Ph.D. and continues until (i)

there is a 5-year interval during which that scientist does not publish, (ii) the scientist starts

publishing exclusively under a corporate affiliation, or (iii) the year is 1993. These restrictions

result in a dataset of 3,771 scientists with 46,301 scientist-year observations.


Variables

        For each scientist-year observation, we created covariates including the individual’s

gender, professional experience, number of jobs, publication and citation counts, co-authorship

patterns, employer ranking and the availability of the two IT-related technologies, namely

BITNET and DNS. Detailed definitions of these variables are given in Table 1 and descriptive

statistics are provided in Table 2.




research project was designed to study university faculty members’ engagement in the commercialization of
academic science. Despite the sampling method, our sample is highly representative of the underlying population of
academic life scientists. See Appendix 1 for more information on how our sample compares the NSF and SESTAT’s
definition of life sciences.
6
  We start our estimation window before the onset of BITNET rather than in 1980, when BITNET was first
available. We use this window because our goal is to assess how availability of IT affects a scientist’s research
patterns, not to study the diffusion of BITNET or DNS per se. In our models, we compare a scientist who has access
to some form of IT (e.g., BITNET) with one who does not, either because BITNET has not yet been introduced or
because his or her employer hasn’t adopted it.


                                                       11
         The three dependent variables in the analysis are (i) research productivity, defined as the

number of research papers published by a scientist in a given year, (ii) research quality, defined

as the average journal impact factor for papers published by a scientist in a given year (following

Azoulay, Ding, and Stuart forthcoming), and (iii) co-authorship gain, which measures the

increase in the number of new coauthors found in a scientist’s publications in a given year. An

example is provided in Table 1.


         Our coding of gender is primarily based on the first name of a scientist.7 When a first

name is androgynous, we search the web for the scientist’s vitae, bio-sketch or pictures, and code

gender accordingly. This strategy permits us to confidently identify gender for 98 percent of the

scientists in our data. All remaining scientists with androgynous first names and no gender-

related information from the web are assumed to be male. Our rationale is that most of the

gender-ambiguous names belong to foreign-born scientists of East Asian decent. It is reasonable

to assume that the vast majority of these are male given the well-documented gender imbalance

in science education in these countries. Such a method for determining gender was previously

used by Ding et al (2006).


         Other individual variables included in the models are professional age, defined as the

number of years lapsed since a scientist obtained his or her Ph.D. degree, and the number of jobs

a scientist has held to proxy the range of his professional network. Following Stuart and Ding

(2006), we use the average citation count to control for professional recognitions received by a

scientist. Average citation is measured by predicted number of citations received per paper for

the papers published by a scientist up through a given year. The total citation count for each


7
  The literature on naming conventions suggests that gender is the primary characteristic individuals seek to convey
in the selection of given names (Alford 1988, Lieberson and Bell 1992).


                                                         12
published article at the time we assembled our database (2002) was obtained from the Web of

Science. Because we wish to estimate a scientist’s annually-updated, cumulative citation count,

we distribute each paper’s total citation count as of 2002 back through time, assuming that

citations arrive according to an exponential distribution with hazard rate equal to 0.1. Our logic

is based on the bibliometric literature (for example, Redner, 1998), showing that citations follow

an exponential distribution and we find this to be true for the typical paper in our study. The

predicted, cumulative citation count is then divided by the publication stock to obtain the average

citation count per paper.


        Two variables are included in the analysis regarding the scientist’s institution: employer

ranking and whether the institution has adopted BITNET and DNS. The former come from the

Gourman Report, which issued rankings for graduate schools beginning in 1980. We assigned

universities their original rating for all years prior to 1980 and updated them every other year for

the subsequent period. Continuous ranking measure is not informative in our models, so we

group institutions into three categories--top 25, between 26 and 50, and below 50. Information

on if and when the scientist’s university adopted BITNET and DNS come from the Atlas of

Cyberspaces and the ALLWHOIS website, respectively, and is entered in the models as a

dichotomous variable with one indicating a scientist’s university has already adopted the IT

technology (at least one year prior) and zero otherwise.


Model

        We use a pooled cross-sectional Poisson Quasi-Maximum Likelihood Estimator

(PQMLE) to examine the effects of BITNET and DNS on the three outcomes of scientific

research noted above: productivity, quality, and collaboration patterns. The choice of a pooled

cross-sectional model over a fixed effect model is driven largely by our interest in how some


                                                 13
important population characteristics (e.g., gender and employer ranking) affect the outcome

variables.8 Because the Poisson model is in the linear exponential family, the coefficient

estimates remain consistent as long as the mean of the dependent variable is correctly specified.

Thus, the PQML estimator does not impose an equi-disperson condition as in a standard Poisson

estimator (Wooldridge, 2002). Further, “robust” standard errors are consistent even if the

underlying data generating process is not Poisson. In fact, the PQML estimator can be used for

any non-negative dependent variable, whether integer or continuous. In our research quality

models, even though the outcome variable contains non-integer values, the QML estimator

should still be consistent as long as our conditional mean is correctly specified (Gourieroux et al.

1984, Santos Silva and Tenreyro 2006).


VI. Results


        Effect of IT on Research Productivity. The regression results are reported in Table 3.

The baseline model includes a set of control variables: calendar-year dummies, Ph.D. subject-

field dummies, professional experience, gender, number of jobs held, lagged publication stock,

lagged average citation count, lagged past-5-year co-authoring ties, and the employer’s ranking

category.


        As expected, research productivity is a concave function of a scientist’s professional age.9

Women scientists have lower productivity than men. Number of jobs held, publication stock,

average citation and past co-authoring ties all show a positive association with the current year’s

publication count. Finally, scientists working at lower-tier institutions (ranked outside the top-

8
  Though not reported in the paper, we have run fixed effect Quasi-Maximum-Likelihood Poisson regressions for
models in which time-invariant variables are not our main interest. The fixed effect PQML estimates on the
technology variables are largely consistent with the results of pooled cross-sectional PQML. The fixed effect PQML
results are available upon request.
9
  Professional age (experience) is highly correlated with a scientist’s actual age (Stephan and Levin 1992).


                                                       14
50) appear to publish less than those employed by the base group (institutions ranked in the top-

25), although the statistical power of the relationship is weak.


           Holding these baseline factors constant, we find that neither the availability of BITNET

nor DNS at a scientist’s institution, measured with a one-year lag, was associated with a

significant increase in research productivity (see models 2 and 3 in Table 3).10 This finding may,

however, mask variations in the effect of IT on different groups within the sample. To test the

three hypotheses set forth at the outset of the paper, we interact the IT variables with three

covariates: gender, professional experience and employer ranking. The results of IT-gender

interactions are reported in columns 4 and 5 of Table 3. For female scientists the availability of

BITNET and DNS increases research productivity by 13% (=exp[0.018+0.102]) and 9% (=exp[-

0.015+0.099]), respectively. Both coefficients are significantly higher than the effects found for

male scientists, measured by the exponent of the coefficient on the non-interacted IT variable.


           We next group a scientist’s professional experience into five categories (1-4, 5-8, 9-14,

15-20 and 21-26 years after the Ph.D. was earned) and interact each with the two IT variables.

Results are reported in columns 6 and 7 of Table 3, and also illustrated in the top panel of Figure

2. We find that the effect of IT changes as a scientist’s career progresses. IT has no significant

impact at an early-career stage (e.g., 1-8 years after the Ph.D. was earned); it has a stronger and

more positive effect on research productivity for mid-career stage scientists (with 9-14 years of

professional experience), increasing output by approximately 16%. The effect on research

productivity decreases significantly for more mature scientists (with 21 or more years of

professional experience).



10
     The DNS model also controls for availability of BITNET, since DNS was a “successor” technology.


                                                        15
       Last, we interact the IT variables with the employer’s rank (top 25, 26-50, and outside top

50); these results are reported in columns 8 and 9 of Table 3 and are also shown in the top panel

of Figure 2. We find that scientists employed at low-to-mid-tier institutions (outside top 50 and

26-50, respectively) benefit from IT. Those employed by top-25 institutions do not. For

scientists at mid-ranked institutions, access to BITNET boosts output by 17%; access to DNS

boosts output by 15%. For scientists who are employed by universities ranked outside the top-

50, access to BITNET is associated with a 6% increase in the current year’s publication count;

no significant effect is found for DNS.


       Effect of IT on Research Quality. Our second set of models (see Table 4) focuses on the

effect of IT on research quality. The estimations control for a set of individual and institutional

factors similar to those controlled for in the estimations described above, with the exception of

the addition of a control for past research quality (measured by the average journal impact factor

for all papers published by a scientist up through the previous year). Holding these factors

constant, we observe no significant main effect of BITNET or DNS on quality.


       To assess whether the IT effect varies across subgroups of scientists, we once again

interact the IT variables with gender, professional experience and employer ranking. We find

some notable differences between the quality results and those found in the earlier productivity

models. First, there is no evidence that women scientists benefit (in term of improved

publication quality) from either BITNET or DNS significantly more than men (see columns 4

and 5 of Table 4). Second, early-career-stage scientists (those with 1-4 years of experience) gain

most in terms of research quality from the availability of these technologies: an 11% increase in

the average journal impact factor when BITNET is available, and a 14% increase when DNS is

available (see columns 6 and 7 of Table 4 and the middle panel of Figure 2). Third, and contrary


                                                 16
to what we observed for research output, the quality-boosting effect of BITNET and DNS exists

only for scientists at top-ranked (within top-25) universities, who enjoy an 11% gain when their

universities adopt BITNET or DNS (see columns 8 and 9 of Table 4 and the middle panel of

Figure 2).


         Effect of IT on Research Collaboration. Our last set of models (see Table 5) concerns the

effect of IT on collaboration patterns of scientists. For this purpose, we examine how the

availability of IT changes the number of new co-authors on a project as evidenced by

publications in a given year.11 Holding constant our standard control variables, we find that

BITNET and DNS do not lead to significant changes in the number of new co-authors. There

are, however, substantial and significant differences in the effect of IT across subsets of the

scientists in our sample.


         First, as in the case of research productivity, the effect of IT is significantly higher for

women than for men (see columns 4 and 5 of Table 5). In term of co-authors, women gain 14%

(=exp[0.135]) more than men when their university has access to BITNET in the previous year,

and 16% (=exp[0.150]) more than men, with access to DNS. Second, breaking down the effects

of BITNET and DNS by career stage, we find that early-to-mid-career scientists (with 1-14 years

of experience) benefit from the adoption of these technologies at their campuses, but the IT

effects on collaboration decrease significantly during the latter half of the career (see columns 6

and 7 of Table 5 and the illustration in the bottom panel of Figure 2). The effects are highly

significant in the case of BITNET and weakly significant in the case of DNS. IT is particularly

instrumental in helping newly-minted Ph.D. researchers (with 1-4 years of experience) expand
11
  Although the maximum number of coauthor gain in a year (=170) may seem high, it is not unusual for life
scientists to be part of a research team consisting of a few hundred people. Nonetheless, we tested our models in
Table 5 by excluding the observations at the top 1% of the “coauthor gain” variable. We found no meaningful
difference from the results reported in Table 5.


                                                         17
their collaboration networks. Lastly, scientists who are employed by mid-ranked universities

enjoy a 13% boost in the number of new co-authors when BITNET becomes available at their

universities. No statistically significant effect is found for DNS (see columns 8 and 9 of Table 5

and the illustration in the bottom panel of Figure 2). Scientists employed by universities outside

the top 50 experience approximately a 7% gain in new co-authors when their employer adopted

BITNET; this effect just misses being significant at the 5% level.


VII. Conclusion


        The internet and other advancements in information technology (IT) are changing the

practice of science. Yet our knowledge concerning how advancements in IT have affected

research productivity over time is limited. In large part this is due to the absence of data linking

information on the adoption of IT technology to the productivity of scientists. Here we remedy

this situation by creating a database that combines information on the diffusion of BITNET and

the Domain Name System (DNS) with career history data on the publishing patterns of research-

active academic life scientists. Three characteristics of publishing patterns are measured: counts

of publications, quality of publications and an increase in co-authorship. We test whether the

adoption of IT by an institution enhanced the research of specific subgroups of the scientific

labor force: (1) female faculty members, (2) faculty early in their careers, and (3) faculty at

lower-tier institutions.


        Our novel approach involves determining the date that BITNET and DNS were adopted

by each of the 430 institutions our sample of research-active life scientists worked at and relating

their availability to three outcomes of the research process. While we find no direct effect of IT,

our findings support the hypotheses that the adoption of IT had differential effects on




                                                 18
productivity depending on a scientist’s individual characteristics and location. Specifically,

women scientists benefitted more than their male colleagues in terms of overall output and an

increase in new co-authors. This is consistent with the idea that IT is especially beneficial to

individuals who face greater mobility constraints. Despite the plusses, IT was not able to boost

the quality of women’s publications, suggesting that their new coauthors were located in lower-

tier institutions. Second, late-career stage scientists did not benefit from the adoption of IT by

their institutions while early-to-mid-career stage scientists—who likely were more willing and

able to take advantage of the new technology—did in terms of research quantity, quality and

collaboration networks. Third, the tier of the research organization matters. The availability of

IT increased the productivity of scientists at mid-tier (and in some instances lower-tier)

institutions. This is consistent with the idea that faculty at mid-and-lower-tier institutions had

relatively more to gain, having fewer in-house colleagues and resources, although some scientists

at the lowest-tier institutions may be too isolated and resource-poor for IT to have made a

significant difference, particularly in terms of the quality of research. Finally, the most notable

effects of IT are on collaboration and are consistent with the frequent inference that IT has been

a major contributing factor to the increase in the number of co-authors in science observed since

the 1980s.


       The gender and research tier results suggest that IT has been an equalizing force, at least

in terms of the number of publications and gain in co-authorship, enabling scientists outside the

inner circle to participate more fully. We would be remiss if we did not point out research on

policy innovations that have increased accessibility in science and thus had a similar effect on

the practice of science. Murray and her colleagues (2008), for instance, studied the impact of

two Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) between Dupont and the National Institutes of Health



                                                 19
which removed many of the restrictions related to working with certain genetically engineered

mice. They found post-MOU citations to the original mouse articles to grow at a faster rate from

institutions that had previously not done research with the mice than from institutions that had

previously done research using the mice. The logic for their finding is that prior to the MOUs,

accessibility to mice was considerably more restricted by intellectual property protection. 12                 As

a second example, Furman and Stern (2009) studied the effect of biological research centers

(BRCs) by examining citations in articles written post-deposit to articles associated with

materials which had been exogeneously shifted to a research center. Consistent with a

democratizing effect, they found the rate of citations from new institutions, new journals and

new countries to increase post deposit. They also found that researchers at institutions outside the

top 50 U.S. research universities benefitted more than those at the top 50 in terms of a post-

deposit citation boost to papers which used materials that had subsequently been transferred to a

BRC. The policy implication of this research on mice and BRCs, as well as of our own research

on IT, is clear: innovations that promote accessibility level the playing field and broaden the

base of individuals doing science.




12
  Researchers at institutions where a colleague had either engineered a mouse or accessed a mouse were likely to
share the benefits while researchers at institutions that did not have a mouse found access more difficult.
Furthermore, agreements made prior to the MOU allowed follow-on research for all faculty at the institution.


                                                        20
                                          References


Adams, J.D., G.C. Black, J.R. Clemmons, P.E. Stephan. 2005. Scientific Teams and Institutional
    Collaborations: Evidence from US Universities, 1981-1999. Research Policy 34(3) 259-
    285.

Agrawal, A., A. Goldfarb. 2008. Restructuring Research: Communication Costs and the
     Democratization of University Innovation. American Economic Review 98(4) 1578-1590.

Alford, R.D. 1988. Naming and Identity. HRAF Press, New Haven, CT.

Azoulay, P., W.W. Ding, T.E. Stuart. 2008. The Impact of Academic Patenting on the Rate,
     Quality, and Direction of (Public) Research Output. Journal of Industrial Economics
     forthcoming.

Barjak, F. 2006. The Role of the Internet in Informal Scholarly Communication. Journal of the
     American Society for Information Science and Technology 57(10) 1350-1367.

Bitnet history. (http://www.livinginternet.com/u/ui_bitnet.htm).

Brynjolfsson, E. 1993. The Productivity Paradox of Information Technology. Communications of
     the Acm 36(12) 67-77.

Brynjolfsson, E., L.M. Hitt. 1998. Beyond the Productivity Paradox. Communications of the Acm
     41(8) 49-55.

Butler, D.M., R.J. Butler, J.T. Rich. 2008. The Equalizing Effect of the Internet on Access to
      Research Expertise in Political Science and Economics. PS-Political Science & Politics
      41(3) 579-584.

Cohen, J. 1996. Computer Mediated Communication and Publication Productivity among
     Faculty. Internet Research-Electronic Networking Applications and Policy 6(2-3) 41-&.

CREN History and Future. (http://www.cren.net/cren-hist-fut.html.)

Dewan, S., K.L. Kraemer. 2000. Information Technology and Productivity: Evidence from
    Country-Level Data. Management Science 46(4) 548-562.

Ding, W.W., F. Murray, T.E. Stuart. 2006. Gender Differences in Patenting in the Academic Life
      Sciences. Science 313(5787): 665-667.

Furman, J. L. and S. Stern. 2009. Climbing Atop the Shoulders of Giants: The Impact of
     Institutions on Cumulative Research. Working Paper.




                                               21
Gourieroux, C., A. Monfort, A. Trognon. 1984. Pseudo Maximum-Likelihood Methods -
     Applications to Poisson Models. Econometrica 52(3) 701-720.

Hamermesh, D.S., S.M. Oster. 2002. Tools or Toys? The Impact of High Technology on
    Scholarly Productivity. Economic Inquiry 40(4) 539-555.

Hesse, B.W., L.S. Sproull, S.B. Kiesler, J.P. Walsh. 1993. Returns to Science - Computer-
     Networks in Oceanography. Communications of the Acm 36(8) 90-101.

Jones, B.F., S. Wuchty, B. Uzzi. 2008. Multi-University Research Teams: Shifting Impact,
      Geography, and Stratification in Science. Science 322(5905) 1259-1262.

Kaminer, N., Y.M. Braunstein. 1998. Bibliometric Analysis of the Impact of Internet Use on
    Scholarly Productivity. Journal of the American Society for Information Science 49(8) 720-
    730.

Kelley, M.R. 1994. Productivity and Information Technology - the Elusive Connections.
     Management Science 40(11) 1406-1425.

Kim, E., A. Morse and L. Zingales. 2006. Are Elite Universities Losing Their Competitive
     Edge? Journal of Financial Economics. Forthcoming.

Levin, S.G., P.E. Stephan, M.B. Walker. 1995. Plancks Principle Revisited - A Note. Social
     Studies of Science 25(2) 275-283.

Levin, S., W. Glanzel, P. Stephan, A. Winkler. 2009. The Diffusion of IT and the Increased
     Propensity of Teams to Transcend Institutional Boundaries Working Paper.

Levin S., P. Stephan, and A.Winkler. In Process. Innovation in Academe: The Diffusion of
     Internet Technologies.

Lieberson, S., E.O. Bell. 1992. Children's 1st Names - an Empirical Study of Social Taste.
     American Journal of Sociology 98(3) 511-554.

Murray, F., P.Aghion, M. Dewatripoint, J. Kolev and S. Stern, 2008. Of Mice and Academics:
     Examining the Effects of Openness on Innovation. Working Paper.

National Science Board, forthcoming, Science and Engineering Indicators 2010.

National Science Foundation. 2009. America’s Investment in the Future. Available at
     (www.nsf.gov/about/history/nsf0050/internet/launch.htm).

Redner, S. 1998. How Popular Is Your Paper? An Empirical Study of the Citation Distribution.
     European Physical Journal B 4:131–34.

Rogers, E. 2003. Diffusion of Innovations, 5th ed. Free Press, New York.


                                               22
Rosenblat, T.S., M.M. Mobius. 2004. Getting closer or drifting apart? Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 119(3) 971-1009.

Silva, J., S. Tenreyro. 2006. The Log of Gravity. Review of Economics and Statistics 88(4) 641-
      658.

Stephan, P., S. Levin. 1992. Striking the Mother Lode in Science: The Importance of Age, Place
     and Time. Oxford University Press, NY.

Stuart, T.E., W.W. Ding. 2006. When Do Scientists Become Entrepreneurs? The Social
      Structural Antecedents of Academic Entrepreneurship in the Academic Life Sciences.
      American Journal of Sociology 112(1): 97-144.

Walsh, J.P., T. Bayma. 1996. Computer Networks and Scientific Work. Social Studies of Science
     26(3) 661-703.

Walsh, J.P., S. Kucker, N.G. Maloney, S. Gabbay. 2000. Connecting Minds: Computer-Mediated
     Communication and Scientific Work. Journal of the American Society for Information
     Science 51(14) 1295-1305.

Winkler, A.E., S.G. Levin, P. Stephan. Forthcoming. The Diffusion of IT in Higher Education:
     Publishing Productivity of Academic Life Scientists. Economics of Innovation and New
     Technology.

Wooldridge, J.M. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge: The
    MIT Press.

Wuchty, S., B.F. Jones, B. Uzzi. 2007. The Increasing Dominance of Teams in Production of
    Knowledge. Science 316(5827) 1036-1039.




                                               23
                                               Table 1
                           Variable Definitions and Sources of Information
Variable Name                                        Description                                  Source
                              Number of research papers published by a scientist in a
Research Productivity                                                                         Web of Science
                              given year (publication flow)

                              Average journal impact factor (JIF) for papers published
Research Quality                                                                              Web of Science
                              by a scientist in a given year
                              Increase in the number of new coauthors found in a
                              scientist’s publications in a given year; for example, if A
                              and B appear for the first time in year t as a coauthor to
Co-authorship Gain            John Doe, Doe’s co-authorship gain value is 2 in year t;        Web of Science
                              however, if A and B have appeared in Doe’s papers
                              before year t, they are not counted as a co-authorship gain
                              for year t
                              Number of years elapsed from the year a scientist                UMI Proquest
Professional Experience
                              receives his Ph.D. degree                                        Dissertations
Female                        1 = Yes; 0 = No                                                Naming convention
                              Number of employers for which a scientist has worked
Number of Jobs                                                                                Web of Science
                              between Ph.D. grant year and the current year

                              Number of research papers published by a scientist
Publication Stock                                                                             Web of Science
                              between Ph.D. grant year and the current year
                              Average journal impact factor (JIF) for the papers
Avg. JIF of all past                                                                    Web of Science; Journal
                              published by a scientist between his Ph.D. grant year and
publications                                                                              Citation Reports
                              the current year

                              Predicted number of citations received per paper for all
                              papers published by a scientist between his Ph.D. grant
Average Citation Count                                                                        Web of Science
                              year and the current year; approximations are used to
                              construct this variable (details on page 13)

                              Number of co-authorship dyads in papers published by a
                              scientist between t-5 and t; for a paper written by a
                              scientist with two coauthors, two co-authorship dyads are
Past 5-year co-authoring ties counted; we then sum up the dyads in all papers by the          Web of Science
                              scientist during the past five years, regardless of whether
                              the scientist has repeated collaboration relations with
                              certain coauthors
                              Ranking categories of employer university (1-25, 26-50
Employer rank                                                                               The Gourman Reports
                              or outside of top 50)
BITNET                        1 = Employer university has adopted Bitnet; 0=otherwise       Atlas of Cyberspace
DNS                           1 = Employer university has adopted DNS; 0 = otherwise            ALLWHOIS
                                                                                               UMI Proquest
Ph.D. subject field           Field in which a scientist is awarded his Ph.D. degree
                                                                                                Dissertation
Year                          Calendar year




                                                        24
                                             Table 2
                                       Descriptive Statistics
                                                           Standard
Variable Name                                   Mean                     Min    Max
                                                           Deviation
Research Productivity (Publication flow)        1.587           2.208     0      35
Research Quality (Avg journal impact factor)    2.503           3.148     0     24.59
Co-authorship Gain                              2.308           4.273     0      170
Professional Experience                         8.344           5.762     1      26
Female                                          0.179           0.383     0       1
Number of Jobs                                  1.335           0.573     1       5
Publication Stock                               13.037          19.785    0      298
Avg. JIF of all past publications               3.325           2.773     0     24.59
Average Citation Count                          12.202          18.805    0     1270.1
Past 5-year co-authoring ties                   18.201          29.165    0      688
Employer rank 1-25                              0.273           0.445     0       1
Employer rank 26-50                             0.144           0.351     0       1
Employer rank outside 50                        0.583           0.493     0       1
BITNET                                          0.332           0.471     0       1
DNS                                             0.240           0.427     0       1
Year                                            1983.3          6.266    1968   1993




                                                25
                                                          Table 3
            Poisson Quasi-Maximum-Likelihood Estimate of Effect of Information Technology on Research Productivity
                                     (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (8)
                                   0.055       0.053       0.053        0.052       0.053                               0.049       0.048
Experience = 5-8 years
                                   (0.021)**   (0.021)*    (0.022)*     (0.021)*    (0.022)*                            (0.021)*    (0.022)*
                                   0.120       0.118       0.118        0.117       0.117                               0.109       0.108
Experience = 9-14 years
                                   (0.037)**   (0.037)**   (0.037)**    (0.037)**   (0.037)**                           (0.037)**   (0.037)**
                                   -0.064      -0.067      -0.067       -0.066      -0.067                              -0.080      -0.081
Experience = 15-20 years
                                   (0.044)     (0.045)     (0.045)      (0.045)     (0.045)                             (0.044)†    (0.044)†
                                   -0.237      -0.240      -0.240       -0.237      -0.237                              -0.256      -0.258
Experience = 21-26 years
                                   (0.058)**   (0.058)**   (0.058)**    (0.058)**   (0.058)**                           (0.058)**   (0.057)**
                                   -0.155      -0.155      -0.155       -0.197      -0.185      -0.157      -0.155      -0.154      -0.154
Female
                                   (0.034)**   (0.034)**   (0.034)**    (0.041)**   (0.039)**   (0.034)**   (0.034)**   (0.033)**   (0.033)**
                                   0.157       0.158       0.158        0.158       0.158       0.162       0.162       0.155       0.154
Number of jobs
                                   (0.026)**   (0.026)**   (0.025)**    (0.026)**   (0.025)**   (0.028)**   (0.027)**   (0.025)**   (0.025)**
                                   0.006       0.006       0.006        0.006       0.006       0.006       0.006       0.006       0.006
Publication Stockt-1
                                   (0.001)**   (0.001)**   (0.001)**    (0.001)**   (0.001)**   (0.001)**   (0.001)**   (0.001)**   (0.001)**
                                   0.001       0.001       0.001        0.001       0.001       0.001       0.001       0.001       0.001
Average Citation Countt-1
                                   (0.001)*    (0.001)*    (0.001)*     (0.001)*    (0.001)*    (0.001)*    (0.001)*    (0.001)*    (0.001)*
                                   0.007       0.007       0.007        0.007       0.007       0.007       0.007       0.007       0.007
Past 5-year co-authoring tiest-1
                                   (0.001)**   (0.001)**   (0.001)**    (0.001)**   (0.001)**   (0.001)**   (0.001)**   (0.001)**   (0.001)**
                                   0.043       0.044       0.045        0.044       0.045       0.046       0.045
Employer rank 26-50
                                   (0.037)     (0.037)     (0.036)      (0.037)     (0.036)     (0.037)     (0.037)
                                   -0.057      -0.049      -0.049       -0.049      -0.049      -0.049      -0.046
Employer rank outside top 50
                                   (0.030)†    (0.029)†    (0.028)†     (0.029)     (0.028)†    (0.030)     (0.029)
                                               0.034       0.034        0.018       0.034                   0.037                   0.048
BITNETt-1
                                               (0.030)     (0.027)      (0.033)     (0.027)                 (0.027)                 (0.028)†
                                                           0.0004                   -0.015
DNSt-1
                                                           (0.037)                  (0.039)
                                                                        0.102
Female × BITNETt-1
                                                                        (0.048)*
                                                                                    0.099
Female × DNSt-1
                                                                                    (0.048)*
                                                                                                0.022
Exp 1-4 years × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                (0.049)
Exp 5-8 years × BITNETt-1                                                                       0.054


                                                                       26
                                                                                                                 (0.036)
                                                                                                                 0.147
Exp 9-14 years × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                                 (0.034)**
                                                                                                                 -0.046
Exp 15-20 years × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                                 (0.046)
                                                                                                                 -0.190
Exp 21-26 years × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                                 (0.078)*
                                                                                                                               0.016
Exp 1-4 years × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                               (0.061)
                                                                                                                               0.023
Exp 5-8 years × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                               (0.046)
                                                                                                                               0.145
Exp 9-14 years × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                               (0.034)**
                                                                                                                               -0.071
Exp 15-20 years × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                               (0.057)
                                                                                                                               -0.196
Exp 21-26 years × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                               (0.087)*
                                                                                                                                              0.011
Employer rank 1-25 × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                                                              (0.051)
                                                                                                                                              0.162
Employer rank 26-50 × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                                                              (0.040)**
                                                                                                                                              0.061
Employer outside 50 × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                                                              (0.031)†
                                                                                                                                                            -0.051
Employer rank 1-25 × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                                                            (0.064)
                                                                                                                                                            0.140
Employer rank 26-50 × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                                                            (0.042)**
                                                                                                                                                            0.041
Employer outside 50 × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                                                            (0.034)
                                        -0.666        -0.672         -0.672        -0.668         -0.670         -0.678        -0.680         -0.695        -0.694
Constant
                                        (0.208)**     (0.208)**      (0.208)**     (0.208)**      (0.208)**      (0.208)**     (0.208)**      (0.205)**     (0.205)**
Log Pseudo-Likelihood                   -77781.3      -77776.7       -77776.7      -77765.2       -77767.1       -77853.4      -77866.4       -7777.2       -77765.7
Wald Chi2                               2758.9        2808.4         2809.0        2791.0         2804.8         2188.9        2304.4         2930.9        3018.2
Number of covariates                    43            44             45            45             46             44            45             44            45
Notes: (1) Number of observations = 46,301; number of researchers = 3,771; number of institutions = 430. (2) All models control for calendar year dummies and
Ph.D. subject field dummies. (3) Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered around scientists. (4) † significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at
1%.

                                                                                 27
                                                          Table 4
                Poisson Quasi-Maximum-Likelihood Estimate of Effect of Information Technology on Research Quality
                                         (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)
                                       -0.185       -0.184       -0.184        -0.184       -0.184                                 -0.191       -0.192
Experience = 5-8 years
                                       (0.018)**    (0.018)**    (0.018)**     (0.018)**    (0.018)**                              (0.018)**    (0.018)**
                                       -0259        -0257        -0257         -0257        -0257                                  -0269        -0271
Experience = 9-14 years
                                       (0.024)**    (0.024)**    (0.024)**     (0.024)**    (0.024)**                              (0.024)**    (0.024)**
                                       -0.346       -0.344       -0.344        -0.344       -0.344                                 -0.357       -0.359
Experience = 15-20 years
                                       (0.032)**    (0.032)**    (0.032)**     (0.032)**    (0.032)**                              (0.032)**    (0.033)**
                                       -0.420       -0.418       -0.418        -0.418       -0.418                                 -0.431       -0.432
Experience = 21-26 years
                                       (0.051)**    (0.051)**    (0.051)**     (0.051)**    (0.051)**                              (0.051)**    (0.051)**
                                       -0.046       -0.046       -0.046        -0.046       -0.047       -0.036       -0.034       -0.046       -0.045
Female
                                       (0.021)*     (0.021)*     (0.021)*      (0.026)†     (0.024)*     (0.022)†     (0.022)      (0.021)*     (0.021)*
                                       0.108        0.107        0.107         0.107        0.107        0.076        0.073        0.107        0.106
Number of jobs
                                       (0.015)**    (0.015)**    (0.015)**     (0.015)**    (0.015)**    (0.015)**    (0.015)**    (0.015)**    (0.015)**
                                       -0.001       -0.001       -0.001        -0.001       -0.001       -0.002       -0.003       -0.001       -0.001
Publication Stockt-1
                                       (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)**    (0.001)**    (0.001)      (0.001)
                                       0.087        0.087        0.087         0.087        0.087        0.087        0.087        0.088        0.088
Avg. JIF of all past publicationst-1
                                       (0.003)**    (0.003)**    (0.003)**     (0.003)**    (0.003)**    (0.003)**    (0.003)**    (0.003)**    (0.003)**
                                       0.002        0.002        0.002         0.002        0.002        0.002        0.002        0.002        0.002
Average Citation Countt-1
                                       (0.0004)**   (0.0004)**   (0.0004)**    (0.0004)**   (0.0004)**   (0.0003)**   (0.0003)**   (0.0004)**   (0.0004)**
                                       0.005        0.005        0.005         0.005        0.005        0.006        0.006        0.005        0.005
Past 5-year co-authoring tiest-1
                                       (0.001)**    (0.001)**    (0.001)**     (0.001)**    (0.001)**    (0.001)**    (0.001)**    (0.001)**    (0.001)**
                                       -0.082       -0.084       -0.084        -0.084       -0.084       -0.088       -0.090
Employer rank 26-50
                                       (0.024)**    (0.024)**    (0.024)**     (0.023)**    (0.024)**    (0.024)**    (0.024)**
                                       -0.154       -0.160       -0.161        -0.160       -0.161       -0.176       -0.179
Employer rank outside top 50
                                       (0.019)**    (0.019)**    (0.019)**     (0.019)**    (0.019)**    (0.019)**    (0.019)**
                                                    -0.027       -0.023        -0.027       -0.023                    -0.036                    0.012
BITNETt-1
                                                    (0.021)      (0.022)       (0.022)      (0.022)                   (0.022)                   (0.022)
                                                                 -0.009                     -0.010
DNSt-1
                                                                 (0.024)                    (0.025)
                                                                               -0.001
Female × BITNETt-1
                                                                               (0.035)
                                                                                            0.004
Female × DNSt-1
                                                                                            (0.037)
                                                                                                         0.101
Exp 1-4 years × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                         (0.036)**


                                                                              28
                                                                                                                 -0.031
Exp 5-8 years × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                                 (0.029)
                                                                                                                 -0.045
Exp 9-14 years × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                                 (0.024)†
                                                                                                                 -0.107
Exp 15-20 years × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                                 (0.030)**
                                                                                                                 -0.186
Exp 21-26 years × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                                 (0.045)**
                                                                                                                               0.135
Exp 1-4 years × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                               (0.044)**
                                                                                                                               -0.031
Exp 5-8 years × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                               (0.037)
                                                                                                                               -0.011
Exp 9-14 years × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                               (0.028)
                                                                                                                               -0056
Exp 15-20 years × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                               (0.032)†
                                                                                                                               -0.124
Exp 21-26 years × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                               (0.045)**
                                                                                                                                              0.107
Employer rank 1-25 × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                                                              (0.026)**
                                                                                                                                              0.037
Employer rank 26-50 × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                                                              (0.031)
                                                                                                                                              -0.056
Employer outside 50 × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                                                              (0.026)*
                                                                                                                                                            0.100
Employer rank 1-25 × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                                                            (0.030)**
                                                                                                                                                            0.041
Employer rank 26-50 × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                                                            (0.037)
                                                                                                                                                            -0.044
Employer outside 50 × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                                                            (0.029)
                                        0.490         0.494          0.4994        0.494          0.494          0.529         0.533          0.381         0.382
Constant
                                        (0.199)*      (0.199)*       (0.199)*      (0.199)*       (0.199)*       (0.199)**     (0.198)**      (0.199)†      (0.199)†
Log Pseudo-Likelihood                   -115335.3     -115330.9      -115330.6     -115330.9      -115330.6      -115737.2     -115763.3      -115483.9     -115528.0
Wald Chi2                               2059.7        2077.6         2078.8        2079.7         2080.5         2049.5        2045.6         1977.6        1959.9
Number of covariates                    44            45             46            46             47             45            46             45            46
Notes: (1) Number of observations = 46,301; number of researchers = 3,771; number of institutions = 430. (2) All models control for calendar year dummies and
Ph.D. subject field dummies. (3) Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered around scientists. (4) † significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at
1%.

                                                                                 29
                                                          Table 5
             Poisson Quasi-Maximum-Likelihood Estimate of Effect of Information Technology on Co-authorship Gain
                                     (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)
                                   0.100       0.096       0.097        0.094       0.096                               0.094       0.094
Experience = 5-8 years
                                   (0.027)**   (0.027)**   (0.027)**    (0.027)**   (0.027)**                           (0.027)**   (0.027)**
                                   0.133       0.127       0.129        0.126       0.128                               0.124       0.124
Experience = 9-14 years
                                   (0.042)**   (0.043)**   (0.044)**    (0.043)**   (0.043)**                           (0.043)**   (0.043)**
                                   -0.040      -0.046      -0.045       -0.046      -0.045                              -0.051      -0.053
Experience = 15-20 years
                                   (0.047)     (0.048)     (0.048)      (0.048)     (0.048)                             (0.047)     (0.047)
                                   -0.207      -0.213      -0.212       -0.209      -0.207                              -0.220      -0.222
Experience = 21-26 years
                                   (0.072)**   (0.072)**   (0.072)**    (0.072)**   (0.073)**                           (0.072)**   (0.072)**
                                   -0.087      -0.087      -0.087       -0.150      -0.141      -0.093      -0.091      -0.087      -0.086
Female
                                   (0.038)*    (0.038)*    (0.038)*     (0.049)**   (0.046)**   (0.039)*    (0.039)*    (0.038)*    (0.038)*
                                   0.172       0.174       0.173        0.173       0.173       0.186       0.181       0.172       0.171
Number of jobs
                                   (0.031)**   (0.030)**   (0.030)**    (0.030)**   (0.030)**   (0.033)**   (0.032)**   (0.030)**   (0.029)**
                                   0.002       0.002       0.002        0.002       0.002       0.002       0.002       0.002       0.002
Publication Stockt-1
                                   (0.001)*    (0.001)*    (0.001)*     (0.001)*    (0.001)*    (0.001)*    (0.001)*    (0.001)*    (0.001)*
                                   0.001       0.001       0.001        0.001       0.001       0.001       0.001       0.001       0.001
Average Citation Countt-1
                                   (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
                                   0.009       0.009       0.009        0.009       0.009       0.009       0.009       0.009       0.009
Past 5-year co-authoring tiest-1
                                   (0.001)**   (0.001)**   (0.001)**    (0.001)**   (0.001)**   (0.001)**   (0.001)**   (0.001)**   (0.001)**
                                   0.025       0.028       0.027        0.028       0.027       0.034       0.032
Employer rank 26-50
                                   (0.042)     (0.042)     (0.041)      (0.042)     (0.041)     (0.043)     (0.042)
                                   -0.031      -0.016      -0.021       -0.016      -0.021      -0.012      -0.013
Employer rank outside top 50
                                   (0.035)     (0.032)     (0.032)      (0.032)     (0.032)     (0.033)     (0.032)
                                               0.058       0.074        0.035       0.074                   0.082                   0.081
BITNETt-1
                                               (0.039)     (0.033)*     (0.042)     (0.034)*                (0.034)*                (0.033)*
                                                           -0.037                   -0.062
DNSt-1
                                                           (0.041)                  (0.044)
                                                                        0.135
Female × BITNETt-1
                                                                        (0.057)*
                                                                                    0.150
Female × DNSt-1
                                                                                    (0.055)**
                                                                                                0.205
Exp 1-4 years × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                (0.059)**
Exp 5-8 years × BITNETt-1                                                                       0.132


                                                                       30
                                                                                                                 (0.043)**
                                                                                                                 0.140
Exp 9-14 years × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                                 (0.042)**
                                                                                                                 -0.055
Exp 15-20 years × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                                 (0.062)
                                                                                                                 -0.185
Exp 21-26 years × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                                 (0.077) *
                                                                                                                               0.116
Exp 1-4 years × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                               (0.067)†
                                                                                                                               0.094
Exp 5-8 years × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                               (0.051)†
                                                                                                                               0.069
Exp 9-14 years × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                               (0.042)
                                                                                                                               -0.137
Exp 15-20 years × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                               (0.068)*
                                                                                                                               -0.291
Exp 21-26 years × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                               (0.078)**
                                                                                                                                              0.043
Employer rank 1-25 × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                                                              (0.058)
                                                                                                                                              0.125
Employer rank 26-50 × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                                                              (0.048)**
                                                                                                                                              0.067
Employer outside 50 × BITNETt-1
                                                                                                                                              (0.040)†
                                                                                                                                                            -0.067
Employer rank 1-25 × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                                                            (0.064)
                                                                                                                                                            0.038
Employer rank 26-50 × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                                                            (0.051)
                                                                                                                                                            -0.015
Employer below 50 × DNSt-1
                                                                                                                                                            (0.040)
                                        -2.133        -2.144         -2.140        -2.138         -2.135         -2.158        -2.153         -2.149        -2.148
Constant
                                        (0.571)**     (0.571)**      (0.571)**     (0.571)**      (0.571)**      (0.571)**     (0.571)**      (0.570)**     (0.570)**
Log Pseudo-Likelihood                   -116978.4     -116957.5      -116952.3     -116925.6      -116915.3      -117020.1     -117015.5      -116949.5     -116939.5
Wald Chi2                               3612.6        3702.6         3709.9        3690.0         3720.6         2921.0        3044.0         3771.8        3788.2
Number of covariates                    43            44             45            45             46             44            45             44            45
Notes: (1) Number of observations = 46,301; number of researchers = 3,771; number of institutions = 430. (2) All models control for calendar year dummies and
Ph.D. subject field dummies. (3) Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered around scientists. (4) † significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at
1%.

                                                                                 31
                       Fig.1 Diffusion of BITNET and DNS




Legend. Cumulative percentage of institutions adopting BITNET and DNS. Diffusion patterns
are graphed for all institutions (black with squares), institutions ranked in top-25 (red with
circles), institutions ranked between 26 and 50 (light blue with triangles), and institutions not
ranked (dark blue with diamonds), by the Gourman Report.




                                             32
       Fig.2. Effects of BITNET and DNS on Scientists’ Research Patterns




Legend. Effect g implies predicted count of publication flow (productivity), average journal impact
factor for publication flow (quality) and gain in new co-authors (collaboration pattern) changes by a
factor of g (or [g-1]*100 percent) when BITNET or DNS becomes available to a scientist in a specified
group. 95% confidence intervals of the estimates are indicated by the caps on the spikes. Predictors are
statistically significant at the 5% level if 1.0 falls outside the confidence interval. (Full regression results
are provided in models 6-9 of tables 2, 4 and 5).




                                                      33
                        Appendix 1. Sample Representativeness

        We randomly drew scientists’ names from UMI’s Proquest Dissertations Database, which
includes the names, fields, and degree-granting institutions for almost all doctoral degree
recipients from accredited U.S. universities. The field and degree years sampled were chosen in
proportions that matched the distribution of Ph.D. fields and graduation years for faculty serving
on the Scientific Advisory Board (SAB) of biotechnology companies that made initial public
offerings between the years 1970 and 2002. The sampling frame was structured in this way
because the initial research project was designed to study university faculty members’
engagement in the commercialization of academic science.

         Table A1 reports, in order of their representation in the sample, the 15 scientific
disciplines that appear most frequently in our data. To determine the degree to which our sample
reflects the underlying population of life scientists, we compare these fields to NSF data (see
Column 4). We first note that with the exception of organic chemistry and psychobiology, all
fields are considered to be in the life, or related sciences, according to NSF’s standardized codes
used in SESTAT (see http://sestat.nsf.gov/docs/educode2.html for detailed information of the
fields in this group). We also compare the distribution of degrees in our sample to the
classification and distribution of degrees awarded at U.S. universities between 1965 and 1990 as
measured in the Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED). See Column (5). We find that, with the
exception of organic chemistry, psychobiology and health sciences/pharmacy, our fields are
classified by the SED as part of the life sciences. Column (6) of the table reports the ranking of a
field in terms of degrees awarded during the period as reported by the SED. We find
considerable, although not complete overlap, between our top fields and SED’s top fields. For
example, biochemistry contributes the largest number of cases to our sample (23%) and it is also
the field in the life sciences with the largest number of doctoral awards in the SED data from
1965 to 1990. The second largest group of doctoral awards in the SED data is microbiology,
which ranks third in our data. We conclude that our sample does not differ markedly from the
underlying population of life scientists working in academe. To the extent that there is a bias, it
is towards fields that are at the forefront of technological developments. We see this as an
advantage in our study since scientists in such fields tend to have more extensive information
about new technologies (including innovations in IT) and thus may be more disposed to put them
to use.




                                                34
                                                  Table A1
                                 Top 15 Scientific Disciplines in the Sample

        (1)                (2)                       (3)                (4)             (5)            (6)
                                                                Classified as “Life Classified as
                                                                                                   Rank in SED
     UMI Ph.D.                                 Frequency and       and Related         “Life
                 UMI Subject Description                                                            Based on
    Subject Code                              Share in Sample   Sciences” by NSF Sciences” in
                                                                               †            ††    Representation
                                                                   in SESTAT           SED
      487; 303   Biochemistry                  845   (22.8%)            Yes             Yes             1
        306      Biology, General              563   (15.2%)            Yes             Yes             7
        410      Biology, Microbiology         455   (12.3%)            Yes             Yes             2
                 Health Sciences,
        419                                    234    (6.3%)           Yes              Yes              5
                 Pharmacology
        786      Biophysics, General           208    (5.6%)           Yes              Yes             16
        490      Chemistry, Organic            198    (5.3%)           No               No              ---
        369      Biology, Genetics             175    (4.7%)           Yes              Yes             15
        433      Biology, Animal Physiology    166    (4.5%)           Yes              Yes              3
                 Health Sciences,
        982                                    152    (4.1%)           Yes              Yes             18
                 Immunology
        307      Biology, Molecular            67     (1.8%)           Yes              Yes              6
        301      Bacteriology                  61     (1.6%)           Yes              Yes             42
        287      Biology, Anatomy              53     (1.4%)           Yes              Yes             14
        571      Health Sciences, Pathology    51     (1.4%)           Yes              Yes             24
        349      Psychology, Psychobiology     36     (1.0%)           No               No              ---
        572      Health Sciences, Pharmacy     33     (0.9%)           Yes              No              ---

†
 Source: “Education Code and Groups”, http://sestat.nsf.gov/docs/educode2.html; NSF codes are more broadly
defined, and some of the subfields are grouped into the “Other” category, e.g., bacteriology (301), anatomy (287)
health sciences-immunology (982), and health sciences-pathology (571).††Source: Statistical tables based on NSF’s
Survey of Earned Doctorates (1965-1990) reported in Science and Engineering Doctorates: 1960-1986 (NSF 88-303)
and Selected Data on Science and Engineering Doctorate Awards: 1994 (NSF 95-337). There is no “health sciences”
category in SED, but some of the fields listed under “health sciences” in our (UMI Proquest) sample do correspond to
SED’s subfields under “biological sciences.” For example, health sciences-pharmacology (419) in our data
corresponds to SED’s human/animal pharmacology; health sciences-immunology (982) corresponds to SED’s
biological immunology; health sciences-pathology (571) corresponds to SED’s human/animal pathology.




                                                           35
