                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         SPRING CLEANING:
  RURAL WATER IMPACTS, VALUATION AND PROPERTY RIGHTS INSTITUTIONS

                                          Michael Kremer
                                            Jessica Leino
                                          Edward Miguel
                                        Alix Peterson Zwane

                                        Working Paper 15280
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15280


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                                             August 2009
This research is supported by the Hewlett Foundation, USDA/Foreign Agricultural Service, International
Child Support, Swedish International Development Agency, Finnish Fund for Local Cooperation in
Kenya, google.org, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, and the Sustainability Science Initiative
at the Harvard Center for International Development. We thank Alicia Bannon, Jeff Berens, Lorenzo
Casaburi, Carmem Domingues, Willa Friedman, Francois Gerard, Anne Healy, Jonas Hjort, Jie Ma,
Clair Null, Owen Ozier, Camille Pannu, Changcheng Song, Eric Van Dusen, Melanie Wasserman,
and Heidi Williams for excellent research assistance, and thank the field staff, especially Polycarp
Waswa and Leonard Bukeke. Jack Colford, Alain de Janvry, Giacomo DiGiorgi, Esther Duflo, Liran
Einav, Andrew Foster, Michael Greenstone, Avner Greif, Michael Hanemann, Danson Irungu, Ethan
Ligon, Steve Luby, Chuck Manski, Enrico Moretti, Kara Nelson, Aviv Nevo, Sheila Olmstead, Ariel
Pakes, Judy Peterson, Pascaline Dupas, Rob Quick, Mark Rosenzweig, Elisabeth Sadoulet, Sandra
Spence, Duncan Thomas, Ken Train, Chris Udry, and many seminar participants have provided helpful
comments. Opinions presented here are those of the authors and not those of the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation or its leadership. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Michael Kremer, Jessica Leino, Edward Miguel, and Alix Peterson Zwane. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Spring Cleaning: Rural Water Impacts, Valuation and Property Rights Institutions
Michael Kremer, Jessica Leino, Edward Miguel, and Alix Peterson Zwane
NBER Working Paper No. 15280
August 2009
JEL No. C93,H75,O13,Q25,Q51

                                              ABSTRACT

In many societies, social norms create common property rights in natural resources, limiting incentives
for private investment. This paper uses a randomized evaluation in Kenya to measure the health impacts
of investments to improve source water quality through spring protection, estimate the value that households
place on spring protection, and simulate the welfare impacts of alternative water property rights norms
and institutions, including common property, freehold private property, and alternative “Lockean”
property rights norms. We find that infrastructure investments reduce fecal contamination by 66%
at naturally occurring springs, cutting child diarrhea by one quarter. While households increase their
use of protected springs, travel-cost based revealed preference estimates of households’ valuations
are only one-half stated preference valuations and are much smaller than levels implied by health planners’
typical valuations of child mortality, consistent with models in which the demand for health is highly
income elastic. Simulations suggest that, at current income levels, private property norms would generate
little additional investment while imposing large static costs due to spring owners’ local market power,
but that private property norms might function better than common property at higher income levels.
 Alternative institutions, such as “modified Lockean” property rights, government investment or vouchers
for improved water, could yield higher social welfare.


Michael Kremer                                       Edward Miguel
Harvard University                                   Department of Economics
Department of Economics                              University of California, Berkeley
Littauer Center M20                                  508-1 Evans Hall #3880
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                             and NBER
mkremer@fas.harvard.edu                              emiguel@econ.berkeley.edu

Jessica Leino                                        Alix Peterson Zwane
The World Bank                                       Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
1818 H Street, NW                                    PO Box 23350
Washington DC 20433                                  Seattle, WA 98102
jessica.leino@gmail.com                              azwane@gmail.com
1. Introduction
Many view movement toward private property rights institutions as critical to successful economic
development (De Soto, 1989, North, 1990). Yet social norms and formal laws often create communal
property rights in natural resources. In Islamic law, for example, the sale of water is generally not
permitted (Faruqui, Biswas, and Bino 2001), and in societies from Tsarist Russia to contemporary
west and southern Africa, land is periodically reallocated among families based on assessments of
need (e.g., Adams et al. 1999, Bartlett 1990, Fafchamps and Gavian 1996, Peters 2007). Some argue
that communities often develop effective institutions for addressing collective action problems
around common property resource use (Ostrom 1990).
        In Kenya, both social norms and law make many water sources, including naturally occurring
springs, common property resources (Mumma 2005). This potentially discourages private
investment in water infrastructure, such as the spring protection technology we examine. Protection
seals off the source of a spring and thus reduces water contamination. On the other hand, communal
property rights in water also limit static inefficiencies due to exploitation of local market power.
        This paper makes four principal contributions. First, we provide what to our knowledge is the
only evidence from a randomized impact evaluation on the health benefits of a source water quality
intervention, a significant area of government and donor investment in less developed countries.
Second, we provide among the first revealed preference estimates of the value of child health gains
and a statistical life in a poor country. Our estimates fall far below those typically used by health
economists in assessing cost effectiveness of health policies and suggest that the demand for health is
highly income elastic, as argued by Hall and Jones (2007). Third, we contribute to the literature on
the valuation of environmental amenities, providing evidence on the divergence between revealed
and stated preference valuation for water-related interventions. Finally, we combine data from our
randomized experiment with structural econometric methods used by Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes
(1995) and others1 to explore the implications of alternative property rights regimes in natural
resources, shedding light on the role of social norms and institutions in economic development
(Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson 2001).



1
  Several recent papers combine data from randomized experiments with structural econometric methods in
development economics, the best known probably being Todd and Wolpin (2006), who use experimental estimates
from Mexico to validate a structural model of educational investment. We do not seek to validate a particular model
in this paper, but rather combine experimental results with a structural model of water infrastructure investment to
explore the implications of alternative property rights institutions on social welfare.


                                                                                                                  1
         Policymakers have called for more investment in water infrastructure in less developed
countries to provide cleaner water and reduce water-borne diseases such as diarrhea, which accounts
for 20% of deaths of children under five each year (Bryce et al. 2005). Progress towards the sole
quantifiable environmental Millennium Development Goal is currently measured by the percentage
of population living near improved water sources such as protected springs. Yet there is controversy
about the health value of improvements that fall short of piping treated water into the home. In the
absence of evidence from randomized trials, several influential reviews argue based on non-
experimental evidence that there may be little point in investing in other water infrastructure because
diarrhea is affected more by the quantity of water available for washing than by drinking water
quality (Curtis, Carincross, and Yonli 2000); improved water supply has little impact without good
sanitation and hygiene (Esrey 1996, Esrey et al. 1991); and water recontamination in transport and
storage may dampen some of the benefits of improved source water quality (Fewtrell et al. 2004).
         As the first (to our knowledge) randomized evaluation of a source water quality investment,
the data used in this paper allow us to isolate the impact of a single intervention affecting the quality
but not quantity of water, and to assess child health impacts.2 We find that spring protection greatly
improves water quality at the source, reducing fecal contamination by 66%, and is moderately
effective at improving household water quality, reducing contamination 24%. Diarrhea among young
children in treatment households falls by 4.7 percentage points, or nearly one quarter on a base
diarrhea prevalence of approximately 19 percent. The incomplete pass through of spring-level water
gains into the home is due both to households’ collection of water from multiple sources and to
partial recontamination of the water in transport and storage. There is no evidence that spring
protection crowds out household water treatment measures such as boiling or chlorination. There is
also no evidence that improved sanitation coverage or hygiene knowledge allows households to
better translate source water quality gains into larger improvements in household water quality.
         The second part of this paper focuses on the valuation of environmental amenities. In our
study area, most households choose from multiple local water sources. The intervention we study
generates exogenous variation in the relative desirability of alternative sources, and we explore how
household water source choices respond to these water quality improvements. A discrete choice
model, in which households trade off water quality against walking distance to the source, generates


2
 Two prospective studies of source water quality interventions find positive child health impacts (Aziz et al. 1990,
Huttly et al. 1987), but the published articles do not mention if the treatment villages were randomly selected, and
generalizing to other settings is hampered by their small sample sizes (five villages each), and they evaluate
improved water quality and quantity simultaneously.


                                                                                                                       2
revealed preference estimates of household valuations of better water quality. Households’ estimated
mean annual valuation for spring protection is equivalent to 32.4 workdays. Based on household
reports on the tradeoffs they face between money and walking time, this corresponds to
approximately US$2.96 per household per year. Under some stronger assumptions this translates to
an upper bound of $0.89 on households’ mean willingness to pay to avert one child diarrhea episode,
and $769 on the mean value of averting one statistical child death, or $23.68 to avert the loss of one
disability-adjusted life year (DALY). These fall far below the values typically used in health cost-
effectiveness analyses in low-income countries, where investments that prevent the loss of one
DALY for less than $100 or $150 are often assumed to be appropriate. These results are consistent
with an income elasticity of demand for health far greater than one.
         We contrast the revealed preference valuation of spring protection, which exploits
experimental variation in water source characteristics, with two stated preference methodologies:
stated ranking of alternative water sources, and contingent valuation (Carson et al. 1996, Whitehead
2006). Most valuation estimates rely on such stated preference data, which is relatively cheap to
collect, yet few stated preference estimates have been validated against reliable benchmarks since
revealed preference data is rarely available in less developed countries, and many studies that do
exist are prone to omitted variable bias critiques.3 We find that stated preference approaches generate
much higher valuations than revealed preference estimates, by a factor of two, with contingent
valuation yielding especially imprecise estimates, casting doubt on their reliability in this setting.
         Our final set of results simulates the impact of alternative social norms and property rights
institutions in the rural water sector. We first show that a social planner maximizing welfare as
captured by our revealed preference valuation estimates would only protect springs with a relatively
large number of household users, but that a paternalistic social planner who valued health at the
levels typically used by health planners would protect many more springs. Using the household water
demand system derived from the revealed preference valuations, we then conduct counterfactual
simulations and find that alternative property rights institutions have important social welfare

3
  Madajewicz et al (2007) find considerable responsiveness to information on water source arsenic contamination in
household water source choices in Bangladesh. Whittington, Mu, and Roche (1990) and Mu, Whittington, and
Briscoe (1990) each study water source choice in rural Africa using a contingent valuation (CV) approach.
However, neither considers water quality in the source choice decision and they explicitly rule out multiple drinking
water sources, which we find to be empirically important. Choe (1996) compares willingness to pay for reduced
river and lake pollution in an urban Philippines setting with piped water, using both travel cost and CV methods, and
finds that both are similarly low but this may not generalize to rural areas. Two other papers have compared averting
expenditure data to stated willingness to pay (Griffin et al. 1995 and Rosado et al. 2006 in India and Brazil,
respectively), though neither exploits experimental variation in water quality. Diamond and Hausman (1994) discuss
the limitations of stated preference approaches to measuring the value of non-market goods.


                                                                                                                   3
consequences. We first find that a freehold private property rights norm would yield lower social
welfare than existing communal rights because the static losses from spring owners pricing above
marginal cost outweigh the dynamic benefits of greater water infrastructure investment incentives,
providing a rationale for why communal water norms in rural Africa have not generally been
displaced by private property rights. However, we estimate that as demand for clean water rises – for
instance, at higher income levels – private property norms do yield higher social welfare than
common property norms, potentially shedding light on the role that underlying economic conditions
might play in the evolution of social norms and institutions.
        We also show that an alternative “modified Lockean” norm under which spring owners can
charge for protected spring water only if they also allow continued free access to unprotected water
generates a Pareto improvement relative to existing communal property norms. Finally, public
investment or a government-financed voucher system for spring users could approximate the solution
for either a social planner who respects households’ spring protection valuations or a paternalistic
planner who places extra value on child health.
        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the intervention and data. Section 3
presents spring protection impacts on water quality and child health. Section 4 discusses the effect of
protection on water source choice and estimates the willingness to pay for spring protection. Section
5 presents social welfare under alternative institutions, and the final section concludes.

2. Rural Water Project (RWP) overview and data
This section describes the intervention, randomization into treatment groups, and data collection.

2. 1 Spring protection in western Kenya
Spring protection is widely used in non-arid regions of Africa to improve water quality at existing
spring sources (Mwami 1995, Lenehan and Martin 1997, UNEP 1998). Protection seals off the
source of a naturally occurring spring and encases it in concrete so that water flows out from a pipe
rather than seeping from the ground, where it is vulnerable to contamination when people dip vessels
into the water to scoop out water and when runoff from the surrounding area introduces human or
animal waste into the area. As spring protection technology has no moving parts, it requires far less
maintenance than other water infrastructure such as pumps.
       Naturally occurring springs are an important source of drinking water in rural western Kenya.
Approximately 43% of rural western Kenyan households use springs for drinking water and over
90% have access to springs (DHS 2003). Survey respondents in our study area report that springs are


                                                                                                        4
their main source of water: 72% of all water collection trips are to springs. The next most common
source are shallow wells (at 13%), followed by boreholes (7%), and surface water sources such as
rivers, lakes and ponds (5%). Over 81% of all water collection trips in the last week are to sources
the respondents used for drinking water (as opposed to strictly for other household needs).
        Most springs in our study area are located on private land. In Kenya, property rights to land
and other natural resources are governed by a combination of traditional customary law and formal
legal statutes (Mumma 2005). Not only does custom require that private landowners allow public
access to water sources on their land, but also under Kenyan law local authorities can “where, in the
opinion of the Authority the public interest would be best served” order water source owners to make
water available “to any applicant so long as the water use of the owner of the works is not adversely
affected.” In practice landowners in our study area are expected to make spring water available to
neighbors for free.4 Spring water simply runs off if not collected. However, this implies that spring
owners have weak incentives to improve water sources, as they are unable to recoup the costs of any
investment via the collection of user fees.
        This study is based on a randomized evaluation of a spring protection project conducted by a
non-governmental organization (NGO), International Child Support (ICS). As implemented by ICS,
spring protection included installing fencing and drainage and organizing a user maintenance
committee, in addition to the actual construction. Spring protection cost an average of US$1024 (s.d.
$85), with some variation depending on land characteristics. All communities contributed 10% of
project costs, mainly in the form of manual labor. After construction, the committees undertake
routine maintenance, including simple patching of concrete, cleaning the catchment area, and
clearing drainage ditches. These costs are roughly $35 per year, and are typically expected to be
covered by local contributions, although free rider problems in collecting these funds are common.


2.2 The study sample and assignment to treatment
Springs for this study were selected from the universe of local unprotected springs. The NGO first
obtained Kenya Ministry of Water and Irrigation lists of all local unprotected springs in Busia and
Butere-Mumias districts. NGO technical staff then visited each site to determine which springs were
suitable for protection. Springs known to be seasonally dry were eliminated, as were sites with
upstream contaminants (e.g., latrines, graves). From the remaining suitable springs, 200 were


4
 However, in another rural Kenyan region, local officials do sometimes permit landowners to charge for access to
spring water once the landowners have invested in spring protection (personal communication with Scott Lee).


                                                                                                                   5
randomly selected (using a computer random number generator) to receive protection. Permission for
protection was received from the spring landowner in all but two cases.
           The NGO planned for the water quality improvement intervention to be phased in over four
years due to their financial and administrative constraints. Although all springs were eventually
protected, for our analysis the springs protected in round 1 (January-April 2005) and round 2
(August-November 2005) are called the treatment springs and those that were protected later are the
comparison group.5 To address concerns about seasonal variation in water quality and disease
burden, all springs were stratified geographically and by treatment group and then randomly assigned
to an activity “wave,” and all project activities and data collection were conducted by wave.
         Several springs were unexpectedly found to be unsuitable for protection after the baseline data
collection and randomization had already occurred. These springs, which were found in both the
treatment and comparison groups, were dropped from the sample, leaving 184 viable springs.
Identification of the final sample of viable springs is not related to treatment assignment: when the
NGO was first informed that some springs were seasonally dry, all 200 sample springs were re-
visited to confirm their suitability for protection. In only 10 springs among the final sample of 184
viable springs did treatment assignment differ from actual treatment (for example because
landowners refused to allow protection, or the government independently protected comparison
springs); these springs are retained in the sample and we conduct an intention-to-treat analysis
throughout. Table 1 presents baseline summary statistics for the treatment and comparison groups.6
           A representative sample of households that regularly used each sample spring was selected at
baseline. Survey enumerators interviewed users at each spring, asking their names as well as the
names of other household users. Enumerators elicited additional information on spring users from the
three to four households located nearest to the spring. Households that were named at least twice
among all interviewed subjects were designated as “spring users”. The number of household spring
users varied from eight to 59 with a mean of 31. Seven to eight households per spring were randomly
selected from this spring user list for the household sample we use. In subsequent surveys, over 98%
of this sample was found to actually use the spring at least sometimes; the few non-users were
nonetheless retained in the analysis. The spring user list is reasonably representative of all
households living near sample springs. In a census of all households living near nine sample springs
that was conducted near the end of data collection, 71% of households living less than a 20 minute


5
    Appendix Figure 1 summarizes the project timeline.
6
    Additional details about the randomization into treatment groups are in Supplementary Appendix A.


                                                                                                        6
walk from the source were included in the original spring users lists, with even higher rates of
inclusion (77%) for those households less than a 10 minute walk from the spring.

2.3 Data collection
Water quality was measured at all sample springs and households using protocols based on those
used at the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The water quality measure we use is
contamination with E. coli, an indicator bacteria that is correlated with the presence of fecal matter.
The household survey gathered baseline information about child diarrhea and anthropometrics,
mothers’ hygiene knowledge and behaviors (hand washing), household water collection and
treatment behavior, and socioeconomic status. The target survey respondent was the mother of the
youngest child living in the home compound (where extended families often co-reside), or another
woman with childcare responsibilities if the mother of the youngest child was unavailable.7
         A first follow-up round of water quality testing at the spring and in homes, spring environment
surveys, and household surveys was completed three to four months after the first round of spring
protection (April-August 2005). The second round of spring protection was in August-November
2005, and the second follow-up survey one year later (August-November 2006). The third follow-up
survey round took place five months later, (January-March 2007). The main analysis sample consists
of 184 springs and 1,354 households with baseline data and at least one round of follow-up data.
         Attrition was modest: 94% of baseline households were surveyed in at least two of the three
follow-ups and 80% were surveyed in all three follow-up rounds. Attrition is not significantly related
to spring protection assignment: the estimated coefficient on treatment is 0.012 (s.e. 0.018). The
characteristics of households lost over time are statistically indistinguishable from those that remain.
         An intervention providing point-of-use (POU), or in-home, chlorination products was launched
before the third follow-up survey (2007) in a random subset of households. Due to possible
interactions with spring protection and impacts on household water quality and health, the third
follow-up survey for this subset of households is excluded from the analysis. This POU intervention
is studied in other research (Kremer, Miguel, Null and Zwane 2008).

2.4 Baseline descriptive statistics
Table 1 presents baseline summary statistics for springs (Panel A), households (Panel B) and children
under age three (Panel C). For completeness, we report statistics for all springs and households with
baseline data (collected prior to randomization into treatment groups) even if they are dropped from

7
    Details on the data collection protocols are in Supplementary Appendix B.


                                                                                                          7
the analysis because the spring was later found unsuitable for protection, although results are almost
unchanged with the slightly smaller main sample (not shown). As expected with the randomization,
there is no statistically significant difference between baseline water quality at treatment versus
comparison springs (Panel A). Using water quality designations drawn from EPA standards, most
spring water is of moderate quality, only about 5-6% of samples are of high quality, and the rest are
poor quality. Household water is somewhat more likely to be high quality prior to spring protection
in the treatment group (and the difference in means, though small, is significant at 95% confidence),
but there is no significant difference in the proportion of moderate or poor quality water (Panel B). A
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test cannot reject equality of baseline home water quality distributions for the
treatment and comparison groups (p-value=0.24).
         Household water quality is somewhat better than spring water quality on average at baseline:
the average difference in ln E. coli is 0.51 (s.d. 2.63; results not shown). This likely occurs for at least
two reasons. First, many households collect water from sources other than the sample spring: only
half of the households get all their drinking water from their spring at baseline, and overall nearly
one third of water collection trips are to other sources. Second, at baseline 25% of households report
that they boiled their drinking water yesterday. However, it is worth noting that even in those
households, both adults and children often drink some unboiled water; for instance, young children
are commonly given water to drink directly from the household storage container. Moreover, the
correlation between household water contamination and self-reported boiling is low, raising the
possibility of social desirability reporting bias. Finally, some households may chlorinate their water.
Following a 2005 cholera outbreak the government distributed free chlorine and in the first follow-up
(2005) survey, 29% of households reported chlorinating their water at least once in the last six
months, though by the second follow-up survey (when more time had passed since the outbreak) just
8% of households reported chlorinating their water in the last week.
         Water quality tests were also conducted at the two main alternative sources near each sample
spring during the third follow-up (2007). Protected springs have the least contaminated water of all
source types with average ln E. Coli MPN/100 ml = 2.3, followed by unprotected springs, boreholes,
shallow wells, lakes/ponds, and rivers/streams with 3.6, 4.1, 5.2, 6.0, and 7.0 respectively. 8




8
  Springs are often located in close proximity. Sample springs have an average of 1.2 other springs within 1 km and
9.2 within 3 km. Of these, 0.4 and 2.8 are protected within 1 and 3 km, respectively, although some were protected
long ago and are currently in a state of disrepair. There are no significant baseline differences in the total number of
nearby springs within 1, 3, or 6 km for the treatment versus comparison groups (not shown).


                                                                                                                       8
        Respondents are well-informed about the relative desirability of different types of water
infrastructure but only imperfectly about the cleanliness of individual sources. The proportion of
respondents stating that a source is “very clean” or “somewhat clean” is highest for protected springs,
the objectively cleanest source type, at 92%, followed by boreholes (87%) and unprotected springs
(75%), shallow wells (73%), lakes/ponds (31%) and streams/rivers (14%). Yet the correlation
between ln E. coli MPN/100ml levels at water sources and household perceptions of source water
quality (on a 1 to 5 scale with 1=very clean and 5=very unclean) is just 0.12 (s.e. 0.02), though this
rises to 0.19 (s.e. 0.02) when conditioning on household fixed effects. This is just under half the
correlation of actual E.Coli counts across successive survey rounds (0.46). This moderate correlation
of objective E.Coli counts over time is presumably due both to measurement error and fluctuation in
actual spring contamination.
        Most other household and child characteristics are similar across the treatment and
comparison groups (Table 1, Panels B and C). Average mother’s education is six years, less than
primary school completion. Approximately four children under age 12 reside in the average
compound. Water and sanitation access is fairly high compared to many other poor countries as
about 86% of households report having a latrine, and the mean walking distance (one-way) to the
closest local water source is 8 minutes (median 5 minutes). A fairly high 20% of children in the
comparison group had diarrhea in the past week at baseline, as did 23% in the treatment group.

3. Spring protection impacts on water quality and health
This section discusses estimation and spring protection impacts on water quality and child health.

3.1 Estimation strategy
Equation 1 illustrates an intention-to-treat (ITT) estimator using linear regression.
(1)                     WjtSP = αt + φ1Tjt + XjSP′ φ2 + (Tjt * XjSP)′ φ3 + εjt.
WjtSP is the water quality measure for spring j at time t (t ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3} for the four survey rounds)
and Tjt is a treatment indicator that takes on a value of one after spring protection assignment, (i.e. for
treatment group 1 in all follow-up survey rounds and for treatment group 2 in the second and third
follow-ups, see Appendix Figure 1). XjSP are baseline spring and community characteristics (e.g.,
water contamination) and εjt is a white noise disturbance term that is allowed to be correlated across
survey rounds for a spring. Random assignment implies that φ1 is an unbiased estimate of the
reduced-form ITT spring protection effect. In some specifications we explore differential effects as a
function of baseline characteristics, captured in the vector φ3. Survey round and wave fixed effects αt


                                                                                                          9
are also included to control for any time-varying factors affecting all groups, as are the variables used
to balance the randomization into treatment groups (see Bruhn and McKenzie 2008 and discussion of
randomization in Supplementary Appendix A). Estimates of the average treatment effect on the
treated (TOT, Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin 1996) are very similar to the ITT estimates since
assignment differs from actual treatment for few springs.

3.2 Impact of protection on spring water
Spring protection dramatically reduces fecal contamination of source water. The average reduction
in ln E. coli across all four rounds of data is -1.07, corresponding to a 66% reduction (Table 2,
regression 1). These estimated effects are robust to including baseline contamination controls, and
protection does not lead to a significantly larger proportional reduction where initial water
contamination was highest (regression 2). There is substantial mean reversion in water quality across
survey rounds, likely reflecting both measurement error and transitory water quality variation.9 There
is no statistically significant evidence of differential treatment effects by baseline hygiene knowledge
(the average among local spring users), average local sanitation (latrine) coverage, or education
(regression 3). Protected springs are rated by enumerators as having significantly clearer water
(regression 4) but not greater water yields (regression 5), consistent with spring protection improving
water quality but not quantity. Communities maintain protected springs better than unprotected
springs: protected springs also have better fencing and drainage, and less fecal matter and brush in
the vicinity (not shown).

3.3 Home water quality effects
Relying again on the randomized design, we estimate a regression analogous to equation 1 to
estimate the impact of spring protection on home water quality. We control for baseline household
characteristics in some specifications including sanitation access, respondent’s diarrhea knowledge,
water boiling, an iron roof indicator, years of education, and the number of children under age 12 at
baseline, and we also allow for differential treatment effects as a function of these characteristics.
Regression disturbance terms are clustered at the spring level.
           The average reduction in ln E. coli contamination at the home is -0.27, or roughly 24%,
considerably smaller than the impacts on source water quality (Table 3, regression 1). For “sole
source” households, those who used only water from their reference spring in the pre-treatment
period, home water quality should be unambiguously better after treatment since they still rely

9
    For evidence on mean reversion, note the downward slope of the non-parametric plot in Appendix Figure 2.


                                                                                                               10
mainly on the spring and its quality improves after protection. For baseline “multi-source” water
users in our data, who were roughly on the margin between using their reference spring and other
sources, spring water will be combined in the home with water of unknown quality from other
sources, and endogenous source choice could thus cause home water quality to increase or decrease
after protection depending on whether these alternative sources are cleaner or dirtier than the spring.
The point estimates of contamination reductions are slightly smaller for multi-source households
(regression 2), as predicted, but we cannot reject equal impacts for sole- and multi-source users.10, 11
         Using the comparison households, we also non-experimentally estimated the relationship
between the use of different water source types and household water quality. Conditional upon
collecting some spring water, comparison households that chose to obtain water from protected
springs have significantly better home water quality: making all water collection trips to protected
rather than unprotected springs is associated with a 0.44 drop in ln E. coli contamination (s.e. 0.18),
or roughly 37% (not shown), substantially larger than the more reliable experimental estimates in
Table 3. Other non-experimental approaches – such as including detailed controls for respondent
education, boiling and at-home chlorination (and interaction terms), or employing distance to the
protected source as an IV for use (point estimate 0.46) – also differ substantially from the
experimental estimate (results not shown).
         We find no evidence of differential treatment effects as a function of household sanitation,
diarrhea prevention knowledge, or mother’s education (Table 3, regression 3). This runs counter to
claims that source water quality improvements are much more valuable when sanitation access or
hygiene knowledge are also in place, although the relatively large standard errors on these interaction


10
   Random assignment of springs to protection implies that we might potentially avoid both omitted variable bias
and also reduce attenuation bias (due to measurement error in water quality) by estimating the correlation between
source and home water quality in an IV framework in the sole-source users subsample, with assignment to
protection as the IV for spring water quality. Conceptually, sole-source users could be useful for estimating the pass
through of source water quality gains to the home, if these households almost exclusively used the sample spring for
drinking water in all periods. Unfortunately, water use patterns are not static across our four years of data: in the first
follow-up survey, 70% of comparison group baseline sole-source spring users remained sole-source users but only
26% remained sole source users in all three follow-ups. This “churning” could be due to changes in other water
options over time (as other sources improve or deteriorate, often by season), or variation in water collection costs
due to evolving household composition. Regardless of the cause, baseline sole- and multi-source user status
becomes less meaningful over time, making it infeasible to reliably estimate pass-through in this way.
11
   At baseline, 15.4% of comparison households get at least some of their drinking water from protected springs. In
follow-up rounds, this percentage rises to 24.5%, but most of this increase is due to the secular increase over time in
spring protection funded by donors or government: only 18.7% of comparison household trips to protected springs
in the last follow-up survey round are identified as trips to our sample treatment springs. This non-compliance with
treatment assignment is likely to somewhat reduce estimated protection impacts on diarrhea, and thus boost
estimated valuation per case of diarrhea averted, although given the small fraction of trips that are to our treatment
springs (24.5% x 18.7% ≈ 5% of all trips), the magnitude of any resulting bias appears unlikely to be large.


                                                                                                                       11
terms argue for caution in interpretation. Home water gains are smaller for households that report
boiling their water, as expected if boiling and spring protection are substitutes.
        Spring protection could potentially generate spillover benefits either for other water sources
or households due to hydrological interconnections, the infectious nature of diarrheal diseases, and
reductions in the number of people using alternative sources. To test for this, we consider the effect
of the number of nearby treated springs (located within 1, 3, or 6 kilometers) on both spring and
household water quality controlling for the total number of local springs (protected or not). For
springs we find little evidence of externalities in water quality: the coefficient estimate on treated
springs within 3 kilometers is small at -0.004 (s.e. 0.086), and similar results hold for springs at other
distances (not shown). On the other hand, we cannot rule out some positive water quality spillovers
for households: the coefficient on treatment springs located within 3 kilometers is -0.090 (s.e. 0.050,
regression not shown). This is consistent either with some households switching to use nearby
protected sources or with moderate spillover benefits to spring protection within the local area.

3.4 Child health and nutrition impacts
We estimate the impact of spring protection on child health and anthropometrics in equation 2.
(2)             Yijt = αi + αt + φ1Tjt + Xij′φ2 + (Tjt * Xij)′ φ3 + uij + εijt.
The main dependent variable is an indicator for diarrhea in the past week. The coefficient estimate,
φ1, on the treatment indicator Tjt captures the spring protection effect. An advantage of this
experimental design over existing studies, beyond the usual benefits of addressing omitted variable
bias, is our ability to avoid measurement error and the associated attenuation bias in the key water
quality explanatory variable through use of the treatment indicator. We include child fixed effects
(αi) and survey round and month fixed effects (αt). We also explore heterogeneous treatment effects
as a function of child and household characteristics, Xij.
        Spring protection leads to statistically significant reductions in diarrhea for children under
age 3 at baseline or born since the baseline survey. In the simplest specification taking advantage of
the experimental design, diarrhea incidence falls by -4.5 percentage points (standard error 1.2, Table
4, regression 1). In a probit specification the impact is similar, at -4.4 percentage points (s.e. 2.0,
regression 2), and similarly in a linear specification with child, treatment group and survey month
fixed effects (-4.5 percentage points, s.e. 2.3, p-value=0.06, regression 3). In our preferred
specification with month and child fixed effects and child gender and age polynomial controls, the
point estimate is -4.7 percentage points (s.e. 2.3, regression 4). On a comparison group average of



                                                                                                          12
19% of children with diarrhea in the past week, this is a drop of one quarter. We conclude that the
moderate reductions in household water contamination caused by spring protection were sufficient to
significantly reduce diarrhea incidence. 12
         While the estimated reduction in diarrhea remains negative for boys, the effects are driven
mainly by reduced diarrhea among girls (Table 4, regression 5). For girls the estimated reduction is
9.0 percentage points, an effect significant at 99% confidence. This finding is surprising since
baseline diarrhea rates are similar for boys and girls in our sample, and differential gender impacts
are rarely found in the related epidemiology literature; a decisive explanation remains elusive and
further investigation is warranted.13
         Interactions with baseline sanitation (latrine) coverage, diarrhea prevention knowledge, and
education are not significant (regression 6), in line with the lack of additional water quality gains for
such households. Effects are similar in the second and third years after protection, and also across
baseline sole-source versus multi-source households (not shown). Spring protection effects do not
differ significantly by month of year (rainy versus dry season), nor by child age up through age five
years (not shown). Spring protection effects also do not differ significantly as a function of the
number of nearby treated springs (located within 1, 3, or 6 kilometers), conditional on the total
number of local springs (protected or not).
         There are no statistically significant impacts on child weight but impacts are positive and
marginally significant for body mass index (BMI) in the three follow-up surveys (Table 4,
regressions 7-10). We do not find evidence of differential effects at points along the child weight
and BMI distributions using quantile regression (not shown).
         There is some suggestive evidence that spring protection produces a small reduction in
diarrhea among children ages 5-12 as well. In the basic specification equivalent to regression 1 in
Table 4, the point estimate is -0.017 (standard error 0.005, not shown), on a base diarrhea rate of 4.1
percent, though the effect is no longer significant when the full set of controls is included. There is


12
   Using children in comparison households in a non-experimental analysis using the same controls as in Table 4
(col. 3 and 4), we once again find that non-experimental and experimental estimates differ sharply. Households that
choose to obtain water from protected springs do not have significantly lower diarrhea rates than other households:
the coefficient on the fraction of water collection trips taken to protected springs is 0.007 (s.e. 0.041). Comparison
households can also choose to obtain water from project treatment springs, partially complicating comparisons with
our experimental estimates, although this effect should be small (as described above, under 5% of all trips by
comparison households are to project treatment springs). Also, again using the sample of comparison household
children, we find no evidence that water quality, as measured by ln E. coli MNP at either the household or the
source, significantly impacts diarrhea. This may occur because water quality measures are noisy, leading to
attenuation bias, and because quality is measured in the survey while diarrhea is for the week prior to the survey.
13
   Unlike Jayachandran and Kuziemko (2009), we do not find differential gender breastfeeding in our sample.


                                                                                                                    13
no evidence that spring protection improved school attendance in this age group, nor is there
evidence of diarrhea impacts among adults (regressions not shown).14


3.5 Estimating water transport, storage and treatment behavior changes
Theoretically the estimated effects of spring protection on household water quality and diarrhea
could reflect not only the direct impact of improved source water, but also indirect effects on water
transport, storage, or home treatment behaviors. Empirically, however, there were no significant
changes in water handling or treatment behaviors (Table 5, Panel A) aside from the increased use of
protected springs discussed below. There are also no changes in diarrhea knowledge or in a direct
hygiene measure, fecal contamination on respondents’ hands (Panel B).
         Households do change their choice of water sources substantially in response to spring
protection. We discussed earlier some of the implications of endogenous source choice for estimating
household water quality impacts. Recall that each household in our dataset is linked to a particular
spring (their “reference” spring) based on the baseline user list. The potential for differential impacts
among sole-source users of this reference spring arises because protected spring use should increase
more among multi-source users than sole-source users (who are already at 100% usage). As
predicted, assignment to spring protection treatment leads to greater use of the reference spring for
those households not previously using it exclusively: treated households increase the fraction of
water collection trips to their reference spring by 21 percentage points if they were multi-source users
at baseline (Table 5, Panel C). Underlying this increased use of protected springs are increasingly
positive perceptions about their quality: respondents at treated springs were 22 percentage points
more likely to believe the water is “very clean” during the rainy season, with somewhat smaller
effects in the dry season. There is no significant effect on the total number of trips made to water
sources in the past week, further indication that the intervention did not change water quantity used.

4. Valuing clean water
This section uses a travel cost model of water source choice to develop a revealed preference
estimate of households’ valuation of spring protection. We then argue that the more common stated
preference approaches substantially overstate households’ valuation of spring protection. Finally, we

14
  We collected information on infant mortality in our household sample, and also from a somewhat larger sample of
households with the assistance of local village elders who kept a diary of local infant births and deaths. However,
given the rarity of child death events and limited sample sizes, in neither sample is there sufficient statistical power
to detect moderate infant mortality treatment effects at traditional confidence levels, although point estimates have
the expected negative sign (estimated reduction -6.7 percent, s.e. 24.9 percent, not shown).


                                                                                                                     14
argue that households’ valuation of a statistical life is smaller than typically assumed in public health
expenditure cost-effectiveness analysis, but consistent with models such as Hall and Jones (2007) in
which the income elasticity of demand for health is far greater than one.

4. 1 A travel cost model of household water source choice
Let the valuation of water from source j be Zj, which could reflect both health and non-health
attributes, such as the ease of water collection. Spring protection at source j in time t (Tjt) contributes
an additional benefit βi to household i’s utility. Denote household i’s cost of time per minute as Ci >
0. Thus the cost household i bears to make an additional water trip to source j is CiDij, where Dij is
the household’s round trip distance to the source. Households make multiple water collection trips
and each trip is affected by unobserved factors, including the weather, which household member is
collecting water, the expected queue, other errands the water collector needs to undertake, or their
mood that day. Household i’s indirect utility from one water collection trip to source j at time t is:
(3)                                   uijt = βiTjt + Zj – CiDij + eijt ,
where eijt is an i.i.d. type I extreme value error term. Household i chooses source j over an alternative
k if its benefits outweigh any travel costs, namely when βi(Tjt – Tkt) + (Zj – Zk) – Ci(Dij – Dik) + (eijt –
eikt) ≥ 0. Focusing on those households on the margin between choosing two sources conceptually
allows one to estimate households’ valuations. The additional travel cost households choose to incur
is a revealed preference measure of their willingness to pay for spring protection.15
         More generally, given a set of characteristics Xijt for individual i and spring j at time t, where
these include the protection status of the spring and the walking time to each potential local water
source, as above, the probability household i chooses source j from among alternatives h ∈ H at time
t (yijt = 1) can be represented in the conditional logit formulation (McFadden 1974):
                                                            ′
                                                  exp( X ijt B )
(4)                          P ( y ijt | X ) =                    ≡ ρ ijt   .
                                                              ′
                                                 ∑ exp( X iht B )
                                                  h




15
   We follow most of the discrete choice literature in assuming a constant utility benefit from each additional trip to
a water source. While declining marginal benefits from each additional trip to a particularly clean source is plausible
if water quality is more important for some uses (like drinking) than others, we find no evidence for it in our data.
To illustrate, there is no significant difference in annual household valuation of spring protection (from the mixed
logit specification in Table 6 below) for households with different baseline usage of their reference spring: with
spring protection valuation as the dependent variable, the coefficient estimate on an indicator for baseline sole
source use is 0.84 (s.e. 1.06), and, in a separate regression, the coefficient on the proportion of collection trips to the
reference spring is 1.71 (s.e. 1.14, results not shown). We thank Pascaline Dupas for useful discussions on this issue.


                                                                                                                        15
        The ratio of the coefficient estimate on the treatment (spring protection) indicator to the
coefficient estimate on walking time to a source delivers the value of spring protection in terms of
minutes spent walking. We also allow the households’ time costs and valuation of spring protection
to vary as a function of the number of children in the household and their health status, and
household sanitation, hygiene knowledge, and education, by including interactions between these
characteristics and the treatment indicator and the walking distance term.
        After estimating the conditional logit, we follow Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (1995), Train
2003) and others in explicitly estimating heterogeneity using a mixed logit model with random
coefficients on spring protection and walking distance in the household indirect utility function. We
estimate choice probabilities as:

(5)                      P ( y ijt | X ) = ∫ ρ ijt f ( B ) dB
                                           B

where y, X, B and ρ are defined as above, and f(⋅) is the mixing distribution, which we take to be the
normal distribution for the spring protection coefficient and the triangular distribution (constrained to
be non-negative) for the distance coefficient. Bayesian numerical methods maximize the log-
likelihood to estimate the mean and standard deviation of these distributions, and allow both for
household specific taste parameter estimates, as well as arbitrary correlations of spring protection
valuation and walking time disutility across households. We use data from the third follow-up
survey, which asked respondents for the universe of water sources they could potentially choose and
the number of trips made to each in the last week. The median respondent used two water sources in
the last week, and 65% of respondents named available alternatives that they chose not to use.

4.2 Estimating willingness to pay for spring protection
The conditional logit analysis yields a large, negative, and statistically significant effect on the
round-trip walking distance to water source (measured in minutes) term, at -0.055 (standard error
0.001, Table 6, regression 1) and a positive statistically significant effect on the treatment (protected)
indicator term (0.51, standard error 0.04). Other terms in the regression indicate that streams, rivers,
and wells are less preferred than non-program springs (the omitted source category), while there are
only minor differences in tastes for program (sample) springs, non-program springs, and boreholes.
The distance to the closest water source is only weakly correlated with a range of household
characteristics, including the distance to the second closest source (not shown), alleviating some
concerns about omitted variables bias in the estimation of how walking distance affects choice.




                                                                                                       16
        One issue with the interpretation of this result is possible measurement error and attenuation
bias in the reported distance walking variable. The correlation across survey rounds in the reported
walking distance to the reference spring is moderate, at 0.38. In addition to simple recall error, the
variation in reported walking time may be due to variation in travel time, depending on the weather
and thus the condition of the path to the spring, whether the collector is accompanied by a child, and
the respondent’s health or energy that day. To approximately correct for classical measurement error
in this term, we inflate its coefficient to -0.055/0.38 = -0.145 and use this correction below, although
the correction estimated in a Monte Carlo simulation is similar at 0.3 (not shown).
        The ratio of the two main coefficient estimates in this specification implies that one round
trip to a protected spring compared to an unprotected spring is valued at (0.51)/(0.145) = 3.5 minutes
of walking time. Over the course of a year, using the average number of trips per week to sample
springs, this is equivalent to 12.2 work days.
        The inclusion of terms for measured E. Coli contamination (available at a subset of
alternative water sources) as well as the household’s perception of water quality at each source
reduces the coefficient estimate on the spring protection indicator to near zero (Table 6, regression
2), consistent with the possibility that households’ greater valuation of protected springs is almost
entirely due to the impact of protection on water quality, rather than also being influenced by other
factors, such as the reduced need to bend down to collect water or faster collection times. However, a
specification that includes objective E. Coli contamination as an explanatory variable but excludes
perceived water quality (for which respondents might give self-justifying answers that are
endogenous to their actual choices) reveals that, while the coefficient estimate on the spring
protection indicator falls by half, it remains positive and statistically significant, at 0.27 (s.e. 0.07,
regression not shown). Taking these results together, it is difficult to definitively pin down the
magnitude of the amenity value attached to spring protection beyond improved water quality.
        One might conjecture that households have an incorrect view of the health impacts of spring
protection at baseline, and that their behavior would shift over time as they learn more about true
impacts. However, valuations are nearly identical for households with one additional year of
experience with spring protection due to the phase in of treatment (results not shown).
        Households with young children could potentially have both greater time costs of walking to
collect water (due to the demands of child care or carrying a child) and also greater benefits of clean
water, since the epidemiological evidence suggests that young children experience the largest health
gains. Empirically, households with more children under age five at baseline find additional walking
distance to be more costly, as predicted, and the effect is especially large for households whose


                                                                                                             17
children had diarrhea at baseline: the estimate is large and significant at 99% confidence (Table 6,
regression 3). The coefficient on the interaction between the treatment indicator and households with
child under five who had diarrhea in the past week is also positive, although this result is difficult to
interpret since households with sick children may also have different child health preferences.
        Household valuations of spring protection rise with latrine ownership (perhaps reflecting
underlying household taste for investing in health) and with mother’s years of schooling (Table 6,
regression 4). However, the choice of protected springs is not significantly affected by baseline
respondent diarrhea prevention knowledge (in the household survey), or by expressing knowledge of
a direct link between contaminated water and diarrheal disease (not shown). Asset ownership does
not affect the taste for protection, nor does child gender (even though health gains appear
concentrated among girls), and including higher order walking distance polynomial controls does not
substantively change the results (not shown).
        As further evidence on heterogeneous valuations, the mixed logit approach suggests
considerable dispersion of spring protection valuations: the mean value of spring protection is 32.4
work days with a standard deviation of 102.8 work days (Table 6, regression 5 and Table 7, Panel A).

4.3 Comparing revealed vs. stated preference water valuations
This subsection compares our revealed preference spring protection valuations to two different stated
preference approaches, stated ranking and contingent valuation. The stated ranking approach asks
respondents to rank order their potential water source options rather than relying on information on
actual household water trips. This ranking is performed sequentially in the survey, with the highest
ranked source eliminated from the choice set at each subsequent question. These data are then
analyzed in the discrete choice travel cost framework described above.
        Estimated stated ranking valuation for spring protection is much higher than the revealed
preference estimate. The magnitude of the coefficient estimate on distance walking falls to -0.033
while that on spring protection rises to 0.96 (Table 6, regression 6). Using the same attenuation bias
correction for walking distance as above, the mixed logit estimate is almost twice as large as the
revealed preference value, with a willingness to pay for one year of spring protection at 56.2 work
days (Table 6, regression 7 and Table 7, Panel B). Comparing the analogous columns in Table 6
(regressions 1 and 6) suggests social desirability bias may also be affecting the state ranking results.
The coefficient estimates on several unimproved sources many Kenyans generally think of as
unclean (e.g., streams, ponds) are far more negative in the stated ranking case than in revealed
preference, while the spring protection estimate is more positive.


                                                                                                       18
         The second stated preference method is contingent valuation (CV). Households in protected
spring communities were asked how much they would be willing to pay per year to keep their spring
protected. The CV questions were only asked of households in the treatment group since they have
first-hand experience with spring protection. In the final wave of the survey, respondents were first
asked if they would be willing to pay either 250 or 500 Kenyan Shillings (US$7.14 or $14.29),
followed by a question that emphasized the expenditure trade-off (in other words, the goods they
would be giving up by spending that much on spring protection), and then were asked if they would
be willing to pay the next higher amount, also with emphasis on the expenditure trade-off.16
         Nearly all households said they were willing to pay $7.14 for one year of spring protection,
and the majority of households say they are willing to pay twice that ($14.29) even after being
walked through the expenditure trade-offs (Table 7, Panel C). The use of the expenditure trade-off
prompt reduces willing to pay substantially (by 11-14 percentage points), indicating that these CV
results are sensitive to question framing. Valuations are also sensitive to the starting value: those
respondents randomly chosen to be asked whether they valued a year of spring protection at 500
Kenyan Shillings have mean willingness to pay that is twice as high ($23.91) as those respondents
first asked about a value of 250 Kenyan Shillings ($12.62). If we assume spring protection valuations
are normally distributed and use a maximum likelihood approach to find the normal distribution that
best fits the data, the mean willingness to pay overall is $17.64 (standard deviation $13.09).
         To move from walking time to monetary values for the revealed preference and stated
ranking cases, we need to know how households value water collection time. We do this in two
ways, the first based on survey evidence on the time-money trade-off, and second by making
assumptions using local wages. In the first approach, we asked a subset of contingent valuation
subjects (surveyed after the round 3 follow-up survey) about their willingness to walk additional
minutes to access a protected spring (versus an unprotected spring). As above, we implemented this
using a closed-end format, offering respondents discrete value choices for additional minutes walked.
We then did the same thing in terms of willingness to pay money, the standard CV questions. We
derive water collectors’ time value by dividing their stated monetary valuation for spring protection
by their walking time valuation.17 As we only had the detailed matched monetary and walking time


16
  See Supplementary Appendix B for the exact survey question wording.
17
  In computing household time values, we know only the bounds of valuation due to the closed-end nature of the
CV questions. We address this by fitting normal distributions to both the monetary and walking time distributions,
and assigning individuals the median value in the interval of the distribution defined by the bounds. For instance,
among those individuals willing to walk 10 but not 15 additional minutes to a protected spring, the median value is
12.61 minutes. The time value is then the ratio of the monetary valuation to the walking time valuation estimate.


                                                                                                                  19
CV data for a subset of 104 respondents, we next regressed the estimated monetary value of water
collectors’ time on a detailed set of household characteristics (e.g., education, number of children,
asset ownership) in this subsample and then use these estimated coefficients to predict time values
for the entire sample. The resulting mean value of time is about $ 0.088 per day, or about 10% of the
wage those carrying water would have earned for local agricultural labor.18
         Combining these household-level estimated time values with our revealed preference mixed
logit estimates, the mean valuation for a year of access to protected spring water is only $2.96 (Table
7, Panel A). The analogous stated ranking estimate is nearly double at $4.96 (Panel B). The estimated
distributions for the three valuation approaches (in Figure 1) indicate not only that stated preference
methods exaggerate household willingness to pay for environmental amenities in a rural Kenyan
setting, but that the revealed preference approach yields less variable valuations. One plausible
explanation for the dispersion in stated preference methods is that many respondents fail to introspect
carefully in hypothetical valuation exercises, and thus their resulting answers are far “noisier” than in
the revealed preference case, where they face real time costs.
         Because limited time-income substitution possibilities are frequently encountered empirically
(Larson, 1993, McKean, Johnson, and Walsh 1995), other authors also focus on a range of time
values below the individual wage, often 25 to 50% of the average wage as a starting point (Train
1999). We thus also present revealed preference valuations using 25% of the average Kenyan wage
or $0.35 per work day (in Table 7), but while valuation levels shift upward, they remain far below the
contingent valuation figures. Note that the ratio of stated ranking to revealed preference valuations is
unchanged by construction, since both are scaled up by the same value of time.

4.4 Implications for health valuation
Under the assumption that households are aware of the relationship between spring protection and
diarrhea, combining the results from Tables 4 and 6 yields an upper bound on the willingness to pay
to avert child diarrhea. The bound will be tight to the extent that households’ valuation of spring
protection is entirely due to its impact on real and perceived child health, rather than also being due
to other spring protection amenities (water clarity, ease of collection, or health gains other than child
diarrhea); if these other factors are important in households’ valuation of spring protection, actual
willingness to pay to avert child diarrhea will be lower than our estimates.

18
  While we use US$1 as the approximate local daily agricultural wage, this value likely overstates the value of time
for multiple reasons, including the fact that workers often need to travel long distances to work, and that agricultural
labor is not always available, being concentrated in certain peak seasons. For these reasons, the value of water
collector time is plausibly more than about 10% of the local daily wage.


                                                                                                                     20
        Spring protection averts an average of (0.047 diarrhea cases / child-week) * (1.3 children age
3 and under / household) * (52 weeks / year) = 3.2 diarrhea cases per household-year. Using our
mean spring protection household valuation of 32.4 work days (from the mixed logit), this
corresponds to a willingness to pay of 10.1 work days per case of child diarrhea averted. Under the
further assumption that spring protection reduces diarrhea mortality by the same proportion as
diarrhea incidence, this yields an upper bound on the valuation of a statistical life of 8,742 work-days
or 35 work-years (at 250 work days per year). This bound will again be tight if households’ valuation
of diarrhea reduction is entirely due to its impact of mortality.19
        Using the household time values derived from our surveys, the bound on the value of averting
one case of child diarrhea is a mere US$0.89 (=$0.088*10.1 working days), and on avoiding a child
diarrhea death is $769 (=$0.088*8,742 working days). Using a standard conversion from diarrhea to
disability-adjusted life years (DALYs), this corresponds to an upper bound on the value of averting
one DALY of about $23.68. Using the higher time value (25% of the average Kenyan wage)
translates into $3,006 per averted child diarrhea death and $92.56 per DALY. For comparison, we
estimate that the cost per DALY averted for this intervention is $16.75.
        These value of life estimates are far below the estimated value of a statistical life in the U.S.
and other rich countries (using hedonic labor market approaches), where the median value is
approximately $7 million (Viscusi and Aldy 2003). Studies from two poorer countries (India and
Taiwan) yield estimates on the order of $0.5-1 million per statistical life, although they are difficult
to compare to our sample since they rely on data for urban factory workers, who are much richer than
our rural respondents. Deaton et al. (2008) also find low values of life in African samples using a
subjective life evaluation approach. We are unaware of hedonic value of statistical life estimates
from the poorest less developed countries.
        This revealed preference bound on the willingness to pay per DALY averted is far below the
cost effectiveness cutoffs usually used in analyses of health projects in less developed countries. For
example, the 1993 World Development Report termed health interventions that cost less than $150
per DALY as “extremely cost effective” (World Bank 1993), and others have used a threshold of
$100 per DALY (Shillcutt et al 2007). Sachs (2002) has argued for setting health cost effectiveness
thresholds per DALY at levels corresponding to countries’ GDP per capita, which for Kenya would
be over $400, nearly twenty times higher than our preferred estimate. While an important source of

19
  There are 5.69 deaths per 1000 children under age five each year in sub-Saharan Africa (Lopez et al. 2006, Table
3B.7). With roughly 4.9 annual diarrhea episodes per African child under five (see Kirkwood, 1999), 1.16 deaths
from diarrhea would be averted for each 1,000 diarrhea cases eliminated if mortality is proportional to morbidity.


                                                                                                                21
uncertainty in our valuations is the conversion from the value of time to monetary value, it is worth
noting that even if our preferred time values were tripled, the implied valuation of health and life
would still fall far the below those typically used by health planners.
        In contrast, our revealed preference estimate of the value of health is consistent with models
in which there is a high income elasticity of demand for health, and thus where households’ valuation
on life in less developed countries is very low. Hall and Jones (2007) use US$3 million to $6 million
as benchmarks for the value of life in the United States. In a calibration of their model (using data
from UNDP 2007), in which the value of a year of life is roughly proportional to per capita annual
consumption raised to the CRRA utility function curvature parameter (which might take on a value
of 2), the value of a statistical life in Kenya ranges from $953 to $2,711. If per capita consumption in
our rural study site is only four fifths of the Kenyan national average, this range becomes $477 to
$1,603, accommodating our revealed preference estimate of $769.
        Establishing the ideal way to conduct welfare analysis here is important but beyond the scope
of this paper, and thus we present a variety of approaches in section 5 below. We first present results
following the conventional neoclassical economic approach of valuing lives according to households’
own revealed preference measures. We then consider the case of a social planner with a higher
valuation (whom we term “paternalistic”, for convenience). This may be appropriate, for example, if
the planner values averting child diarrhea deaths more than other forms of household consumption, if
children receive less weight in the household welfare function than in the planner’s welfare function,
or if households consider only private benefits of reducing diarrhea and ignore disease externalities.
Using higher spring protection valuations might also be appropriate if households systematically
underestimate protection’s health benefits or if they are subject to time inconsistency problems.

5. Simulating alternative property rights norms and institutions
Under Kenyan law, local authorities can determine whether or not land owners have to allow
neighbors access to water on their land, and authorities typically follow local social norms. In our
study area, these norms prevent spring owners from charging for water. Perhaps partially as a result
of these common property rights, virtually no springs are privately protected in our study area. Social
norms regarding water rights in the study region date to pre-colonial times, when there were no
centralized kingdoms or chiefdoms in the area and the key local socio-political unit was the kinship
clan (Were 1967, 1986). In the colonial and post-independence eras, administrative boundaries were
typically set to at least roughly correspond to clan boundaries, with the region settled by a clan
typically being a Kenyan administrative unit called a sublocation, and below (section 5.2) we thus


                                                                                                        22
consider springs within a sublocation as a natural unit for the analysis of property rights institutions.
The typical rural Kenyan sublocation contains approximately four thousand inhabitants.20
         In this section, we determine the socially optimal level of spring protection under the
alternative assumptions that the social planner takes household revealed preference valuations as
given, or that the social planner values child health at levels similar to those assumed by health
planners working in poor country contexts, and then estimate social welfare under various property
rights norms and institutions. We abstract from the costs of enforcing property rights throughout and
instead consider the narrower question of what outcomes social norms would produce if they could
be costlessly implemented. This discussion should thus be taken as an analysis of the welfare impacts
of alternative social norms and institutions and not necessarily an exploration of short-run Kenyan
government policy options, since there may be significant enforcement and transactions costs not
considered here, as well as other costs in the transition to a new institutional regime. Determining the
most effective way of changing property rights norms remains a major topic in development
economics but is beyond the scope of this paper.
         To build intuition, we first consider the problem of a social planner deciding whether to protect
an isolated spring in section 5.1, before moving on to the more realistic case of endogenous choice
among multiple water sources in 5.2. In general, a planner’s decision depends on whether other
nearby springs are also protected, given households’ ability to choose among sources within walking
distance. Throughout we treat the marginal cost of providing spring water as zero since water flows
out of the ground without a pump, user congestion is minimal, and unused water simply flows away.

5. 1 The social planner’s problem for an isolated spring
Spring protection costs an average of $1,024 per spring in this area, with maintenance costs of $35
per year. Assuming that protected springs last for 15 years, this implies the discounted net present
cost of spring protection is $1,405 (with a 5% annual discount rate). The total benefit of protecting a
spring is the sum of willingness to pay for spring protection among current users. Based on the
analysis above, we assume that mean household valuation is $2.96. Whether it is socially optimal to
protect a particular spring depends critically on the number of users. The typical spring in our data is
used by 31 households, so the total discounted net present valuation is $909. Under our assumptions,
the revealed preference valuation of protection exceeds the cost of protection only for springs with 46
or more baseline household users, implying that a social planner taking household preferences as


20
     This estimate is derived from Kenyan census data: http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/gpw/country.jsp?iso=KEN.


                                                                                                                   23
given would only protect springs in relatively densely populated areas, or in areas with few springs
(where each has many users), and that protection will become increasingly attractive as local
population grows. However, a paternalistic planner who valued averting a DALY at $125, a
valuation often used by health planners in poor countries, would have a much lower threshold
number of users, at just 10 households. Overall, if all springs in our sample were isolated, the
paternalistic planner would find it socially optimal to protect 97% of sample springs, whereas using
the revealed preference valuations only the 15% of springs with the largest number of household
users are protected. As we show in the next section, a paternalistic social planner optimally protects
far fewer springs when taking into account households’ ability to walk to other nearby sources.

5.2 Impacts of alternative property rights institutions with endogenous household water choice
We now consider the impact of alternative water property rights social norms and institutions when
households endogenously choose among multiple local water sources, trading off source quality,
walking distance, and water price, and spring owners choose whether to invest in spring protection
based on profitability. Private property rights allow spring owners to charge for access to spring
water, providing an incentive to invest in protection, but also introduce a static distortion in water
source choice, since the marginal cost of providing spring water is zero. Charging positive water
prices can thus lead households to choose springs that would be less preferred based on walking time
and water contamination, the factors that are socially efficient for them to consider.
        Consider a partition of nearby springs into contiguous subgroups, such as the springs in the
territory of a clan, which is typically a subset of a Kenyan administrative sublocation. We consider
each subgroup separately and then aggregate across subgroups for overall welfare outcomes. The
term j ∈ {1, …, J} denotes the springs within each subgroup; and i ∈ {1, …, I} refers to households
that choose among these sources. Household demand parameters are derived from the revealed
preference mixed logit results (in Table 6, column 5). The utility value of spring protection for
household i (with reference spring j) is βij, γij is the disutility from an additional minute of walking
time, and δij is the monetary value of a minute of water collector time, from the survey method
described above; in the notation of equation 3, the disutility of time in monetary terms Cij = γij*δij.
We mainly focus on these monetary values below but also discuss robustness to other assumptions.
        A household’s preferences can be represented by θij = {βij,γij,δij}, where F(θij) is their joint
distribution among all households in the population. These parameter estimates are available for each
household from the mixed logit estimation, and allow us to compute expected household utility per



                                                                                                           24
water collection trip (from equation 3) to a particular source w, denoted uwij, as well as the total trips
households choose to make to each of their alternative water sources in a full year, Nwij. Annual
household utility (in monetary terms) for household i from water consumption is Vij = ∑ ( N wij * u wij )
                                                                                                       w


minus any monetary costs incurred purchasing the water. Empirically, recall that the total quantity of
household water collected varies neither with spring protection status nor with distance to the
reference spring, allowing us to simplify the problem by assuming that the total number of household

water trips is fixed ( ∑ N wij = N ij for household i regardless of their choices among sources w ∈ {1,
                         w

.., W}). Recall also that since households can obtain water from other sources, such as wells or
streams, springs (subscripted j) are a subset of all sources (subscripted w).
         We simulate the following game in the private property cases. At t=0, the property rights
regime is chosen. At t=1 profit-maximizing spring owners within a subgroup simultaneously decide
whether to protect their spring, where protection is denoted by the indicator variable protectj. At t=2
spring owners simultaneously set prices pj per unit of water. The vector of protection and price
decisions for all springs are denoted protect and p, respectively. We assume that spring owners set
prices with full knowledge of each household’s water source choice situation and preferences,
including the distance to each of the household’s options and θij. At t=3 households choose water
sources to maximize utility given protection decisions and prices. 21 We solve the model backwards.
         Households can choose to obtain water from their reference spring, any other sources (such
as public boreholes, streams and rivers) they listed in the household survey when asked about
potential alternative drinking water sources, plus other local springs within their spring subgroup. We
generally considered springs located within 1 km of each other to be part of the same subgroup,
although in some cases springs at a slightly greater distance from each other were grouped together.
We consider subgroups of up to four contiguous springs within the same administrative sublocation.
Analyzing the full interdependence of spring protection decisions in the full sample of 167 sample
springs with 2167 possible protection combinations would be computationally impossible, and in any

21
  We ignore any water consumption utility gains for spring owners since they would not necessarily live locally or
consume spring water. We also incorporate demand from new household users post-protection using information
from a household user census, as described in the Simulation Appendix. A household census conducted at a subset
of nine springs suggests that protection increases the number of user households by 22% when the water is free. The
welfare gains to protection for these new households are presumably smaller, since they preferred an alternative
source to the reference spring at baseline. For instance, we find in the census that many new users live a greater
distance from the spring than baseline users. For a useful approximation of the welfare gains for this group, we
assume in the simulation that their consumer surplus is uniformly distributed between zero and the valuation of the
baseline user household that lives farthest from each spring (in our data), as might be the case if households live at a
continuum of distances from the spring but their underlying taste for clean water is otherwise the same.


                                                                                                                     25
case subgroups of approximately the size we use seem to correspond more closely to the relevant
social unit in both the pre-colonial period and under current Kenyan law, which delegates power over
water issues to local authorities. In sublocations where the number of springs is not divisible by four,
we created the largest possible groups (e.g., a location with seven springs was generally divided into
one group of four springs and one of three springs) unless a spring was located far from any other
spring (generally more than 1 km), in which case it was treated as isolated. The solution with groups
of up to four nearby springs is only an approximation to the full solution but we believe it is a fairly
close approximation: we have also run similar analyses with groups of one spring and two springs, in
addition to the four spring case we focus on below, and, while prices charged by private spring
owners do fall as the degree of competition increases, they fall at a declining rate and the social
welfare rankings of alternative property rights institutions are unchanged (not shown).
           Spring owners’ profits are equivalent to the net present value of revenues, minus any spring
protection construction and maintenance costs (since the marginal cost of providing spring water is
zero) over a 15 year time horizon, and these costs are estimated at $1,405 and denoted K. The fact
that we have data on the actual local cost of the spring protection technology greatly simplifies the
solution of the spring owner’s problem. We find optimal spring owner prices conditional on
protection status either through a grid search (when computationally feasible) or the numerical
Nelder-Mead simplex method based on the profit functions’ first order conditions described below.22
We assume that neither spring owners nor planners can prevent resale of water, so pricing is linear in
the quantity collected and there is no price discrimination. To determine the Nash equilibrium choice
of protection with multiple springs, we estimate best responses to all possible protection/non-
protection combinations (at most 24 = 16 in subgroups of four springs) and search for a fixed point.
           We consider the impact of changing property rights norms on spring investments and pricing
outcomes, holding constant policies for other water sources. This approach is realistic in the rural
Kenyan setting, where there is typically open access through public paths to naturally-occurring
rivers and lakes and most boreholes are sunk on public property such as schools or market centers so
people can collect water for free at these places. We assume this would continue to be possible.
           We normalize social welfare to zero in the benchmark “status quo” case with common
property rights to water and no spring protection (Table 8, row 1 in panels A and B). We express
household utility and social welfare in U.S. dollar values on a per spring basis. We generally do not
present results on a per capita basis since the number of users can change with protection, but for a


22
     Further details on the solution methods are in the supplementary Simulation Appendix available upon request.


                                                                                                                    26
rough sense of per capita gains, recall that the average baseline number of household spring users is
31 and households contain an average of 6.6 members, for roughly 200 persons per community.
        We first consider the problem of a neoclassical social planner maximizing the utility of
households as indicated by revealed preference, and then a paternalistic social planner valuing each
DALY averted from spring protection at $125. We also evaluate various property rights institutions
from the perspective of each type of social planner. The decision problem of a social planner
maximizing revealed preference can be represented as follows, where WS denotes social welfare:
                               J     I                           J
(6)             Max W S = ∑∑ Vij ( protect | θ ij ) − K * ∑ protect j
                 protect
                              j =1 i =1                         j =1


and Vij(protect | θij) denotes household utility given that the planner is fully informed about true
household preference parameters, θij. In particular, given that households’ average revealed
preference valuation of health is equivalent to $23.68 per DALY averted, we assume the paternalistic
planner increases the utility value (βij) placed on spring protection approximately five-fold when
computing social welfare and making spring protection choices. We assume both the neoclassical
and paternalistic social planners are constrained to allow households to make their own water
collection choices based on revealed preference. (In section 5.4 below we also consider a third type,
an unconstrained paternalistic social planner who also determines household water collection
choices based on a welfare function that values each DALY averted from spring protection at $125.)
        We next consider four forms of property rights – common property (the status quo described
above), “freehold” private property, Lockean private property, and modified Lockean (all defined
below) – and then consider two non-budget balancing mechanisms, public provision and vouchers.
We analyze each from the standpoint of both neoclassical and paternalistic social planners.
        In freehold private property social norms, there are no restrictions on spring owners’
behavior. Private property rights are somewhat analogous to patents in this analysis. Creating private
property rights may spur potentially productive investments but induce static distortions since spring
owners have some market power in setting prices, given the travel costs households face in water
collection. To model this tradeoff, we assume spring owners set prices and make protection decisions
to maximize profits taking the decisions of neighboring spring owners as given, and we solve for the
Nash equilibrium. The owner of spring j maximizes

                                                {                                }
                                   J'     I
(7)              Max π j = p *j ∑∑ N jij ' ( protect j , protect −* j , p * ) | θ ij − K * protect j
                protect j
                                   j '=1 i =1                                                          ,




                                                                                                           27
where πj denotes profits and the owner takes others’ prices, p-j*, and protection decisions, protect-j*,
as given. The double summation refers to all households at each spring j′ in the spring subgroup that j
belongs to, and Njij’ is the number of trips the household makes to spring j given the equilibrium
protection status and price decisions of other springs. This is solved subject to optimal non-
cooperative price setting: p *j = arg max π j ( protect j , protect −* j , p−* j ) . The Nash equilibrium solution
                                           pj


is a vector of protection and price decisions for each spring, and consumption decisions for all
households, such that consumption decisions are optimal given protection and prices, and protection
and prices are optimal for each spring owner given other springs’ prices and protection decisions.
         The simulations were run ten times, each with an independent draw of household preference
parameters (from mixed logit), and the results presented below are the average of the ten runs.23


5.3 Social Planner and Property Rights Simulation Results
The neoclassical social planner respecting households’ revealed preference valuations protects 29%
of springs, typically those with many baseline household users (Table 8, panel A, row 2). The net
social gain across all springs (protected and unprotected) is $351 per spring, or roughly $1.75 per
capita. A paternalistic social planner valuing a DALY averted by spring protection at $125 would
protect 63% of springs (Panel B, row 2). This is fewer than the 97% figure cited in section 5.1 for
isolated springs, since households can choose among multiple local springs in this case.
           Under freehold private property, only 5% of spring owners find it profitable to protect their
spring (Table 8, panel A, row 3). The net present value of profits per spring owner is $420 and the
average price charged per water collection trip in these springs is $0.0027. While competition from
local springs does dampen potential price increases – the equilibrium price spring owners charge is
monotonically decreasing in the number of local competitor springs (if we compare the solution with
maximum group size of one, two, and four – not shown) – this average price remains quite expensive
for Kenyan households. For the typical household making 32 trips per week to a spring, this is
equivalent to $4.49 per year, or several days’ wages.
           Freehold private property rights substantially reduce social welfare as measured by
household revealed preference relative to the status quo of communal property rights, with a social
welfare loss of $91 per spring. This finding may be a partial explanation why communal water rights
have been so durable in African settings like ours: they may simply yield higher social welfare than


23
     A simulation run takes two days, so for practical reasons we use 10 runs (results from each available on request).


                                                                                                                     28
private property rights. The logic is straightforward: the dynamic gains from spring protection are
small since nearly all springs remain unprotected, but there are large static losses from households
walking further or choosing dirtier sources to avoid paying for water from springs located on private
land. The proportion of household trips to rivers and streams, the dirtiest local sources, increases by
45% relative to common property rights, and as a result average fecal contamination as measured by
E. Coli in collected water increases by 26 log points (from 4.66 to 4.92). Average walking time per
collection trip also rises by over a minute, from 11.6 to 12.9 minutes, and this amounts to over 100
extra hours per household each year.24
         Freehold property rights lead to both under- and over- protection. On the one hand, only 13%
of the springs that would be protected by a neoclassical social planner are protected under private
property, but on the other hand some springs this social planner would not protect are protected under
private property. The inability of spring owners to capture the full consumer surplus of potential
users due to heterogeneity in valuations leads to under-protection, but a rent-stealing effect can lead
to over-protection, since land owners do not consider the negative impact of spring protection on
owners of competing nearby springs. The tendency of private owners with market power to focus on
the marginal consumer’s valuation of spring protection, rather than that of the average consumer,
could lead them to under- or over-protect springs depending on local demand patterns (Tirole 1988).
         We do not present paternalistic social planner welfare outcomes for the freehold (or Lockean)
private property cases in Table 8, Panel B since they are not directly comparable to the communal
property outcomes. This is a product of the way we model the paternalistic planner’s social welfare
function in panel B: the planner places additional value on spring protection (essentially scaling up
the βij coefficient five-fold), but not on health gains from using other clean sources; a richer
simulation that incorporates the health impacts from the full range of sources awaits future research.
Yet a brief examination of panel B indicates that communal property will almost certainly continue
to yield higher social welfare in this case: while freehold private property leads to some spring
protection, it continues to generate increased average E. coli water contamination (as families turn
from relatively safe springs to more contaminated sources like rivers and streams due to high user
fees), and water collection walking times also rise considerably relative to common property.



24
  In a small number of spring groups (3) there are multiple Nash equilibria in the freehold private property rights
case. Here we assume there is coordination on the equilibrium that maximizes social welfare, although given the
small number of cases other equilibrium selection rules do not change the main results. Thus the social welfare
outcomes in the freehold private property rights case (where multiple equilibria sometimes arise) likely represent
upper bounds, yet despite this there are substantial welfare losses relative to communal property.


                                                                                                                      29
        It is also worth considering other private property rights institutions beyond the stylized
extremes of common property and freehold private property, since actual social norms are often more
complex. Locke (1689 [2002]) argued that people acquire property rights in land when they mix their
labor with it, for example by clearing land or planting a crop. This element of property rights is
common in rural Africa and elsewhere. For example, in Ghana actively farming a plot is critical to
securing property rights (Goldstein and Udry 2005) and clearing land is traditionally necessary for
establishing rights to plots at the margin of Amazon tropical forests. A “Lockean” private property
norm in our context would only permit spring owners to charge positive prices if they had invested in
spring protection. In the model, the spring owner’s profit maximizing condition is similar but now
the price is constrained to be pj=0 if protectj=0.
        Historically, some legal systems seem to have evolved from common property for water
towards the Lockean norm; for instance, despite the fact that water sales are discouraged by several
hadith (see Caponera 2006), certain Islamic legal traditions evolved to allow the builders of wells
and irrigation canals to charge for access to the water made available by their investments (Mawardi
1901: 316, Wanasharisi 1909: 285). Lockean norms may also be emerging in another Kenyan
region: local officials in Nyanza province do sometimes permit spring owners to charge for access to
spring water once they have invested in spring protection (personal communication with Scott Lee).
        Under Lockean property rights, spring owners’ continued inability to price discriminate and
thus capture the full consumer surplus from protection leads to under-protection, as in the freehold
private property case. On the other hand, the possibility that protecting a spring allows owners to
capture not just the valuation on spring protection but also part of the surplus from consuming
unprotected water could lead to over-protection. In practice, there is substantial under-protection
(Table 8, panel A, row 4). The simulations suggest Lockean private property rights yield somewhat
higher investment in water infrastructure than freehold private property: 12% of owners now find it
profit maximizing to invest in spring protection. Although social welfare (using revealed preference
valuation) remains lower than the status quo, Lockean rights are marginally better for welfare than
freehold private property: the average annual social welfare loss per community is only $43, average
fecal contamination increases by just 4 log points and average walking time rises slightly, from 11.6
to 12.3 minutes. Yet the increase in both fecal contamination and walking time suggests that a
paternalistic planner would also likely prefer common property to Lockean property norms.25

25
  It is possible that disaggregating trips by water use (something we are unfortunately unable to do with our data)
could partially affect the conclusion, since households would have the option of purchasing some drinking water at
springs and collecting water for other uses elsewhere. We leave this for future research.


                                                                                                                 30
        A “modified Lockean” private property rights regime would permit spring owners to charge
for water from spring protection infrastructure as long as they also allowed free unimpeded access to
unprotected water from the spring. In our setting, a system of modified Lockean property rights could
be achieved simply by requiring owners who protect springs to allow some water to flow out of the
pipe and away from the protected spring, where it becomes a pool of unprotected spring water
exposed to the environment that anyone can access for free. In this case, the spring owner’s profit
maximizing condition is equivalent to that under the Lockean case, with the critical change that
under protection the spring owner must now take into account that households have the choice of
continuing to consume unprotected spring water at price pj=0 at the source. This regime generates a
Pareto improvement over the common property status quo, since the availability of free unprotected
spring water shields households from the utility losses experienced under the other private property
cases, and spring owners cannot be worse off than under common property.
        This regime performs best within the set of set of budget-neutral social norms. Under
modified Lockean property rights, 2% of springs are protected (Table 8, panel A, row 5). Six percent
of the springs a neoclassical social planner would protect are protected in this case, while only 1% of
springs the neoclassical planner would not protect are protected (not shown). While this form of
property rights is far from attaining the social optimum, it incentivizes spring owners to perform
some socially beneficial spring protection while leaving no households worse off.
        The paternalistic planner would also prefer this modified Lockean system to common
property. Although average ln(E. Coli) levels are the same to two decimal places in Table 8, they are
in fact lower by 0.002 under the modified Lockean system. Yet these social welfare gains from
modified Lockean rights are sufficiently small that it is perhaps unsurprising that there has been
limited institutional innovation along these lines in Kenya, given the transition costs of changing
property norms, enforcing charges for protected sources, preventing owners from impeding access to
unimproved water, and any engineering costs of allowing spring water to freely run off.
        Public funding, either through direct government provision or vouchers, performs much
better than the budget-neutral property rights norms considered above. Consider the impact of public
funding by a hypothetical benevolent government that had access only to distortionary taxation and
knows only the distribution of preferences in the population, F(θij), not individual household
preferences in each community. Consider first a policymaker that maximizes household revealed
preference welfare. This policymaker’s optimization problem is the following, where DW denotes the
deadweight loss of taxation per dollar of revenue raised:



                                                                                                      31
                                         J     I                               J
                                  ~
(8)                    Max W = ∑∑ Vij ( protect | F (θ ij )) − (1 + DW ) * K * ∑ protect j
                                     P
                         protect
                                         j =1 i =1                                           j =1

              Assuming that DW=0.3 (Ballard et al. 1985)26, the government protects 22% of springs
(Table 8, panel A, row 6) but there is some misallocation of protection: 49% of those springs the
neoclassical social planner would optimally protect get protected, and 12% of those the planner
would not protect (not shown). The welfare gain per spring is $131, less than the $351 gain attained
by a social planner, due to the tax distortion and the misallocation of protection across springs due to
policymakers’ limited information on households’ preferences. A paternalistic government that
values health gains from protection at $125/DALY would protect 67% of springs (panel B, row 6),
coming much closer to the corresponding social planner than any of the budget-neutral approaches.
              Finally, consider a regime where the government does not protect springs directly but rather
provides households with vouchers for protected spring water which they can pay to spring owners,
and which spring owners can then exchange for a fixed payment from the government. The
government optimally sets the voucher payment taking into account the later non-cooperative
protection decisions of private spring owners. We assume that the policymaker only knows the
distribution of water preferences in the entire population, but that spring owners still have perfect
knowledge of local preferences. Spring owners are assumed to be restricted from charging top-up
fees to water users, so households’ ex post decisions on which water sources to use are efficient. The
policymaker maximizes social welfare WV by setting the uniform voucher price pv:

                                 {                            }
(9) Max W V = ∑ ∑ V~ij ( protect * ( p v ) | F (θ ij )) + ∑ {π *j ( p v )} − DW * p v ∑ ∑ N ij ( protect * ( p v ) | F (θ ij ))
                     J      I                                     J                      J      I

        pv
                     j =1 i =1                                    j =1                   j =1 i =1


subject to spring owner protection decisions being profit maximizing:
(10)                     protect *j = arg max π *j ( pv ) ,

where spring owner profits are given by π j = p v ∑∑ {N jij ' ( protect j , protect −* j ,0) | θ ij }− K * protect j .
                                                                      J'   I


                                                                   j '=1 i =1


             For a government that respects household revealed preferences, and again faces 30%
deadweight loss, the optimal voucher price is $0.0010 per trip to a protected spring (much less than
the price charged in the freehold private property rights case), and social welfare gains per spring
under water vouchers are $138 (or roughly $0.69 per capita). 12% of spring owners protect their
springs (Table 8, panel A, row 7), still short of the social optimum, but there is less misallocation of
protection in this case, since spring owners with good information on local demand are the ones

26
     The main results are unchanged under the assumption that DW=0.5 (results not shown).


                                                                                                                             32
making protection decisions: only 3% of the sample springs the social planner would not protect get
protected here (not shown in the table). This policy improves social welfare substantially relative to
all the budget-neutral cases, and social welfare is comparable to government investment.
      A paternalistic policymaker with health valuation at $125/DALY sets a uniform voucher price
of $0.0041 (Table 8, panel B, row 7), four times higher than the previous price level, and as a result
65% of spring owners choose protection. For the paternalistic planner, we estimate slightly higher
spring protection and social welfare under government provision than under vouchers. We conjecture
that this is, in part, because raising the voucher price to increase protection above the 65% level
associated with vouchers does not effectively target those springs a social planner would protect but
instead leads to increased protection of other springs due to rent-stealing effects (recall that spring
owners make protection decisions in the voucher case). However, both government cases perform
much better than any budget-neutral property rights system under both the neoclassical social planner
and the paternalistic planner.


5.4 The Determinants of Optimal Property Rights Institutions
If households’ spring protection valuation increased by 20%, freehold private property rights and
Lockean private property rights norms would both become preferable to common property norms
(not shown, available on request). If these valuations increase with income, and the income elasticity
of demand for health is greater than one (as in Hall and Jones 2007), this implies that per capita
income growth of less than 20% in this region could make private property rights more attractive
than the current norm of communal access. If this finding that private property rights are optimal at
higher income levels holds more broadly, it could help explain the strong cross-sectional relationship
documented between institutions and income levels, and suggests it would be risky to assume that
causality always runs from stronger property rights protection to higher income levels (North 1990).
      The social welfare ordering of the public cases (government investment and vouchers) versus
private property rights cases is remarkably robust to alternative assumptions about households’
monetary valuation of spring protection (and equivalently, the value of water collectors’ time). In
results not presented in Table 8, public investment and vouchers both yield far higher social welfare
than any of the private property rights cases when household valuation for spring protection is 2, 3, 4,
or 5 times larger than the revealed preference estimates. Note that the evaluation of social welfare by
a planner in this exercise is equivalent to the case of the unconstrained paternalistic social planner
mentioned above, in which the planner not only makes investment and pricing decisions but also
determines household water collection decisions.


                                                                                                          33
      Yet for household spring protection valuations sufficiently close to zero (such that zero
protection investment is socially optimal), it is straightforward to show that communal property
rights yield social welfare at least as high as all other property rights norms, including the
government cases. It thus seems likely that communal property norms for water were in fact socially
optimal when they emerged in pre-colonial Kenya, a historical period when income was much lower,
the spring protection technology was costlier, and population density – and thus water contamination
levels and the number of potential users among whom to share fixed investment costs – was lower.
        Finally, the analysis above abstracts from transaction costs in collecting water user fees, but
these are likely to be large under private property norms. In particular, it may be expensive for spring
owners to monitor the amount of water that households collect, and these transaction costs would
reduce social welfare benefits. More generally, there are likely to be non-trivial transition costs in
moving from any one system to another, and these may be particularly large for water privatization
that runs against traditional communal social norms, as in rural Kenya. Certain cases may also have
real-world advantages that are not modeled here, especially with regards to ongoing incentives for
spring maintenance over time. For instance, an inept or corrupt government’s investment program
may collapse after a short time, in which case a voucher system (where maintenance remains with
private spring owners) or the modified Lockean case could be preferable.

6. Discussion and conclusion
Spring protection dramatically improved source water quality in a rural African setting, reducing
fecal contamination by two thirds and both home water contamination and child diarrhea by one
quarter. By capitalizing on changes in water source choice in response to spring protection, we
develop revealed preference estimates of willingness to pay for improved water quality. Because of
the experimental research design, these travel cost estimates are not subject to many typical
econometric concerns, and can be used to validate the reliability of stated preference estimates.
Revealed preference estimates of spring protection valuation are far below stated preference
estimates and, assuming people understand the effect of spring protection on health, imply valuations
of only US$23.68 per disability adjusted life year (DALY), roughly one fifth of the valuations
typically used by public health planners. The estimated valuations are consistent with models such as
Hall and Jones (2007) in which the elasticity of demand for health is much greater than one.
        Using structural econometric methods in tandem with the spring protection experiment, we
carry out counterfactual simulations based on estimated household revealed preference valuations for
spring protection, to examine the consequences of alternative property rights norms for water.


                                                                                                         34
Existing social norms allowing communal access to naturally occurring springs yield higher social
welfare than private property norms in this setting, providing a rationale for why communal water
rights have persisted in this rural African region. Simulations suggest that private property becomes
more attractive than communal norms when health valuations reach a sufficient level, which seems
like to occur as incomes rise. We also conjecture (as argued in Platteau 2000) that higher population
densities, or other factors that affect water scarcity would also boost local willingness to pay for
water and thus the attractiveness of freehold private property rights relative to communal property
norms. Water scarcity is an increasingly pressing issue in India, for instance, where expanding
irrigation and urban water use is leading to rapid drops in the water table.
        Many historical analyses of movements from common property to private property
institutions, such as British land enclosures (Allen 1982), may well find they are associated with
increased social welfare. Yet this is not inconsistent with arguments that common property
institutions are in fact sometimes optimal in other contexts. If health valuations rise with income, and
there are substantial costs to shifting to new property rights institutions, then if income follows a
stochastic process, societies may only elect to change property rights norms at income levels far
above those at which such shifts appear statically efficient. Such changes may also be delayed in
practice if political institutions make it impossible for “winners” from the new property rights to
credibly compensate “losers”, or they can only be undertaken with the consent of supra-majorities.
        Our property rights simulations suggest, that even at current Kenyan income levels, new
institutions and policies could potentially be layered onto existing common property norms to
improve social welfare, including government provision or vouchers through which the government
pays spring owners based on the number of water users, or by allowing spring owners to charge for
improved water while maintaining access to unimproved sites, what we call the modified Lockean
approach. In our setting, the Government of Kenya and foreign aid donors are in fact protecting
increasing numbers of springs over time while maintaining common property access. The analysis in
this paper suggests their approach is reasonable given current technology and household preferences.




                                                                                                        35
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. (2001). “The Colonial Origins of
        Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation”, American Economic Review, 91(5),
        1369-1401.
Adams, Martin, Sipho Sibanda and Stephen Turner (1999). “Land Tenure Reform and Rural
        Livelihoods in Southern Africa,” Natural Resources Perspectives v39.
Allen, Robert C. (1982). “The Efficiency and Distributional Consequences of Eighteenth Century
        Enclosures”, Economic Journal, 92, 937-953.
Angrist, J., G. Imbens, and D. Rubin (1996), “Identification of causal effects using instrumental
        variables,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 91(434), 444-472.
Aziz, K., et al. (1990), “Reduction in diarrhoeal diseases in children in rural Bangladesh by
        environmental and behavioural modifications,” Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical
        Medicine and Hygiene 84(3), 433-438.
Ballard, Charles L., John B. Shoven, and John Whalley. (1985). “General equilibrium computations
        of the marginal welfare costs of taxes in the United States”, American Economic Review,
        75(1), 128-138.
Bartlett, Roger (ed.). (1990). Land Commune and Peasant Community in Russia: Communal Farms
        in Imperial and Early Soviet Society. New York: St. Martin's Press.
Bateman, I. and K. G. Willis, (1999), Valuing Environmental Preferences: The Theory and Practice
        of the Contingent Valuation Method in the US, EU and Developing Countries. Oxford Univ.
        Press: New York.
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. (1995). “Automobile Prices in Market
        Equilibrium”, Econometrica, 63(4), 841-890.
Black, R.E. (1998), “Therapeutic and preventive effects of zinc on serious childhood infections
        diseases in developing countries,” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 68(suppl.), 476-9s.
Bruhn, Miriam and David McKenzie. (2008). “In pursuit of balance: Randomization in practice in
        development field experiments”, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper #4752.
Bryce, J. et al. (2005), “WHO estimates of the causes of death in children,” Lancet 365: 1147-52.
Cameron, T.A. (1992), “Combining contingent valuation and travel cost data for the valuation of
        nonmarket goods,” Land Economics, 68(3):302-317.
Caponera, Dante A.. (2006). “Ownership and transfer of water and land in Islam.” Updated 8
        June 2006. IDRC: Science for Humanity. <www.crdi.ca/es/ev-93957-201-1-
        DO_TOPIC.html> Accessed December 26, 2008.
Carson, R.T., N.E. Flores, K. Martin, and J. Wright (1996), Contingent valuation and revealed
        preference methodologies: Comparing the estimates for quasi-public goods, Land Economics,
        72(1): 80-99.
Choe, K. (1996) “The economic benefits of surface water quality improvements in developing
        countries: A case study of Davaeo, Philippines” Land Economics 72(4): 519-537
Curtis, V., S. Cairncross, and R. Yonli. (2000), “Domestic Hygiene and diarrhea—Pinpointing the
        problem.” Tropical Medicine and International Health 5(1):22–32.
De Soto, Hernando. (1989) The Other Path: The Invisible Revolution in the Third World. New York:
        Harper & Row.
Deaton, Angus, Jane Fortson, and Robert Tortora. (2008). “Life (evaluation), HIV/AIDS, and death
        in Africa”, unpublished working paper, Princeton University.
Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) (2003). Kenya Demographic and Health Household Survey
        Data. MEASURE DHS, Macro International Inc., Calverton, MD.
Diamond, P.A. and J. A. Hausman, (1994), “Contingent valuation: Is some number better than no
        number?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8(4),45-64


                                                                                                  36
Esrey S.A. (1996), “Waste, water and well-being: A multicountry study,” American Journal of
        Epidemiology 143(6), 608-22.
Fafchamps, Marcel and Sarah Gavian, (1996). “Land Tenure and Allocative Efficiency in Niger,”
        American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 78(2): 460-471.
Faruqui, Naser I., Asit K. Biswas, and Murad J. Bino, eds.. (2001). Water Management in Islam.
        New York: United Nations University Press.
Fewtrell, L. et al. (2005), “Water, sanitation, and hygiene interventions to reduce diarrhoea in less
        developed countries: A systematic review and meta-analysis,” Lancet Infectious Diseases 5,
        42-52.
Goldstein, Markus, and Christopher Udry. (2005). “The Profits of Power: Land Rights and
        Agricultural Investment in Ghana”, unpublished manuscript World Bank and Yale Univ.
Griffin, C. et al (1995) “Contingent valuation and actual behavior: predicting connections to new
        water systems in the state of Kerala, India” World Bank Economic Review 9(3): 373-395
Hall, R., and C.I. Jones, (2007), “The Value of Life and the Rise in Health Spending", Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, 122(1): 39-72.
Hoy, M. and Jimenez, E., (2006), "Property Rights and the Urban Environment: Local Public Goods
        in Indonesian Cities," Working Paper 2006-9, University of Guelph, Dept. of Economics.
Huttly S.R.A. et al. (1987), “The epidemiology of acute diarrhea in a rural community in Imo State,
        Nigeria,” Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 81, 865-70.
Imbens, Guido, and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. (2008). “Recent developments in the econometrics of
        program evaluation”, NBER Working Paper #14251.
Kay, D., J.M. Fleisher, R.L. Salmon, F. Jones, M.D. Wyer, A.F. Godfree, Z. Zelenauch-Jacquotte
        and R. Shore, (1994). Predicting likelihood of gastroenteritis from sea bathing: results from
        randomised exposure. Lancet 344, pp. 905–909.
Kirkwood, B.R. (1991). “Diarrhea”, pp. 134-157, in R.G. Feacham and D.T. Jamison, eds., Disease
        and Mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa. New York: Oxford Univ. Press for World Bank.
Kremer, Michael, Edward Miguel, Clair Null, and Alix Zwane. (2008). “Trickle down: Diffusion of
        chlorine for drinking water treatment in Kenya”, unpublished working paper, U.C. Berkeley.
Larson, Douglas M. 1993. "Separability and the Shadow Value of Time," American Journal
        of Agricultural Economics, 75 (August), pp. 572-577.
Lenehan, A. and J. Martin (1997), “Spring protection in southern KwaZulu Natal,” presented at 23rd
        Water, Engineering, & Development Centre Conference on Affordable Water Supply &
        Sanitation, Durban.
Locke, John. (1689 [2002]). The 2nd Treatise of Government and a Letter Concerning Toleration.
        Dover.
Lopez, A.D., et al., eds. (2006). Global Burden of Disease and Risk Factors, Washington DC: World
        Bank and Oxford University Press.
Madajewicz, M., et al. (2007) “Can information alone change behavior? Response to arsenic
        contamination of groundwater in Bangladesh”, J. of Development Economics, 84, 731-54.
Mawardi, Ali ibn Muhammad. Traité de droit public musulman, tr. L. Ostrorog. Paris: Leroux, 1900-
        1901. (Cited in Caponera, Dante A. above.)
McFadden, D. (1974), “Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior”, in P. Zarembka,
        ed., Frontiers in Econometrics, Academic Press, New York, pp. 105-142.
McKean, J. R., D. Johnson, and R. Walsh, (1995) "Valuing time in travel cost demand analysis: An
        empirical investigation," Land Economics, 71(1).
Mu, X., D., Whittington, and J. Briscoe, (1990), “Modelling village water demand behavior: A
        discrete choice approach,” Water Resources Research 26(4), 521-529.




                                                                                                  37
Mumma, Albert. (2005). “Kenya’s new water law: an analysis of the implications for the rural poor”,
        paper presented at the Workshop on African Water Laws: Plural Legislative Frameworks for
        Rural Water Management in Africa, January 2005, Johannesburg, South Africa.
Mwami, J. (1995), “Spring protection/sustainable water supply,” presented at Water, Engineering,
        and Development Centre Conference on Affordable Water Supply and Sanitation, Kampala.
North, Douglas C. (1990). Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. Cambridge;
        New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ostrom, Elinor. (1990). Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action.
        Cambridge University Press.
Peters, Pauline E. (2007). “Challenges in land tenure and land reform in Africa: An anthropological
        perspective,” CID Working Paper No. 141.
Platteau, J-P. (2000). Institutions, Social Norms, and Economic Development. Harwood.
Rosado, Maria et al (2006), “Combining averting behavior and contingent valuation data: an
        application to drinking water treatment in Brazil,” Environment and Development
        Economics, 11:729-746
Sachs J. (2002), Macroeconomics and health: Investing in health for economic development. World
        Health Organization: Geneva.
Shillcutt, Samuel, Damian Walker, Catherine Goodman, and Anne Mills. (2007). “Cost-effectiveness
        in low- and middle-income countries: A review of the debates surrounding decision rules”,
        iHEA 6th World Congress: Explorations in Health Economics Paper.
Tirole, Jean. (1988). The Theory of Industrial Organization. MIT Press: Cambridge.
Todd, Petra, and Kenneth Wolpin. (2006). “Assessing the Impact of a School Subsidy Program in
        Mexico: Using a Social Experiment to Validate a Dynamic Behavioral Model of Child
        Schooling and Fertility”, American Economic Review, 96(5), 1384-1417.
Train, K. (2003). Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cambridge Univ. Press: Cambridge.
Train, K.,(1999). “Mixed Logit Models of Recreation Demand,” in C. Kling and J. Herriges, eds.,
        Valuing the Environment Using Recreation Demand Models, Elgar Press.
UNDP (2007) Human Development Report 2007/2008: Fighting Climate Change: Human Solidarity
        in a divided world, UNDP: New York.
UNEP (United Nations Environment Program) (1998), Sourcebook of alternative technologies for
        freshwater augmentation in Africa, Osaka: UNEP.
Wansharisi, Ahmad ibn Yahyá. La pierre de touche des fétwas, tr. É. Amar. Paris: Leroux, 1909.
        (Cited in Caponera, Dante A. above.)
Were, Gideon. (1967). A History of the Abaluyia of Western Kenya. East African Publish.: Nairobi.
Were, Gideon (ed.). (1986). Socio-cultural Profile of Busia District. Government of Kenya:
        Ministry of Planning and National Development.
Whitehead, J. C. (2006), “A comparison of contingent valuation method and random utility model
        estimates of the value of avoiding reductions in King Mackerel bag limits," Applied
        Economics, 38(15):1725-1735.
Whittington, D., X. Mu, and R. Roche (1990) “Calculating the value of time spent collecting water:
        Some estimates for Ukunda, Kenya,” World Development 18(2), 269-280.
World Bank (1993). World Development Report. New York: Oxford University Press.




                                                                                                38
                               Table 1: Baseline descriptive statistics (2004 survey)
                                                             Treatment           Comparison        Treatment –
                                                             (protected)                           Comparison
                                                           Mean (sd) Obs       Mean (sd)   Obs         (se)
Panel A: Spring level data
Ln. E. coli MPN (CFU/ 100 ml)                                 3.90      98        3.79        95       0.11
                                                             (1.95)              (1.97)              (0.28)
Water is high quality (E. coli MPN ≤ 1)                       0.05      98        0.06        95      -0.01
                                                             (0.22)              (0.24)              (0.03)
Water is high or moderate quality (E. coli MPN <126)          0.70      98        0.69        95      0.01
                                                             (0.46)              (0.46)              (0.07)
Water is poor quality (E. coli MPN 126-1000)                  0.19      98        0.23        95      -0.04
                                                             (0.40)              (0.42)              (0.06)
Latrine density (fraction of homes with latrines)             0.85      98        0.88        95      -0.02
                                                             (0.16)              (0.15)              (0.02)
Average diarrhea prevention knowledge score                   3.06      98        3.19        95      -0.13
                                                             (0.87)              (1.17)              (0.15)
Iron roof density (fraction of compounds with iron roof)      0.70      98        0.68        95      0.03
                                                             (0.21)              (0.23)              (0.03)
Other variables used for randomization balancing:
Distance of spring from paved road (meters)                   3005      98        3028        95       -23
                                                            (2101)              (2198)               (310)
Slope of catchment area (1=flat, 5=very steep)                3.56      98        3.59        95      -0.03
                                                             (0.69)              (0.63)              (0.09)
Number of households that use the spring                     29.90      98       29.60        95       0.30
                                                            (13.99)             (14.33)              (2.04)
Butere district indicator                                     0.34      98        0.32        95       0.02
                                                             (0.48)              (0.47)              (0.07)
Mumias district indicator                                     0.41      98        0.40        95      0.01
                                                             (0.49)              (0.49)              (0.07)
Total coliform MPN (CFU/ 100 ml)                              2170      98        2152        95        17
                                                             (622)               (624)                 (90)
E. coli MPN (CFU/ 100 ml)                                     265       98        248         95        17
                                                             (548)               (552)                 (79)
Water is poor or moderate quality (E. coli MPN 100-1000)      0.23      98        0.26        95     (0.03)
                                                             (0.43)              (0.44)              (0.06)
Panel B: Household level data
Ln. E. coli MPN (CFU/ 100 ml)                                 3.22      733       3.33     712         -0.11
                                                             (2.22)              (2.13)               (0.14)
Water is high quality (E. coli MPN ≤ 1)                       0.15      733       0.12     712          0.04
                                                             (0.36)              (0.32)              (0.02)**
Water is high or moderate quality (E. coli MPN <126)          0.76      733       0.76     712          0.00
                                                             (0.43)              (0.43)               (0.03)
Water is poor quality (E. coli MPN 126-1000)                  0.17      733       0.16     712          0.01
                                                             (0.37)              (0.37)               (0.02)




                                                                                                        39
                                                                  Treatment              Comparison         Treatment –
                                                                 (protected)                                Comparison
                                                               Mean (sd)   Obs        Mean (sd)     Obs         (se)
Respondent years of education                                      5.71       731         5.66       717         -0.05
                                                                  (3.61)                 (3.60)                 (0.23)
Children under age 12 in the compound                              4.04       736         3.93       719          0.11
                                                                  (2.48)                 (2.46)                 (0.14)
Iron roof indicator                                                0.70       735         0.68       717          0.03
                                                                  (0.46)                 (0.47)                 (0.03)
Walking distance to closest water source (minutes)                 8.74       725         8.03       714          0.71
                                                                  (8.40)                 (6.82)                 (0.49)
Water collection trips per week by household                      48.03       733        47.99       716          0.04
                                                                 (36.51)                (38.48)                 (2.51)
Ever collects drinking water at “reference” spring indicator       0.82       661         0.80       668          0.02
                                                                  (0.38)                 (0.40)                 (0.03)
Multi source user (uses sources other than reference spring)       0.45       732         0.44       715          0.00
                                                                  (0.50)                 (0.50)                 (0.04)
Fraction of respondent water trips to “reference” spring           0.72       655         0.71       663          0.01
                                                                  (0.41)                 (0.42)                 (0.04)
Rates water at the spring “very clean” – rainy season              0.33       736         0.33       719          0.00
                                                                  (0.47)                 (0.47)                 (0.04)
Rates water at the spring “very clean” – dry season                0.74       736         0.74       719         -0.01
                                                                  (0.44)                 (0.44)                 (0.03)
Fraction of water trips by those under age 12                      0.10       727         0.10       711         -0.00
                                                                  (0.20)                 (0.20)                 (0.01)
Water storage container in home was covered                        0.90       673         0.93       656         -0.03
                                                                  (0.30)                 (0.26)                (0.02)**
Yesterday's drinking water was boiled indicator                    0.25       731         0.29       711         -0.03
                                                                  (0.43)                 (0.45)                 (0.02)
Respondent diarrhea prevention knowledge score                     3.06       736         3.19       719         -0.13
                                                                  (2.14)                 (2.26)                 (0.15)
Respondent said “dirty water” causes diarrhea                      0.68       736         0.67       719          0.01
                                                                  (0.47)                 (0.47)                 (0.03)
Household has soap in the home                                     0.91       733         0.91       717          0.00
                                                                  (0.28)                 (0.29)                 (0.02)
Panel C: Child demographics and health
Child age (years)                                                  1.70       1047        1.72       995         -0.02
                                                                  (0.95)                 (0.97)                 (0.04)
Child male (=1)                                                    0.52       1047        0.53       995         -0.01
                                                                  (0.50)                 (0.50)                 (0.02)
Child had diarrhea in past week indicator                          0.23        996        0.20       961          0.03
                                                                  (0.42)                 (0.40)                 (0.02)
Child height (cm)                                                 76.10        870       76.13       835         -0.03
                                                                 (11.67)                (12.16)                 (0.57)
Child weight (kg)                                                  9.98        864       10.02       810         -0.05
                                                                  (3.04)                 (3.09)                 (0.16)
    Notes: The treatment springs were later protected (in 2005). Huber-White robust standard errors are clustered
    at spring level when using household level data, significant at * 90% ** 95% *** 99% confidence. Reference
    spring is based on spring user lists. Children in Panel C were under age 3 at baseline or were born since then.




                                                                                                                  40
                   Table 2: Spring protection source water quality impacts (2004-2007)
                                                        Dependent variable:
                                                    ln(Spring water E. coli MPN)         Water clarity    Water yield
                                                                                          (observed)      (observed)
                                                    (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)
Treatment (protected) indicator                    -1.07        -1.04         -1.10           0.26           -0.06
                                                 (0.27)***    (0.23)***     (0.24)***       (0.07)***        (0.06)
Baseline ln(Spring water E. coli MPN)                           0.99             1.01
                                                              (0.07)***       (0.08)***
Baseline ln(Spring water E. coli MPN)                           -0.17           -0.16
    * Treatment indicator                                      (0.12)          (0.13)
Baseline latrine density                                                        -0.23
                                                                               (0.59)
Baseline latrine density                                                         0.89
    * Treatment indicator                                                      (1.75)
Baseline diarrhea prevention score                                              -0.03
                                                                               (0.07)
Baseline diarrhea prevention score                                              -0.29
   *Treatment indicator                                                        (0.24)
Baseline boiled water yesterday density                                          0.48
                                                                               (0.65)
Baseline boiled water yesterday density                                          0.94
   *Treatment indicator                                                        (1.51)
Baseline mother’s years of education density                                    -0.04
                                                                               (0.05)
Baseline mother’s years of education density                                     0.06
   *Treatment indicator                                                        (0.14)
Treatment group 1 (phased in early 2005)                                        -0.29
                                                                               (0.20)
Treatment group 2 (phased in late 2005)                                         -0.21
                                                                               (0.17)
R2                                                   0.30         0.43           0.45          0.13            0.13
Observations                                         726          726            726            478            478
Mean (s.d.) of dependent variable                    3.63         3.63           3.63          0.71            0.73
                                                    (1.95)       (1.95)        (1.95)
  Notes: Estimated using OLS. Huber-White robust standard errors are presented (clustered at the spring level),
  significantly different than zero at * 90% ** 95% *** 99% confidence.
  There are 184 spring clusters with data for some of the four survey rounds (2004, 2005, 2006, 2007).
  MPN stands for “most probable number” coliform forming units (CFU) per 100ml.
  Average diarrhea prevention knowledge calculated as average of demeaned sum of number of correct
  responses given to the open ended question “to your knowledge, what can be done to prevent diarrhea?”
  Outcomes in columns 4 and 5 are enumerator assessments of spring water clarity and the spring’s water yield.
  All variables that are interacted with the treatment indicator are de-meaned.
  Time (survey round and wave) fixed effects are included in all regressions but not reported, as are all variables
  used to balance the initial randomization into treatment and comparison groups. When interactions are
  included, baseline variables are interacted with time indicators and treatment group indicators in addition to the
  treatment (protected) indicator. These coefficients not reported. Baseline iron roof density and its interaction
  with the treatment indicator (in col. 3) are included as additional control variables (not shown in the table).
  The -1.07 effect in column 1 is equivalent to a 66% reduction in E. Coli fecal coliform units per 100ml.




                                                                                                                 41
              Table 3: Spring protection household water quality impacts (2004-2007)
                                                                                      Dependent variable:
                                                                                  ln(Home water E. coli MPN)
                                                                              (1)              (2)              (3)
Treatment (protected) indicator                                             -0.27            -0.29            -0.67
                                                                          (0.15)*           (0.19)          (0.27)**
Baseline ln(Spring water E. coli MPN)                                       0.01             0.03            0.035
                                                                           (0.05)           (0.05)           (0.05)
Baseline multi-source user                                                                   -0.29            -0.27
                                                                                           (0.16)*           (0.17)
Baseline multi-source user * Treatment indicator                                              0.04             0.06
                                                                                            (0.25)           (0.26)
Baseline latrine density                                                    -0.73            -0.73            -0.02
                                                                          (0.32)**         (0.31)**          (0.60)
Baseline latrine density * Treatment indicator                                                                 1.42
                                                                                                             (1.01)
Baseline diarrhea prevention score                                          -0.02            -0.03            -0.05
                                                                           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.04)
Baseline diarrhea prevention score * Treatment indicator                                                      -0.05
                                                                                                             (0.06)
Baseline boiled water yesterday indicator                                    0.17             0.16             0.29
                                                                          (0.08)**         (0.08)**         (0.15)*
Baseline boiled water yesterday indicator * Treatment indicator                                                0.52
                                                                                                            (0.28)*
Baseline mother’s years of education                                         0.00             0.00             0.02
                                                                           (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.02)
Baseline mother’s years of education * Treatment indicator                                                     0.02
                                                                                                             (0.04)
Treatment group 1 (phased in early 2005)                                     0.00            -0.14            -0.01
                                                                           (0.14)           (0.18)           (0.27)
Treatment group 2 (phased in late 2005)                                     -0.10            -0.12            -0.16
                                                                           (0.12)           (0.15)           (0.27)
R2                                                                           0.04             0.04             0.05
Observations (spring clusters)                                          4343 (184)       4343 (184)       4343 (184)
Mean (s.d.) of dependent variable in comparison group                   3.00 (2.27)      3.00 (2.27)      3.00 (2.27)
Notes: Estimated using OLS. Huber-White robust standard errors (clustered at the spring level) are presented,
significantly different than zero at * 90% ** 95% *** 99% confidence. MPN stands for “most probable number”
coliform forming units (CFU) per 100ml.
Additional control variables are: season fixed effects, number of children under 12 living in the home, home
has iron roof indicator, iron roof density within spring community. When differential treatment effects are
reported in column 3, we also include interactions of these control variables with the treatment (protected)
indicator (not shown in the table). Baseline spring water quality, latrine density, diarrhea prevention score, and
mother’s education are de-meaned.
Time (survey round and wave) fixed effects included in all regressions but not reported, as are all variables
used to balance the initial randomization into treatment and comparison groups. When interactions are
included, baseline variables are interacted with time effects and treatment group indicators, in addition to
interactions with treatment (protected) indicator. These coefficients not reported in the table.
The -0.27 effect in column 1 is equivalent to a 24% reduction in E. Coli fecal coliform units per 100ml.




                                                                                                               42
                      Table 4: Health outcomes for children under age three at baseline or born since 2004 (2004-2007 data)
                                                                                                                         Dependent variable    Dependent variable
                                                  ------------Dependent variable: Diarrhea in past week ------------        Weight (kg)        Body mass index,
                                                                                                                                                  BMI (kg/m2)
                                                   (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)       (8)         (9)       (10)
                                                               Probit
Treatment (protected) indicator                 -0.045***     -0.044**     -0.045*    -0.047**    -0.090***    -0.032     0.065     0.093       0.21         0.27
                                                 (0.012)      (0.020)      (0.023)    (0.023)      (0.029)    (0.039)    (0.076)   (0.100)     (0.13)*      (0.17)
Treatment (protected) indicator *                                                                  0.083**                         -0.054                   -0.12
   Male                                                                                            (0.040)                         (0.120)                  (0.19)

Treatment (protected) indicator *                                                                              0.105
   Baseline latrine density                                                                                   (0.119)

Treatment (protected) indicator *                                                                             -0.0084
   Baseline diarrhea prevention score                                                                         (0.0073)

Treatment (protected) indicator *                                                                              0.0023
   Baseline mother’s years of education                                                                       (0.0044)

Child fixed effects                                   No           No          Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Treatment group fixed effects                         No           No          Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Month of year controls                                No           No          Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Gender-age controls                                   No           No           No         Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
R2                                                   0.00           -          0.53        0.53      0.53       0.53      0.96        0.96       0.69        0.69
Child-year observations                              6750         6749         6749        6660      6660       6601      5736        5736       5646        5646
Mean (s.d.) of the dependent variable in the         0.19         0.19         0.19        0.19      0.19       0.19     11.36       11.36       17.0        17.0
comparison group                                    (0.39)       (0.39)       (0.39)      (0.39)    (0.39)     (0.39)    (3.50)      (3.50)      (2.2)       (2.2)
   Notes: Column 2 estimated using probit (marginal effects presented), columns 1 and 3-10 estimated using OLS. Huber-White robust standard errors
   (clustered at the spring level) are presented, significantly different than zero at * 90% ** 95% *** 99% confidence. Data from all four survey rounds (2004,
   2005, 2006, 2007), sample restricted to children under age three at baseline (in 2004) and children born since 2004. Diarrhea defined as three or more
   “looser than normal” stools within 24 hours at any time in the past week. The gender-age controls include linear and quadratic current age (by month),
   and these terms interacted with a gender indicator. Columns 3-10 also contain survey round controls. In column 6, additional control variables are number
   of children under 12 living in the home, home has iron roof indicator, iron roof density within spring community, and the boiled water yesterday indicator
   (all measured at baseline), all interacted with the treatment indicator.




                                                                                                                                                             43
                          Table 5: Treatment effects on household water source choice and health behaviors (2004-2007)
                                                                         Coefficient (s.e.) on   Coefficient (s.e.) on    Coefficient (s.e.) on       Mean (s.d.)
                                                                         treatment indicator     treatment indicator      treatment indicator     comparison group in
Dependent variable                                                           Full sample          Sole-source users       Multi-source users       2006, 2007 surveys
Panel A: Water transportation and storage                                         (1)                      (2)                      (3)                    (4)
Fraction of water trips by those under age 12(a)                          0.00       (0.01)        0.00       (0.02)       0.00        (0.02)       0.09       (0.19)
Water storage container in home covered indicator                         0.00       (0.01)       -0.01       (0.02)       0.01        (0.02)       0.98       (0.15)
Ever treated water with chlorine indicator(b)                             0.02       (0.03)        0.03       (0.05)       0.01        (0.04)       0.45       (0.50)
Yesterday’s drinking water boiled indicator(c)                            0.03       (0.02)        0.05      (0.03)*       0.01        (0.03)       0.25       (0.44)
Panel B: Sanitation and hygiene behaviors
Diarrhea prevention knowledge score                                        0.14      (0.14)        0.21       (0.18)       0.04        (0.19)       3.92       (2.07)
Respondent says drinking clean water is a way to prevent diarrhea         -0.03      (0.03)       -0.03       (0.04)      -0.04        (0.04)       0.73       (0.44)
Household has soap in the home indicator                                  -0.01      (0.02)       -0.02       (0.02)       0.01        (0.03)       0.89       (0.31)
Fingers with bacterial contamination (fecal Streptococci colonies) (d)     0.10      (0.12)        0.41      (0.23)*       0.11        (0.21)       0.71       (1.26)
Panel C: Water collection and source choice
Fraction of trips to reference spring                                         0.09     (0.03)***     0.03       (0.02)*       0.21      (0.05)***     0.76       (0.40)
Perceive water at reference spring to be very clean – rainy season                            ***                     ***                      ***
                                                                              0.22     (0.04)        0.22      (0.05)         0.22      (0.04)        0.18       (0.38)
Perceive water at reference spring to be very clean – dry season                              ***                      **                      ***
                                                                              0.11     (0.04)        0.07       (0.03)        0.15      (0.06)        0.76       (0.43)
Trips made to get water (all uses, members, sources) past week               -2.38      (2.15)      -0.71        (2.41)      -4.41       (3.51)      31.77      (24.42)
  Notes: N=1354 households at 184 springs (full sample), 755 of whom are baseline sole source users. Each cell reports the differences-in-differences treatment
  effect estimate from a separate regression, where the dependent variable is reported in the first column. Huber-White robust standard errors (clustered at the
  spring level) are presented, significantly different than zero at * 90% ** 95% *** 99% confidence. Reported means of the dependent variables are in the
  comparison group 2006 and 2007 (rounds 2 & 3 post-treatment) surveys. Reference spring is the sample spring that we believed households used at baseline
  based on spring user lists. The fingertip contamination results are for the respondent’s main hand (values range from 0-5).
  (a): Because of changes in survey design, responses to this question are not available for the third (2006) round of data collection.
  (b): Because of changes in survey design, responses to this question are not available for the first (2004) round of data collection.
  (c): Because of changes in survey design, responses to this question are not available for the fourth (2007) round of data collection.
  (d): Because information on fingertip contamination was collected only in the third (2006) round of data collection, this cell reports the difference between the
  treatment and comparison groups rather than the differences-in-differences treatment effect.




                                                                                                                                                                  44
                 Table 6: Discrete choice models (conditional and mixed logit) of water source choice (2007 surveys)
                                                                            ----------------- Revealed Preference -----------------       --- Stated Ranking ---
                                                                          (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)         (6)         (7)
Treatment (protected) indicator                                        0.51***          -0.02      0.34***      0.68***                    0.96***
                                                                        (0.04)         (0.08)       (0.08)       (0.09)                    (0.24)
                                     Mixed logit – Mean (normal):                                                               2.95***                 1.46**
                                                                                                                                (0.25)                  (0.60)
                                  Mixed logit – Std. dev. (normal):                                                             5.73***                  1.22
                                                                                                                                (0.33)                  (0.75)
ln (source water E. coli MPN)                                                         -0.14***
                                                                                       (0.01)
Water quality at source perceived to be above average                                  1.14***
                                                                                       (0.07)
Distance to water source (minutes walking)                            -0.055***      -0.059***    -0.031***    -0.053***                  -0.033***
                                                                       (0.001)        (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.002)                    (0.010)
                      Mixed logit – Mean (restricted triangular):                                                              -0.21***                -0.03***
                                                                                                                                (0.01)                  (0.01)
                    Mixed logit – Std. dev (restricted triangular)                                                               0.09                   0.001

Distance * Children aged 0-5 with diarrhea last week                                             -0.006***
                                                                                                  (0.001)
Treatment indicator * Children aged 0-5 with diarrhea last week                                   0.09***
                                                                                                   (0.03)
Treatment indicator * Baseline latrine ownership                                                                 1.80***
                                                                                                                 (0.25)
Treatment indicator * Baseline diarrhea prevention score                                                         0.023
                                                                                                                (0.020)
Treatment indicator * Baseline mother’s years of education                                                      0.057***
                                                                                                                (0.011)
Source type: Borehole/piped                                            -0.08                       -0.05         -0.13*       -1.02***       0.07        0.04
                                                                       (0.05)                      (0.07)        (0.08)        (0.14)      (0.25)       (0.27)
Source type: Well                                                     -0.28***                    -0.35***      -0.31***      -1.87***     -0.43*       -0.47*
                                                                       (0.05)                      (0.07)        (0.07)        (0.13)      (0.24)       (0.25)
Source type: Stream/river                                             -0.77***                    -0.71***      -0.63***      -1.46***    -2.19***     -2.25***
                                                                       (0.06)                      (0.09)        (0.09)        (0.15)      (0.52)       (0.53)
Source type: Lake/pond                                                 -0.20                       -0.20          -0.18         -0.32       -2.82       -2.85
                                                                       (0.14)                      (0.20)        (0.19)        (0.35)      (1.86)       (1.87)
Number of observations (water collection choice situations)            53427         29068         50988         50024         53427        2114         2114
Number of households                                                    452           329           428            422           452         483         483



                                                                                                                                                                   45
Notes: The data are from the final round of household surveys (2007). Conditional logit in columns 1-4 and 6, and mixed logit in columns 5 and 7 (grouped by
choice and weighting households equally). Significant at * 90 ** 95 *** 99% confidence. In columns 1-5 each observation is a unique household-water source pair
in one water collection trip. In columns 6-7, each observation is a household-water source pair from questions where the respondent chooses their preferred
source. The dependent variable is an indicator equaling 1 if the household chose the water source represented in the household-source pair. The omitted water
source category is “non-program spring”. The coefficient estimate on the indicator for the household’s reference sample spring is included in the analysis but not
shown in the table. In column 3, additional controls are children aged 0-5 and 5-12 at baseline, directly and interacted with the treatment indicator and distance to
the water source (not shown). In column 4, additional controls are the number of children under 12, home has iron roof indicator, iron roof density in the
community, and the boiled water yesterday indicator (all measured at baseline), directly and interacted with the treatment indicator.




                                                                                                                                                                  46
                                         Table 7: Valuation of one year of spring protection (2007 survey)
       Panel A: Revealed preference valuation (from mixed logit – Table 6, column 5)                           One year of spring protection
                                                                                                             Mean                   Std. dev.
       Work days (8 hour days)                                                                             32.4 days               102.8 days
       Assume value of time is 25% Kenyan worker average wage                                               $11.57                   $36.69
       Time value from survey questions (time and monetary value)                                            $2.96                   $11.13

       Panel B: Stated preference ranking valuation (from mixed logit – Table 6, column 7)
       Work days (8 hour days)                                                                             56.2 days                 12.3 days
       Assume value of time is 25% Kenyan worker average wage                                               $20.06                     $4.38
       Time value from survey questions (time and monetary value)                                            $4.96                     $1.97

                                                                                                                                  Final Wave,
       Panel C: Contingent Valuation                                                                      Full Round          emphasizing trade-offs
       Proportion willing to pay this for spring protection:
       US$3.57 (250 Kenya Shillings)                                                                      0.94 [308]                 0.80 [98]
       US$7.14 (500 Kenya Shillings)                                                                      0.90 [316]                 0.79 [204]
       US$14.29 (1000 Kenya Shillings)                                                                         -                     0.60 [204]

                                                                                                              One year of spring protection
                                                                                                            Mean                   Std. dev.
       Sample: Final Wave, emphasizing trade-offs                                                           $17.64                  $13.09
          Subsample with 250 KSH starting value                                                             $12.62                  $11.06
          Subsample with 500 KSH starting value                                                             $23.91                  $14.28

Notes: The number of observations is in brackets in Panel C. The contingent valuation questions were only asked of households in the treatment group, since they
have first-hand knowledge of protection. In the final wave of the survey, respondents were first asked if they would be willing to pay either 250 or 500 Kenya
Shillings, followed by the question that emphasized the expenditure trade-off for their assigned amount, and then were asked if they would be willing to pay the
next higher amount, also with emphasis on the expenditure trade-off.




                                                                                                                                                             47
                                    Table 8: Property Rights Norms and Institutions: Counterfactual Simulations
                                               Springs        Average price     Spring owner       Household      Average          Average fecal Social welfare
                                            protected (%)     per water trip    profits (USD), utility (USD) per walking time      contamination,  (USD) per
                                                             (USD) | price>0      per spring          spring        (min)           ln(avg E coli)   spring
 Panel A: Revealed preference valuation,
 Neoclassical planner
 (1) Communal property (status quo)               0                 0                 0                 0               11.6             4.66              0
 (2) Social planner                               29                0                 0.               726              12.5             4.45             351
 (3) Freehold private property                    5              0.0027              420               -511             12.9             4.92             -91
 (4) Lockean private property                     12             0.0069               84               -127             12.3             4.70             -43
 (5) Modified Lockean property                    2              0.0058               8                 26              11.7             4.66              35
  (6) Public investment                             22                0                 0               510             12.4             4.48            131
  (7) Public vouchers                               12             0.0010              39               348             12.1             4.56            138
  Panel B: Paternalistic social planner
  (1) Communal property (status quo)                 0                0                 0                 0             11.6             4.66              0
  (2) Social planner                                67                0                 0             3,586             12.9             4.32           5,138
  (3) Freehold private property                      5             0.0027             420              -511             12.9             4.92                a
                                                                                                                                                          --
  (4) Lockean private property                      12             0.0069              84              -127             12.3             4.70                a
                                                                                                                                                          --
  (5) Modified Lockean property                      2             0.0058               8                26             11.7             4.66            366
  (6) Public investment                             67                0                 0               944             12.8             4.33           4,724
  (7) Public vouchers                               65             0.0041            1,160              891             12.4             4.40           3,915
 Notes: a Social welfare in the freehold and Lockean cases in panel B cannot be reliably compared to the communal property case, as described in section 5.3.
 Profits, utility and welfare are net present values (5% annual discount over 15 years). Household spring protection valuations are from Table 6, column 5, and
 utility is converted into USD using households’ predicted time value. The Neoclassical planner values spring protection at households’ revealed preference level,
 while the Paternalistic planner values it at US$125/DALY averted. A summary of key assumptions is as follows:
(1) Communal property rights: The price of spring water is zero. No springs are protected. Social welfare is normalized to zero.
(2) Social planner: Planner maximizes social welfare. The price of spring water is zero, its marginal cost. There is no deadweight loss to raising funds for spring
protection. The planner knows preferences θij (protection valuation, disutility of walking time) for each household.
(3) Freehold private property rights: Spring owners simultaneously choose whether to protect springs and then simultaneously choose price per unit of water non-
cooperatively (in groups of up to four). Spring owners know preferences θij for each household.
(4) Lockean private property rights: Same as the freehold private case except the price of unprotected spring water is constrained to be zero.
(5) Modified Lockean property rights: Same as the Lockean private case except the spring owner must always provide access to free unprotected water.
(6) Public investment: Policymaker maximizes social welfare. The price of spring water is zero. There is 30% deadweight loss to raising funds for spring
protection. The policymaker knows the distribution of preferences F(θij) in the population but not preferences for each household.
(7) Vouchers: The policymaker sets the voucher price for protected spring water to maximize social welfare, taking into account effects on spring owners’
subsequent investment. Spring owners then make profit-maximizing protection decisions in simultaneous non-cooperative play. There is 30% deadweight loss to
funding the vouchers. The policymaker knows the distribution of preferences F(θij) in the population; spring owners know preferences θij for each household.



                                                                                                                                                                 48
                                     Figure 1: Household revealed preference and stated preference valuations
                                                     of one year of spring protection (2007)

                                               USD 2.96




                             .25
                                                                  USD 4.96




                             .2
                                                                                  USD 17.64




                             .15
                             .1
                             .05
                             0
                                   -20                     0                  20                          40                       60
                                                                  Spring protection valuations

                                                   Revealed preference (US$)                          Stated ranking (US$)
                                                   Contingent Valuation (US$)


Notes: The revealed preference estimates are from the mixed logit results in Table 6, regression 5, and the stated preference ranking results are from the mixed
logit results in Table 6, regression 7. The contingent valuation data are presented in Table 7, Panel C.




                                                                                                                                                                   49
Supplemental Online Appendix (not intended for publication)

Appendix A: Randomization procedures
The randomization procedure for the 200 springs was designed for balance on observable variables.
For each of three data collection “waves” of springs in the study (containing 68, 70, and 62 springs),
we found a randomized, balanced assignment to treatment and control groups as follows.
         First, all spring communities were stratified by both water quality (into three groups, low,
medium and high contamination levels) and by geographic region (the three main administrative
divisions in our sample: Mumias, Butula, and Busia/Nambale). This resulted in nine distinct strata of
springs. Within each stratum, springs were randomly allocated (using a computer random number
generator in the STATA statistical program) to either treatment (protection) in 2004, treatment in
2005, or the comparison group (at ratios of approximately 1:1:2). Because the stratum sizes were not
all multiples of four, there is still some imbalance in sample sizes across groups despite stratification.
         Second, we next carried out 100 randomizations (for wave 1) and 200 randomizations (for
waves 2 and 3) and identified the most “balanced” randomization along the following five observed
baseline characteristics: total coliform bacteria level at the spring; E. coli bacteria level at the spring;
approximate distance to nearest tarmac road (in meters); approximate slope of ground near the
spring; number of household spring users. For each randomization, we checked for balance by
regressing each of these five observables on indicator variables for the treatment groups. We
considered the t-statistics from these regressions and chose the one that minimized the largest t-
statistic (in absolute value) across all five variables. If this value was above 1, we drew another 100-
200 randomizations, repeating this procedure until the largest t-statistic was below 1. Finally, this
balance test was applied to all three waves considered together, and a randomization satisfying the
maximum t-statistic requirement overall was chosen.
         Bruhn and McKenzie (2008) argue correctly that this process of re-randomization to achieve
balance on observables may lead standard errors to be either under- or over-estimated. In this case,
they show that correct inference can be achieved by including the “balancing” observables in the
regression analysis as control variables, and we do this throughout all analysis in this paper. The
treatment effect estimates are thus interpreted as impacts conditional on these observables. It is worth
noting, however, that coefficient estimates and standard errors are nearly unchanged if these controls
are excluded from the analysis. (The one exception where the baseline “balancing” controls are not
included is in the conditional and mixed logit analysis in Table 6. Here the controls do not affect
inference since they are constant across all alternative water sources in a community and effectively
drop out of the estimation equation.)
         We also performed a randomization inference exercise that required generation of 10,000
placebo treatment groups using exactly the same re-randomization procedure described above. For
each of the treatment coeﬃcients estimated in the regressions in our tables, we computed the
randomization inference p-values, using a Monte Carlo extension to Fisher’s exact test; see Imbens
and Wooldridge (2008). The p-value is the number of regressions (including the real assignment
regression) with a coefficient at least as large in absolute value as the coefficient from the real
assignment regression. The results are again nearly unchanged from the standard errors presented in
the tables, and in fact in many cases the randomization inference procedure produced slightly smaller
p-values than those we present, suggesting that our results are somewhat conservative. Overall, the
re-randomization procedure to achieve balance on baseline observables does not appear to have
substantially affected statistical inference. We thank Lorenzo Casaburi and Owen Ozier for their
excellent work on this exercise.




                                                                                                        A1
Appendix B: Measuring water quality, diarrhea, anthropometrics, and hygiene knowledge
Water quality
Water samples were collected in sterile bottles by field staff trained in aseptic sampling techniques.
At springs, the protocol was as follows. The cap of a 250 ml bottle is removed aseptically. Samples
are taken from the middle of standing water and the bottle is dragged through the water so the sample
is taken from several locations at unprotected springs, while bottles are filled from the water outflow
pipe at protected springs. About one inch of space is left at the top of full bottles. The cap is replaced
aseptically. In homes, following informed consent procedures, respondents are asked to bring a
sample from their main drinking water storage container (usually a clay pot). The water is poured
into a sterile 250 ml bottle using a household’s own dipper (often a plastic cup).
         Samples were then packed in coolers with ice and transported to water testing laboratories for
same-day analysis. A substantial fraction of water samples were held for longer than six hours, the
recommended holding time limit of the U.S. EPA, but baseline water quality measures are balanced
across treatment and comparison groups when attention is restricted to those water samples incubated
within six hours of collection, yielding the most reliable estimates (results not shown). Extended
holding time increases the noise in the E. coli estimate, but there is no definitive direction of bias as
bacteria both grow and die prior to incubation.
         The labs use Colilert, a method which provides an easy-to-use, error-resistant test for E. coli,
an indicator bacteria present in fecal matter. Our lab procedures were adapted from EPA Colilert
Quantitray 2000 Standard Operating Procedures. A continuous quantitative measure of fecal
contamination is available after 18-24 hours of incubation. E. coli MPN CFU measurements provided
by Colilert can take values from <1 to >2419. In the analysis, we treat values of <1 as one and values
of >2419 as 2419, although in practice, there are very few censored observations. We categorize
water samples with E. coli CFU/100 ml ≤ 1 as “high quality” those with counts between 1 and 126
“moderate quality” those and with counts > 126 as “poor quality”. For reference, the U.S. EPA and
WHO standard for clean drinking water is zero E. coli CFU/100 ml, and the EPA standard for
swimming/recreational water is less than 126.
         Quality control procedures used to ensure the validity of the water testing procedures
included monthly positive and negative controls, and duplicate samples (blind to the analyst), as well
as occasional inter-laboratory controls. There remain several potential sources of measurement error.
First, Colilert generates a “most probable number” of E. coli coliform forming units (CFU) per 100
ml in a given sample, with an estimated 95% confidence interval. Second, samples that are held for
more than six hours prior to incubation may be vulnerable to some bacterial re-growth/death, making
tested samples less representative of the original source. Third, sampling variation is an issue given
the small size of the collection bottle (at 250 ml).
         It is common to use E. coli to quantify microbacteriological water contamination in semi-arid
regions like our study site. The bacteria E. coli is not itself necessarily a pathogen, but testing for
specific pathogens is costly and can be difficult. Dose-response functions for E. coli have been
estimated for gastroenteritis following swimming in fresh water (Kay et al. 1994), but such functions
are location-specific because fecal pathogen characteristics and loads vary over space and time. In a
district near our study site, a U.S. Centers for Disease Control study finds that the most common
bacterial pathogens are Shigella and non-typhoidal Salmonella. We thank Sandra Spence for her
guidance on these procedures.

Child diarrhea
For all children in the compound under age five the respondent is asked about as the incidence of
“three or more loose or watery stools in a 24 hour period,” over the period of the past day and the



                                                                                                      A2
past week. This definition of diarrhea is identical to that used by Aziz et al. (1990) and Huttly et al.
(1987). Additional information about measuring diarrhea in this sample is in Kremer, Miguel, Null,
Van Dusen, and Zwane (2009).

Child anthropometrics
Enumerators used a board and tape measure to measure height for children older than two years of
age, and digital scales for weight. The height of children under two was measured as their recumbent
length using a measuring board, and a digital infant scale measured their weight.

Hygiene knowledge and behaviors
A baseline “diarrhea prevention knowledge score”, was constructed based on the number of correct
responses to an unprompted question on methods to prevent diarrhea; provided. The set of plausible
answers include “boil drinking water”, “eat clean/protected/washed food”, “drink only clean water”,
“use latrine”, “cook food fully”, “do not eat spoiled food”, “wash hands”, “have good hygiene”,
“medication”, or “clean dishes/utensils”. Hygiene behavior was explored by measuring
contamination of people’s hands. To measure fingertip contamination, respondents pressed their
hands into KF Streptococcal media (agar plates), and the lab isolated fecal streptococci bacteria
colonies. Fingertip contamination was measured in only one round of follow-up data collection, so
the reported coefficient gives the difference between the treatment and comparison groups rather than
the difference-in-difference estimate.

Contingent valuation surveys
The exact contingent valuation question wording was:
         Now that you have seen the protected spring, suppose that somehow the spring had been split
         so that there was free access to an unprotected spring and restricted access to a protected
         spring, both at the same site. Would you be willing to pay __ Ksh for one year's access to the
         protected spring, assuming everyone else would also have to pay this amount too?
This closed-end format, offering discrete value choices, is standard in the contingent valuation
literature (Bateman and Willis 1999).

The wording of the question emphasizing expenditure trade-offs was:
      So, just to be sure I understand, you would be willing to give up [price] Ksh of purchases that
      you currently make in order to have access to the protected part of the spring. 250 Ksh per
      year is about 20 Ksh every month. That's a little bit less than a half-liter of kerosene or a
      quarter-kilo of sugar every month. For another reference, a school uniform costs about 500
      Ksh. If you had to give up something you would otherwise spend money on, would you still be
      willing to pay [price] Ksh for access to the protected part of the spring?

We thank Michael Hanemann for discussions on the phrasing and framing of these questions.




                                                                                                      A3
   Appendix Figure 1: Rural Water Project (RWP) Timeline 2004-2007

                         Identified universe of springs; June-July 2004
                         (Nsprings=562)


             Conducted initial site visits and water quality tests,
             Further site visits with Ministry of Water and NGO technical staff,
             Selection of sample; July-November 2004 (Nsprings=200)


                             Spring user lists compiled;
                             July 2004-January 2005 (Nsprings=200)


             Randomization of springs into year of treatment (Nsprings=200)
             Random selection of 7-8 households per spring (Nhh=1500)



Year 1 Treatment                    Year 2 Treatment                  Years 3 and 4 Treatment
(Nsprings=50; Nhh=371)              (Nsprings=50; Nhh=378)            (Nsprings=100; Nhh=751)

Sample after nonviable              Sample after nonviable            Sample after nonviable
springs eliminated                  springs eliminated                springs eliminated
(Nsprings=47; Nhh=350)              (Nsprings=46; Nhh=349)            (Nsprings=91; Nhh=685)



         Household baseline surveys, water quality testing; August 2004-February 2005
         (Nsprings= 184, Nhh=1384 in viable sample)


Year 1 spring protection;
January-April 2005 (Nsprings=47)



    Household surveys, water testing; April-August 2005 (Nsprings=175, Nhh=1,250)



                               Year 2 spring protection;
                               August-November 2005 (Nsprings=46)



  Household surveys, water testing; August-November 2006 (Nsprings=183, Nhh=1,283)
  Household surveys, water testing; January-March 2007 (Nsprings=184, Nhh=1,231)




                                                                                                A4
       Appendix Figure 2: Change in spring water contamination from 2004 to 2007 versus baseline (2004) water contamination




                                                         2
                                                         0
                                                         -2
                                2004 to 2007
                        Change in Spring ln E Coli MPN
                                                         -4
                                                              0        2                4                  6                    8
                                                                           Baseline Spring ln E Coli MPN
                                                                  Treatment Groups 1 and 2            Comparison Group



Notes: The 10-90 range in Baseline ln (E Coli MPN) is [1.1, 6.3]. MPN stands for “most probable number” coliform forming units (CFU) per 100ml.




                                                                                                                                                  A5
