NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE GRANULAR ORIGINS OF AGGREGATE FLUCTUATIONS
Xavier Gabaix
Working Paper 15286
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15286

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2009

For excellent research assistance I thank Francesco Franco, Jinsook Kim, Heiwai Tang, Ding Wu,
and, particularly, Fernando Duarte. For helpful discussions I thank seminar participants at Berkeley,
Boston University, Brown, Columbia, ECARE, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Harvard,
Michigan, MIT, New York University, NBER, Princeton, Toulouse, U.C. Santa Barbara, Yale, the
Econometric Society, the Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics, and Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth
Arrow, Robert Barsky, Susanto Basu, Roland Bénabou, Olivier Blanchard, Ricardo Caballero, David
Canning, Andrew Caplin, Thomas Chaney, V. V. Chari, Larry Christiano, Diego Comin, Don Davis,
Bill Dupor, Steve Durlauf, Alex Edmans, Martin Eichenbaum, Eduardo Engel, John Fernald, Jesus
Fernandez-Villaverde, Richard Frankel, Mark Gertler, Robert Hall, John Haltiwanger, Chad Jones,
Boyan Jovanovic, Finn Kydland, David Laibson, Ellen McGrattan, Todd Mitton, Thomas Philippon,
Robert Solow, Peter Temin, Jose Tessada and David Weinstein. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Xavier Gabaix. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations
Xavier Gabaix
NBER Working Paper No. 15286
August 2009
JEL No. E32
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes that idiosyncratic firm-level fluctuations can explain an important part of aggregate
shocks, and provide a microfoundation for aggregate productivity shocks. Existing research has focused
on using aggregate shocks to explain business cycles, arguing that individual firm shocks average
out in aggregate. I show that this argument breaks down if the distribution of firm sizes is fat-tailed,
as documented empirically. The idiosyncratic movements of the largest 100 firms in the US appear
to explain about one third of variations in output and the Solow residual. This "granular" hypothesis
suggests new directions for macroeconomic research, in particular that macroeconomic questions can
be clarified by looking at the behavior of large firms. This paper's ideas and analytical results may
also be useful to think about the fluctuations of other economic aggregates, such as exports or the trade
balance.

Xavier Gabaix
New York University
Finance Department
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, 9th floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
xgabaix@stern.nyu.edu

1.

Introduction

This paper proposes a simple origin of aggregate shocks. It develops the view that a large part
of aggregate fluctuations arises from idiosyncratic shocks to individual firms. This approach
sheds light on a number of issues that are diﬃcult to address in models that postulate aggregate
shocks. Although economy-wide shocks (inflation, wars, policy shocks) are no doubt important,
they have diﬃculty in explaining most fluctuations (Cochrane 1994, Summers 1986). Often, the
explanation for year-to-year jumps of aggregate quantities is elusive. On the other hand, there is
a large amount of anecdotal evidence for the importance of idiosyncratic shocks. For instance, in
December 2004, the $24 billion one-time Microsoft dividend boosted growth in personal income
from 0.6% to 3.7%.1 A macroeconomist would have diﬃculty in explaining this jump in personal
income without examining individual firm behavior. The OECD (2004) analyzes that in 2000,
Nokia contributed 1.6 percentage points of Findland’s GDP growth. Likewise, shocks to GDP
may stem from a variety of events, such as successful innovations by Wal-Mart, the diﬃculties
of a Japanese bank, new exports by Boeing, a strike at General Motors.2
Since modern economies are dominated by large firms, idiosyncratic shocks to these firms
can lead to non-trivial aggregate shocks. For instance, in Korea, the top two firms (Samsung
and Hundyai) together account for 35% of exports, and the sales of those two firms account for
22% of Korean GDP (di Giovanni and Levchenko 2009). In Japan, the top 10 firms account for
35% of the exports (Canals et al. 2007). For the U.S., Figure 1 reports the total sales of the top
50 and 100 firms as a fraction of GDP. On average, the sales of the top 50 firms are 24% of GDP,
while the sales of the top 100 firms are 29% of GDP. The top 100 firms hence represent a large
part of the macroeconomic activity, and so understanding their actions gives a good insight into
aggregate economy.
In this view, many economic fluctuations are not due, primitively, to small diﬀuse shocks
that directly aﬀect every firm. Instead, many economic fluctuations are attributable to the
incompressible “grains” of economic activity, the large firms. I call this view the “granular”
hypothesis. In the granular view, idiosyncratic shocks to large firms have the potential to
generate small aggregate shocks that aﬀect GDP, and via general equilibrium, all firms.
The granular hypothesis oﬀers a microfoundation for the aggregate shocks of real business
cycle models (Kydland and Prescott 1982). Hence, real business cycle shocks are not, at heart,
mysterious “aggregate productivity shocks” or “a measure of our ignorance” (Abramovitz 1956).
Instead, they are well-defined shocks to individual firms. The granular hypothesis sheds light
1

Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, January 31, 2005.
The example of Nokia is extreme but may be useful. In 2003, worldwide sales of Nokia were $37 billion,
representing 26% of Finland’s GDP of $142 billion. This is not suﬃcient for a proper assessment of Nokia’s
importance, but gives some order of magnitude, as the Finnish base of Nokia is an important residual claimant
of the fluctuations of Nokia International.
2

2

.35
.3
.25
.2
.15
.1
.05
0

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

year
Top 50 firms

Top 100 firms

Figure 1: Sum of the sales of the top 50 and 100 non-oil firms in Compustat, as a fraction of
GDP. Hulten’s theorem (Appendix B) motivates the use of sales rather than value added.

on a number of other issues, such as the dependence of the amplitude of GDP fluctuations
on GDP level, the microeconomic composition of GDP, the distribution of GDP and firm-level
fluctuations.
In most of this paper, the standard deviation of the percentage growth rate of a firm is
assumed to be independent of its size.3 This explains why individual firms can matter in the
aggregate. If Wal-Mart doubles its number of supermarkets and thus its size, its variance is not
divided by two – as would be the case if Wal-Mart was the amalgamation of many independent
supermarkets. Instead, the newly acquired supermarkets inherit the “Wal-Mart” shocks, and
the total percentage variance of Wal-Mart does not change. This paper conceptualizes these
shocks as productivity growth, but the analysis holds for other shocks.4

√
The main argument is summarized as follows. First, it is critical to show that 1/ N di-

versification does not occur in an economy with a fat-tailed distribution of firms. A simple
diversification argument shows that, in an economy with N firms with independent shocks, ag√
gregate fluctuations should have a size proportional to 1/ N . Given that modern economies
3

The benchmark that the variance of the percentage growth rate is approximately independent of size (“Gibrat’s
law” for variances) appears to hold to a good first degree, see section 2.5.
4
The productivity shocks can come from a decision of the firm’s research department, of the firm’s chief
executive oﬃcer, of how to process shipments, inventories, or which new line of products to try. They can also
stem from changes in capacity utilization, and particularly strikes. Suppose a firm, which uses only capital and
labor, is on strike for half the year. For many purposes, its eﬀective productivity that year is halved. This paper
does not require the productivity shocks to arise from any particular source.

3

can have millions of firms, this suggests that idiosyncratic fluctuations will have a negligible
aggregate eﬀect. This paper points out that, when firm size is power-law distributed, the conditions under which one derives the central limit theorem break down, and other mathematics
apply (see Appendix A). In the central case of Zipf’s law, aggregate volatility decays according
√
√
to 1/ ln N , rather than 1/ N . The strong 1/ N diversification is replaced by a much milder
one that decays according to 1/ ln N . In an economy with a fat-tailed distribution of firms,
diversification eﬀects due to country size are quite small.
Section 4 then investigates accordingly the proportion of aggregate shocks that can be accounted for by idiosyncratic fluctuations. I construct the “granular residual” Γt , which is a
parsimonious measure of the shocks to the top 100 firms:

Γt :=

ÃK
X
i=1

Salesi,t−1

!−1 Ã K
X
i=1

!

Salesi,t−1 (git − gt ) ,

where git −gt is a simple measure of the idiosyncratic shock to firm i. Regressing the growth rate
of GDP on the granular residual yields an R2 of roughly one third. Prima facie, this means that

idiosyncratic shocks to the top 100 firms in the U.S. can explain one third of the fluctuations of
GDP and the Solow residual.
Having established that idiosyncratic shocks do not die out in the aggregate, I show in
section 5 that they are of the correct order of magnitude to explain business cycles. A result
based on Hulten (1978) shows that, if firm i has a productivity shock dπi , these shocks are
i.i.d., and there is no amplification mechanism, then the standard deviation of TFP growth
is σT F P = σπ hS , where σπ is the standard deviation of the i.i.d. productivity shocks, and
hS is the sales Herfindahl of the economy. Using the estimate of volatility of productivity of
σπ = 12%/year, the sales Herfindahl of hS = 6.1% for the US in 2002, one predicts a TFP
volatility equal to σT F P = 12% · 6.1% = 0.9%. Standard amplification mechanisms generate the

order of magnitude of business cycle fluctuations, σGDP = 1.4%. Non-US data leads to even

larger business cycle fluctuations. I conclude that idiosyncratic volatility seems quantitatively
large enough to matter at the macroeconomic level.
Previous economists have proposed mechanisms that generate macroeconomic shocks from
purely microeconomic causes. A pioneering paper is Jovanovic (1987), whose models generate
√
non-vanishing aggregate fluctuations owing to a multiplier proportional to N , the square root of
√
the number of firms. However, Jovanovic’s theoretical multiplier of N ' 1000 is much larger

than is empirically plausible.5 Nonetheless, Jovanovic’s model spawned a lively intellectual

quest. Durlauf (1993) generates macroeconomic uncertainty with idiosyncratic shocks and local
5

If the actual multiplier was so large, the impact of trade shocks, for instance, would be much higher than we
observe.

4

interactions between firms. The drivers of his results are the non-linear interactions between
firms, while in this paper it is the skewed distribution of firms. Bak, Chen, Scheinkman, and
Woodford (1993) apply the physical theory of self-organizing criticality. While there is much to
learn from their approach, it generates fluctuations more fat-tailed than in reality, with infinite
means. Nirei (2006) proposes a model where aggregate fluctuations arise from (s,S) rules at the
firm level, in the spirit of Bak et al. (1993). These models are conceptually innovative, but
they they are hard to work with theoretically and empirically. The mechanism proposed in this
paper is tractable, and relies on readily observable quantities.
Long and Plosser (1983) suggest that sectorial (rather than firm) shocks might account for
GDP fluctuations. As their model has a small number of sectors, those shocks can be viewed as
mini-aggregate shocks. Horvath (1998, 2000) and Conley and Dupor (2003) explore this hypothesis further. They find that sector-specific shocks are an important source of aggregate volatility.
Finally, Horvath (1998) and Dupor (1999) debate whether N sectors can have a volatility that
√
does not decay according to 1/ N . I find an alternative solution to their debate, which is,
formalized in Proposition 2. My approach relies on those earlier contributions, and clarifies that
the fat-tailed nature of the sectoral shocks is important theoretically, as it determines whether
the central limit theorem applies.
Studies disagree somewhat on the relative importance of sector specific shocks, aggregate
shocks, and complementarities. Shea (2002) quantifies that complementarities play a major role
in aggregate business cycle fluctuations. Caballero, Engel and Haltiwanger (1997) find that
aggregate shocks are important, while Horvath (1998) concludes that sector-specific shocks go a
long way toward explaining aggregate disturbances. Many of these eﬀects in this paper could be
expressed in terms of sectors. Carvahlo (2009) studies granular eﬀects in the economy viewed
as a network, by looking at the size of sectors and their interconnectedness.
Pareto (1896) was the first to discover that the income distribution follows a power law. A
growing number of other economic variables appear to follow power laws: in particular Zipf’s
law, which is a power law with an exponent close to 1. This includes the size of cities (Zipf
1949, Gabaix 2009), firms (Axtell 2001, Fujiwara et al. 2004, Okuyama et al. 1999), mutual
funds (Gabaix et al. 2006), Internet sites (Barabasi and Albert 1999). The origin of this Zipf
distribution is becoming better understood (Simon 1955, Gabaix 1999, 2009, Luttmer 2007,
Rossi-Hansberg and Wright 2007).
Granular eﬀects are likely to be even stronger outside the U.S, as the U.S. is more diversified
than most other countries. One number reported in the literature is the value of the assets
controlled by the richest 10 families, divided by GDP. Claessens, Djankov and Lang (2000) find
a number equal to 38% in Asia, including 84% of GDP in Hong Kong, 76% in Malaysia, 39% in
Thailand. Faccio and Lang (2002) also find that the top 10 families control 21% of listed assets
in their sample of European firms. It would be interesting to transpose the present analysis to
5

those countries, and to other entities than firms — for instance, business groups, or sectors.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops a simple model. Section 3 provides
a richer model that gives a foundation for the measurement of idiosyncratic shocks, and spells
out how production linkages can make all microeconomic and macroeconomic variables comove.
Section 4 shows directly that the idiosyncratic movements of firms appear to explain, year by
year, about one third of actual fluctuations in GDP and the Solow residual. Section 5 provides
a calibration that indicates that the eﬀects are of the right order of magnitude to account for
macroeconomic fluctuations. Section 6 concludes.

2.
2.1.

The Core Idea

A Simple “Islands” Economy

This section uses a concise model to illustrate the idea. In this economy there are only idiosyncratic shocks to firms. Let Sit represent firm i’s production in year t. It experiences a growth
rate:
Si,t+1 − Sit
∆Si,t+1
=
= σi εi,t+1
Si,t
Sit

(1)

where σi is firm i’s volatility and εi,t+1 are uncorrelated random variables with mean 0 and
variance 1. Total GDP is:
Yt =

N
X

Sit

(2)

i=1

and GDP growth is
N
N
X
Sit
1 X
∆Yt+1
=
∆Si,t+1 =
σi εi,t+1 .
Yt
Yt
Yt
i=1

i=1

As the shocks εi,t+1 are uncorrelated, the standard deviation of GDP growth is σGDP =
´1/2
³
var ∆YYt+1
:
t
ÃN
µ ¶2 !1/2
X
Sit
2
σGDP =
σi ·
.
(3)
Yt
i=1

2
, is the weighted sum of the variance σi2 of idiosyncratic shocks
Hence the variance of GDP, σGDP
³ ´2
with weights equal to SYitt , the squared share of output for which that firm i accounts. If the

firms all have the same volatility σi = σ, we obtain:

σGDP = σh

6

(4)

where h is the square root of the sales Herfindahl of the economy:

h=

" N µ ¶ #1/2
X Sit 2
Yt

i=1

.

(5)

For simplicity, h will be referred to as the “Herfindahl” of the economy.
This paper works first with the basic model (1)-(2), which can be viewed as the linearization of
a host of richer models, such as the one in section 3. The arguments apply if general equilibrium
mechanisms are added.

2.2.

√
The 1/ N Argument for the Irrelevance of Idiosyncratic Shocks

Macroeconomists often appeal to aggregate (or at least sector-wide) shocks, since idiosyncratic
fluctuations disappear in the aggregate if there is a large number of firms N . Consider firms
of initially identical size equal to 1/N of GDP, and identical standard deviation σi = σ. Then
(4)-(5) gives:
σ
σGDP = √ .
N
To estimate the order of magnitude of the cumulative eﬀect of idiosyncratic shocks, take an
estimate of firm volatility σ = 12% from Section (5), and consider an economy with N = 106
firms6 . Then
σ
12%
= 0.012% per year.
σGDP = √ =
103
N
Such a GDP volatility of 0.012% is much too small to account for the empirically-measured
size of macroeconomic fluctuations of around 1%. This is why economists typically appeal to
√
aggregate shocks. More general modeling assumptions predict a 1/ N scaling, as shown by the
next Proposition, whose proof is in Appendix B.
Proposition 1 Consider an islands economy with N firms whose sizes are drawn from a distribution with finite variance. Suppose that they all have the same volatility σ. Then the economy’s
GDP volatility is:
σGDP

£ ¤1/2
E S2
σ
√ .
=
E [S]
N

(6)

Proposition 1 will be contrasted with Proposition 2 below, which shows that diﬀerent models
of the size distribution of firms lead to dramatically diﬀerent results.
6

Axtell (2001) reports that in 1997 there were 5.5 million firms in the United States.

7

Figure 2: Log frequency ln f (S) vs log size ln S of U.S. firm sizes (by number of employees) for
1997. OLS fit gives a slope of 2.059 (s.e.= 0.054; R2 =0.992). This corresponds to a frequency
f (S) ∼ S −2.059 , i.e. a power law distribution with exponent ζ = 1.059. This is very close to
Zipf’s law, which says that ζ = 1. Source: Axtell (2001).

2.3.

Empirical Evidence that for the Fat-Tailed Distribution of Firms

Empirical evidence suggests that a good parameterization for the firm size distribution is a
power law distribution:
P (S > x) = ax−ζ .

(7)

for x > a1/ζ . To estimate (7), it is useful to take the density f (x) = ζa/xζ+1 , and its logarithm
ln f (x) = − (ζ + 1) ln x + C

(8)

where C is a constant. An extensive literature has estimated the size distribution of firms, but
typically the sample includes only firms listed in the stock market. Axtell (2001) extends the
literature by using the Census, which lists all the U.S. firms.
I reproduce his plot of (8) in Figure 2. The horizontal axis shows ln x, where x is the size of
a firm in number of employees. The vertical axis shows the log of the fraction of firms with size
x, ln f (x). We expect to see a straight line in the region where (8) holds, and indeed the Figure
shows a very clear fit.7 An OLS fit of (8) yields an estimate of R2 = 0.992, and ζ = 1.059±0.054.
7
Power law fits are typically less good at the two extremes of the distribution. In Axtell’s data, which are
binned in powers of 3, the fit is less good for firms between 1 and 3 employees. This does not aﬀect our analysis,
which deals with large firms. The fit may also be less good in the last bin, for the firms between 311 =309,000 and

8

The size distribution of U.S. firms is well approximated by the power law with exponent ζ = 1.8
The rest of the paper will pay special attention to the case ζ = 1, the “Zipf” value. This
value (ζ ' 1) is often found in the social sciences, for instance in the size of cities (Zipf 1949),
and in the amount of assets under management of mutual funds (Gabaix et al. 2003) and banks

(Pushkin and Hassan 2004).9 The origins of this distribution are becoming better understood10 .
The power law distribution (7) has fat tails, and thus produces some very large firms. The
next section studies its implications for GDP fluctuations.

2.4.

√
The Failure of the 1/ N Argument when the Firm Size Distribution is
Power Law

The next Proposition examines behavior under a “fat-tailed” distribution of firms. The proof is
in Appendix B.
Proposition 2 Consider an islands economy with a large number N of firms with volatility of
growth rate σ, and whose size distribution is a power law distribution P (S > x) = ax−ζ with
exponent ζ ≥ 1. Then its GDP volatility is:
vζ
σ for ζ = 1
ln N
vζ
∼ 1−1/ζ σ for 1 < ζ < 2
N
vζ
∼ 1/2 σ for ζ ≥ 2
N

σGDP ∼
σGDP
σGDP

(9)
(10)
(11)

where vζ is a random variable that is independent of N and σ.
The firm size distribution has thin tails, i.e. finite variance, if and only if ζ > 2. Proposition
√
1 states that if the firm size distribution has thin tails, then σGDP decays according to as 1/ N .
In contrast, Proposition 2 states that if the firm size distribution has fat tails (ζ < 2), σGDP
√
decays much more slowly than 1/ N .
In the limit case of Zipf’s law (ζ = 1), larger countries are barely more diversified than small
countries.11 The reason is that, if Zipf’s law holds, the top K firms of a country account for
312 =920,000 employees. But there are so few such firms, that it is unclear whether the deviation is statistically
significant.
8
Okuyama et al. (1999) and Fujiwara et al. (2004) also find that ζ ' 1 for Japanese and European firms
respectively.
9
Axtell (2001) shows also ζ ' 1 for sales.
10
See Simon (1955), Gabaix (1999), Gabaix (2009) for a survey of various candidate explanations, and Luttmer
(2007) and Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2007) for recent developments.
11
If there are N identical firms, 1/h2N = N . So 1/h2N reveals the “eﬀective” number of firms in the economy, for
diversification purposes. So, in a Zipfian world (where ζ = 1), the eﬀective number of firms is not N but (ln N)2 .
For 1 < ζ < 2, the eﬀective number of firms scales as N 2−2/ζ . This notion of the “eﬀective” number of firms
is important as long as diversification plays a role, as is the case in Caballero and Engel (2004) and the present
paper.

9

a finite, as opposed to infinitesimal, fraction of the total output.12 To see the result, take two
countries, 1 and 2, and suppose that country 2 is twice as large as country 1, in the sense that
it has twice as many firms as country 1. Firms in both countries are drawn from the same
distribution. If Zipf’s law holds, then the largest firm of country 2 will be, on average, twice as
large as the largest firm in country 1. Indeed, the largest K firms will be, on average, twice as
large in country 2 than in country 1. Hence, the relative share of the top K firms will be the
same in country 2 and country 1. The Herfindahls are the same, and, as GDP volatility comes
only from firm-level volatility in the scenario considered in Proposition 2, GDP volatilities are
the same. If the distribution is a power law with exponent ζ between 1 and 2, the same reasoning
holds, except that the largest firms in country 2 are 21/ζ larger than in country 1, so their share
of GDP is 21/ζ−1 < 1 that of country 1. Thus the volatility of country 2 is that of country 1,
times 21/ζ−1 , as given by equation 10.
Proposition 2 oﬀers a resolution to the debate between Horvath (1998, 2000) and Dupor
(1999). Horvath submits evidence that sectorial shocks may be enough to generate aggregate
fluctuations. Dupor (1999) debates this on theoretical grounds, and claims that Horvath is able
to generate large aggregate fluctuations only because he uses a moderate number of sectors
(N = 36). If he had much more disaggregated sectors (e.g. 100 times as many), then aggregate
√
volatility would decrease in 1/ N (e.g. 10 times smaller). Proposition 2 illustrates that both
viewpoints are correct, but apply in diﬀerent settings. Dupor’s reasoning holds only in a world
of small firms, when the central limit theorem can apply. Horvath’s empirical world is one where
the firm size distribution of firms is suﬃciently leptokurtic that the central limit theorem does
not apply. Instead, Proposition 2 applies, and GDP volatility remains substantial even if the
number N of subunits is large.
Though the benchmark case of Zipf’s law is empirically relevant, and theoretically clean and
appealing, most of the arguments in this paper do not depend on it. The results only require
that the Herfindahl of actual economies is suﬃciently large. For instance, if the distribution of
firm sizes was lognormal with a suﬃciently high variance, then quantitatively very little would
change.

2.5.

GDP Volatility When the Volatility of a Firm Depends on its Size

I now study the case where the volatility of a firm’s percentage growth rate decreases with firm
size. I examine the functional form σ Firm (S) = kS −α , from equation 12. If α > 0, then large
firms have a smaller standard deviation that small firms. This was Hymer and Pashigan (1962)’s
original finding. A series of papers (Stanley et al. 1996, Amaral et al. 1997, Canning et al.
1998) quantify the relation more precisely, and showed that (12) holds for firms in Compustat,
12

This is true up to a slowly varying factor, 1/ ln N .

10

with α ' 1/6.

It is unclear whether the conclusions from Compustat can generalize to the whole economy.

Compustat only comprises firms traded on the stock market and these are likely to be more
volatile than non-traded firms, as small volatile firms are more likely to seek outside equity
financing, while large firms are in any case very likely to be listed in the stock market. This
selection bias implies that the value of α measured from Compustat firms alone is likely to be
larger than in a sample composed of all firms. It is indeed possible α may be 0 when estimated
on a sample that includes all firms, as random growth models have long postulated. Axtell
and Teitelbaum (2005), using on two years of data from the U.S. census, conclude that α ' 0.
Further research is needed to verify this on a comprehensive set of large firms over a long time
period.
In any case, any deviations from Gibrat’s law for variances are likely to be small, i.e. 0 ≤

α ≤ 1/6. If there is no diversification as size increases, then α = 0. If there is full diversification,

and a firm of size S is composed of S units, then α = 1/2. Empirically, firms are much closer to
the “Gibrat” benchmark of no diversification, α = 0.
The next Proposition extends Propositions 1 and 2 to the case where firm volatility decreases
with firm size.

Proposition 3 Consider an islands economy, with N firms that have power law distribution
P (S > x) = x−ζ for ζ ∈ [1, ∞). Assume that the volatility of a firm of size S is
σ Firm (S) = kS −α
for some α > 0. Define
α0 = min

µ

α−1
1
,1 +
2
ζ

(12)
¶

(13)

GDP fluctuations have the form:
∆Yt
0
= kN −α gt if ζ > 1
Yt
0
N −α
∆Yt
gt if ζ = 1
=k
Yt
ln N

(14)
(15)

such that when N → ∞, gt converges to a non-degenerate distribution. When ζ > 1, gt converges

to a Lévy stable distribution with exponent min {ζ/ (1 − α) , 2}.

In particular, the volatility σ (S) of GDP growth decreases as a power law function of GDP

11

S:13
0

σ GDP (S) ∼ S −α .

(16)

To see the intuition for Proposition 3, we apply the case of Zipf’s law (ζ = 1) to the twocountry example of Proposition 2.14 Country 2 has twice as many firms as country 1. Its largest
K firms are twice as large as the largest firms of country 1. However, scaling according to (12)
implies that their volatility is 2−α times the volatility of firms in country 1. Hence, the volatility
of country 2’s GDP is 2−α times the volatility of country 1’s GDP, i.e. (16). Putting this another
way, under the case presented by Proposition 3, and ζ = 1, large firms are less volatile than
small firms (equation 12). The top firms in big countries are larger (in an absolute sense) than
top firms in small countries. As the top firms determine a country’s volatility, big countries have
less volatile GDP than small countries (equation 16).
Also, one can reinterpret Proposition 3 by interpreting a large “firm” as a “country” made up
of smaller entities. If these entities follow a power-law distribution, then Proposition 3 applies
and predicts that the fluctuations of the growth rate ∆ ln Sit , once re-scaled by Sit−α , follow a
Lévy distribution with exponent min {ζ/ (1 − α) , 2}. Amaral et al. (1997) and Canning et al.

(1998) plot this empirical distribution, which looks roughly like a Lévy stable distribution. It
could be that the fat tails distribution of firm growth come from the fat tail distribution of the
subcomponents of a firm.15
A corollary of Proposition 3 may be worth highlighting.
Corollary 1 (Similar scaling of firms and countries.) When Zipf ’s law holds (ζ = 1) and
α ≤ 1/2, we have α0 = α, i.e. firms and countries should see their volatility scale with a similar
exponent:

σ Firms (S) ∼ σ GDP (S) ∼ S −α .

(17)

Interestingly, Canning et al. (1998) and Lee et al. (1998) present evidence that supports
(17), with an small exponent α ' α0 ' 1/6 (see also Koren and Tenreyro 2007). A more

systematic investigation of this issue would be interesting.

3.

A Model with Comovement

The previous section has shown that how idiosyncratic firm shocks might explain a significant
portion of aggregate fluctuations. This section considers whether they can also create plausibly
13

In this paper, f (S) ∼ g (S) for some functions f, g, means that the ratio f (S) /g (S) tends, for large S, to be
a positive real number. So f and g have the same scaling “up to a constant real factor”.
14
When ζ = 1, the limiting distribution of g is a more complicated distribution, a ratio of two non-independent
Lévy distributions. Logan et al. (1973) provide an analysis of some such ratios.
15
See Sutton (2002) for a related model; and Wyart and Bouchaud (2003) for a related analysis, which acknowledges the contribution of the present article (which was first circulated in the Fall 2001).

12

the strong comovements between the various firms or sectors of the economy, as observed, for
instance, by Long and Plosser (1983), Shea (2002), Franco and Philippon (2008) and Foerster,
Sarte and Watson (2008).

Horvath (1998), Long and Plosser (1983) and Shea (2002) present

models that generate comovement.16 Horvath (2000) calibrates a dynamic general equilibrium
model with many sectors. I present a simplified version of those models. Its main virtue is that
it is solvable in closed form, so that the mechanisms are fairly transparent.
After a shock to firm i, all the other firms adjust instantaneously, rather than over time
through the input-output matrix. There is an aggregate good. Each intermediate good firm i
uses Li , Ki , Xi of labor, capital and aggregate good, to produce:
Qi =

¡
¢b
Ai Lαi Ki1−α Xi1−b
bb (1 − b)1−b

(18)

GDP is production net of the intermediate inputs, the Xi ’s:
Ã
!ψ
X 1/ψ
X
Y =
Qi
−
Xi
i

(19)

i

with ψ > 1. b is the share of intermediate inputs, and will also be the ratio of value added to
sales, both at the level of the firm, and of the economy.
The representative agent’s utility function is U = C− L1/ξ .17 There is no investment, so
P
Ki =
C = Y . Thus the social planner’s program is: max{K i ,Li ,Xi } Y − L1/ξ subject to
P
K; Li = L.
To abstract from a potential ineﬃciency arising from positive markups, I assume that the

prices equal marginal cost. Several devices can generate this assumption. Firms could be competitive because there is free entry — markets are contestable in the sense of Baumol (1982).
Another interpretation is that the “firms” are sectors made of competitive firms. A last possibility is that the government may have set an input subsidy equal to ψ for the intermediary
firms. In any case, even if there was a strictly positive, constant markup, the formulas for the
main results of this section (Proposition 4) would be unaﬀected.
16

Long and Plosser (1983) impose a Cobb-Douglas structure, which imposes zero idiosyncratic movement in
the sales per employee and dollar sales.
17
Here the utility function C− L1/ξ simply captures the flexibility of labor supply along the business cycle, as
formalized in equations (26)-(27). The linearity in C is for convenience only, as the model abstracts from interest
rate movements and capital accumulation.

13

The model gives:
GDP : Y = ΛLα K 1−α
Ã
!(ψ−1)/b
X 1/(ψ−1)
TFP : Λ =
Ai

(20)
(21)

i

X

pi Qi = Y /b
µ ¶1/(ψ−1)
Salesi pi Qi
Ai
:
=
/b
GDP
Y
Λb

Sum of sales : H =

(22)
(23)

The result is standard, except for the b term in Eq. (21), which indicates that 1/b is a
“productivity multiplier”. If all firms increase their productivity Ai by 1%, TFP increases by
1/b %. This eﬀect comes from the fact that a Hicks-neutral productivity shock increases gross
output (sales), not just value added, and has been analyzed by Domar (1961), Hulten (1978)
and Jones (2009).18
I use the “hat” notation to indicate a proportional change: Zb = dZ/Z.19 I assume that

we start from a steady state equilibrium, and that, in the short run, labor but not capital is
reallocated across firms.20

Models such as (18) always deliver a Sales / Employees ratio that is independent of the
firm’s productivity.21 The reason for this almost surely counterfactual prediction, is that labor
is assumed to be costlessly adjustable. To capture the realistic case of labor adjustment costs, I
assume that a fraction 1−λ of labor is a quasi-fixed factor, in the sense of Oi (1962). Technically,
I represent: Li = LλV,i L1−λ
F,i , where LV,i and LF,i are respectively the variable part labor and the
quasi-fixed part of labor. After a small shock, only LV,i adjusts. The disutility of labor remains
is aggregate labor.22 Likewise, I assume that capital is quasi-fixed in
L1/ξ , where L = LλV L1−λ
F
the short run.23

18

bi to each firm i. I call Si = pi Qi the
One can now study the eﬀect of a productivity shock A

To see this eﬀect most clearly, consider an economy with a production function which, at the level
of the representative firm, is Q = A (L/b)b (X/ (1 − b))1−b , where X is the intermediary inputs. GDP is
Y = maxX A (L/b)b (X/ (1 − b))1−b − X. Solving for X yields Y = A1/b L. Though TFP is A at the firm
level, it is A1/b at the aggregate level.
19
αY β Zγ =
The rules are well-known, and come from taking the logarithm and diﬀerentiating. For instance, X \
e
e
e
αX + β Y + γ Z.
20
This formulation allows for other variants. For instance, if both capital and labor can be reallocated, then
one replaces α, the current share of labor, by 1.
21
If the sales are Si = f (Ai ) Lθi , the frictionless optimum labor supply maximizes f (Ai ) Lθi − wLi , and so at
the optimum, the ratio of sales per employee, Si /Li = w/θ, is independent of the productivity Ai .
22
Alternatively,
one could
 formulate the disutility of labor as any function v (LV , LF ). ξ is then defined as:

∂ 2 v/∂ 2 LV
ξ = λ/ LV ∂v/∂LV + 1 .
23
Proposition 4 describes the short term behavior. In a next iteration of this paper, the long term analysis
should be provided, including with the adjustment of quasi-fixed labor, and capital. One can anticipate that these
extensions will not change materially the calibration for the short run.

14

dollar sales of firm i.
bi . Macroeconomic variProposition 4 Suppose that each firm i receives a productivity shock A
ables change according to:

b=
TFP : Λ

X Si

bi =
A

Y
1
b
Λ
GDP : Yb =
(1 − αξ)
b = ξ Yb
Employment : L

X Salesi
GDP

bi
A

Wage : w
b = (1 − ξ) Yb

(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)

and firm-level variables change according to:

bi = β A
bi + (1 − βb (1 − αξ)) Yb
Dollar sales : Sbi = X

(28)

bi + (1 − ψβb (1 − αξ)) Yb
b i = ψβ A
Production : Q

(29)

b i = λβ A
bi + λ (ξ − βb (1 − αξ)) Yb
Employment : L

(31)

bi + (ψ − 1) βb (1 − αξ) Yb
Price : pbi = − (ψ − 1) β A

\
b
b
Dollar sales per Employee : S
i /Li = (1 − λ) β Ai + (1 − λξ − (1 − λ) βb (1 − αξ)) Y

(30)

(32)

where

β = 1/ (ψ − bαλ − 1 + b)

(33)

Equation (24) is Hulten’s (1978) equation. TFP is entirely the sum of idiosyncratic firm-level
shocks. Otherwise equations (25)-(27) are standard. GDP growth is TFP growth, multiplied by
an amplification mechanism, labor supply.
The new results are the firm-level changes, in equations (28)-(32). The economy behaves
like a one-factor model, with an “aggregate shock”, the GDP shock Yb . Again, this shock stems

from a multitude of idiosyncratic shocks. The “aggregate shock” causes all firm-level quantities
to comove. Aggregating, industry-level quantities would comove too. Economically, when firm

i has a positive shock, it makes the aggregate economy more productive (equations 21 and 24),
and aﬀect the other firms in three diﬀerent ways. First, other firms can use more intermediary
inputs produced by firm i, hence increasing their production. Second, firm i demands more
inputs from the other firms (equation 28), which leads their production to increase. Third,
given firm i commands a large share of output, it will use more of the inputs of the economy,
which tends to reduce the other firms’ output.24 The net eﬀect depends on the magnitudes of
the elasticities.
24

In a more general framework (e.g., Acemoglu 2002), firm i could use less of some inputs.

15

I calibrate the model using conventional parameters to the extent possible.25 The labor
share is α = 2/3. For the share of intermediate inputs Jorgensen, Gollop and Fraumeni (1987),
updated in 1996, provide b = 1/2.26 The elasticity ψ is a conventional ψ = 1.2.

27

To set

ξ ∈ (0, 1), I am guided by (26)-(27). In the business cycle, the volatility of hours is greater
than the volatility of the compensation, which means ξ ∈ (1/2, 1). Indeed, the ratio of these

volatilities is about 2.5 empirically28 , which together with (26)-(27) implies ξ = 0.7. By contrast,
there is little inherited guidance about the share of labor that is flexible in the short run, λ.
Given λ is between 0 and 1, I rely on Laplace’s principle and set λ = 1/2.
Of particular interest is the measure used in section 4, the change in sales per employee,
\
bi , with a coeﬃcient, (1 − λ) β. Hence, idiosyncratic
Si /Li . It varies with the true productivity A
\
movements in S
i /Li are a good measure of the idiosyncratic shocks in productivity. The above
parameter values generate a coeﬃcient of (1 − λ) β = 0.94 in equation (32), which is very close

to one. Hence, labor productivity is a good measure of true productivity.

All the variables in Proposition 4 have a positive loading on the GDP factor Yb , i.e. they

all comove positively with GDP. I conclude that the above model is a useful benchmark to
understand comovement the business cycle.

4.

Tentative Empirical Evidence from the Granular Residual
4.1.

The Granular Residual: Motivation and Definition

This section presents tentative evidence that the idiosyncratic movements of the top 100 firms
explain an important fraction (one third) of the movement of total factor productivity (TFP).
The key challenge is to identify idiosyncratic shocks. Large firms could be volatile because of
aggregate shocks, rather than the other way round. I use a variety of ways to attempt to do
this.
25
ei , which generates a perfect correlation between firm-specific
Model (18) allows only for 1 firm-level shock, A
movements in sales and employment. However, the data shows the an imperfect correlation between sales and
employement of about 1/2, and a correlation between employment and labor productivity (as measured by sales /
employees) of about -1/2, which indicates two shocks — perhaps one Hicks neutral productivity or demand shock,
and one labor-saving shock. This type of diﬃculty is familiar, and there is no consensus solution. Hence, the
above calibration can only be indicative a definitive one would require a richer model with two types of firm-level
shocks. See Altig, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Linde (2005) for a calibration that takes into account many
relevant frictions
26
I thank Susanto Basu for providing this updated number.
27
A higher ψ may be required to better fit the short run behavior. As Golosov and Lucas (2007) note, this
implies that a 10% reduction in price induces a very high quantity response of ψ/ (ψ − 1) × 10% = 60%, which
is probably unrealistically large as a short-run response response. Hence, for the purposes of a calibration of
short-run shocks, one may need a higher ψ. This problem, they point out, is “endemic” in constant elasticity of
substitution models. Other frictions need to be included to solve this problem. I do not attempt to resolve the
problem. For the limited purposes of this calibration, ψ = 1.2 is probably a good benchmark.
28
Indeed, in Cooley and Prescott (1995, p.30), the volatility of hours is 1.64% while the volatility of the wage
is 0.65%.

16

I start with a parsimonious proxy for the labor productivity of firm i, the log of its sales per
worker:
zit := ln

Sales of firm i in year t
.
Number of employees of firm i in year t

(34)

This measure is selected as it requires only basic data that is more likely to be available for
non-US countries, unlike more sophisticated measures such as a firm-level Solow residual. Most
studies that construct productivity measures from Compustat data use (34). I define the productivity growth rate as git = zit − zit−1 . I focus on the K = 100 firms that had the largest sales

in year t − 1. (Results are similar for other choices of K).

Many models, including the model of section 3 (eq. 32) predict that labor productivity

growth rate behaves according to:
bit .
git = ft + γ A

(35)

bit is the growth rate of
where ft is a factor (proportional to GDP growth in equation 32), and A

total factor productivity of firm i. The same models also support the following decomposition:
git = at + aIi (t) + εit

(36)

where at is a shock common to all firms, aIi (t) is a shock specific to the industry Ii of firm i,
and εit is a shock that is purely idiosyncratic to firm i. Hence equations 35 and 36 link firm
bit to market and industry factors, and an idiosyncratic component.
total productivity growth A
Section 4.3 analyzes more complex models.

Hulten (1978)’s theorem, and the model of section 3, predict that TFP in the economy

evolves according to:
bt =
Λ

X Salesi
GDP

bit =
A

X Si
Y

bit
A

(37)

My goal is to investigate whether εit , the idiosyncratic component of the total factor productivity
bit of large firms, can explain aggregate TFP.29 Owing to the relationship between
growth rate A
bit and git , this leads to the definitions:
A

Definition 1 The granular residual Γt is defined as:
Γt :=

29

PK

i=1 Salesi,t−1 (git − gt )
.
PK
Sales
i,t−1
i=1

(38)

The same analysis, with Γt , can be used to explore the weak form of the granular hypothesis, namely that
idiosyncratic industry level shocks aﬀect a large part of GDP.

17

where g t is the equal—weighted average productivity growth rate of the top K firms:
g t = K −1

K
X

git .

(39)

i=1

is defined as:
Definition 2 The granular residual with industry de-meaning Γind
t
Γind
t

=

¡

PK

i=1 Salesi,t−1 git − gI(i)t
PK
i=1 Salesi,t−1

¢

(40)

where g I(i)t is the equal—weighted average productivity growth rate, amongst the top Q largest
firms, for the for firms in i’s industry:
gIi t = Mean of gjt , for firm j belonging to firm i’s industry,

(41)

and in the top Q firms by sales at t − 1.
The justification for the definitions is as follows. In the residual Γt , the term g t removes the
common shock at if (36) holds. In the residual Γind
t , the term gIi t removes the industry shock
oﬀers a better control than Γt for industry shocks, it does
at + aIi (t) if (36) holds. Although Γind
t
not have uniformly better properties than Γt . Indeed, if the common component of volatility
is much greater than industry-specific fluctuations (as often found, for instance in Stock and
is a noisier proxy for the
Watson 2005, and also predicted by the model in section 3), then Γind
t
b t than Γt , as Lemma 1 in Appendix B indicates. In addition, the Γind
requires
true residual Λ
t
are highly correlated, and I use both in the empirical
more data. In any case, Γt and Γind
t

analysis.

is optimal, in the
Lemma 1 in Appendix B indicates that the definition of Γt and Γind
t
sense of maximizing the correlation with TFP while purging common shocks.30 Also, the online
appendix to this paper shows that identification is achieved if the number K of firms in the
granular residual is very large.31
A simple example illustrates the granular residual.32 Suppose that the economy is made of
one big firm, which produces half of output, a hundred small ones. The standard deviation of all
growth rates is 10%, and growth rates are given by git = at + εit , where at is a common shock.
30
Finally, an alternative definition would be to place GDP in the denominator of (38). In practice, such a
measure is well correlated with the granular residual, and yields very similar results.
31
As the online appendix to this paper shows, with small K, the R2 is underestimates
the true R∗2 of the
2
S
S
K
K
2
1
, where HK =
is about 0.6. Hence, if R2
idiosyncratic shocks, by a factor 1 − KH
i=1 Si /
i=1 Si
K

empirically found R2 is 1/3, the R2 of true idiosyncratic shocks is R∗2 = 1/2. On the other hand, if the number
1
of firms K becomes very large, 1 − KH
tends to 1, and the R2 becomes unbiased. I do not pursue that route,
K
because for very large K the homogeneity postulate (36) is less likely to hold.
32
I thank Olivier Blanchard for this example.

18

Suppose that in a given year, GDP increases by 3%, and the big firm has growth of, say, 6%,
while the average of the small ones is close to 0%. What can we infer on the origins of shocks?
If one thinks of all this being generated by an aggregate shock of 3%, then the distribution of
implied idiosyncratic shocks is 3% for the big firm, and −3% on average for all small ones. The

probability that the average of the i.i.d. small ones is −3%, given the law of large number for
these firms, is very small. Hence, it is more likely that the average shock at is around 0%, and

the economy-wide growth of 3% comes from an idiosyncratic shock to the large firm equal 6%.
The estimate of the aggregate shock is captured by g t , which is close to 0%, and the estimate
of the contribution of idiosyncratic shocks is captured by the granular residual, Γ = 3%.

4.2.

Empirical Implementation

I use annual U.S. Compustat data from 1951 to 2008. For the granular residual, I take for each
year t − 1 the K = 100 largest firms in Compustat that are not in the oil or energy sector.33

Compustat contains some large outliers, which may result from extraordinary events, such as
a merger. To handle potential outliers, I winsorize the extreme growth rates. Specifically, I
construct:
Γt :=

ÃK
X

Salesi,t−1

i=1

=
Γind
t

ÃK
X
i=1

!−1 Ã K
X
i=1

Salesi,t−1

!−1 Ã K
X
i=1

!

Salesi,t−1 T (git − gt )

!

Salesi,t−1 T (git − gIi t )

(42)

(43)

using the trimming function T (x) = x if |x| ≤ M , T (x) = sign (x) · M if |x| > M . (I use

M = 20%, but the results are not materially sensitive to this threshold.) In other words, when a
growth rate is larger than 20%, I replace the growth rate by 20%, and I do the same for negative
growth rates.
Table 1 presents regressions of GDP growth and the Solow residual on the granular residual.

These regressions are supportive of the granular hypothesis. The granular residual, and its lagged
values, explain slightly over 1/3 of the fluctuations of GDP growth and the Solow residual.
If only aggregate shocks were important (ft in Eq. 35), then the R2 of the regressions in Table
1 would be zero. Hence the good explanatory power of the granular residual is inconsistent with
a representative firm framework. It is also inconsistent with the hypothesis that most firm-level
volatility might be due to a zero-sum redistribution of market shares.
[Insert Table 1 about here]
33

For firms in the oil and energy sector, the wild swings in world-wide energy prices make (34) too poor a proxy
of total factor productivity.

19

Table 1 indicates that the lagged granular residual predicts GDP growth. This may reflect
several mechanisms: autocorrelation at the firm level; imitation dynamics, where a successful
technology is imitated by other firms; time aggregation; and the propagation of shocks along
supply and demand chains, as in Long and Plosser (1983).
[Insert Table 2 about here]
We next turn to the granular residual with industry-specific de-meaning, Γind
t , using 2 digit
SIC codes to define the industries. Table 2 presents the results, which are consistent with those
in Table 1. The R2 ’s are slightly higher, with an average of 41% (and 38% for the adjusted R2 )
across specifications. The similarity of the results is not surprising, as the correlation between
is 0.84.
Γt and Γind
t
In conclusion, idiosyncratic movements of the top 100 firms seem to explain a large fraction
of the Solow residual and GDP fluctuations.

4.3.

Robustness Checks

The main objection to the granular residual is that the control for the common factors may
be imperfect. This section shows that the explanatory power of the granular residual is not
diminished by controlling for previously studied common shocks. Following the work of Hamilton
(2003) and Romer and Romer (2004), I control for oil and monetary policy shocks. To arrive at
an annual frequency, I sum the shocks over the years.
Table 3 characterizes the explanatory power of those variables. Monetary and oil shocks
explain 21% of GDP growth.
[Insert Table 3 about here]
[Insert Table 4 about here]
Table 4 shows the explanatory power of the granular residual, controlling for oil and monetary
shocks. The mean R2 across specifications is 53%. Hence, if oil and monetary shocks explain
22% of GDP shocks, the granular residual explains a minimum of 31% of GDP fluctuations.
This estimate is close to the one of 1/3 found in section 4.2.
I conclude that adding controls for oil and monetary shocks confirms the initial estimate
of good explanatory power of the granular residual, of approximately 1/3 of GDP fluctuations.
Further analysis shows that the results seem reasonably robust to changes in the number of large
firms K, the number of firms for the industry controls Q, and the trimming level.
controls for industry
Another potential objection to the granular residual is that, while Γind
t
shocks and common shocks in model (36), it may not control well for them in an alternative
model such as:
git = βi at + βi0 aIi (t) + εit
20

(44)

Given the short sample, if the βi ’s are completely unconstrained, there does not seem to be
any manageable way to estimate (44) and obtain clean enough estimates of the εit to form
a granular residual of their weighted sum, and test the granular hypothesis.34 Thus, some
parametric restriction seems necessary. The most natural is that the sensitivity to shock might
depend on firm size. Accordingly, I consider the following model:
£
¡
¢¤
git = 1 + b ln Si,t−1 − ln Sj,t−1;,j∈Ii gIi t + εit ,

(45)

where εit is orthogonal to gIt , and ln Sj,t−1;,j∈Ii is the mean log size of firms in i’s industry. I
estimate it by running the OLS regression:
¡
¢
git − g Ii t = b ln Si,t−1 − ln Sj,t−1;,j∈Ii g Ii t + noiseit

(46)

which yields b = −0.34 (s.e. 0.04).35 This result mean that large firms are actually less sensitive

to aggregate shocks than small firms. Hence, in the definition of Γt (respectively Γind
t ), g t

(respectively g Ii t ) adds a negative loading on the industry and GDP shocks. Hence the results
are biased against the granular hypothesis. I conclude that consideration of
from Γt and Γind
t
models such as (45) reinforces the previous results, rather than contradicts them.
The above results are considered provisional. The situation is the analogue, with smaller
stakes, to that of the Solow residual.36 Solow understood at the outset that there are very strong
assumptions in the construction of his residual, in particular fully capacity utilization, no fixed
cost etc. But a “purified” granular residual took decades to construct (e.g., Basu et al. 2006),
and requires much better data, is harder to replicate in other countries, and relies on special
assumptions as well. Because of that, the Solow residual still endures, at least as a first pass.
In the present paper too, it is good to have a first step in the granular residual, together with
caveats that may help future research do construct a better residual. The conclusion of this
article contains some other measures of granular residuals that build on the present paper.

4.4.

A Brief Narrative of GDP and the Granular Residual

Figure 3 plots a time series of the simple and industry-demeaned granular residual. Figure 4
presents a scatter plot with Γt + Γt−1 , a choice motivated by the fact that Γt and Γt−1 have
similar coeﬃcients in the regressions of Table 1.
While a full narrative is outside the scope of this paper, this section proposes an interpretation
34
For instance, if one regresses git on GDP, and take the residuals, then tautologically the residuals will be
orthogonal to GDP, which by construction contradicts the granular hypothesis. Also, oil and monetary shocks
are not good instruments, asthey can aﬀect an industry
directly.

35
Estimating: git − g t = b ln Si,t−1 − ln Sj,t−1 g t +noiseit , gives a similar b = −0.21 (s.e. 0.03).
36
I thank Steve Durlauf for this intepretation.

21

.06
.04
.02
0
−.02
−.04

1950

1960

1970

1980

GDP growth
Granular Residual −− Industry

1990

2000

2010

Granular Residual

Figure 3: Time series of per capita GDP growth, the granular residual Γt , and the granular
residual industry de-meaning Γind
t , computed over the largest 100 firms by sales in the previous
year.

of the most extreme points.37 A general caveat is that the direction of the causality is generally
hard to assess definitively, as the measures gt for aggregate economy-wide and industry-wide
movements are imperfect.
The bottom right quadrant of Figure 4 contains two outliers. 1954 can be attributed to the
end of the Korean War. 1982 is commonly called the Volcker recession.
An interesting “granular year” may be 1955, which experiences a high GDP growth, and
a reasonably high granular residual. The likely microfoundation is a boom in car production.
Two main specific factors seem to explain the car boom: the introduction of new models of cars
(Gordon 1980), and the fact that car companies engaged in a price war (Bresnahan 1987). In
1955, the granular residual is 1.5%, of which 81% is solely due to General Motors.38 In 1956,
the price war in cars ends, and sales drop back to their normal level (the sales of General Motors
decline by 17%). The granular residual is -3.0%, of which 57% is due to General Motors. Hence,
one may provisionally conclude the 1955-1956 boom-bust episode was in large part a granular
event driven by new models and a price war in the car industry.39
An extreme negative granular residual occurs in 1970. This year features a major strike at
General Motors, which lasts ten weeks (September 15 to November 20). Sales of GM fall by
37

Gordon (1980), Temin (1998), and the reports of the Council of Economic Advisors provide useful narratives.
This number is the fraction due to General Motors in the numerator of equation 38. By this definition, the
sum of the shares is 1.
39
To completely resolve the matter, one would like to control for the eﬀect of the Korean war.
38

22

.06

84
59

66

78

64

Growth of GDP per capita
0
.02
.04

55

65

73

62

68
04
05
67

57
08

56

76
77

72

83

85 97 88 99
63
53 98
94
89 96
86
00
87
69
71 92
52
79
06
03
81
93
95
07
90
61
02
60
01

−.02

70
74

80

75
91
58

−.04

54
82

−.02
0
.02
Granular Residual −− Current + Lagged value

.04

Figure 4: Growth of GDP per Capita against Γt + Γt−1 , the granular residual and its lagged
value. The display of Γt + Γt−1 is motivated by Table 1, which yields regression coeﬃcients on
Γt and Γt−1 that are similar in magnitude.

31%. Hence, it is plausible to interpret 1970 as a granular year, whose salient event was the GM
strike.40 Additionally, one can interpret the positive granular shock in 1971 (which appears in 4
as label “72”, for representing the sum of the granular residuals in 1971 and 1972) as a rebound
from the negative granular 1970 shock. Hence the General Motors strike may explain the very
negative “70” (1969+1970) point and the very positive “72” (1971+1972) point.
Another interesting granular event happens in 1971. The Council of Economic Advisors
(1972, p.33) reports that “prospects of a possible steel strike after July 31st [1971], the expiration
day of the labor contracts, caused steel consumers to build up stock in the first seven months
of 71, after which these inventories were liquidated.” Here, a granular shock — the possibility
of a steel strike — creates a large swing in inventories. Without exploring inventories here, one
notes that such a plausibly orthogonal inventory shock could be used in future macroeconomic
studies.41
Figure 4 reveals that in the 1990s, granular shocks are smaller. Likewise, GDP volatility is
40

Temin (1988) notes that the winding down of the Vietnam War (which ended in 1975) may also be responsible
for the slump of 1970. This is in part the case, as during 1968 to 1972 the ratio of defense outlays to GDP was 9.5,
8.7, 8.1, 7.3, 6.7%. On the other hand, the ratio of total government outlays to GDP were respectively 20.6, 19.4,
19.3, 19.5, 19.6% (source: Council of Economic Advisors, 2005, Table B-79). Hence the aggregate government
spending shock was very small in 1970.
41
Although 1974 is not a granular year, the low value of the granular residual reflects the fact that the top three
car companies, and particularly General Motors, were disproportionately aﬀected by the shock. It is likely that,
if large companies were producing more fuel eﬃcient models, the granular residual would have been closer to 0,
and the slump of 1974 could have been much more moderate.

23

smaller, a phenomenon explored in the literature42 , though of course that needs to be reassessed
with the financial crisis that started in 2007.43 Under a granular view, this might be because
firm-level shocks were minor, particularly for large firms. Indeed, it seems that the average
firm volatility has decreased since 1976 in the USA (Davis et al. 2006), even though firms in
Compustat experienced a rise in volatility (Comin and Philippon 2005), perhaps because of a
selection eﬀect (it is the most volatile firms, with the largest growth options, that choose to raise
money on the stock market).44 Further research is needed to assess this hypothesis.

5.

Empirical Evidence on Concentration and Firm-Level
Volatility

This section illustrates that idiosyncratic fluctuations are indeed of the correct order of magnitude to explain aggregate shocks.

5.1.

Large Firms are very Volatile

Most estimates of plant-level volatility find very large volatilities of sales and employment, with
an order of magnitude σ = 30% to σ = 50% per year (Caballero and Engel 2004, Caballero,
Engel and Haltiwanger 1997, Davis, Haltiwanger, Schuh 1996). Also, the volatility of firm size
in Compustat is a very large 40% per year (Comin and Mulani 2006). Much of the work has
been focused on the median firm, but the present paper requires an estimate of the volatility
of large firms. This sub-section therefore studies the volatility of the top 100 non-oil industry
firms each year.
Measuring firm volatility is diﬃcult, because various frictions and identifying assumptions
provide conflicting predictions about links between changes in total factor productivity and
changes in observable quantities such as sales and employment (Proposition 4).

I consider

the volatility of three measures of growth rates: ∆ ln (Salesit /Employeesit ), ∆ lnSalesit and
∆ lnEmployeesit .

For each measure and each year, I calculate the cross-sectional variance

amongst the top 100 firms of the previous year, and take the average.45 I find a standard
42

See, for example, Blanchard and Johnson (2001), McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000), and Stock and Watson
(2003).
43
It would be interesting to exploit the hypothesis that the financial crisis was largely caused by the (ex-post)
mistakes of a few large firms, e.g. Lehman and AIG. Their large leverage and interconnectedness amplified into
into a full-fledged crisis, what could have been a run-of-the-mill drop in asset values aﬀecting on average the
financial sector. Of course, those ideas are very tentative at this stage.
44
As per Eq. 3, the weighing for the relevant “average” firm level volatility is the square of the sales, not
the sales. This weighing gives an enormously higher weight to the top firms. A future paper will develop this
point, which requires some statistical care, as standard analysis based on standard errors cannot be applied. Most
moments here are infinite.
S
45
2
In other term, for each year t, I calculate the cross-sectional variance of growth rates, σt2 = K −1 K
i=1 git −

24

deviation of 12%, 12% and 14% for, respectively, for growth rates of the sales per employee,
of sales, and of employees. Also, amongst the top 100 firms, the sample correlations are 0.023,
0.073 and 0.033 respectively, for each of the three measure.46 Hence the correlation between
growth rates is small. At the firm level, most variation is idiosyncratic.47
In conclusion, the top 100 firms have a volatility of 12% based on sales per employee. In
what follows I use σ = 12% per year for firm-level volatility as baseline estimate.

5.2.

Herfindahls and Induced Volatility

This sub-section discusses the theoretically appropriate measure of the firm size, for use in
constructing the Herfindahl index. The key is given by Hulten’s (1978) result, which shows that
total sales, rather than value added, is the appropriate measure. Consider an economy with
several competitive firms or sectors, and let firm i have a Hicks-neutral productivity growth dπi .
Hulten (1978) shows that the increase in TFP is:
dTFP X Sales of firm i
=
dπi .
TFP
GDP

(47)

i

The weights add up to more than 1. This reflects the fact that productivity growth in a firm
generates an increase in the economic value of all the inputs it uses. The firms’ sales are the
proper statistics for that social value. For completeness, Appendix B rederives and generalizes
Hulten’s theorem.
I now draw the implications for GDP volatility. Suppose productivity shocks dπi are uncorrelated with standard deviation σπ . Then, the variance of productivity growth is:
dTFP X
=
var
TFP
i

µ

Sales of firm i
GDP

¶2

var (dπi ) ,

and so the volatility of the growth of TFP is:
σT F P = hS σπ ,

(48)


2
S
S
K −1 K
, with K = 100. The corresponding average standard deviation is [T −1 Tt=1 σt2 ]1/2 .
i=1 git
l
k
1 S 2
S
46
1
For each year, we measure the sample correlation ρt = K(K−1)
i6=j git gjt / K
i git , with K = 100.
The correlations are positive. Note that a view that would attribute the major firm-level movements to shocks to
the relative demand for a firm’s product compared to its competitors, would counterfactually predict a negative
correlation.
47
Hence another indirect measure is the volatility of idiosyncratic stock market returns. If a firm produces ait
per year, of which a fraction f is paid in dividends, and the dividend grows at a rate μ, then the Gordon formula
predicts a stock price pt = at f / (R − μ), where R is the discount rate. In particular, the volatility of returns
is equal to the volatility of productive capacity a. For the top 100 largest firms, I find an average annualized
volatility of idiosyncratic returns of σ = 27%.

25

where hS is the sales Herfindahl

hS =

ÃN µ
!1/2
X Salesit ¶2
i=1

GDPt

.

(49)

Hulten’s theorem allows us to simplify the analysis. For the total volatility, one does not
need to know the details of the input-output matrix. The sales Herfindahl is a suﬃcient statistic.
The international Herfindahls are from Acemoglu, Johnson and Mitton (2009). They analyze the
Dun and Bradstreet dataset, which has a good coverage of the major firms in many countries.48

[Insert Table 5 about here]

b when there
Almost all models predict that GDP growth Yb is proportional to TFP growth Λ,
b with μ = 1/ (1 − αξ). If
are no other disturbances. For instance, in equation (25), Yb = μΛ

b is a geometrical random walk, in the neoclassical growth model where only capital can be
Λ
b in the long run, with μ = 1/α, which gives μ = 1.5.49 So both in the
accumulated, Yb = μΛ
short run and long run, one gets a relation of the type: σY = μσT F P , i.e.
σGDP = μσπ hS .

(50)

The calibration of section 3 gives μ = 1/ (1 − αξ) = 1.9, which is the value I use for short

term volatility. As seen above, a baseline estimate for the firm-level volatility is σπ = 12%.
Table 5 displays the results. The sales Herfindahl hS is quite large: hS = 22% average over
all countries, and hS = 6.1% for the U.S. By Eq. 48 this implies a GDP volatility σGDP =
1.9 × 12% × 6.1% = 1.4% for the U.S., and σGDP = 1.9 × 12% × 22% = 5.0% for a typical

country. This is very much in the order of magnitude of GDP fluctuations. As always, further
amplification mechanisms can increase the estimate. I conclude that idiosyncratic volatility
seems quantitatively large enough to matter at the macroeconomic level.

6.

Conclusion

This paper shows that the forces of randomness at the micro level create a inexorable amount
of volatility at the macro level. Because of random growth at the micro level, the distribution of
48

There may be problems with multinationals. For instance, the sales of G.M. are probably counted as the
worldwide sales of G.M.
1/α
49
If Yt = Λt Kt1−α Lα , Λt ∼ eγt , and capital is accumulated, then in balanced growth path, Yt ∼ Kt ∼ Λt . In
the long run, ∆ ln Yt = μ∆ ln Λt , with μ = 1/α. This holds also with stochastic growth. If ln Λt is a Brownian
motion with drift, lim var (ln Yt /Y0 ) /t = α−2 var (ln Λt /Λ0 ) /t.

26

firm sizes is very fat tailed (Simon 1955, Gabaix 1999, Luttmer 2007). That fat-tailness makes
the central limit theory break down, and idiosyncratic shocks to large firms (or, more generally,
to large subunits in the economy), aﬀect aggregate outcomes.
This paper illustrates this eﬀect by taking the example of GDP fluctuation. This paper
argues that idiosyncratic shocks to the top 100 firms explain a large fraction (one third) of aggregate volatility. While aggregate fluctuations such as changes to monetary, fiscal and exchange
rate policy, and aggregate productivity shocks, are clearly important drivers of macroeconomic
activity, they are not the only contributors to GDP fluctuations. Using theory, calibration and
direct empirical evidence, this paper makes the case that idiosyncratic shocks are an important,
and possibly the major, part of the origin of business-cycle fluctuations.
The importance of idiosyncratic shocks in aggregate volatility leads to a number of implications and directions for future research. First, and most evidently, to understand the origins of
fluctuations better one should not focus exclusively on aggregate shocks, but concrete shocks to
large players, such as Wal-Mart, Intel, and Nokia.
Second, shocks to large firms (such as a strike, a new innovation or a CEO change), initially
independent of the rest of the economy, oﬀer a rich source of shocks for VARs and impulse
response studies — the real-side equivalent of the “Romer and Romer” shocks for monetary
economics.
Third, this paper gives a new theoretical angle for the propagation of fluctuations. If WalMart innovates, its competitors may suﬀer in the short term and thus race to catch up. This
creates rich industry-level dynamics (that are already actively studied in the industrial organization literature) that should be useful for studying macroeconomic fluctuations, since they
allow one to trace the dynamics of productivity shocks.
Fourth, this argument could explain the reason why people, in practice, do not know “the
state of the economy”. This is because “the state of the economy” depends on the behavior
(productivity and investment behavior, among others) of many large and interdependent firms.
Thus the integration is not easy, and no readily-accessible single number can summarize this
state. This contrasts with aggregate measures, such as GDP, which are easily observable. Conversely, agents that focus on aggregate measures may make potentially problematic inferences
(see Veldkamp and Wolfers (2007) for research along those lines). For example, the aggregate
dividend-price ratio is often used as a key business cycle variable. However, changes in aggregate
dividends may stem only from the policies of a small number of firms, as found by DeAngelo
et al. (2004). This paper therefore could oﬀer a new mechanism for the dynamics of “animal
spirits”.
Finally this mechanism might explain a large part of the volatility of many aggregate quantities other than output, for instance, inventories, inflation, short- or long-run movements in
productivity, and the current account. Fluctuations of exports due to “granular” eﬀects are
27

explored in Canals et al. (2007) and di Giovanni and Levchenko (2009). The latter paper in
particular finds that lowering trade barriers increases the granularity of the economy (as the
most productive firms as selected), and imply an increase in the volatility of exports. Blank,
Buch and Neugebauer (2009) construct a “banking granular residual” and find that negative
shocks to large banks impact negatively small banks. Malevergne, Santa-Clara and Sornette
(2008) find that the granular residual of stock returns (the return of large firm, minus a return of the average firm) is an important priced factor in the stock market, and explains the
performance Fama-French factor models.
In sum, this paper suggests that the study of very large firms can oﬀer a useful angle of
attack on some open issues of macroeconomics.

28

Appendix A: Lévy’s Theorem
The basic theorem can be found in most probability textbooks, e.g. Durrett (1996, p.153).
Theorem 5 Suppose that X1 , X2 , ... are i.i.d. with a distribution that satisfies:
(i) limx→∞ P (X1 > x) /P (|X1 | > x) = θ ∈ [0, 1]
(ii) P (|X1 | > x) = x−ζ L (x)

with ζ ∈ (0, 2) and L (x) slowly varying50 . Let sn =

Pn

i=1 Xi ,

and

£
¤
an = inf {x : P (|X1 | > x) ≤ 1/n} and bn = nE X1 1|X1 |≤an

As n→ ∞, (sn − bn ) /an →d Y where Y is a Lévy distribution with exponent ζ.
The most typical use of Lévy’s theorem is the case of a distribution with zero mean and power¢−1 PN
¡
d
law distributed tails, P (|X1 | > x) ∼ (x/x0 )−ζ . Then an ∼ x0 n1/ζ , bn = 0, and x0 N 1/ζ
i=1 Xi →
PN
Y , where Y follows a Levy distribution. The sum i=1 Xi does not scale as N 1/2 , as it does in
the central limit theorem, but it scales as N 1/ζ . This is because the size of the largest units Xi

scales as N 1/ζ .
1
π

A symmetrical Lévy distribution with exponent ζ ∈ (0, 2] has the distribution λ (x, ζ) =
R ∞ −kζ
R∞
ζ
cos (kx) dk and the cumulative Λ (x, ζ) = 12 + π1 0 e−k sin(kx)
dk.
k
0 e
For ζ = 2, a Lévy distribution is a Gaussian. For ζ < 2, the distribution has power law tail

with exponent ζ.

Appendix B: Longer Derivations
6.1.

Hulten’s Theorem with and without Instantaneous Reallocation of
Factors

For clarity, I re-derive and extend Hulten (1978)’s result, which says that a Hicks-neutral productivity shock dπi to firm i causes an increase in TFP equal to:
TFP growth =

X Sales of firm i
dπi .
GDP
i

There are N firms. Firm i produces good i, and uses a quantity Xij of intermediary inputs
from firm j. It also uses Li units of labor, Ki units of capital. It has productivity πi . If
production is: Qi = eπi F i (Xi1 , ..., XiN , Li , Ki ). The representative agent consumes Ci of good
50
L (x) is said to be slowly varying (e.g. Embrechts et al. 1997, p.564) if ∀t > 0, limx→∞ L (tx) /L (x) = 1.
Prototypical examples are L (x) = a and L (x) = a ln x for a non-zero constant a.

29

i, and has a utility function is U (C1 , ..., CN ). Production of firm i serves as consumption, and
P
intermediary inputs, so: Qi = Ci + k Xki . The optimum in this economy reads:
max

U (C1 , ..., CN ) subject to
X
X
X
Xki = eπi F i (Xi1 , ..., XiN , Li , Ki ) ;
Li = L;
Ki = K
Ci +
Ci ,Xik ,Li ,Ki

i

k

i

The Lagrangian is:
W = U (C1 , ..., CN ) +
"

+w L−

X
i

#

X
i

"

pi eπi F i (Xi1 , ..., XiN , Li , Ki ) − Ci −

"

Li + r K −

X

#

X
k

Xki

#

Ki .

i

Assume marginal cost pricing.51 GDP is this economy is Y = wL + rK =
added of firm i is wLi + rKi , and its sales are pi Qi .

P

i pi Ci .

The value

If each firm i has a shock dπi to productivity, I diﬀerentiate the expression of W to find TFP
growth:
¤ X Sales of firm i
1 X £ πi i
dW
=
dπi ,
pi e G (Xi1 , ..., XiN , Li , Ki ) dπi =
W
W
GDP
i

i

which is Eq. 47.
The above analysis shows that Hulten’s theorem holds even if, after the shock, the capital,
labor, and material inputs are not reallocated. This is a simple consequence of the envelope
theorem. Hence Hulten’s result also holds if there are frictions to adjust labor, capital, or
intermediate inputs.

6.2.

Proof of Proposition 1

Since σGDP = σh, I examine h.
´1/2
³
P
N −1 N
Si2
i=1
N 1/2 h =
P
N −1 N
i=1 Si

The law of large numbers ensures that N −1
£ ¤1/2
/E [S] .
This yields: N 1/2 h →a.s. E S 2
51

PN

2
i=1 Si

£ ¤
P
a.s. E [S].
→a.s. E S 2 , and N −1 N
i=1 Si →

Basu and Fernald (2001) provide an analysis with imperfect competition.

30

Proof of Proposition 2
Since σGDP = σh, I examine h.

³P
N

´1/2
2
S
i=1 i
PN
i=1 Si

h=

(51)

I treat the cases where ζ > 1 and ζ = 1 separately. When ζ > 2, the variance of firm sizes is
finite, and we use Proposition 1.
When 1 < ζ ≤ 2. By the law of large numbers,
N

−1

N
X
i=1

Si →d E [S] .

In addition, Si2 has power law exponent ζ/2 ≤ 1, as shown by:
´
³
´−ζ
³
¡
¢
P S 2 > x = P S > x1/2 = a x1/2
= ax−ζ/2 .
So to handle the numerator of (51), I use Lévy’s Theorem from Appendix A. This implies:
N −2/ζ

N
X
i=1

Si2 → u,

where u is a Lévy distributed random variable with exponent ζ/2. So
´1/2
³
P
2
N −2/ζ N
S
1/2
i=1 i
d u
.
N 1−1/ζ h =
→
P
E [S]
N −1 N
i=1 Si

When ζ = 1. Additional care is required, because E [S] = ∞. Lévy’s Theorem 5 in Appendix

A gives bn = n ln n, hence:

N −1

ÃN
X
i=1

Si − N ln N

!

→d g,

where g is a Lévy with exponent 1. I conclude ln N · h →d u1/2 /g.

Proof of Proposition 3
As ∆Si /Si = Si−α ui :
∆Yt+1
=
Yt

PN

i=1 ∆Sit

Yt

31

=

PN

1−α
uit
i=1 Si
.
PN
i=1 Si

(52)

When ζ > 1, by the law of large numbers:
N

−1

Yt = N

−1

N
X
i=1

Si → S.

To tackle the numerator, I observe that Si1−α has power law tails with exponent ζ 0 =
ζ/ (1 − α). I consider two cases.

If ζ 0 < 2, xi = Si1−α ui , which has power law tails with exponent ζ 0 , and by Lévy’s theorem:
0

N −1/ζ ∆Yt = N −1/ζ

0

N
X
i=1

Si1−α uit →d g,

where g is a Lévy with exponent ζ 0 .
If ζ 0 ≥ 2, Si1−α ui has finite variance, and N −1/2 ∆Yt →d g, where g is a Gaussian.
In both cases:

0

N − max(1/2,1/ζ ) ∆Yt →d g
for a distribution g. So, when ζ > 1:
0

N 1−max(1/2,1/ζ )

∆Yt+1 d g
g.
→
Yt
S

Hence the proposition holds, with
¡
¢
¡
¢
α0 = 1 − max 1/2, 1/ζ 0 = 1 + min −1/2, −1/ζ 0
µ
¶
¢
¡
1−α
.
= min 1/2, 1 − 1/ζ 0 = min 1/2, 1 −
ζ
When ζ = 1, a ln N correction appears, as in the proof of Proposition 2.

Proof of Proposition 4
Step 1. Frictionless equilibrium. I define:
Ã
!ψ
X 1/ψ
H=
Qi

(53)

i

The price of firm i is: pi =

∂H
∂Qi ,

∂H
so: Si /H = pi Qi /H = Qi ∂Q
/H, and
i

Si
=
H
Because H is homogenous of degree 1, H =

µ

Qi
H

P
32

¶1/ψ

∂H
∂Qi Qi

(54)
=

P

Si . H is the sum of sales in the

economy.
Firm i solves: maxKi ,Li ,Xi pi Qi −Xi −wLi , which gives: (Ki , Li , Xi ) = ((1 − α) b/r, αb/w, 1 − b) Si ∝

Si . I use ∝ to mean that the variables are proportional, up to a factor that does not depend
P 1/(ψ−1)
1/(ψ−1)
. Calling B =
Ai
, and using
on i. So, Siψ ∝ Qi ∝ Ai Si by (18), so Si ∝ Ai
P
the adding up constraint
(Ki , Li , Xi ) = (K, L, X), we find the constant of proportionality:
1/(ψ−1)

(Ki , Li , Xi ) = (K, L, X) Ai

/B. Plugging this in (53), we get:

H=B

ψ−1

µ

Lα K 1−α
b

¶b µ

X
1−b

¶1−b

Now, we solve for X, i.e. solve maxX H − X. The solution is: Y = H − X = B (ψ−1)/b Lα K 1−α ,
i.e. the announced relation.
P
P
Also, as Y = H − Xi , and Xi = (1 − b) Si , Y = H − (1 − b) Si = bH.

Step 2. Changes, assuming λ = 1. To keep the proof streamlined, I first consider the case

λ = 1, i.e. the case no frictions in the adjustment of labor.
We now look at the changes. TFP growth comes from (21), and is also Hulten’s formula.
b As the total production is: Y = ΛDLα , for a constant D, the optimal
Y = bH gives Yb = H.
1
b = ξ Λ.
b
labor supply L maximizes ΛDLα − L1/ξ , so L = Λ 1/ξ−α times a constant, and L
1−αξ
´
³
b + αL
b = 1 + αξ Λ
b the announced relation. The wage
b = 1 Λ,
This implies that Yb = Λ
1−αξ
1−αξ
³
´
b which gives the announced value. It is convenient that
b = 1ξ − 1 L,
is w = 1ξ L1/ξ−1 , so: w

one can solve for changes in the macroeconomic variables without revisiting the firms’ decision
problems.

We now turn to the firm-level changes. Optimization of the demand for labor gives wLi =
bi = Sbi − w.
bi = A
bi + (1 − b) αL
bi + bSbi . Eq. (54) gives
b We have, from (18), Q
(1 − b) αSi , so L

b , and using Yb = H,
b
bi = ψSbi + (1 − ψ) H
Q

³
´
bi + (1 − b) α Sbi − (1 − ξ) Yb + bSbi ,
bi = ψ Sbi + (1 − ψ) Yb = A
Q

bi .52 L
bi = Sbi − w.
bi comes from L
b Si was
which gives the announced expressions for Sbi and Q
b
b
defined as Si = pi Qi , which gives pbi = Si − Qi .

Step 3. With a general λ ∈ [0, 1] .
bi , only LV,i can adjust. First, we remark that the utility function is
After the changes A
´1/ξ
³
, so the elasticity associated with LV is ξ 0 = ξ/λ, while the production share of
Lξ = LλV L1−λ
F

LV is α0 = αλ. Hence, the expression (25) for GDP holds, replacing (α, ξ) by (α0 , ξ 0 ) = (αλ, ξ/λ).
As α0 ξ 0 = αξ, (25) is invariant in λ.

´1/ξ
³
α K 1−α − Lλ L1−λ
Furthermore, the planner solves: maxLV ΛLαλ
L
. There are now
V
F
V F

52

In (33), bαλ + 1 − b is the share of flexible factors, i.e. of the factors that adjust in the short run.

33

two wages, wV and wF , which are the marginal products of respectively LV and LF . One
bV = ξ Λ/
b (1 − αξ). As total employment varies as: L
b =
finds: LV ∼ Λ1/(λ/ξ−αλ) , i.e. λL
bF = λL
bV = ξ Λ/
b (1 − αξ), we get (26). Likewise, w
bV , w
b V + (1 − λ) L
bV = Yb − L
bF = Yb , and
λL
b (1 − αξ) = (1 − ξ) Λ.
b Hence
bF = Yb − ξ Λ/
the weighted wage changes as: w
b = λw
bV + (1 − λ) w

expressions (24)-(27) do not change with a general λ.

For the firm-level variables, one replaces (α, ξ) by (α0 , ξ 0 ) = (αλ, ξ/λ), which delivers the

expressions (28)-(30) and (33). The expression for employment becomes:
bi + (ξ − βb (1 − αξ)) Yb
bV,i = β A
L

b i = λL
bV,i , which gives expression (31). The expression
as so total employment in firm i varies as L
\
b
b
for (32) follows immediately from S
i /Li = Si − Li .

Lemma 1

The following Lemma is used in section 4.
bit , Λ
b t = P Si A
b
Lemma 1 Suppose a world where git = ft + γ A
i Y it , and the productivity shocks
bit are uncorrelated and have equal variance. Consider the class of residuals of the form Γ0t =
A
K
K
X
X
wi git , with weights (wi )i=1...K satisfying
wi = 0, so that Γ0t is not aﬀected by ft . One seeks
i=1

i=1

ÃK
X
P
b t , i.e. which solve maxw corr
wi git , N
residuals Γ0t that have the greatest correlation with Λ
i
i=1
i=1
P
subject to
wi = 0. The highest correlation is achieved by any multiple of the granular residual

Γt given in (38).

´
³
b t , kΓ0t is independent of k, one first looks
Proof of Lemma 1. Given for any k > 0, corr Λ
´
³
b t , Γ0t s.t.
at the residuals Γ0t with a given variance, say 1. The problem is then: maxwi cov Λ

var (Γ0t )

K
X
bit , one forms the Lagrangian
= 1 and
wi = 0. Calling σ 2 = varA
i=1

´
³
X
¡ ¢
b t , Γ0t − λvar Γ0t − μ
wi
L = cov Λ
Ã
!
´
³X
X
X Si
X
bit − λvar
bit − μ
bit ,
wi
= cov
wi γ A
A
wi γ A
Y
i
i
X
X
X
= Y −1 γσ 2
Si wi − λγ 2 σ 2
wi
wi2 − μ
i

Forming 0 = ∂L/∂wi = Y −1 γσ 2 Si − 2λγ 2 σ 2 wi − μ, so the optimal weights are of the form: wi =
´
³
P
P
wi = 0 gives: wi = a Si − K −1 K
S
aSi + b, with a and b independent of i. Condition
j=1 j ,
P
and a residual Γ0t = a Si (git − g t ), which proves the Proposition.
34

Si b
Y Ait

!

Appendix C: Data Appendix
Firm level data. The firm-level data comes from Compustat, North America, Industrial Annual.
The frequency is annual, the years 1950 to 2008. I download the following variables: company
name (CONAME), industry name (INAME), industry classification code (DNUM), DATA 3 —
Investments — Total ($MM), DATA 6 — Assets — Total ($MM), DATA 12 — Sales (Net) ($MM),
DATA 29 — Employees (M), DATA 78: Inventories - Finished goods ($MM).
I filter out oil and oil-related companies (DNUM=2911, 5172, 1311, 4922, 4923, 4924 and
1389), and energy companies (DNUM between 4900 and 4940), as fluctuations of their sales come
mostly from worldwide commodity prices, rather than real productivity shocks, and financial
firms (DNUM between 6,000 and 7,000), because their sales do not mesh well with the meaning
used in the present paper.53 To exclude foreign firms based in the US, I filter out companies
whose name ends with -ADR, -ADS, -PRE FASB.
An important caveat is in order for U.S. firms. With Compustat, the sales of Ford, say,
represent the worldwide sales of Ford, not directly the output produced by Ford in the U.S. There
is no simple solution to this problem, especially if one wants a long time series. An important
task of future research is to provide a version of Compustat that corrects for multinationals.
Macroeconomic data. GDP per capita comes from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The
Solow residual is the multifactor productivity of the private business sector from the Bureau of
Labor Studies. The data for the Romer and Romer (2004) monetary policy shocks come from
David Romer’s web page. Their original series (RESID) is monthly, from 1966 to 1996. Here
the yearly Romer-Romer shock is the sum of the 12 monthly shocks in that year. For the years
not covered by Romer and Romer, the value of the shock is assigned to be 0, the mean of the
original data. This assignment does not bias the regression coeﬃcient under simple conditions,
for instance if the data is i.i.d. It does lower the R2 by the fraction of years in which the
assignment is done, which is 0.4.
The data for the Hamilton (2003) oil shocks come from James Hamilton’s web page. A
quarterly Hamilton shock is the amount by which oil price exceeds the maximum price over the
previous year, zero otherwise. This paper’s yearly shock is the sum of the quarterly Hamilton
shocks.

References
Abramowitz, Moses (1956): “Resource and Output Trends in the United States Since 1870,”
American Economic Review, 46, 5-23.
53

The results with financial firms are very similar, and are available upon request.

35

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and Todd Mitton (2009): “Determinants of Vertical Integration: Financial Development and Contracting Costs,” Journal of Finance, 64, 1251-1290.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Fabrizio Zilibotti (1997): “Was Prometheus Unbound by Chance? Risk,
Diversification and Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 105, 709-751.
Altig, David, Lawrence Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum and Jesper Linde (2005): “FirmSpecific Capital, Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle,” NBER Working Paper 11034.
Amaral, L. A. N. , S. V. Buldyrev, S. Havlin, H. Leschhorn, P. Maass, M. A. Salinger, H.
E. Stanley, and M. H. R. Stanley (1997): “Scaling Behavior in Economics: I. Empirical
Results for Company Growth,” Journal de Physique (France) I, 7, 621-633.
Axtell, Robert (2001): “Zipf Distribution of U.S. Firm Sizes,” Science, 293, 1818-20.
Bak, Per, Ken Chen, José Scheinkman, and Michael Woodford (1993): “Aggregate Fluctuations
from Independent Sectoral Shocks: Self-Organized Criticality in a Model of Production
and Inventory Dynamics,” Ricerche Economiche, 47, 3-30.
Barabási, A.-L., and R. Albert (1999): “Emergence of Scaling in Random Networks,” Science,
286, 509-12.
Basu, Susanto, and John Fernald (1997): “Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates and
Implications,” Journal of Political Economy, 105, 249-83.
Basu, Susanto, and John Fernald (2001): “Why is Productivity Procyclical? Why Do We
Care?” in New Developments in Productivity Analysis, Charles R. Hulten, Edwin R. Dean
and Michael J. Harper, eds. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Basu, Susanto, John Fernald, and Miles Kimball (2006): “Are Technology Improvements Contractionary?” American Economic Association, 96, 1418-1448.
Baumol, William J. (1982): “Contestable Markets: An Uprising in the Theory of Industry
Structure,” American Economic Review, 72, 1-15.
Bertrand, Marianne, Johnson, Simon, Samphantharack, Krislert, and Schoar, Antoinette (2004):
“Mixing Family With Business: A Study of Thai Business Groups and the Families Behind
Them,” Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Simon Johnson (2001): “The Long and Large Decline in U.S. Output
Volatility,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 165-71.

36

Blank, Sven, Claudia Buch, and Katja Neugebauer (2009): “Shocks at Large Banks and Banking Sector Distress: the Banking Granular Residual, ” Discussion Paper 04/2009, Deutsche
Bundesbank.
Bresnahan, Timothy (1987): “Competition and Collusion in the American Automobile Market:
The 1955 Price War,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 35, 457-482.
Buldyrev, S. V. , L. A. N. Amaral, S. Havlin, H. Leschhorn, P. Maass, M. A. Salinger, H. E.
Stanley, and M. H. R. Stanley (1997): “Scaling Behavior in Economics: II. Modeling of
Company Growth,” Journal de Physique (France) I, 7, 635-650.
Caballero, Ricardo, and Eduardo M.R.A. Engel (2004): “Adjustment is Much Slower than You
Think,” NBER Working Paper No. 9898.
Caballero, Ricardo, Eduardo M.R.A. Engel, and John C. Haltiwanger (1997): “Aggregate
Employment Dynamics: Building from Microeconomic Evidence,” American Economic
Review, 87, 115—137.
Canals, Claudia, Xavier Gabaix, Josep Vilarrubia, and David Weinstein (2007): “Trade Patterns, Trade Balances, and Idiosyncratic Shocks,” Columbia University and New York
University Working Paper.
Canning, D. , L. A. N. Amaral, Y. Lee, M. Meyer, and H. E. Stanley (1998): “Scaling the
Volatility of GDP Growth Rates,” Economics Letters, 60, 335-341.
Carvalho, Vasco (2009): “Aggregate Fluctuations and the Network Structure of Intersectoral
Trade,” Working Paper, CREI.
Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, and Larry H.P. Lang (2000): “The Separation of Ownership
and Control in East Asian Corporations,” Journal of Financial Economics, 58, 81—112.
Cochrane, John (1994): “Shocks,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 41,
295-364.
Comin, Diego, and Sunil Mulani (2006): “Diverging Trends in Macro and Micro Volatility:
Facts,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 88, 374—383.
Comin, Diego and Thomas Philippon (2005): “The Rise in Firm-Level Volatility: Causes
and.Consequences,” in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, eds., NBER Macroeconomics
Annual
Conley, Timothy, and Bill Dupor (2003): “A Spatial Analysis of Sectoral Complementarity,”
Journal of Political Economy, 111, 311-52.
37

Cooley, Thomas F. and Edward C. Prescott (1995): “Economic Growth and Business Cycles,”
in Thomas F. Cooley ed, Frontiers of Business Cycle Research. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1-38.
Council of Economic Advisors, “Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress”,
published every year since 1950.
Davis, Steven, John C. Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2006): “Volatility and
dispersion in business growth rates: publicly traded versus privately held firms.” NBER
Macroeconomics Annual.
Davis, Steven, John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh (1996): Job Creation and Destruction.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
DeAngelo, Harry, Linda DeAngelo and Douglas J. Skinner (2004): “Are Dividends Disappearing? Dividend Concentration and the Consolidation of Earnings,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 72, 425-456.
di Giovanni, Julian, and Andrei Levchenko (2009): “International Trade and Aggregate Fluctuations in Granular Economies,”, Working Paper 585, Research Seminar in International
Economics, University of Michigan.
Domar, Evsey (1961): “On the Measurement of Technological Change,” Economic Journal, 71,
709-729.
Dupor, William (1999): “Aggregation and Irrelevance in Multi-Sector Models,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 43, 391—409.
Durlauf, Steven (1993): “Non Ergodic Economic Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, 60,
349-66.
Durrett, Richard (1996): Probability: Theory and Examples (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz (2004): “Dissecting Trade: Firms,
Industries, and Export Destinations,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
94, 150-154.
Embrechts, Paul, Claudia Kluppelberg, and Thomas Mikosch (1997): Modelling Extremal
Events. New York: Springer Verlag.
Faccio, Mara and Larry H.P. Lang (2002): “The Ultimate Ownership of Western European
Corporations,” Journal of Financial Economics, 65, 365-395.

38

Foerster, Andrew, Pierre-Daniel Sarte, and Mark Watson (2008): “Sectoral vs. Aggregate
Shocks: A Structural Factor Analysis of Industrial Production,”Working Paper 08-07,
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.
Franco, Francesco, and Thomas Philippon (2007): “Firms and Aggregate Dynamics, ”Review
of Economics and Statistics, 89, 587-600.
Fujiwara, Y., C. Di Guilmi, H. Aoyama, M. Gallegati, and W. Souma (2004): “Do Pareto—Zipf
and Gibrat Laws Hold True? An Analysis with European Firms,” Physica A, 335, 197-216.
Gabaix, Xavier (1999): “Zipf’s Law for Cities: An Explanation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 739-67.
Gabaix, Xavier (2009): “Power Laws in Economics and Finance,” Annual Review of Economics,
1, 255—93.
Gabaix, Xavier, Parameswaran Gopikrishnan, Vasiliki Plerou and H. Eugene Stanley (2003):
“A Theory of Power Law Distributions in Financial Market Fluctuations,” Nature, 423,
267—230.
Gabaix, Xavier, Parameswaran Gopikrishnan, Vasiliki Plerou and H. Eugene Stanley (2006):
“Institutional Investors and Stock Market Volatility,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
121, 461-504.
Gibrat, Robert (1931): Les Inégalités économiques. Paris, France: Librairie du Recueil Sirey.
Golosov, Mikhail, and Robert E. Lucas, Jr. (2007): “Menu Costs and Phillips Curves,” Journal
of Political Economy, 115, 171-199.
Gordon, Robert J. (1980): “Postwar Macroeconomics: The Evolution of Events and Ideas” in
Martin Feldstein, ed. The American Economy in Transition. Chicago, IL: The University
of Chicago Press.
Hamilton, James D. (2003): “What Is an Oil Shock?,” Journal of Econometrics, 113, 363-398.
Harberger, Arnold (1998): “A Vision of the Growth Process,” The American Economic Review,
88, 1-32.
Horvath, Michael (1998): “Cyclicality and Sectoral Linkages: Aggregate Fluctuations from
Sectoral Shocks,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 1, 781-808.
Horvath, Michael (2000): “Sectoral Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 45, 69-106.

39

Horvath, Michael, and R.J. Verbrugge (1999): “Shocks and Sectoral Interactions: An Empirical
Investigation,” Mimeo, Stanford University.
Hulten, Charles (1978): “Growth Accounting with Intermediary Inputs,” Review of Economic
Studies, 45, 511-18.
Hymer, S. and P. Pashigan (1962): “Firm Size and Rate of Growth.” Journal of Political
Economy, 70, 556-569.
Jones, Charles I. (2005): “The Shape of Production Functions and the Direction of Technical
Change,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 517-549.
Jones, Charles I. (2009): “Intermediate Goods and Weak Links: A Theory of Economic Development,” Working Paper, Stanford.
Jorgenson, Dale W., Frank M. Gollop and Barbara M. Fraumeni (1987): Productivity and U.S.
Economic Growth. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Jovanovic, Boyan (1987): “Micro Shocks and Aggregate Risk,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
102, 395-409.
Koren, Miklós, and Silvana Tenreyro (2007): “Volatility and Development,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 122, 243-287.
Kray, Aart, and Jaume Ventura (2007): “Comparative Advantage and the Cross-Section of
Business Cycles,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 5, 1300-1333.
Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott (1982): “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, 50, 1345-70.
Lee, Youngki, Luís A. Nunes Amaral, Martin Meyer, David Canning, and H. Eugene Stanley
(1998): “Universal Features in the Growth Dynamics of Complex Organizations,” Physical
Review Letters, 81, 3275-3278.
Logan, Benjamin F., Colin Mallows, Stephen Rice, and Larry Shepp (1973): “Limit Distributions of Self-Normalized Sums,” Annals of Probability, 1, 788-809.
Long, John, and Charles Plosser (1983) “Real Business Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy,
91, 39—69.
Luttmer, Erzo G.J. (2007): “Selection, Growth, and the Size Distribution of Firms,”Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 122, 1103-1144.

40

Malevergne, Yannick, Pedro Santa-Clara and Didier Sornette (2009): “Professor Zipf goes to
Wall Street,” NBER Working Paper.
McConnell, Margaret, and Gabriel Perez-Quiros (2000): “Output Fluctuations in the United
States: What has Changed Since the Early 1980’s,” American Economic Review, 90, 14641476.
McKinsey Global Institute (2001): “Productivity in the United States,” http://www.mckinsey.com.
Nirei, Makoto (2006): “Threshold Behavior and Aggregate Critical Fluctuations,”Journal of
Economic Theory, 127, 309-322.
OECD (2004): “Economic Survey of Finland” (issue 14).
Oi, Walter Y. (1962): “Labor as a Quasi-Fixed Factor,”Journal of Political Economy, 70,
538-555.
Okuyama, Kenji, Misako Takayasu, and Hideki Takayasu (1999): “Zipf’s Law in Income Distribution of Companies,” Physica A, 269, 125-131.
Pareto, Vilfredo (1896): Cours d’Economie Politique. Geneva, Switzerland: Droz.
Pushkin, Dmitri, and Hassan Aref (2004): “Bank Mergers as Scale-Free Coagulation,” Physica
A, 336, 571-584.
Romer, Christina and David Romer (2004): “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation
and Implications,” American Economic Review, 94, 1055-1084.
Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, and Mark Wright (2007): “Establishment Size Dynamics in the
Aggregate Economy,” American Economic Review, 97, 1639-1666.
Rotemberg, Julio J. and Michael Woodford (1996): “Imperfect Competition and the Eﬀects of
Energy Price Increases on Economic Activity,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking,
28, 549-577.
Shea, John (2002): “Complementarities and Comovements,” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, 42, 412—433.
Simon, Herbert (1955): “On a Class of Skew Distribution Functions,” Biometrika 44, 425-440.
Stanley, Michael H. R., Luís A. N. Amaral, Sergey V. Buldyrev, Shlomo Havlin, Heiko Leschhorn,
Philipp Maass, Michael A. Salinger, and H. Eugene Stanley (1996): “Scaling Behaviour in
the Growth of Companies,” Nature, 379, 804-806.

41

Stock, James, and Mark Watson (2003): “Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?” in
NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Mark Gerler and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, eds. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Sutton, John (2002): “The Variance of Firm Growth Rates: The ‘Scaling’ Puzzle,” Physica A,
312, 577-590.
Teitelbaum, Daniel and Robert Axtell (2005): “Firm Size Dynamics of Industries,” Working
Paper, Brookings.
Temin, Peter (1998): “The Causes of American Business Cycles: an Essay in Economic Historiography”, in Beyond Shocks, Fuhrer, Jeﬀery C. and Scott Schuh, eds. Boston: Federal
Reserve Bank.
Veldkamp, Laura and Justin Wolfers (2007): “Aggregate Shocks or Aggregate Information?
Costly Information and Business Cycle Comovement,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
54, 37-55.
Wyart, Matthieu, and Jean-Philippe Bouchaud (2003): “Statistical Models for Company
Growth,” Physica A, 326, 241-255.
Zipf, George (1949): Human Behavior and the Principle of Least Eﬀort Cambridge, MA:
Addiston-Wesley.

42

Granular Residual Γt
Granular Residual Γt−1

GDP growtht
0.574
(0.193)
0.675
(0.187)

Granular Residual Γt−2
R2
Adjusted R2
Observations

0.26
0.24
57

GDP growtht
0.747
(0.186)
0.843
(0.183)
0.628
(0.180)
0.41
0.37
56

Solow Residualt
0.756
(0.155)
0.410
(0.147)

0.37
0.34
50

Solow Residualt
0.871
(0.163)
0.506
(0.156)
0.320
(0.154)
0.42
0.39
49

Table 1: Explanatory Power of the Granular Residual. For the year t = 1952 to 2008, per capita
GDP growth and the Solow residual are regressed on the granular residual Γt of the top 100
non-oil industry firms (equation 42). The firms are the largest by sales of the previous year.
Standard errors in parentheses.

Granular Residual

Γind
t

Granular Residual Γind
t−1

GDP growtht
1.003
(0.228)
0.804
(0.196)

Granular Residual Γind
t−2
R2
Adjusted R2
Observations

0.34
0.32
57

GDP growtht
1.279
(0.215)
1.183
(0.203)
0.801
(0.180)
0.53
0.50
56

Solow Residualt
0.931
(0.185)
0.407
(0.159)

0.36
0.33
50

Solow Residualt
1.074
(0.199)
0.499
(0.187)
0.313
(0.166)
0.41
0.37
49

Table 2: Explanatory Power of the Granular Residual, with industry de-meaning. For the year
t = 1952 to 2008, per capita GDP growth and the Solow residual are regressed on the granular
of the top 100 non-oil industry firms (equation 42), removing the industry mean
residual Γind
t
within this top 100. The firms are the largest by sales of the previous year. Standard errors in
parentheses.

43

GDP growtht
-5.1e-06
(.00015)
-.000643
(.00028)

Oilt
Oilt−1

.003464
(.05784)
-.099848
(.04805)
0.06
0.02
53

Monetary Shockt
Monetary Shockt−1
R2
Adjusted R2
Observations

GDP growtht

0.18
0.15
49

GDP growtht
.000037
(.00016)
-.000616
(.00028)
-.00268
(.05602)
-.077234
(.04757)
0.22
0.15
49

Table 3: Explanatory Power of oil and monetary shocks. The shocks are the yearly aggregations
of the measures of Hamilton (2003) and Romer-Romer (2004). Standard errors in parentheses.

Granular Residualt
Granular Residualt−1
Granular Residualt−2
R2
Adjusted R2
Observations

With Simple Granular Residual
0.565
0.778
(0.224)
(0.218)
0.677
0.936
(0.214)
(0.212)
0.654
(0.206)
0.40
0.53
0.32
0.45
49
48

With Industry Granular Residual
0.902
1.188
(0.261)
(0.258)
0.699
1.118
(0.218)
(0.234)
0.728
(0.203)
0.43
0.58
0.35
0.50
49
48

Table 4: Explanatory Power of the Granular Residual, with controls for oil and monetary shocks.
For the year t = 1952 to 2001, per capita GDP growth is regressed on the granular residual Γt of
the top 100 non-oil industry firms (equation 42-43), and the contemporaneous and lagged values
of the Romer-Romer and Hamilton shocks. The firms are the largest by sales of the previous
year. Standard errors in parentheses.

Sales Herfindahl
GDP volatility induced by
idiosyncratic firm-level shocks

All Countries

USA

hS

22.0

6.1

σGDP = μσπ hS

5.0

1.4

Table 5: Sales herfindahl hS (eq. 49) in 2002, and induced GDP volatility. Units are in %. For
the induced GDP volatility, I take σGDP = μσhS , with a firm-level volatility σ = 12% (eq. 50),
and an amplification factor μ = 1.9, as discussed in the text. Source: Acemoglu, Johnson and
Mitton (2009) for the international data, and Compustat for the U.S. data.

44

