NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOUSE PRICES, HOME EQUITY-BASED BORROWING, AND THE U.S. HOUSEHOLD
LEVERAGE CRISIS
Atif R. Mian
Amir Sufi
Working Paper 15283
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15283

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2009

We thank Neil Bhutta, Erik Hurst, Sydney Ludvigson, Jeremy Stein, Francesco Trebbi, Robert Vishny,
and seminar participants at Boston College, the University of British Columbia, the University of Chicago,
and the NBER Monetary Economics, Risk and Financial Institutions, and Aggregate Implications
of Microeconomic Behavior sessions for comments. We are grateful to the National Science Foundation
and the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business for funding.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Atif R. Mian and Amir Sufi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the U.S. Household Leverage Crisis
Atif R. Mian and Amir Sufi
NBER Working Paper No. 15283
August 2009
JEL No. E0,E00,E2,E3,E5,E6,G01,G21,G3,G32,G33
ABSTRACT
Using individual-level data on homeowner debt and defaults from 1997 to 2008, we show that borrowing
against the increase in home equity by existing homeowners is responsible for a significant fraction
of both the sharp rise in U.S. household leverage from 2002 to 2006 and the increase in defaults from
2006 to 2008. Employing land topology-based housing supply elasticity as an instrument for house
price growth, we estimate that the average homeowner extracts 25 to 30 cents for every dollar increase
in home equity. Money extracted from increased home equity is not used to purchase new real estate
or pay down high credit card balances, which suggests that borrowed funds may be used for real outlays
(i.e., consumption or home improvement). Home equity-based borrowing is stronger for younger households,
households with low credit scores, and households with high initial credit card utilization rates. Homeowners
in high house price appreciation areas experience a relative decline in default rates from 2002 to 2006
as they borrow heavily against their home equity, but experience very high default rates from 2006
to 2008. Our estimates suggest that home equity-based borrowing is equal to 2.8% of GDP every year
from 2002 to 2006, and accounts for at least 34% of new defaults from 2006 to 2008.

Atif R. Mian
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
atif@chicagogsb.edu
Amir Sufi
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
amir.sufi@chicagogsb.edu

U.S. household leverage sharply increased in the years preceding the current economic
recession. The top panel of Figure 1 shows the steady rise in household debt since 1975, which
sharply accelerated beginning in 2002. In just five years, the household sector doubled its debt
balance. In comparison, the contemporaneous increase in corporate debt was modest. The middle
panel shows that the increase in household debt from 2002 to 2007 translated into a striking rise
in household leverage as measured by the debt to income ratio. During the same time period,
corporate leverage declined. The dramatic absolute and relative rise in U.S. household leverage
from 2002 to 2007 is unprecedented compared to the last 25 years.
One reason for the rapid expansion in household leverage during this period was that
mortgage credit became more easily available to new home buyers (Mian and Sufi (2009)).
However, strong house price appreciation from 2002 to 2006, which may have been fueled by
the availability of mortgage credit to a riskier set of new home buyers, could also have had an
important feedback effect on household leverage through existing homeowners.
Our central goal in this study is to investigate how existing homeowners respond to the
rising value of their home equity, a channel we refer to as the home equity-based borrowing
channel. This is an important question for several reasons. First, given that 65% of U.S.
households already owned their primary residence before the acceleration in house prices
beginning in the late 1990s, a strong home equity-based borrowing channel may be an important
cause of the rapid rise in household leverage preceding the economic downturn.
Second, the quantitative strength of the home equity-based borrowing channel is
theoretically ambiguous. House price appreciation may have no effect on homeowner borrowing
because the increase in home equity wealth is counter-balanced with a higher cost of future
housing consumption (Sinai and Souleles (2005), Campbell and Cocco (2007)). On the other
hand, if homeowners are credit-constrained or subject to self-control issues, then house price

1

appreciation may induce households to borrow more (Stein (1995), Ortalo-Magne´ and Rady
(2006), Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2006), and Laibson (1997)).
Third, to the extent that homeowners use home equity-based borrowing to finance real
outlays such as consumption or home improvement, a large home equity-based borrowing
channel could provide a quantitative explanation for the decline in the U.S. savings rate in the
decade preceding the financial crisis. More broadly, if house prices strongly affect existing
homeowners’ borrowing behavior, then dramatic swings in the housing market may have real
effects on the economy through consumption and mortgage defaults.
We examine the home equity-based borrowing channel using a data set consisting of
anonymous individual credit files of a national consumer credit bureau agency. The agency has
provided us a random sample of almost 70,000 homeowners living in every major metropolitan
statistical area in the United States. We track these individuals at an annual frequency from the
end of 1997 until the end of 2008. This data set allows us to separate homeowners borrowing
against the rising value of their home equity from renters buying into a hot housing market.
The bottom panel of Figure 1 plots the growth in debt of 1997 homeowners over time,
and shows that existing homeowners borrow significantly more debt as their house prices
appreciate from 2002 to 2006. While the aggregate trend is suggestive of a link, changes in house
prices and homeowner borrowing may be jointly determined by an omitted variable such as a
shock to expected income growth (King (1990), Attanasio and Weber (1994), Muellbauer and
Murphy (1997)). As a result, proper identification of the effect of house prices on borrowing
requires an exogenous source of variation in house price growth.
We use two different instruments for house price growth, one based on across-MSA
variation and another based on within-MSA variation. The across-MSA specification uses
housing supply elasticity at the MSA level as an instrument for house prices. MSAs with elastic
housing supply should experience only modest increase in house prices in response to large shifts

2

in the demand for housing because housing supply can be expanded relatively easily. In contrast,
inelastic housing supply MSAs should experience large house price changes in response to the
same housing demand shock (Glaeser, Gyourko, and Saiz (2008)).
We confirm this relationship in our data using the land-topology based measure of
housing supply elasticity introduced by Saiz (2008). Using this instrument, the across-MSA
instrumental variables estimate uncovers a large home equity-based borrowing channel. Our
preferred estimate suggests an elasticity of borrowing with respect to increased home equity of
0.60. Alternatively, we find that households borrow 25 to 30 cents on each additional dollar of
home equity from 2002 to 2006.
An obvious concern with the IV estimates is that MSAs with an inelastic supply of
housing could also experience differential non-house price-related credit demand shocks. A
number of tests mitigate this concern however. First, the borrowing patterns in elastic and
inelastic MSAs closely track each other until 2002 when housing prices accelerated. Second,
there is almost no difference in measures of non-house price credit demand shocks such as
income, payroll, and employment growth between inelastic and elastic MSAs during this period.
Third, our results are insensitive to non-parametric controls for changes in credit demand
driven by individual income, credit score, age, and sex. Fourth, we find no statistically
significant difference in the growth of credit card balances for homeowners living in inelastic
versus elastic MSAs. This finding suggests that the home equity borrowing channel, and not a
general shift in credit demand, is driving our basic result. Finally, there is no difference in the
borrowing behavior of renters between elastic and inelastic MSAs.
Our second instrument for house price growth exploits within-MSA variation and uses
the interaction of the 1997 fraction of subprime borrowers in a zip code with MSA level housing
supply inelasticity as an instrument for house price growth. The instrument is motivated by Mian
and Sufi (2009) who show that an expansion of mortgage credit from 2002 to 2005 is associated

3

with stronger house price appreciation in subprime zip codes compared to prime zip codes,
despite relatively declining income opportunities for subprime areas. Furthermore, as theory
would suggest, the differential house price appreciation in subprime zip codes is present only in
inelastic housing supply MSAs. The interaction of the 1997 share of subprime population in a zip
code with MSA level housing supply inelasticity therefore serves as an instrument for withinMSA house price growth.1 Our within-MSA estimates are similar to the across-MSA estimates.
The real effects of the home equity-based borrowing channel depend on what households
do with the borrowed money. We find little evidence that borrowing in response to increased
house prices is used to purchase new homes or investment properties. We also find no evidence
that home equity-based borrowing is used to pay down credit card balances, even for households
in the highest quartile of the 1997 credit card utilization distribution. This finding suggests that
the marginal return to the use of borrowed funds is higher to households than the high interest
rate on credit card debt. While we do not have data on real outlays, these findings suggest that
consumption and home improvement are possible uses of the increased borrowing.
We use our microeconomic estimates to calculate the aggregate impact of the home
equity-based borrowing channel. We find that a total of $1.45 trillion of the rise in household
debt from 2002 to 2006 is attributable to existing homeowners borrowing against the increased
value of their homes. This translates to 2.8% of GDP per year. This is a conservative lowerbound estimate given that it is based on a difference-in-differences estimator that ignores any
level effect of house prices on borrowing.
Given the large effect of house prices on homeowner borrowing, which model of
household behavior is consistent with our estimates? We explore cross-sectional heterogeneity in
the effect to explore this question. We find that homeowners with high credit card utilization
rates and low credit scores at the beginning of the sample have the strongest tendency to borrow
1

See Section II.C for more on the within-MSA triple-difference identification strategy.

4

against increases in home equity. In fact, we find no effect of house prices on borrowing for
homeowners in the top quartile of credit score distribution as of 1997. We also find that the
home-equity based borrowing channel is stronger for younger homeowners. We find no evidence
of a differential effect based on either income or gender.
These results are consistent with a model of credit constraints under the assumption that
low credit scores and high credit card utilization rates serve as indicators for borrowing
difficulty. However, these characteristics may also proxy for individuals with self-control
problems. Our finding that older individuals have a smaller home equity-based borrowing
channel is inconsistent with standard life cycle-based models.
The increase in homeowner leverage due to the home equity-based borrowing channel
plays an important role in the ensuing financial crisis. Using homeowner default rate data, we
show that borrowing against rising home equity is accompanied by a relative decline in default
rates from 2002 to 2006, especially for low credit score and high credit card utilization
homeowners. However, the relative decline in default rate begins to reverse starting in 2006. By
the end of 2008, the default rate of homeowners experiencing house price appreciation from
2002 to 2006 skyrockets past homeowners experiencing no previous house price appreciation.
The reversal is especially strong among low credit score and high credit card utilization
homeowners who most aggressively borrow against rising home equity during the housing
boom. These same households also see a sharp relative reduction in auto loans from 2006 to
2008, highlighting the link between homeowner leverage and the drop in durable consumption at
the beginning of the current recession.
Our findings are related to research on the effect of house price growth on consumption,
refinancing, and borrowing behavior (Case, Quigley, and Shiller (2005), Bostic, Gabriel, and
Painter (2009), Lehnert (2004), Haurin and Rosenthal (2006), Hurst and Stafford (2004),
Campbell and Cocco (2007), Greenspan and Kennedy (2007), Cooper (2009)). Our results

5

complement this research by using a novel data set and a novel empirical strategy to isolate the
effect of house prices on borrowing. We believe that the empirical strategy we utilize is of firstorder importance given that house prices, borrowing behavior, and consumption are likely jointly
driven by unobservable permanent income shocks. In addition, we are the first in this literature to
examine default behavior as it relates to home equity-based borrowing.
These issues are important given that declines in housing and durable consumption often
precede economic recessions. Leamer (2008) points out that eight of the ten post-World War II
recessions were preceded by a decline in housing and durable consumption. The current
recession is no different. Understanding the links between housing and the real economy
necessitates a better understanding of the way homeowners respond to fluctuating asset prices.
Our analysis provides microeconomic estimates on homeowners’ response to increased house
values and the macroeconomic effect of the home equity-based borrowing channel. Our findings
are therefore related to models in which housing plays a crucial role in the macroeconomy (Aoki,
Proudman, and Vlieghe (2004), Iacoviello (2005), Jeske and Krueger (2005), Iacoviello and
Manetti (2008), and Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van Niewerburgh (2009)).
The rest of our study proceeds as follows. The next section describes the data and
summary statistics. Sections II through V present results, and Section VI concludes.
I. Data and Summary Statistics
A. Data
The final data set used in our analysis consists of detailed credit report information from
Equifax for 67,489 homeowners in 2,046 zip codes located in 45 MSAs. The initial random
sample includes a total of 266,058 individuals that live in 3,072 zip codes located in 84 MSAs
covered by the Fiserv Case Shiller Weiss zip code level house price indices as of 1997. We
choose to focus on the FCSW zip codes given the importance of zip code level house prices in
our empirical tests. As noted in Mian and Sufi (2009), these zip codes represent over 45% of

6

aggregate home debt outstanding. Within these zip codes, we randomly sample individuals at a
rate of 0.45% per zip code. Given the importance of housing supply elasticity as an instrument
for house price growth, we further limit the sample to zip codes located within an MSA covered
by the Saiz (2008) topography-based elasticity measure. This reduces the sample to 189,305
individuals within 2,076 zip codes in 45 MSAs.2
The Equifax data do not contain an explicit measure of homeownership. Instead, we
measure homeownership by splitting the sample into three groups of individuals based on 1997
credit report information. The first group (34%) contains individuals that have mortgage or home
equity debt outstanding. The second group (9%) contains individuals that do not currently have
mortgage or home equity debt outstanding, but their credit report indicates that they have had a
mortgage or home equity account in the past. The third group (57%) contains individuals that do
not have either a current or previous mortgage account. We define as “1997 homeowners”
individuals in the first two groups.3
The rate of homeownership among individuals in the credit report data (43%) is
significantly lower than the fraction of households that own their primary residence in census
data (65%). We believe that this difference is driven by the fact that our measures are for
individuals, not for households. As a result, individuals with no current or previous mortgage
debt that live in a home in which some other individual has mortgage debt will not be counted as
a homeowner. In addition, any homeowner with no previous or current mortgage debt
outstanding will be excluded in our definition of homeownership.

2

In an unreported robustness test, we match the remaining FCSW zip codes to the closest MSA covered by the Saiz
(2008) measure. The correlation between housing supply inelasticity and house price growth is slightly weakened,
but all other results are similar.
3
The second group includes two types of individuals that we cannot separate: individuals that own their home but
have paid off their mortgage and individuals who previously had a mortgage but are now renters. We choose to
count this group as homeowners given that they have a low probability of moving, which suggests that they are
homeowners who have paid off their previous mortgage. Nonetheless, all results are materially unchanged if we
exclude this group from our homeowner classification.

7

There are 81,264 homeowners in our sample. The final restriction we make is to exclude
homeowners that move from their 1997 zip code between 1997 and 1999. Approximately 15% of
homeowners move within the first two years of our sample, at which point the fraction that
moves levels off significantly. We exclude these “transient” individuals since we want to ensure
that when the house price shock hits, the homeowners are living in the zip code we assign them
to initially. This leaves a final sample of 67,489 individuals in 2,046 zip codes located in 45
MSAs.4
Due to restrictions on the dissemination of individual credit report information, Equifax
only provides us data on these homeowners in groups of at least five individuals. We are free to
sort the data in any way before the groups are formed. The primary data-sort that we utilize sorts
homeowners by their 1997 zip code and then by their 1997 credit score before groups are
formed. This ensures that our unit of observation, a group of 5 homeowners on average, is as
homogenous as possible on observed characteristics. In a few tests where we estimate
heterogeneity of our main effect, we re-sort the data to maximize available variation along the
dimension of interest. For example, we re-sort data by zip code and then age when testing
whether young homeowners behave differently than old homeowners.
We augment the individual level data with several additional data sets. We use the
following zip code level time-varying sources of data: house price data from FCSW, IRS income
data, employment and payroll information from the Census Business Statistics, aggregate
consumer credit score data from Equifax. All of these additional data sets are described in detail
in the appendix of Mian and Sufi (2009). The IRS data are available only for 1998, 2002, 2003,
2005, and 2006. We add information for missing years by interpolating data prior to 2006 and
extrapolating data post 2006 based on observed time trends. We also use 2000 decennial census

4

Appendix Tables 1 and 2 show information on renters and homeowners that move zip codes between 1997 and
1999.

8

zip code level information on demographics. Finally, the primary measure of topology-based
housing supply elasticity comes from Saiz (2008).
B. Summary Statistics
Table I presents summary statistics for the sample of 67,489 1997 homeowners grouped
into units containing 5 to 9 individuals. The median home debt (mortgage plus home equity)
outstanding as of 1997 is $88 thousand which is higher than the average amount of $62 thousand
reported in the 1998 Survey of Consumer Finances.5 The discrepancy is likely due to two factors:
first, we do not count as homeowners any individual that has never used debt to finance their
home purchase. Second, the 1998 SCF separates out debt used for the purchase of second homes
or residential investment properties, whereas we cannot separate primary residence versus other
residential mortgage debt. Mortgage debt makes up over 85% of total debt outstanding for
homeowners.
After remaining relatively constant from 1998 to 2002, total debt grows by 34% from
2002 to 2006. This growth is driven almost exclusively by home debt. The increase in leverage
can also be seen in the sharp increase in the total debt to income ratio, which increases by 0.7
from 2002 to 2006, which is almost ½ a standard deviation of the 1997 level. Default rates are
stable from 1998 to 2006, at which point they rise sharply by 3.8 percentage points from 2006 to
2008, which is a doubling of the 1997 level. Table I also includes information on individual 1997
credit score, 1997 credit card utilization, 1997 age, sex, and 2008 income.6
The housing supply elasticity measure in Saiz (2008) varies from 0 to 3 and is increasing
in elasticity. Our measure is 3 minus the Saiz (2008) measure so that our measure increases in
housing supply inelasticity. Appendix Table 3 shows the inelasticity measure for the 45 MSAs in
our sample. Both the zip code level IRS wage data and the Census business statistics payroll data
5

See Kennickell, Starr-McCluer, and Surette (2000).
Individual income data are only available from Equifax for 2008. This estimate is based on payroll data that
Equifax matches with their records.
6

9

show growth of about 12% from 2002 to 2006. Employment growth is 8% over the same time
period. One measure from Mian and Sufi (2009) that we use is the fraction of all consumers in a
zip code with a “subprime” credit score, which is defined to be a score below 660 as of 1997. In
our sample, homeowners on average live in a zip code with 31% subprime consumers.
II. The Effect of House Prices on Home Equity-Based Borrowing
A. Theoretical Motivation
How should an individual homeowner respond to an increase in their house price, all else
being equal? This is the thought experiment that our empirical specification attempts to
implement using instruments for house price growth. The theoretical answer to this question
depends on the underlying model of consumer behavior.
A useful starting benchmark is unconstrained long-lived homeowners. These
homeowners plan on using housing consumption in the foreseeable future, perhaps due to
bequest motives, and are not credit-constrained when choosing their consumption paths. Sinai
and Souleles (2005) and Campbell and Cocco (2007) show that such households are naturally
hedged against house price fluctuations in the absence of credit constraints or substitution
effects. Any increase in house prices makes future housing consumption more expensive. As a
result, the propensity to borrow out of housing gains is zero.7
A second possible model is based on short-lived homeowners who do not value housing
bequests very highly and plan on consuming part of their housing capital before death. Such
homeowners would like to borrow against unexpected increases in home equity to finance
consumption, with the propensity to borrow being strongest for older homeowners with shorter
life horizons.

7

An important caveat is a situation in which homeowners have short expected tenure or a high probability of
moving. In this case, a relative house price shock may be treated as a real wealth shock.

10

A third possibility is credit-constrained homeowners who want to borrow more today to
smooth consumption over time, but are unable to do so due to limited collateral. Such
homeowners would borrow more against increases in home equity to relax their budget
constraints (Ortalo-Magne´ and Rady (2006), Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh, (2006)). Finally
following Laibson (1997), homeowners with limited self-control may aggressively borrow
against increased access to housing wealth in order to finance current consumption.
B. Across MSA Empirical Strategy Based on Housing Supply Inelasticity
Our empirical strategy is designed to estimate the effect of house prices on home equitybased borrowing. As the aggregate data in Figure 1 show, there is a strong correlation between
house price growth and homeowner debt growth. However, it is possible that omitted time
varying factors drive both house prices and borrowing behavior. Perhaps the most worrisome
time-varying trend is changes in productivity or permanent income.
Our first empirical test exploits variation across MSAs in housing supply elasticity. The
intuition of the tests is straightforward: for an equivalent housing demand shock, the slope of the
housing supply curve determines that degree to which housing prices rise in an area. The insight
of Glaeser, Gyourko, and Saiz (2008) is that this basic prediction holds under most models of
house price evolution. As long as builders respond to house prices, an increase in housing supply
puts an upper bound on house price appreciation in elastic housing supply MSAs.
In the top panel of Figure 2, we show evidence consistent with this intuition. We compare
MSAs in the highest and lowest quartile categories based on the Saiz (2008) housing supply
elasticity measure. The most elastic housing supply MSAs experience almost no increase in
house prices from 1997 to 2008. In contrast, inelastic housing supply MSAs experience strong
growth of over 100% from 2001 to 2006. The pattern in the top panel of Figure 2 is also seen in
our first stage estimate in column 1 of Table II, which shows a strong effect of housing supply
inelasticity on house price growth. The magnitude suggests that a one standard deviation increase

11

in MSA housing supply inelasticity leads to a one-half standard deviation increase in house price
growth from 2002 to 2006.
The bottom two panels of Figure 2 show a graphical version of the reduced form
specification estimates from our empirical model; they show that total debt growth and the
change in debt to income is significantly higher in inelastic MSAs from 2002 to 2006. The
growth rate is 20 percentage points higher and the debt to income change is 0.5 higher in
inelastic MSAs relative to elastic MSAs.
Figure 2 and the estimate in column 1 of Table II motivate the following first-differenced
instrumental variables specification:
(1)
(2)

0206

0206

0206

,

Where LeverageGrowth0206izm represents the change in homeowner leverage from 2002 to 2006
for individual i living in zip code z within MSA m. Equation (2) represents the first stage, where
the instrument is MSA level housing supply inelasticity (Inelasticity). All standard errors are
clustered at the MSA level.
Column 2 of Table II presents the instrumental variables estimate with no control
variables. The estimated elasticity of debt with respect to house prices is 0.6 among
homeowners. The estimate is completely insensitive to individual level control variables when
added linearly (column 3) or when added non-parametrically with 50 indicator variables for 2percentile bins (column 4). The estimate is reduced only slightly when we include a host of zip
code level census demographic control variables and zip code level controls for the growth in
wages, payroll, and employment (column 5).
An alternative IV specification using the debt to income ratio also shows a positive effect
of house prices on leverage. The estimate of 1.6 in column 6 implies that a one standard
deviation change in house prices leads to a 1/4 standard deviation increase in the debt to income

12

ratio. As with the elasticity measures, the effect of house prices on debt to income ratios is
completely insensitive to individual level controls (columns 7 and 8), and only slightly sensitive
to zip code level demographics and income patterns (column 9).
Figure 3 presents the non-parametric plot of the effect of house price growth on debt
growth across the full distribution. It shows the second stage of the IV estimate in column 2 of
Table II by plotting total debt growth from 2002-2006 against predicted house price growth over
the same period. As Figure 3 shows, the effect is close to linear with a slight convexity near the
middle of the distribution. The pattern is also robust across almost the entire distribution,
although the statistical precision is lower at the low end of the house price growth distribution.
In Table III, we present IV estimates of the effect of an increase in home equity on home
borrowing in dollar units. The first stage estimate in column 1 implies that a one standard
deviation increase in housing supply inelasticity leads to a $30 thousand increase in home equity.
The second stage estimates in columns 2 through 5 suggest that 1997 homeowners borrow 25 to
30 cents on every dollar of additional home equity value. As columns 3 to 5 show, the estimate is
completely insensitive to both individual and zip code level control variables.
One concern with the findings in Table II, Figure 3, and Table III is the validity of the
exclusion restriction. In other words, it is possible that differential trends in inelastic and elastic
MSAs during this time period would lead to differential borrowing patterns even in the absence
of differential house price growth. Of course, the robustness of our findings to a series of
rigorous control variables partially mitigates this concern, but omitted factors not captured by our
control variables could still be a worry.
In Table IV, we further examine the exclusion restriction. Panel A presents evidence on
the correlation between housing supply inelasticity and zip code level measures of per capita
payroll, per capita wage, and total employment growth. Our goal in Panel A is to present
evidence on differential permanent income or productivity shocks that may drive household

13

borrowing and house price appreciation in inelastic areas. There is no evidence of differentially
stronger growth in per capita payroll or employment growth. While there is a positive correlation
between housing supply inelasticity and IRS per capita wage growth over the 2002 to 2006 time
period, this correlation is not robust across the different measures of payroll and employment
growth (columns 1 and 3).
However, a comparison of the level of income growth from 2002 to 2006 is not
necessarily the proper empirical test. As permanent income theory would predict, what matters
for changes in household borrowing behavior is the change in expected income growth. When
we examine the difference in growth rates between 1998-2002 and 2002-2006, we find no
positive correlation with housing supply inelasticity. Instead, column 4 of Table IV presents
evidence that inelastic MSAs receive a negative payroll shock from 2002 to 2006.
In Panel B, we conduct additional tests to examine the exclusion restriction. Columns 1
and 4 of Panel B show that the positive effect of house prices on borrowing is driven by an
increase in home (mortgage plus home equity) debt. The effect of house price growth on credit
card balances is statistically insignificant and very close to 0 for the credit card balances to
income ratio. These findings suggest that the channel through which consumers in inelastic
MSAs increase debt outstanding is home-equity related and not a general increase in the demand
for credit. In columns 5 and 6, we examine renters who never buy into the rising housing market
during the sample period. As the estimates show, there is no statistically significant differential
increase in borrowing among renters in inelastic areas.
While it is impossible to test the exclusion restriction explicitly, there is little evidence to
suggest that the increased homeowner borrowing that we find in inelastic housing supply MSAs
is driven by something other than house prices. The fact that the increased borrowing is
concentrated in home-related debt is consistent with a home equity-based borrowing channel.
Further evidence in support of the validity of the exclusion restriction is presented in Section V

14

where we focus on cross-sectional heterogeneity in the effect of house prices on consumer
borrowing. As we show there, there is almost no differential effect for high credit score and low
credit card utilization borrowers, which suggests the absence of non-housing related factors
driving our results.
C. Within-MSA Empirical Strategy Based on 1997 Fraction of Subprime Borrowers
This section presents an alternative IV strategy that exploits within- MSA variation at the
level of zip codes to identify the effect of house prices on homeowner borrowing. The motivation
for this test comes from Mian and Sufi (2009). They present evidence of a securitization-driven
shift in the supply of mortgages for new home purchase from 2002 to 2005 toward zip codes that
have a high fraction of subprime borrowers. Column 1 of Panel A in Table V replicates the basic
finding, which shows a strong positive correlation between new home purchase mortgage growth
from 2002 to 2006 and the fraction of borrowers with a credit score below 660 as of 1997.
Mian and Sufi (2009) show that higher credit growth for home-purchase mortgages
occurs in subprime zip codes despite declining relative, and in some cases absolute, income
growth in these areas. Furthermore, 2002 to 2005 is the only period in the last 18 years in which
mortgage origination for home purchase is higher in areas with lower income growth.
In columns 2 to 5 of Table V, Panel A, we replicate another finding of Mian and Sufi
(2009): the relative shift in the supply of mortgage credit for home purchase toward high
subprime share zip codes occurs even in the most elastic MSAs where there is no significant
house price growth. However, the shift in the supply of mortgage credit is stronger in more
inelastic housing supply MSAs that experience strong house price growth. Based on these
findings, Mian and Sufi (2009) argue that house price appreciation cannot fully explain the shift
in the supply of mortgage credit to high subprime areas, but house price growth strengthens the
effect through a collateral feedback mechanism (as in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997)).

15

Column 1 of Table V, Panel B presents evidence that the shift in the supply of credit
toward subprime share zip codes leads to higher house price growth in subprime zip codes
relative to prime zip codes within the same MSA. Columns 2 through 5 show that this effect is
only present in inelastic MSAs, as we would expect given the intuition on house prices and
supply elasticity in Glaeser, Gyourko, and Saiz (2008). Mian and Sufi (2009) present evidence
that the relative house price appreciation in high subprime share zip codes within inelastic MSAs
is credit-induced: they find that house price growth and income growth are negatively correlated
from 2002 to 2006 and that high subprime share zip codes experience relative house price
growth despite relatively negative income growth.
Our instrumental variable strategy is designed to exploit credit-induced house price
appreciation in high subprime share zip codes within inelastic MSAs to estimate the effect of
house price appreciation on homeowner borrowing. The exact thought experiment is as follows.
Take two homeowners IP and IS with the same credit score as of 1997. The homeowners live in
the same inelastic MSA, but differ in the neighborhood of residence. Homeowner IP lives in a
prime neighborhood, while IS lives in a subprime neighborhood. We know from Mian and Sufi
(2009) that IS experiences a larger house price increase than IP as a result of the aggregate credit
supply expansion. Let BIS and BIP be the change in household borrowing for IS and IP
respectively during the price boom period. Then the double difference (BIS - BIP) provides one
possible reduced form measure of the effect of house prices on homeowner borrowing.
However, a concern with this estimate is that despite IS and IP having the same initial
credit score, the fact that they live in different neighborhoods potentially makes them different
on unobserved dimensions. The unobserved dimensions could also affect the borrowing
decisions in a way that makes (BIS - BIP) a biased estimate of the direct house price effect.

16

How does one control for the unobserved neighborhood effect of subprime versus prime
neighborhoods? The triple-difference strategy exploits the additional variation in housing supply
elasticity. In particular, as mentioned earlier, the difference in house prices of subprime versus
prime neighborhood disappears in elastic MSAs due to easily adjustable housing supply.
However, the unobserved dimension of neighborhood effects is still operating on homeowners
living in elastic MSAs. Let ES and EP be two homeowners with the same initial credit scores as
IS and IP. ES and EP live in subprime and prime neighborhoods of an elastic MSA respectively.
Then we can control for the unobserved neighborhood effect of homeowners living in subprime
areas by computing the triple difference: [(BIS - BIP)- (BES - BEP)].
This idea translates into estimating the following reduced form regression equation:
(3)

,
,

,

1999, 2000, … , 2008

,

which examines the growth in y from the base year 1998 to t for individual i living in zip code z
within MSA m. We relate the growth in y to MSA fixed effects, individual and zip code level
control variables (X), the fraction of subprime borrowers (Subprime) in zip code z within MSA m
in 1997, and the interaction between the zip code fraction of subprime borrowers and the housing
supply inelasticity (Inelasticity) of MSA m. The coefficient of interest is .
Figure 4 presents the estimate of  for years 1999 to 2008. The top panel examines the
relative growth in house prices for high subprime share zip codes in highly inelastic MSAs.
Consistent with the estimates in Panel B of Table V, house price growth is strongest in subprime
zip codes of inelastic MSAs. In terms of magnitudes, the coefficient estimate for 2006 implies
that in the most inelastic MSA, a one standard deviation increase in the 1997 subprime share of
the zip code leads to a 15% increase in house prices from 2002 to 2006.
The bottom two graphs show a relative increase in debt growth and debt to income ratios
for homeowners living in high subprime share zip codes within highly inelastic MSAs. Once

17

again, these graphs are based on a triple-difference estimate which compares homeowner
leverage in high subprime share zip codes within inelastic MSAs to both homeowners in high
subprime share zip codes in elastic MSAs and homeowners in low subprime share zip codes in
the same MSA. In terms of magnitudes, the coefficient estimate for 2006 implies that in the most
inelastic MSA, a one standard deviation increase in the 1998 subprime share of the zip code
leads to a 9% increase in debt and a 1/2 standard deviation increase in the homeowner debt to
income ratio from 2002 to 2006.
Figure 4 suggests that a potential instrument for house prices is the zip code level share of
subprime borrowers as of 1997 interacted with MSA housing supply inelasticity. In Panel C of
Table V, we examine how this instrument is correlated with debt and debt to income levels in
2002. As Panel C shows, homeowners’ debt amounts and debt to income ratios in high subprime
share zip codes within inelastic MSAs are not significantly different than homeowners in high
subprime share zip codes within elastic MSAs prior to the house price acceleration in 2002.
The results in Table V and Figure 4 together with the results in Mian and Sufi (2009)
motivate the following within-MSA instrumental variables specification:
0206

(4)

,

0206
0206

(5)
,

,
,

Equation (5) represents the first stage in which house price growth from 2002 to 2006 is
instrumented with the interaction of zip code level subprime share as of 1997 and MSA level
housing supply inelasticity. Equation (4) represents the second stage in which we examine the
growth in leverage for homeowners as a function of predicted house price growth. The control
variables in X include median home value in the zip code and individual credit score, income,
sex, and age. The control variables imply that we are comparing two homeowners with the same

18

age, same credit score, same sex, and same income, but one resides in a high subprime share zip
code within an inelastic housing supply MSA.
The second stage estimates for both debt growth and the change in debt to income are
presented in Table VI. The estimates from the within-MSA specification are slightly higher than
the estimates from the across-MSA analysis presented in the previous sub-section. The inclusion
of control variables does not change the debt growth specification estimate. However, the effect
of house price growth on the change in debt to income is more sensitive to the inclusion of
control variables.
The within-MSA approach in Table VI explores a different source of house price
variation relative to the across-MSA approach of Table II. In econometric terms, both the across
and within approaches are local average treatment effect (LATE) estimators with the “local
average” computed over mutually exclusive parts of the house price distribution. Yet the two
approaches produce quite consistent estimates of the effect of house prices on homeowner
borrowing. It should be kept in mind that the majority of the overall house price variation is
across MSAs.8 For this reason, the across-MSA estimate is economically more meaningful,
while the within-MSA estimate serves as a useful robustness check.
III. The Macroeconomic Impact of the Home Equity-Based Borrowing Channel
A. What Are Consumers Doing with Borrowed Money?
What do homeowners do with the money borrowed against home equity? The question is
important in order to understand the real effects of the home equity-based borrowing channel.
For example, if home equity borrowing is used to pay down other more expensive forms of
consumer credit such as credit card debt, then home equity borrowing may not have a large

8

Variance decomposition of house price growth from 2002 to 2006 at the zip code level reveals a between-MSA
standard deviation of 0.22 and a within-MSA standard deviation of 0.06. See Table I in Mian and Sufi (2009).

19

aggregate impact. However, if home equity-based borrowing is used primarily for consumption
or home improvement, then the real and policy implications are substantial.
We first test whether high house prices lead homeowners to “trade up” by taking a bigger
mortgage to move to a bigger home. Our data records the current zip code of each individual
borrower. We can therefore construct an indicator variable for whether a homeowner moves
from 2002 to 2006. Columns 1 and 2 of Panel A in Table VII show that house price appreciation
is not correlated with the probability of moving. This is true when examining the OLS
specification or when using MSA housing supply inelasticity as an instrument for house price
growth. These estimates are inconsistent with the argument that households are much more likely
to move to new homes after realizing an increased value of home equity. In columns 3 and 4,
respectively, we split the sample into homeowners that move and do not move zip codes between
2002 and 2006. The elasticity of debt growth with respect to house price growth is similar in
both samples. Taken together, the estimates in Panel A are inconsistent with the argument that
homeowners use borrowed money primarily to finance the purchase of new homes.
In Panel B, we examine whether homeowners use the increased value of home equity to
buy investment properties. This may be a concern given that the percentage of households in the
Survey of Consumer Finances that have outstanding debt on a residential property other than
their primary residence increased from 4.6% in 2001 to 5.5% in 2007 (Bucks, Kennickell, Mach,
and Moore (2009), Aizcorbe, Kennickell, and Moore (2003)). While we do not have data on the
purchase of investment properties, the consumer credit reports contain the number of mortgage
accounts. Under the assumption that consumers must obtain a new mortgage to purchase an
investment property, we should detect any systematic use of increased home equity to purchase
an investment property by examining the number of mortgage accounts.
Column 1 and 2 of Panel B show that the change in the number of mortgage accounts
from 2002 to 2006 is negatively correlated with house price growth. In other words, our

20

estimates suggest that homeowners in high house price appreciation MSAs are less likely to buy
investment properties. In column 3, we control for the change in the number of mortgage
accounts and find a similar elasticity of debt growth with respect to house price growth. Finally,
in column 4, we exclude any consumer with any change in the number of mortgage accounts and
find a similar estimate of the effect of house price growth on debt growth. Taken together, the
evidence in Panel B is inconsistent with the hypothesis that households use increased home
equity to buy investment properties.
We do not have individual information on financial assets. However, evidence from the
Survey of Consumer Finances is inconsistent with the view that homeowners use borrowing to
buy additional financial assets.9 According to the SCF, the fraction of families holding almost
every class of financial security declined from 2001 to 2007. This is true of stocks (21.3% to
17.9%), savings bonds (16.7% to 14.9%), and pooled investment vehicles (17.7% to 11.4%).
Only retirement accounts increased slightly (52.2% to 52.6%). Conditional on having a financial
asset, the SCF reports a decline in the median value of financial assets from $29.8 thousand to
$25.3 thousand from 2001 to 2007.
One additional fact is also inconsistent with the hypothesis that consumers use home
equity-based borrowing to purchase financial assets. As we show in the next section, the home
equity borrowing channel is stronger among low credit quality and high credit card utilization
individuals. Evidence from the SCF suggests that participation among lower income and lower
net worth individuals dropped even more dramatically than the average from 2001 to 2007.
The evidence is inconsistent with the argument that consumers borrowed against
increased home equity to purchase real estate or financial assets. In Panel C, we explore whether
consumers use increased home equity-based borrowing to pay down outstanding credit card

9

See Bucks, Kennickell, Mach, and Moore (2009), Aizcorbe, Kennickell, and Moore (2003), and Bucks,
Kennickell, and Moore (2006)

21

balances. This is a useful exercise given that the mean interest rate on outstanding credit card
debt is 12.5% according to the SCF (Bucks, Kennickell, Mach, and Moore (2009)). If consumers
do not pay down credit card balances, then it suggests that homeowners derive considerable
marginal utility from the use of home-equity based borrowing.
Panel C isolates the sample to homeowners in the top quartile of the credit card
utilization distribution as of 1997. The mean credit card balance outstanding among this group is
almost $10 thousand and the mean credit card utilization rate (amount outstanding divided by the
high limit) is 0.71. Column 1 shows an elasticity of home debt borrowing with respect to house
price growth of 0.8 among this sample. Despite the large increase in home-equity based
borrowing and the large amount of outstanding credit card balances, the estimates in columns 2
and 4 show that these individuals do not pay down credit card balances in response to house
price growth.10 While we cannot see the exact use of borrowed funds in our data, the results in
Panel C suggest that the marginal return to the use of borrowed funds is quite high.
While we do not have direct data on real outlays by individuals, we are able to
demonstrate that consumers do not use home equity-based borrowing to buy real estate or
financial assets, and consumers do not use borrowed funds to pay down credit card debt with a
high interest rate. While more evidence is needed, our findings are suggestive that a large
fraction of home equity-based borrowing is used for consumption or home improvement. This
conclusion is consistent with survey evidence by Brady, Canner, and Maki (2000) who find that
from 1998 to 1999, 40% of households cite home improvement as a reason for home equity
extraction, and 39% cite consumer expenditures. Using similar survey data, Canner, Dynan, and
Passmore (2002) find that over 50% of funds liquefied from home equity are used for either
10

Ideally, we would want to examine outstanding credit card debt on which interest is being paid. However, the
credit bureau only collects outstanding credit card balances. Several tests suggest that balances are strongly
correlated with outstanding debt, especially among high credit card utilization individuals. Increases in credit card
balances are strongly positively correlated with future default, and outstanding credit card balances are strongly
negatively correlated with credit scores. Further, given that all of our tests are done in first-differences, any error in
using balances instead of debt that is similar across housing supply elasticity is removed.

22

home improvement or consumer expenditures.
B. The Macroeconomic Impact of the Household Borrowing Channel
Since our estimates of the home equity-based borrowing channel is based on a
representative sample of the U.S., we can integrate our estimated effect to compute the economy
wide magnitude of home equity-based borrowing due to higher house prices.
How much of the increase in mortgage credit can be attributed to a direct effect of
existing homeowners borrowing against the increasing value of their housing equity? We start
with our baseline estimate of column 2 in Table II that suggests that homeowners increase their
total borrowing by 0.6 percent for every 1.0 percent increase in house prices. Since our estimated
effect is based on a difference in differences approach, the level impact of house prices on
borrowing is not identifiable. Therefore, the appropriate in-sample aggregate effect of our
estimate should be computed using relative differences in house price growth.
Let i index an MSA such that the MSAs are ordered by their housing supply inelasticity
with i=1 being the most elastic. Let ∆ be the predicted percentage change in house prices for
MSA i given its supply inelasticity. Given our home equity-based borrowing elasticity estimate
of 0.6, the average percentage change in total borrowing due to the house price channel for
homeowner living in MSA i is given by 0.6

∆

∆

]. Since we know each homeowner’s

level of initial debt, we can convert the percentage change in debt into new debt taken out in
dollars. Aggregating this procedure for all MSAs gives us an aggregate borrowing due to house
price appreciation effect of $1.45 trillion dollars over four years from 2002 to 2006.11 This
increase represents 59.2% of the overall increase in debt of homeowners from 2002 to 2006.
11

The sum of home equity-based borrowing over our regression sample is equal to $2.21 billion. Since our random
sample has a sampling rate of 0.494%, and we dropped 18.3% of homeowners (dollar-weighted) due to early moves,
the total effect in our sample of zip codes is: $2.21/(0.00494*(1-0.183))= $548 billion. The zip codes in our
regression sample represent 26.5% of U.S. household credit in 2002. To estimate the home-equity borrowing
channel effect for remaining zip codes not in our sample, we apply our home equity-based borrowing elasticity
estimate of 0.6 to the house price appreciation for these zip codes. House price appreciation is measured using zip
code level price estimate from zillow.com wherever possible, and using MSA level OFHEO price index otherwise.

23

The aggregate increase in debt due to house price appreciation represents 2.8% of GDP
per year over the four years. While we do not have data on real outlays, our previous evidence
suggests that it is likely that some of the borrowings are used for consumption and home
improvement. If we take the extreme view that all of borrowed money is used for real outlays,
then our estimate helps explain the drop in the savings rate during this time period.
IV. Does the Home Equity-Based Borrowing Channel Vary By Consumer Type?
Our estimates above suggest a large response of homeowner borrowing to increases in
the value of home equity. In this section, we explore cross-sectional heterogeneity of the effect.
Our goal is to provide insight into the underlying model of consumer behavior that is most
consistent with the home equity-based borrowing channel.
We first examine how the propensity to borrow against increased home equity varies by
the homeowner’s base year credit score and credit card utilization rate. Credit scores play an
important role in the availability and pricing of consumer credit, and consumers below critical
thresholds are often unable to obtain financing at reasonable interest rates.12 Credit card
utilization rate is measured by the fraction of the total available credit card limit that is used.
Credit scores and credit card utilization rates have a correlation coefficient of -0.88 in our sample
of homeowners, and an OLS regression of one on the other yields an R2 of 0.78. The literature on
consumer credit often interprets low credit scores and high credit card utilization rates as
indicators for liquidity constrained households (see Gross and Souleles (2002)). However, such
variables may also be systematically correlated with an underlying behavioral attribute of
households such as self-control problems.

For 16.6% of dollar-weighted zip codes, we do not have any house price data and assume a home equity borrowing
effect of 0 to be conservative. The aggregate home equity borrowing effect comes out to be $1.45 trillion.
12
See http://www.freddiemac.com/corporate/reports/moseley/chap6.htm and congressional testimony of Staten
(2004) at http://financialservices.house.gov/media/pdf/033004ms.pdf#page=3.

24

The top four panels of Figure 5 examine debt growth patterns for inelastic and elastic
MSAs by 1997 homeowner credit score and credit card utilization rate. We define “high” and
“low” categories as the top and bottom quartile of the respective distribution. The top panel of
Figure 5 shows a very strong home equity-based borrowing effect for low credit quality
borrowers. In contrast there is almost no effect for high quality borrowers as both elastic and
inelastic debt growth path are similar throughout the sample period. A similar pattern is revealed
in the middle panel that uses 1997 credit card utilization to separate borrowers.
The top four panels of Figure 5 provide support for the exclusion restriction in our
instrumental variables specification. The fact that there is almost no difference in borrowing
between inelastic and elastic MSAs for high credit quality and low credit card utilization zip
codes is inconsistent with a general non-housing related credit demand shift in inelastic MSAs.
An alternative channel for higher borrowing in inelastic MSAs must explain why the effect is
absent in high credit score and low credit card utilization individuals.
As we discuss in Section II.A, a standard model without liquidity constraints
hypothesizes that older consumers should be more willing to extract cash from the increased
value of home equity. The bottom two panels of Figure 5 do not show evidence in favor of this
hypothesis. We split the sample into consumers in the lowest and highest quartile of the age
distribution, and we find that inelastic-elastic differential in debt growth is not significantly
different for young and old homeowners.
Table VIII presents regression equivalent results for Figure 5 by estimating the following
specification:
0206

(6)

0206

0206
0206

(7)

,

,

25

As equation (7) shows, the instruments in the first stage are housing supply inelasticity and
housing supply inelasticity interacted with the relevant interaction variable listed at the top of the
column in Table VIII. In column 1, the estimated coefficient on the interaction term is negative,
which implies that the effect of house price growth on home equity-based borrowing from 2002
to 2006 is lower for individuals with a higher 1997 credit score. The magnitude of the difference
is large. For a consumer one standard deviation above the mean 1997 credit score, the elasticity
of debt with respect to house prices is 0.35. For a consumer one standard deviation below the
mean 1997 credit score, the elasticity is 0.83.
The positive estimate on the interaction term in column 2 implies that individuals with a
high credit card utilization rate have a larger borrowing response to house price growth. The
estimate implies that for a consumer one standard deviation below the mean 1997 credit card
utilization rate, the elasticity of debt with respect to house prices is 0.37. For a consumer one
standard deviation above the mean 1997 credit card utilization rate, the elasticity is 0.85.
The coefficient estimate on the interaction term is not significant for either sex or
household income. The coefficient estimate on the age interaction term in column 4 is negative
and marginally statistically significant with a p-value of 0.11. In column 5, we create an
independent interaction term for homeowners over the age of 65. As the interaction term
coefficient estimate shows, individuals over 65 have a lower sensitivity of borrowing to house
price growth. The evidence suggests that the borrowing of older consumers is less responsive to
house price growth than young consumers, which is inconsistent with standard life-cycle models
of consumer financial behavior.13
V. Home Equity-Based Borrowing and the Financial Crisis

13

In unreported results, we find similar results for cross-sectional heterogeneity of the home equity-based borrowing
effect using the within-MSA specification outlined in Section II.C.

26

The evidence above shows the importance of the home equity-based borrowing channel
during the U.S. housing boom. What role did the unprecedented increase in leverage for high
house price growth homeowners play in the ensuing financial crisis? A unique advantage of our
data set is that we can estimate the default rate implications of aggressive home equity-based
borrowing when house price growth decelerates and turns negative. Moreover, since the
purchase of autos (a key durable good) is often financed through auto loans, we can estimate the
effect of household leverage in explaining the plummet of auto sales during the downturn.
The top panel in Figure 6 examines total debt default rates for 1997 homeowners in the
highest and lowest quartile MSAs based on house price inelasticity. As previous results show,
homeowners in inelastic MSAs experience both a sharp rise in house price growth and home
equity-based borrowing from 2002 to 2006 relative to homeowners in elastic MSAs. As the top
panel shows, there is a contemporaneous relative decline in the default rate for homeowners in
inelastic versus elastic MSAs. From 2006 to 2008, default rates for homeowners in inelastic
MSAs experience a sharp increase in default rates, surpassing the default rate in inelastic areas.
We also split the sample into borrowers in the lowest and highest quartile of the credit
quality distribution. As the middle panel shows, low credit quality borrowers in inelastic MSAs
experience a very sharp relative decline in default rates. From 2001 to 2005, the default rate falls
by almost five full percentage points in inelastic MSAs, whereas it falls by only two percentage
points in elastic MSAs. Recall that it is precisely low credit quality borrowers in inelastic MSAs
that experience the largest increase in home equity-based borrowing during this time period.
When house prices begin to decelerate and fall from 2006 to 2008, the default rate for
low credit quality borrowers in inelastic MSAs skyrockets past the default rate for high credit
quality borrowers. The magnitude is very large. The default rate for low credit quality
homeowners increases by more than 12 percentage points from 2005 to 2008 in inelastic MSAs.
The corresponding increase in elastic MSAs is less than 4 percentage points.

27

Table IX presents estimates of the effect of house price growth on the change in default
rates from 2002 to 2006. The instrumental variables specification in columns 1 and 2 is similar to
the specification outlined in equations (1) and (2) above, except we examine default rates as the
outcome variable. Consistent with Figure 6, we find a negative correlation between default rates
and house price growth from 2002 to 2006. The estimate in column 2 implies that a one standard
deviation increase in house prices leads to a 1 percentage point decrease in default rates.
In columns 3 through 7, we examine how house price growth differentially affects the
decline in default rates from 2002 to 2006 for different homeowners. The instrumental variables
specification is similar to the specification outlined in equations (6) and (7) above. The estimates
in columns 3 and 4 show that lower credit quality and higher credit card utilization rate
homeowners experience an even stronger decline in default rates from 2002 to 2006. In other
words, the exact same borrowers experiencing the largest effect of house prices on home equitybased borrowing also experience the largest declines in default rates from 2002 to 2006.
Table X presents the analogous specifications that examine the increase in default rates
from 2006 to 2008. The coefficient estimate on house price growth in column 2 is positive and
statistically distinct from zero at a high confidence level. In other words, lagged house price
growth strongly predicts future default rates. As the specifications with interaction terms show,
the effect of lagged house price growth on future defaults is strongest among low credit quality
and high credit card utilization households. The magnitude of the difference is very large.
Among homeowners one standard deviation below the mean 1997 credit score, a one standard
deviation increase in house prices from 2002 to 2006 leads to a full standard deviation increase
in default rates from 2006 to 2008. In contrast, among homeowners one standard deviation above
the mean 1997 credit score, a one standard deviation increase in house prices from 2002 to 2006
leads to 1/6 standard deviation increase in default rates from 2006 to 2008.

28

To obtain the macroeconomic magnitudes, we can repeat our analysis from Section III.B
to examine the effect of house price appreciation on total defaults for the U.S. economy. Taking
the estimate of 0.085 from column 1 of Table X, we find that defaults due to the home equitybased borrowing channel represent 34.8% percent of total new defaults in the U.S. economy.
This suggests that the current mortgage default crisis is not entirely driven by individuals buying
into a rising housing market. A significant part of the default crisis is driven by existing
homeowners borrowing heavily against the rising value of their house.
Figure 7 provides suggestive evidence on the effect of increased household leverage on
the consumption contraction during the recent recession. The top panel compares the evolution
of auto loans for elastic and inelastic MSAs for homeowners in the top and bottom quartile of
credit score distribution as of 1997. The top-left panel shows a sharp (relative) reduction in auto
loans starting in 2006 for low credit quality homeowners living in inelastic MSAs. The
magnitude of this drop is also large at almost 20%. There is no such relative drop for high credit
quality homeowners living in inelastic MSAs.
The bottom panel repeats this exercise for homeowners in the top and bottom quartile of
credit card utilization distribution in 1997. Consistent with the top panel, homeowners with a
high credit card utilization rate as of 1997 significantly cut back their purchase of autos with
financing, while there is no such effect for homeowners with low credit card utilization. In
unreported regression results, we find that the differential drop in auto loans over 2006 to 2008
for homeowners in inelastic MSAs is statistically significant at the 1% level.
From 2002 to 2006, high credit card utilization rate and low credit score homeowners in
high house price growth MSAs borrow heavily against the increased value of home equity and
experience a sharp relative decline in default rates. These same individuals experience a very
large relative increase in default rates and sharp reduction in auto loans when house prices

29

decelerate and fall from 2006 to 2008. These results highlight the important role that increased
homeowner leverage played in the financial and economic downturn of recent years.
VI. Conclusion
We provide evidence of a strong link between asset prices and household borrowing
decisions. The use of individual level data and an instrumental variables methodology enables us
to precisely estimate the magnitude of the home equity-based borrowing channel. Since our
individual level data is representative of U.S. household sector, we can provide an estimate of the
economy-wide effect of the rise in house prices on household borrowing during the period of
strong house price growth from 2002 to 2006.
The macroeconomic estimate of the effect of house price on household borrowing is
large. We also show evidence that the increase in homeowner borrowing is not used to buy new
houses, buy investment properties, or pay down costly consumer debt. Taken together, these
findings lend support to the view that home equity-based borrowing is used for real outlays.
While the effect of collateral on macroeconomic fluctuations has typically focused on business
investment (Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997)), our evidence suggests
that fluctuations in house prices and household credit availability may play an important role in
the evolution of business cycles. Exploring this link is an important question moving forward.
Our results also highlight the importance of understanding the microeconomic
foundations of household behavior. We find that the home equity-based borrowing channel is
driven primarily by homeowners with low credit scores and high credit card utilization rates.
This may suggest that house price appreciation allows previously credit-constrained homeowners
to move toward their optimal level of borrowing and consumption. However, it may also imply
house price appreciation provides greater access to borrowing for homeowners that suffer from
behavioral biases such as adaptive house price expectations (Agarwal (2007)), dynamically
inconsistent preferences, or self-control problems.

30

References
Agarwal, Sumit, 2007, “The Impact of Homeowners’ Housing Wealth Misestimation on
Consumption and Savings Decisions,” Real Estate Economics 35: 135-154.
Aizcorbe, Ana, Arthur Kennickell, and Kevin Moore, 2003, “Recent Changes in U.S. Family
Finances: Evidence from the 2001 and 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances.” Available at:
http://www.federalreserve.gov/PUBS/oss/oss2/2001/scf2001home.html
Aoki, Kosuke, James Proudman, and Gertjan Vlieghe, “House Prices, Consumption, and
Monetary Policy: A Financial Accelerator Approach,” Journal of Financial Intermediation 13:
414-435.
Attanasio, O.P., Weber, G., 1994. “The aggregate consumption boom of the late 1980s:
aggregate implications of microeconomic evidence”. Economic Journal 104, 1269–1302.
Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, 1989, “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,”
American Economic Review 79: 14-31.
Bostic R., Stuart Gabriel and Gary Painter, 2009, “Housing Wealth, Financial Wealth, and
Consumption: New Evidence from Micro Data”, Working Paper.
Bucks, Brian, Arthur Kennickel, Traci Mach, and Kevin Moore, 2009, “Changes in U.S. Family
Finances from 2004 to 2007: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances.” Available at:
http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/2009/pdf/scf09.pdf
Bucks, Brian, Arthur Kennickel, and Kevin Moore, 2006, “Recent Changes in U.S. Family
Finances: Evidence from the 2001 and 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances.” Available at:
http://www.federalreserve.gov/PUBS/oss/oss2/2004/bull0206.pdf
Campbell, J. and Cocco, J., 2007. “How do house prices affect consumption? Evidence from
micro data”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 591–621.
Canner, Glenn, Peter Brady, and Dean Maki, 2000, “The Effects of Recent Mortgage
Refinancing,” Federal Reserve Bulletin, July: 441-450.
Canner, Glenn, Karen Dynan, and Wayne Passmore, “Mortgage Refinancing in 2001 and early
2002,” Federal Reserve Bulletin, December: 469-481.
Case, K., Quigley, J. and Shiller, J., 2003. “Comparing wealth effects: the stock market versus
the housing market”, unpublished paper.
Cooper, Dan, 2009, “Impending Spending Bust? The Role of Housing Wealth as Borrowing
Collateral,” Working Paper, University of Michigan.

31

Favilukus, Jack, Sydney Ludvigson, and Stijn Van Niewerburgh, 2009, “The Macroeconomic
Effects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk-Sharing in General
Equilibrium,” Working paper, New York University.
Glaeser, Edward, Joseph Gyourko and Albert Saiz, 2008. “Housing Supply and Housing
Bubbles”, Harvard University, Working Paper.
Greenspan, A. and Kennedy, J., 2007. “Sources and uses of equity extracted from homes”,
Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Working Paper no. 2007–20.
Gross, David and Nicholas S. Souleles, 2002. “Do Liquidity Constraints And Interest Rates
Matter For Consumer Behavior? Evidence From Credit Card Data”, The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, MIT Press, vol. 117(1), pages 149-185, February.
Haurin D. and Stuart S. Rosenthal, 2006. “House Price Appreciation, Savings, and Consumer
Expenditures”, Working Paper.
Hurst, E. and Stafford, F., 2004. “Home is where the equity is: mortgage refinancing and
household consumption”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 36, 985–1014.
Iacoviello, M., 2005. “House prices, borrowing constraints and monetary policy in the business
cycle”, American Economic Review, 95, 739–64.
Iacoviello, Matteo and Raoul Minetti, 2008, “The Credit Channel of Monetary Policy: Evidence
from the Housing Market,” Journal of Macroeconomics 30: 69-96.
Jeske, Karten, and Dirk Krueger, 2005, “Housing and the Macroeconomy: The Role of Implicit
Guarantees for Government-Sponsored Enterprises,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of
Atlanta.
Kennickell, Starr-McCluer, and Brian Surette, 2000, “Recent changes in U.S. Family Finances:
Results from the 1998 Survey of Consumer Finances,” Available at:
http://www.federalreserve.gov/PUBS/oss/oss2/98/bull0100.pdf
King, M., 1990. Discussion. Economic Policy 11, 383–387.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997. “Credit Cycles”, Journal of Political Economy, 105,
211-248.
Laibson, David, 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 443-477.
Leamer, Edward, 2008. “Macroeconomic Patterns and Stories”, Springer.
Lehnert, Andreas, 2004, “Housing, Consumption, and Credit Constraints,” Working Paper,
Federal Reserve Board.

32

Lustig, H. and Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2005. “Housing collateral, consumption insurance and risk
premia: an empirical perspective”, Journal of Finance, 60, 1167–1219.
Mian, Atif R. and Sufi, Amir, 2009. “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion:
Evidence from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis”, Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Muellbauer, J., Murphy, A., 1997. “Booms and busts in the UK housing market”, Economic
Journal 107, 1701–1727.
Ortalo-Magne´, F., Rady, S., 2006. “Housing market dynamics: on the contribution of income
shocks and credit constraints”, Review of Economic Studies 73, 459–485.
Saiz, Albert, 2008. “On Local Housing Supply Elasticity”, Wharton Working Paper, 2008.
Sinai, T. and Souleles, N. S., 2005. “Owner-occupied housing as a hedge against rent risk”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 763–89.
Stein, Jeremy, 1995. “Prices and Trading Volume in the Housing Market: A Model with
Downpayment Effects”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, May, pp. 379-406.

33

Table I
Summary Statistics
This table presents summary statistics for 67,489 individuals who have either an existing mortgage account with
positive balance as of 1997 or a previous mortgage account. The sample is further restricted to individuals that do
not move zip codes between 1997 and 1999. Individuals are sorted into groups of at least 5 individuals. Each group
consists of individuals living in the same zip code as of 1997, and the individuals are sorted by 1997 credit score
before groups are formed. The income in the denominator of the debt to income ratio comes from zip level IRS data.
The zip code level median home value as of 2002 comes from the 2000 value reported in the decennial Census
multiplied by the growth rate from 2000 to 2002 reported in the Fiserv Case Shiller Weiss data. The housing supply
inelasticity measure we use is three – the Saiz (2008) measure. The Saiz (2008) measure is increasing in elasticity
from 0 to 3. There are 2,046 zip codes and 45 MSAs that are represented in the sample.
N

Mean

Median

St. Dev.

Equifax individual level data
Total debt, 1997, $thousands
Home debt, 1997, $thousands
Growth in total debt, 1998-2002
Growth in total debt, 2002-2006
Growth in home debt, 1998-2002
Growth in home debt, 2002-2006
Total debt to income ratio, 1997
Change in debt to income ratio, 1998-2002
Change in debt to income ratio, 2002-2006
Total debt default rate, 1997
Change in default rate, 1998-2006
Change in default rate, 2006-2008
Credit score, 1997
Credit card utilization fraction, 1997
Age, 1997
Male
Income, 1997, $thousands

12161
12161
12161
12161
12161
12161
11872
12160
12160
12161
12158
12153
12161
12160
12160
12148
12160

101
88
0.089
0.339
0.099
0.389
2.507
0.007
0.736
0.039
-0.006
0.038
779
0.333
58
0.513
79

95
83
0.080
0.313
0.052
0.350
2.494
-0.071
0.413
0.000
0.000
0.000
788
0.261
57
0.500
74

72
71
0.620
0.681
0.901
0.899
1.504
0.900
1.364
0.112
0.133
0.168
95
0.256
7
0.257
35

Fiserv Case Shiller Weiss zip level data
House price growth, zip level, 1998-2002
House price growth, zip level, 2002-2006

12122
12161

0.394
0.463

0.415
0.466

0.140
0.232

Saiz (2008) MSA level elasticity measure
Housing supply inelasticity

12161

1.978

2.080

0.473

Median home value, 2002, $thousands

12152

228

193

135

IRS zip level income data
Per capita wage growth, 2002-2006

12160

0.116

0.110

0.063

Census business statistics zip level data
Per capita payroll growth, 2002-2006
Employment growth, 2002-2006

11850
11850

0.118
0.083

0.118
0.073

0.122
0.190

12161

0.307

0.293

0.119

Equifax zip level aggregate data
Fraction of zip code
with credit score under 659, 1997

Table II
The Effect of House Prices on Household Borrowing for 1997 Homeowners
This table presents estimates of the effect of house prices on household borrowing for individuals who have either an existing mortgage account with positive
balance as of 1997 or a previous mortgage account. Individual dummy variables are quintile indicator variables for 2% bins of the 1997 credit score, 2008
income, and 1997 age variables. Census controls are zip code level variables for the vacancy rate, fraction white, fraction black, education indicator variables for
less than high school and high school diploma only, the unemployment rate, the poverty rate, and the fraction of households in the zip code living in an urban
setting, all measured as of 2000. Income controls are zip code level variables from the IRS and Census business statistics for the logarithm of the 2002
employment, per capita wage, and per capita payroll level, and the growth in wage, payroll and employment from 1997 to 2000, 2000 to 2002, and 2002 to 2006.
All standard errors are clustered at the MSA level.

Left hand side variable

Housing supply inelasticity
Instrumented HP growth, 2002-2006
(Credit score, 1997)/100
Ln(household income, 2008)
Age, 1997
Male dummy variable
Additional control variables

(1)
HP growth
2002-2006

(2)

(3)
(4)
Total debt growth
2002-2006

(5)

(6)

(7)
(8)
(9)
Change in total debt to income ratio
2002-2006

0.619**
(0.148)

0.539**
(0.113)

1.599**
(0.344)

0.024
(0.024)
Individual
dummy
variables

0.013
(0.025)
Individual
dummy,
census,
income
variables
11473
0.04

0.213**
(0.060)
0.602**
(0.157)

0.614**
(0.150)
-0.026*
(0.012)
0.142**
(0.020)
-0.011**
(0.001)
0.022
(0.026)

N
12161
12161
12146
12146
R2
0.19
0.01
0.01
0.02
**,*, + coefficient statistically distinct from 0 at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.

12160
0.00

1.722**
(0.362)
-0.100**
(0.029)
0.214**
(0.044)
-0.034**
(0.003)
0.182**
(0.062)

12145
0.04

1.742**
(0.365)

1.313**
(0.254)

0.181**
(0.058)
Individual
dummy
variables

0.117*
(0.054)
Individual
dummy,
census,
income
variables
11473
0.11

12145
0.06

Table III
The Effect of House Prices on Household Borrowing for 1997 Homeowners, Dollar for Dollar Changes
This table presents estimates of the effect of house prices on household borrowing for individuals who have either an existing mortgage account with positive
balance as of 1997 or a previous mortgage account. Individual dummy variables are quintile indicator variables for 2% bins of the 1997 credit score, 2008
income, and 1997 age variables. Census controls are zip code level variables for the vacancy rate, fraction white, fraction black, education indicator variables for
less than high school and high school diploma only, the unemployment rate, the poverty rate, and the fraction of households in the zip code living in an urban
setting, all measured as of 2000. Income controls are zip code level variables from the IRS and Census business statistics for the logarithm of the 2002
employment, per capita wage, and per capita payroll level, and the growth in wage, payroll and employment from 1997 to 2000, 2000 to 2002, and 2002 to 2006.
All standard errors are clustered at the MSA level. All standard errors are clustered at the MSA level.

Left hand side variable

Housing supply inelasticity

(1)
Change in home value
2002-2006
$thousands

(3)
(4)
Change in total debt
2002-2006
$thousands

(5)

63.433**
(17.773)

Instrumented change in home value, 2002-2006
Median home value, 2002

(2)

0.464**
(0.112)

0.245**
(0.051)
0.017
(0.042)

(Credit score, 1997)/100
Ln(household income, 2008)
Age, 1997
Male dummy variable

0.298**
(0.056)
-0.028
(0.055)
-6.902**
(1.092)
25.425**
(4.770)
-2.123**
(0.238)
11.302*
(4.700)

Additional control variables

N
12152
12152
R2
0.57
0.03
**,*, + coefficient statistically distinct from 0 at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.

12137
0.06

0.302**
(0.056)
-0.030
(0.051)

0.289**
(0.080)
-0.117
(0.101)

11.172*
(4.576)
Individual
dummy variables

8.889*
(4.405)
Individual
dummy, census,
income variables
11473
0.10

12137
0.08

Table IV
Examining Exclusion Restriction for MSA-level Analysis
This table presents evidence on the exclusion restriction for the MSA-level analysis in Tables II and III. Panel A examines the correlation between economic
activity and housing supply elasticity in the sample of homeowners. “Growth shocks” represent the differences in 1998 to 2002 and 2002 to 2006 growth rates
for each respective variable. Panel B examines the home debt and credit card balances for homeowners and debt patterns for renters. Renters are defined as
individuals that have no housing related debt from 1997 to 2006. All standard errors are clustered at the MSA level.
Panel A: Income and employment measures

Left hand side variable

Housing supply inelasticity
N
R2

(1)
Business payroll
growth
2002-2006

(2)
IRS wage growth
2002-2006

(3)
Employment
growth
2002-2006

(4)
Payroll growth
shock

(5)
Wage growth
shock

(6)
Employment
growth shock

-0.001
(0.009)
1990
0.00

0.026**
(0.005)
2045
0.03

-0.016
(0.022)
1990
0.00

-0.027**
(0.010)
1969
0.00

0.001
(0.008)
2045
0.00

-0.006
(0.020)
1969
0.00

Panel B: Home, credit card, and renters’ debt

Sample
Left hand side variable

Instrumented HP growth, 2002-2006

(1)
Homeowners

(2)
Homeowners

(3)
Homeowners

(4)
Homeowners

(5)
Renters

(6)
Renters

Home debt
growth
2002-2006

Credit card
balances growth
2002-2006

Change in home
debt to income
2002-2006

Change in credit
card balance to
income
2002-2006

Total debt growth
2002-2006

Change in total
debt to income
2002-2006

0.021
(0.024)
12160
0.00

0.103
(0.160)
4625
0.00

0.022
(0.043)
4624
0.00

0.628**
0.191
1.491**
(0.177)
(0.183)
(0.311)
N
12161
12161
12160
R2
0.00
0.00
0.01
**,*, + coefficient statistically distinct from 0 at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.

Table V
Motivation for Within-MSA Test Based on 1997 Subprime Share of Zip Code Population
Panel A shows the effect of subprime fraction in the zip code on mortgage origination growth for home purchase at the zip code level by MSA housing supply
elasticity. The zip code level mortgage origination growth data come from HMDA. Panel B shows the effect of the 1997 fraction of subprime individuals in the
zip code on house price growth from 2002 to 2006 by MSA housing supply elasticity. Panel C shows the correlation between the instrument, subprime share of
total population interacted with housing supple elasticity, and measures of debt as of 2002. Individual dummy variables are quintile indicator variables for 2%
bins of the 2002 median home value in the zip code, 1997 credit score, 2008 income, and 1997 age variables. All specifications include MSA fixed effects and
standard errors are clustered at the MSA level.
Panel A: Mortgage origination growth for new home purchase (HMDA), 2002-2006
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Full
Most elastic
2nd quartile
3rd quartile
Fraction in zip code with credit score under 660, 1997

1.434**
(0.185)

0.696*
(0.252)

Panel B: House price growth, 2002-2006
(1)
(2)
Full
Most elastic
Fraction in zip code with credit score under 660, 1997

Dependent variable

0.282**
(0.058)

-0.014
(0.022)

0.763*
(0.297)

1.820**
(0.187)

1.893**
(0.216)

(3)
2nd quartile

(4)
3rd quartile

(5)
Most inelastic

0.113+
(0.060)

0.330**
(0.056)

0.459**
(0.080)

Panel C: Correlation of instrument with measures of debt as of 2002
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Ln(total debt, 2002)
Total debt to income ratio, 2002

Fraction in zip code with credit score under 660, 1997
*Housing supply inelasticity

-0.214
(0.182)

Fraction in zip code with credit score under 660, 1997

-1.005**
(0.332)

0.055
(0.138)

-0.068
(0.310)
Additional control variables
Individual
dummy variables
**,*, + coefficient statistically distinct from 0 at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.

(5)
Most inelastic

0.584
(0.400)

0.227
(0.435)

1.224
(0.733)

2.190*
(0.873)
Individual
dummy variables

Table VI
The Effect of House Prices on Household Borrowing for 1997 Homeowners
Using Within-MSA Variation
This table presents second stage estimates from a within-MSA instrumental variables specification where the first stage instrument for house price growth from
2002 to 2006 is the fraction in the zip code with a credit score under 660 as of 1997 interacted with MSA level housing supply inelasticity. Individual dummy
variables are quintile indicator variables for 2% bins of the 2002 median home value in the zip code, 1997 credit score, 2008 income, and 1997 age variables. All
specifications (both first and second stage) include MSA fixed effects and standard errors are clustered at the MSA level.
(1)

(2)
Total debt growth
2002-2006

(3)

(4)

Instrumented house price growth, 2002-2006

0.940**
(0.305)

0.899**
(0.262)

0.902**
(0.241)

4.177**
(1.107)

3.167**
(0.833)

2.360**
(0.706)

Fraction in zip code with credit score under 660, 1997

-0.256**
(0.084)

-0.047
(0.081)
-0.000
(0.000)
-0.046**
(0.010)
0.170**
(0.026)
-0.009**
(0.001)
0.013
(0.025)

0.054
(0.108)

0.262
(0.274)

0.619*
(0.243)
-0.001**
(0.000)
-0.145**
(0.022)
0.527**
(0.048)
-0.027**
(0.002)
0.135*
(0.057)

1.162**
(0.317)

Dependent variable

Median home value, 2002
(Credit score, 1997)/100
Ln(household income, 2008)
Age, 1997
Male dummy variable
Additional control variables

N
12161
12137
R2
0.01
0.03
**,*, + coefficient statistically distinct from 0 at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.

0.015
(0.022)
Individual
dummy
variables
12137
0.05

(5)
(6)
Change in total debt to income
2002-2006

12160
0.04

12137
0.10

0.134*
(0.052)
Individual
dummy
variables
12137
0.12

Table VII
What Do Homeowners Do with Borrowed Money?
Panel A examines whether households in high house price growth areas are more likely to move to a new zip code
and whether movers and non-movers experience differential growth rates in debt from 2002 to 2006. Panel B
examines whether households in high house price growth areas are more likely to increase their number of
mortgages, which is a proxy for the purchase of an investment property. Panel C isolates the sample to individuals in
the top quartile of the 1997 credit card utilization distribution and examines whether households in high house price
appreciation areas are more likely to pay down credit card balances. All specifications include control variables for
individual 1997 credit score, 2008 income, age, and sex. Standard errors are clustered at the MSA level.
Panel A: Purchase of new homes?
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Sample
MSA averages
Full
Movers
Non-movers
Left hand side variable
Probability of
Probability of
Total debt growth
moving
moving
2002-2006
HP Growth, 2002-2006
0.030
(0.035)
Instrumented HP Growth, 2002-2006
-0.092
0.674**
0.578**
(0.101)
(0.171)
(0.146)
N
45
12143
6167
5976
R2
0.34
0.01
0.00
0.01

Sample

Panel B: Purchase of investment properties?
(1)
(2)
Full
Full

Left hand side variable
HP Growth, 2002-2006
Instrumented HP Growth, 2002-2006

Change in # of mortgages
2001-2005
-0.039+
(0.023)
-0.182**
(0.048)

Change in # of mortgages, 2001-2005
N
R2

11893
0.02

11893
0.01

(3)
Full

(4)
No change in
# of mortgages
Total debt growth
2002-2006

0.652**
(0.123)
0.628**
(0.033)
11893
0.10

0.597**
(0.177)

3569
0.02

Panel C: Paying down credit card balances?
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Sample
Top quartile credit card utilization as of 1997
Left hand side variable
Home debt
Credit card
Change in
Change in
growth
balance growth
home debt to
credit card
2002-2006
2002-2006
income
balance to
2002-2006
income
2002-2006
Instrumented HP Growth, 2002-2006
0.801**
0.147
2.146**
0.026
(0.153)
(0.169)
(0.417)
(0.025)
N
3031
3031
3031
3031
R2
0.02
0.00
0.04
0.01
**,*, + coefficient statistically distinct from 0 at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.

Table VIII
Cross-Sectional Heterogeneity in Effect of House Prices on Household Borrowing for 1997 Homeowners
This table presents estimates of the cross-sectional heterogeneity of the effect of house prices on household borrowing for individuals that have either positive
outstanding mortgage debt as of 1997 or a previous mortgage account. In each column, we interact house price growth with the variable in the top of the column.
The instruments in the first stage are MSA level housing supply elasticity and MSA level housing supply elasticity interacted with the interaction variable listed
in the top of the column. In all columns, we use the data sorts that maximize variation in the interaction variable. More specifically, in columns 1 and 2 we use
data sorted by credit score before groups are formed. In columns 3 to 6, we use data sorted by each interaction variable before groups are formed. All standard
errors are clustered at the MSA level.

Interaction variable

(1)
(Credit score,
1997)/100

(2)
Credit card
utilization,
1997

Left hand side variable

(3)
Ln(household
income, 2008)

(4)
Age, 1997

Instrumented house price growth, 2002-2006

2.576**
(0.479)

0.292*
(0.124)

Total debt growth
2002-2006
1.053+
1.253**
(0.563)
(0.413)

Instrumented house price growth, 2002-2006
*Interaction term (listed at top of column)
Age>=65 indicator

-0.255**
(0.055)

0.952**
(0.226)

-0.100
(0.114)

0.055+
-0.065**
(0.033)
(0.022)
Credit cart utilization, 1997
-0.158*
-0.609**
(0.064)
(0.094)
Ln(household income, 2008)
0.149**
0.151**
(0.022)
(0.022)
Age, 1997
-0.010**
-0.010**
(0.001)
(0.001)
Male dummy variable
0.023
0.024
0.055+
-0.065**
N
12145
12145
R2
0.01
0.01
**,*, + coefficient statistically distinct from 0 at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.

(6)
Male

0.702**
(0.147)

0.609**
(0.138)

-0.011
(0.007)

0.089
(0.143)
-0.358+
(0.186)
0.156
(0.096)

Instrumented house price growth, 2002-2006
*Age>=65
(Credit score, 1997)/100

(5)
Age>=65, 1997

-0.047
(0.036)
-0.092
(0.061)
0.251**
(0.058)
-0.012**
(0.002)
-0.016
-0.047
11576
0.03

-0.032
(0.034)
0.023
(0.050)
0.165**
(0.020)
-0.009**
(0.003)
-0.021
-0.032
11844
0.06

-0.031
(0.033)
0.027
(0.048)
0.162**
(0.020)
-0.014**
(0.001)
-0.022
-0.031
11844
0.06

-0.089**
(0.028)
-0.205**
(0.067)
0.156**
(0.022)
-0.010**
(0.002)
-0.036
-0.089**
10742
0.01

Table IX
The Effect of House Prices on Default Rates from 2002-2006 for 1997 Homeowners
This table presents the effect of house price growth on default rates from 2002 to 2006. In columns 3 to 6, we interact house price growth with the variable in the
top of the column. The instruments in the first stage are MSA level housing supply elasticity and MSA level housing supply elasticity interacted with the
interaction variable listed in the top of the column. In all columns, we use the data sorts that maximize variation in the interaction variable. More specifically, in
columns 3 and 4 we use the data sorted by credit score before groups are formed. In columns 5 to 7, we use the data sorted by each interaction variable before
groups are formed. All standard errors are clustered at the MSA level.
(1)

(2)

(3)
(Credit score,
1997)/100

-0.029**
(0.009)

-0.039**
(0.008)

-0.300**
(0.094)

-0.002
(0.015)

0.034**
(0.012)

-0.005
(0.006)
Ln(household income, 2008)
0.003
(0.003)
Age, 1997
0.000
(0.000)
Male dummy variable
0.006
(0.005)
Credit card utilization, 1997
0.005
(0.010)
N
12158
12144
12143
R2
0.00
0.01
0.02
**,*, + coefficient statistically distinct from 0 at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.

Interaction variable

Left hand side variable
Instrumented house price growth, 2002-2006

Instrumented house price growth, 2002-2006
*Interaction term (listed at top of column)
(Credit score, 1997)/100

0.010**
(0.002)
0.003
(0.003)
0.000
(0.000)
0.006
(0.005)

(4)
(5)
Credit card
Ln(HH
utilization,
income,
1997
2008)
Change in default rate, 2002-2006

(6)
Age, 1997

(7)
Male

0.093
(0.100)

-0.064
(0.058)

-0.033*
(0.016)

-0.106*
(0.045)

-0.029
(0.022)

0.001
(0.001)

0.025
(0.026)

0.011**
(0.003)
0.003
(0.003)
0.000
(0.000)
0.006
(0.005)
0.054*
(0.024)
12143
0.02

0.008+
(0.004)
0.015
(0.011)
0.000
(0.000)
0.013+
(0.007)
-0.012
(0.011)
11549
0.00

0.005+
(0.003)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.008
(0.005)
-0.022*
(0.010)
11836
0.01

0.006+
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.003)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.007
(0.012)
-0.004
(0.010)
10736
0.01

Table X
The Effect of House Prices from 2002-2006 on Default Rates from 2006-2008 for 1997 Homeowners
This table presents the effect of house price growth from 2002 to 2006 on default rates from 2006 to 2008. In columns 3 to 6, we interact house price growth with
the variable in the top of the column. The instruments in the first stage are MSA level housing supply elasticity and MSA level housing supply elasticity
interacted with the interaction variable listed in the top of the column. In all columns, we use the data sorts that maximize variation in the interaction variable.
More specifically, in columns 3 and 4 we use the data sorted by credit score before groups are formed. In columns 5 to 7, we use the data sorted by each
interaction variable before groups are formed. All standard errors are clustered at the MSA level.
(1)

(2)

(3)
Credit score,
1997

0.093**
(0.017)

0.116**
(0.020)

0.685**
(0.162)

0.026
(0.017)

-0.075**
(0.019)

0.016+
(0.009)
Ln(household income, 2008)
-0.006
(0.004)
Age, 1997
-0.001**
(0.000)
Male dummy variable
-0.001
(0.006)
Credit card utilization, 1997
0.022
(0.014)
N
12153
12140
12139
R2
0.02
0.04
0.05
**,*, + coefficient statistically distinct from 0 at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.

Interaction variable

Left hand side variable
Instrumented house price growth, 2002-2006

Instrumented house price growth, 2002-2006
*Interaction term (listed at top of column)
(Credit score, 1997)/100

-0.024**
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.004)
-0.001**
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.006)

(4)
(5)
Credit card
Ln(HH
utilization,
income,
1997
2008)
Change in default rate, 2006-2008

(6)
Age, 1997

(7)
Male

0.057
(0.090)

0.250**
(0.081)

0.110**
(0.026)

0.251**
(0.065)

0.011
(0.022)

-0.002+
(0.001)

-0.006
(0.035)

-0.019**
(0.004)
-0.006
(0.004)
-0.001**
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.006)
-0.097**
(0.030)
12139
0.05

-0.019**
(0.006)
-0.010
(0.012)
-0.001*
(0.000)
0.005
(0.008)
0.012
(0.015)
11536
0.02

-0.018**
(0.005)
-0.012*
(0.005)
0.000
(0.001)
0.014*
(0.006)
0.022+
(0.013)
11832
0.04

-0.022**
(0.005)
-0.010*
(0.005)
-0.001**
(0.000)
0.002
(0.017)
0.017
(0.015)
10731
0.03

Figure 1
Aggregate U.S. Leverage and House Price Patterns
This figure presents aggregate U.S. leverage and house price patterns. Aggregate debt information come from the
Federal Reserve flow of funds data, aggregate income comes from NIPA, and aggregate house price index data
come from OFHEO. In the bottom right panel, aggregate debt for 1997 homeowners comes from Equifax data where
homeowners are defined to be individuals who have either an existing mortgage account with positive balance as of
1997 or a previous mortgage account.

0

$ Billions
5000
10000

15000

U.S. Outstanding Debt: Households and Corporations

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005 2008

Year

Households

Corporations

3
4
5
6
7
Corporate Debt to Income Ratio

Household Debt to Income Ratio
.8
1
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8

U.S. Debt to Income Ratio: Households and Corporations

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005 2008

Year

Corporations

120 140 160 180 200 220
OFHEO Housing Price Index

U.S. Household Debt for 1997 Homeowners and House Prices

2500

3000

$ Billions
3500 4000

4500

Households

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Year

1997 Homeowners Debt

House Price Index

Figure 2
House Price and Leverage Patterns, Inelastic versus Elastic Housing Supply MSAs
This figure presents house price, total debt, and total debt to income patterns for the top and bottom quartile MSAs
based on housing supply elasticity from Saiz (2008). The sample includes individuals with mortgage debt
outstanding as of 1997 or with a previous mortgage account.

-.5

Benchmarked to 2001
0
.5
1
1.5

Housing price growth, relative to 2001

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Year
Inelastic MSAs

Elastic MSAs

-.2

Benchmarked to 2001
0
.2
.4
.6

Total debt growth, relative to 2001

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Year
Inelastic MSAs

Elastic MSAs

Benchmarked to 2001
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

Change in debt to income ratio, relative to 2001

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

Year
Inelastic MSAs

Elastic MSAs

2008

Figure 3
The Effect of House Prices on Total Debt Growth for 1997 Homeowners

.1

Total debt growth 2002-2006
.2
.3

.4

This figure presents the effect of house price growth on total debt growth from 2002 to 2006 across the full
distribution. The first stage instrument is the MSA-level housing supply elasticity from Saiz (2008). The sample
includes individuals with mortgage debt outstanding as of 1997 who do not move zip codes between 1997 and 1999.

0

.2
.4
Predicted house price change 2002-2006

.6

Figure 4
House Price and Leverage Patterns for
Homeowners Living in High Subprime Share Zip Codes in Inelastic Housing Supply MSAs

This figure plots the coefficient estimates for t for the following specification for each year t:
,

,

,

,

.8
.6
.4
.2
0

2000

2002
2004
2006
Year
(growth is cumulative since 1998)

2008

-.5

0

.5

1

Total debt growth

1998

2000

2002

2004
2006
Year
(growth is cumulative since 1998)

2008

2

3

4

Change in total debt to income ratio

1

Homeowner debt growth
Triple difference: Subprime zip codes in inelastic MSAs

1998

0

Homeowner debt to income
Triple difference: Subprime zip codes in inelastic MSAs

House price growth

-1

House price growth
Triple difference: Subprime zip codes in inelastic MSAs

where y is the natural logarithm of house prices in the top graph, the natural logarithm of total debt in the middle
graph, and the debt to income ratio in the bottom graph. The graphs show differential patterns for homeowners
living in high subprime share zip codes in inelastic housing supply MSAs relative to both homeowners living in low
subprime share zip codes in the same MSA and homeowners in high subprime share zip codes in elastic housing
supply MSAs.

1998

2000

2002

2004
Year
(Change relative to 1998)

2006

2008

Figure 5
Cross-Sectional Heterogeneity in Leverage Patterns for 1997 Homeowners
By Housing Supply Elasticity
This figure presents household leverage patterns for the highest and lowest quartile of housing supply elasticity
MSAs, by the credit quality of borrowers as of 1997 (top two panels), the credit card utilization rate of borrowers as
of 1997 (middle two panels), and the age of borrowers (bottom two panels). The sample includes individuals with
mortgage debt outstanding as of 1997 or with a previous mortgage account.

Benchmarked to 2001
0
.2
.4

.6

Debt growth, 1997 High Credit Quality Homeowners

-.2

-.2

Benchmarked to 2001
0
.2
.4

.6

Debt growth, 1997 Low Credit Quality Homeowners

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

1998

2000

2002

Year

2004

2006

2008

Year

Inelastic MSAs

Elastic MSAs

Inelastic MSAs

Benchmarked to 2001
0
.2
.4

.6

Debt growth, 1997 Low Credit Card Utilization

-.2

-.2

Benchmarked to 2001
0
.2
.4

.6

Debt growth, 1997 High Credit Card Utilization

Elastic MSAs

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

1998

2000

2002

Year

2004

2006

2008

Year

Inelastic MSAs

Elastic MSAs

Inelastic MSAs

Debt growth, Old homeowners

-.2

-.2

Benchmarked to 2001
.2
.4

Benchmarked to 2001
0
.2
.4

.6

.6

Debt growth, Young Homeowners

Elastic MSAs

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Year
Inelastic MSAs

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Year
Elastic MSAs

Inelastic MSAs

Elastic MSAs

Figure 6
Default Patterns for Homeowners, By Housing Supply Elasticity and 1997 Credit Quality
This figure presents default patterns for the highest and lowest quartile of housing supply elasticity MSAs, by the
credit quality of borrowers as of 1997. The top graph examines the full sample. The middle graph examines
borrowers in the lowest quartile of the 1997 credit score distribution, and the bottom graph examines borrowers in
the highest quartile of the 1997 credit score distribution. The sample includes individuals with mortgage debt
outstanding as of 1997 or with a previous mortgage account.

0

Default rate
.05

.1

All 1997 Homeowners

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Year
Inelastic MSAs

Elastic MSAs

0

Default rate
.05
.1

.15

Low Credit Quality 1997 Homeowners

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Year
Inelastic MSAs

Elastic MSAs

0

Default rate
.05

.1

High Credit Quality 1997 Homeowners

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

Year
Inelastic MSAs

Elastic MSAs

2008

Figure 7
Cross-Sectional Heterogeneity in Auto Debt Growth for 1997 Homeowners
By Housing Supply Elasticity
This figure presents household auto debt growth patterns for the highest and lowest quartile of housing supply
elasticity MSAs, by the credit quality of borrowers as of 1997 (top panels) and the credit card utilization rate of
borrowers as of 1997 (bottom panel). The sample includes individuals with mortgage debt outstanding as of 1997 or
with a previous mortgage account.

Auto Debt growth
1997 High Credit Quality Homeowners

-.5

-.3

Benchmarked to 2005Q4
-.4
-.3
-.2
-.1

Benchmarked to 2005Q4
-.2
-.1
0
.1

0

Auto Debt growth
1997 Low Credit Quality Homeowners

2000

2002

2004
Year

2006

Inelastic MSAs

2008

2000

Elastic MSAs

2002

2004
Year

2006

Inelastic MSAs

Elastic MSAs

Auto Debt growth
1997 Low Credit Card Utilization Homeowners

-.5

-.3

Benchmarked to 2005Q4
-.4
-.3
-.2
-.1

Benchmarked to 2005Q4
-.2
-.1
0

0

.1

Auto Debt growth
1997 High Credit Card Utilization Homeowners

2008

2000

2002

2004
Year

Inelastic MSAs

2006

2008

Elastic MSAs

2000

2002

2004
Year

Inelastic MSAs

2006

2008

Elastic MSAs

Appendix Table 1
Summary Statistics for Renters
This table presents summary statistics for individuals who have no current or previous mortgage debt outstanding.
Individuals are sorted into groups of at least 5 individuals. Each group consists of individuals living in the same zip
code as of 1997, and the individuals are sorted by 1997 credit score before groups are formed. The income in the
denominator of the debt to income ratio comes from zip level IRS data. The zip code level median home value as of
2002 comes from the 2000 value reported in the decennial Census multiplied by the growth rate from 2000 to 2002
reported in the Fiserv Case Shiller Weiss data. The housing supply inelasticity measure we use is three – the Saiz
(2008) measure. The Saiz (2008) measure is increasing in elasticity from 0 to 3. There are 2,075 zip codes and 45
MSAs that are represented in the sample.
N

Mean

Median

St. Dev.

Equifax individual level data
Total debt, 1997, $thousands
Home debt, 1997, $thousands
Growth in total debt, 1998-2002
Growth in total debt, 2002-2006
Growth in home debt, 1998-2002
Growth in home debt, 2002-2006
Total debt to income ratio, 1997
Change in debt to income ratio, 1998-2002
Change in debt to income ratio, 2002-2006
Total debt default rate, 1997
Change in default rate, 1998-2006
Change in default rate, 2006-2008
Credit score, 1997
Credit card utilization fraction, 1997
Age, 1997
Male
Income, 1997, $thousands

20369
20369
20254
20116
20254
20116
19541
20192
20099
20323
19609
19336
20369
20337
20157
19237
20047

6
0.000
0.918
0.638
1.312
0.906
0.168
0.514
0.796
0.138
-0.040
0.046
705
0.471
53
0.482
59

4
0.000
0.821
0.498
0.000
0.264
0.126
0.210
0.248
0.000
0.000
0.000
704
0.451
50
0.500
54

5
0.000
1.232
1.300
1.897
1.956
0.161
0.735
1.336
0.270
0.287
0.273
103
0.343
14
0.343
32

Fiserv Case Shiller Weiss zip level data
House price growth, zip level, 1998-2002
House price growth, zip level, 2002-2006

20275
20369

0.410
0.497

0.433
0.497

0.142
0.233

Saiz (2008) MSA level elasticity measure
Housing supply inelasticity

20369

2.015

2.140

0.463

Median home value, 2002, $thousands

20252

220

190

133

IRS zip level income data
Per capita wage growth, 2002-2006

20351

0.117

0.111

0.062

Census business statistics zip level data
Per capita payroll growth, 2002-2006
Employment growth, 2002-2006

19763
19763

0.120
0.067

0.120
0.055

0.122
0.188

20332

0.336

0.322

0.127

Equifax zip level aggregate data
Fraction of zip code
with credit score under 659, 1997

Appendix Table 2
Summary Statistics for Moving Homeowners
This table presents summary statistics for individuals who have either an existing mortgage account with positive
balance as of 1997 or a previous mortgage account, and move zip codes between 1997 and 1999. Individuals are
sorted into groups of at least 5 individuals. Each group consists of individuals living in the same zip code as of 1997,
and the individuals are sorted by 1997 credit score before groups are formed. The income in the denominator of the
debt to income ratio comes from zip level IRS data. The zip code level median home value as of 2002 comes from
the 2000 value reported in the decennial Census multiplied by the growth rate from 2000 to 2002 reported in the
Fiserv Case Shiller Weiss data. The housing supply inelasticity measure we use is three – the Saiz (2008) measure.
The Saiz (2008) measure is increasing in elasticity from 0 to 3. There are 3,016 zip codes and 83 MSAs that are
represented in the sample.
N

Mean

Median

St. Dev.

Equifax individual level data
Total debt, 1997, $thousands
Home debt, 1997, $thousands
Growth in total debt, 1998-2002
Growth in total debt, 2002-2006
Growth in home debt, 1998-2002
Growth in home debt, 2002-2006
Total debt to income ratio, 1997
Change in debt to income ratio, 1998-2002
Change in debt to income ratio, 2002-2006
Total debt default rate, 1997
Change in default rate, 1998-2006
Change in default rate, 2006-2008
Credit score, 1997
Credit card utilization fraction, 1997
Age, 1997
Male
Income, 1997, $thousands

2270
2270
2270
2270
2270
2270
2134
2205
2253
2270
2270
2270
2270
2269
2270
2270
2270

121
105
0.156
0.419
0.156
0.478
2.983
0.182
1.124
0.055
-0.013
0.053
762
0.352
54
0.563
87

115
100
0.142
0.407
0.134
0.448
2.909
0.090
0.820
0.000
0.000
0.000
765
0.310
54
0.571
83

79
77
0.592
0.625
0.837
0.846
1.632
1.071
1.562
0.119
0.135
0.174
79
0.216
6
0.242
32

Fiserv Case Shiller Weiss zip level data
House price growth, zip level, 1998-2002
House price growth, zip level, 2002-2006

2265
2270

0.387
0.498

0.404
0.505

0.138
0.225

Saiz (2008) MSA level elasticity measure
Housing supply inelasticity

2270

1.986

2.080

0.461

Median home value, 2002, $thousands

2166

225

191

132

IRS zip level income data
Per capita wage growth, 2002-2006

2253

0.114

0.108

0.067

Census business statistics zip level data
Per capita payroll growth, 2002-2006
Employment growth, 2002-2006

2169
2169

0.124
0.119

0.123
0.091

0.126
0.230

2223

0.321

0.306

0.132

Equifax zip level aggregate data
Fraction of zip code
with credit score under 659, 1997

Appendix Table 3
Sample MSAs and Inelasticity Scores
This table reports the Saiz (2008) measure of housing supply inelasticity for the 45 MSAs in our sample.

MSA name
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.

Miami-Miami Beach-Kendall, FL
Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA
San Francisco-San Mateo-Redwood City, CA
New York-White Plains-Wayne, NY-NJ
Boston-Quincy, MA
Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA
San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos CA
Fort Lauderdale-Pompano Beach-Deerfield Beach, FL
Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL
San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara CA
Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA
New Haven-Milford CT
Baltimore-Towson MD
Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario CA
Newark-Union, NJ-PA
Providence-New Bedford-Fall River RI-MA
West Palm Beach-Boca Raton-Boynton Beach, FL
Portland-Vancouver-Beaverton OR-WA
Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater FL
Detroit-Livonia-Dearborn, MI
Vallejo-Fairfield CA
Jacksonville FL
Philadelphia, PA
Orlando-Kissimmee, FL
Memphis TN-MS-AR
Minneapolis-St. Paul-Bloomington MN-WI
Denver-Aurora CO
Hartford-West Hartford-East Hartford CT
Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV
Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale AZ
Fresno CA
Bakersfield CA
Raleigh-Cary NC
Stockton CA
Ann Arbor MI
Las Vegas-Paradise NV
Columbus OH
Akron OH
Toledo OH
Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Marietta GA
Youngstown-Warren-Boardman OH-PA
Cincinnati-Middletown OH-KY-IN
Greensboro-High Point NC
Charlotte-Gastonia-Concord NC-SC
Toledo, OH

Inelasticity
2.430
2.430
2.410
2.360
2.350
2.340
2.320
2.290
2.270
2.250
2.220
2.140
2.140
2.080
2.080
2.030
2.010
1.990
1.970
1.960
1.940
1.940
1.900
1.850
1.830
1.820
1.820
1.810
1.720
1.710
1.690
1.660
1.500
1.470
1.300
1.180
1.120
1.100
1.070
1.060
0.880
0.850
0.610
0.410
0.090

