NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPACTS OF ALTERNATIVE EMISSIONS ALLOWANCE ALLOCATION METHODS
UNDER A FEDERAL CAP-AND-TRADE PROGRAM
Lawrence H. Goulder
Marc A. C. Hafstead
Michael S. Dworsky
Working Paper 15293
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15293

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2009

The authors are grateful to Kenny Gillingham, Marcus Schneider, and Robert Stavins for very helpful
suggestions, to Abhinav Agrawal and Zhe Zhang for excellent research assistance, and to the Energy
Foundation and Stanford University’s Precourt Energy Efficiency Center for financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Lawrence H. Goulder, Marc A. C. Hafstead, and Michael S. Dworsky. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Impacts of Alternative Emissions Allowance Allocation Methods under a Federal Cap-and-Trade
Program
Lawrence H. Goulder, Marc A. C. Hafstead, and Michael S. Dworsky
NBER Working Paper No. 15293
August 2009
JEL No. D58,H23,Q52,Q54,Q58
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the implications of alternative allowance allocation designs under a federal cap-and-trade
program to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases. We focus on the impacts on industry profits and
overall economic output, employing a dynamic general equilibrium model of the U.S. economy. The
model’s unique treatment of capital dynamics permits close attention to profit impacts.
We find that the effects on profits depend critically on the method of allowance allocation. Freely
allocating fewer than 15 percent of the emissions allowances generally suffices to prevent profit losses
among the eight industries that, without free allowances or other compensation, would suffer the largest
percentage losses of profit. Freely allocating 100 percent of the allowances substantially overcompensates
these industries, in many cases causing more than a doubling of profits.
These results indicate that profit preservation is consistent with substantial use of auctioning and the
generation of considerable auction revenue. GDP costs of cap and trade depend critically on how
such revenues are used. When these revenues are employed to finance cuts in marginal income tax
rates, the resulting GDP costs are about 33 percent lower than when all allowances are freely allocated
and no auction revenue is generated. On the other hand, when auction proceeds are returned to the
economy in lump-sum fashion (for example, as rebate checks to households), the potential cost-advantages
of auctioning are not realized.
Our results are robust to cap-and-trade policies that differ according to policy stringency, the availability
of offsets, and the extent of opportunities for intertemporal trading of allowances.
Lawrence H. Goulder
Department of Economics
Landau Economics Building 328
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
goulder@stanford.edu
Marc A. C. Hafstead
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
mha337@stanford.edu

Michael S. Dworsky
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
mdworsky@stanford.edu

1. Introduction
Cap and trade has emerged as the centerpiece of discussions of potential federal-level
climate-change policies. Within discussions of alternative cap-and-trade programs, there has
been an intense focus on the issue of how emissions allowances might be allocated and how
the revenues from an allowance auction (if any) might be used. What fraction of the
allowances should be auctioned out, as opposed to given out free? How much free allocation
would be sufficient to preserve profits in various industries? What are the economy-wide
implications of alternative uses of whatever auction revenues are collected?
Despite considerable and sometimes contentious debate on these issues, there have
been very few quantitative analyses of industry profit impacts and associated GDP
consequences under a range of allocation methods.1 One reason is that many of the leading
models employed to investigate cap-and-trade policy, while offering many very important
and policy-relevant insights, are not well suited to examining potential impacts on profits.
Some of the models 2 assume that physical capital is perfectly mobile across the economy,
which means that capital can instantly flow out of one sector and into another in response to
a change in economic conditions. This precludes an assessment of the differential profit
impacts across industries, since it eliminates the possibility of stranded assets and instead
implies that capital in all sectors instantly reachieves the same productivity following a
policy intervention.
Other models adopt a “putty-clay” approach to capital dynamics, according to which
capital is completely immobile once it is installed. 3 This approach may exaggerate the
problem of stranded assets, since it does not allow for any removal or sale of previously
installed capital; capital stocks can only decline through physical depreciation. Thus, the
coal mining industry, for example, would be prevented from significantly reducing its
equipment as part of its effort to respond to reduced coal demand resulting from a cap-andtrade program.
The present study offers results from a numerical general equilibrium model of the
U.S. economy that is uniquely well-suited to assessing the profit impacts across various
1

Burtraw and Palmer (2002) investigated the implications of alternative allocation methods for profits and asset
values in the HAIKU model, which focuses on the electricity sector. Bovenberg and Goulder (2001) and Smith,
Ross, and Montgomery (2002) considered alternative allocations using general equilibrium models with a
relatively primitive treatment of cap and trade, as discussed below. See Ramseur (2008) for a review of existing
studies of the impacts of alternative allowance allocation designs.

2

The IGEM model developed by Dale Jorgenson and his collaborators assumes perfectly mobile capital.
Details on this model are contained in Goettle et al. (2007).

3

The ADAGE model and MIT EPPA model adopt a putty-clay treatment for capital, as does the model of
Smith, Ross, and Montgomery (2002). The ADAGE model is described in Ross (2007); the EPPA model is
documented in Paltsev et al. (2005). See Smith, Ross, and Montgomery (2002) for details on their model.

industries under possible cap-and-trade program designs. In contrast with other models 4 , it
derives both investment and disinvestment behavior from optimizing decisions at the
industry level. Forward-looking managers in each industry make investment decisions that
take into account the adjustment costs associated with both the installation and removal of
productive capital.
This approach permits a close examination of how profits are affected in various
industries under a range of allocation approaches. As discussed below, the impacts differ
dramatically depending on the extent to which auctioning or free allocation is employed.
When a firm must purchase all of its allowances (as is the case when all allowances are
auctioned) the potential policy-generated rents (or, equivalently, the value of emissions
allowances) are transferred from the firm to the government. In contrast, when a firm
receives allowances free, it retains these rents. This makes an enormous difference. Indeed,
it generally determines whether cap and trade causes a reduction (the 100 percent auction
case) or an increase (the 100 percent free allocation case) in the firm’s profit.
This paper applies the model to assess how policy impacts differ across various types
of emissions allowance allocation. We consider policies that vary in terms of both the
reliance on free versus auctioned allowances and the use of revenues from allowance
auctioning (if applicable). These alternatives are evaluated under programs that differ in
terms of policy stringency (the total number of allowance put in circulation), the points of
regulation, the availability of offset programs, and the possibility of intertemporal banking or
borrowing of allowances. These are central considerations in current policy discussions,
including the American Clean Energy and Security (ACES) Act passed recently by the U.S.
House of Representatives.
We find that freely allocating a relatively small fraction of the emissions allowances
generally suffices to prevent profit losses among the eight industries that, without free
allowances or other compensation, would suffer the largest relative losses of profit. Under a
wide range of cap-and-trade designs, freely allocating less than 15 percent of the total
allowances prevents profit losses to these eight most vulnerable industries. Freely allocating
100 percent of the allowances substantially overcompensates these industries, in many cases
leading to profit increases of over 100 percent.
These results indicate that profit-preservation is consistent with auctioning the lion’s
share of allowances. One important potential use of auction revenues is to finance reductions
in the marginal tax rates of ordinary, distortionary taxes such as income, sales, and payroll
taxes. This is important for the GDP and efficiency costs of cap and trade. When just
enough free allocation is offered to compensate (but not overly compensate) the most
vulnerable industries, considerable auction revenue is generated, yielding significant
opportunities to avoid distortionary taxation. Our numerical simulations indicate that when
4

To our knowledge, the only other multisector general equilibrium U.S. economy model incorporating
optimizing investment decisions at the industry level is that described in Bovenberg and Goulder (2001). The
present model extends the earlier model by allowing for a more general treatment of the points of regulation
(the earlier model could only impose emissions limits on the coal and oil&gas industries) and by allowing for
various potential cost-saving provisions such as offsets and allowance banking and borrowing. It also contains
considerably more disaggregation of industries.

2

these revenues are used to finance cuts in marginal rates of individual income taxes, the
resulting GDP costs are about one third lower than in the case where all allowances are freely
allocated and no auction revenue is generated. In contrast, the cost-advantages of auctioning
disappear when the auction proceeds are returned to the economy in lump-sum fashion (for
example, as rebate checks to households).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 offers a graphical analysis to
convey how a firm’s profits under a cap-and-trade program are influenced by the way
allowances are allocated, the emissions-reduction opportunities of the firm, the costs of
adjusting physical capital, and demand for the firm’s product. Section 3 describes the
numerical model used for the quantitative assessments. Section 4 discusses the model’s data
and parameters. Section 5 describes and interprets the model’s results. Section 6 is a
conclusion.

2. Allowance Allocation, Profits, and Economy-Wide Cost: A Graphical
Illustration
The nature of allowance allocation can make a huge difference to the distribution of
the burden from regulation, as well as the cost to the overall economy. Figure 1 helps
convey the different impacts. 5 Here it is assumed that the points of regulation (the entities
that must hold and submit allowances) are firms within a competitive industry.
Consider first the market equilibrium in the absence of regulation. The initial
equilibrium price and level of output at the industry level are shown as p0 and X0 ,
respectively. These are determined by the equilibrium of the original supply and demand
curves S0 and D.
Introducing a cap-and-trade system covering emissions from this industry gives firms
incentives to reduce emissions. No matter whether allowances are given out free or
auctioned, each additional unit of emissions has an opportunity cost: either it obliges the
firm to purchase an additional allowance, or it reduces the number of surplus allowances that
the firm can sell. In general, a firm can accomplish the emissions reductions by changing the
input mix (for example, switching to less carbon-intensive fuels), installing end-of-pipe
equipment, or reducing its level of output. In the figure, it is assumed that the first two
adjustments raise production costs by c per unit of output. The figure also assumes that the
cost per unit of remaining emissions – the allowance price multiplied by emissions per unit
of output – is r. Thus, the policy drives a wedge of c+r between the consumer price pC and
the producer price pS. This implies the new supply curve S1, which in turn implies that
industry output will be reduced to X1.

5

For analyses of some of these issues using somewhat different frameworks, see Parry (2003) and Burtraw and
Palmer (2007).

3

2.1 Auctioned Allowances
If the allowances are introduced through a competitive auction, the policy will
generate no rents: they are bid away through competitive bidding for allowances. In this
case, the loss of producer surplus is shaded trapezoid p0 bdpS, while the loss of consumer
surplus is pC abp0. The shaded rectangular area pC aef represents the revenue that the
government would receive from the allowance auction. These revenues can benefit
taxpayers to the extent that they reduce the government’s reliance on other taxes.
Alternatively, the revenues pC aef can be used to pay for additional public spending, in
which case the general public benefits from the goods or services provided.

2.2 Freely Allocated Allowances
If the allowances are introduced through free allocation, the distribution of impacts
between producers and taxpayers is fundamentally different. In this case the shaded
rectangle pC aef represents rents to producers rather than revenues to the government. In
the figure, these rents are about three times as large as the gross loss of producer surplus (the
loss before considering the rents) represented by the shaded area p0bdpS . Thus, in this
figure, free allocation would enable the firm to enjoy a higher profit than in the absence of
regulation.

2.3 Combining Auctioning and Free Allocation
Policy choices are not limited to the cases of 100 percent auctioning and 100 percent
free allocation: another option is combining free allocation and auctioning. For the industry
depicted in the diagram, industry profits would be preserved if about a third of the
allowances were given out free, thus enabling the firm to enjoy about a third of the potential
rents. The rest of the allowances could be auctioned out. As indicated below, auctioning
confers some potential advantages in terms of cost-effectiveness.
The amount of free allocation necessary to compensate firms for the costs of
complying with the program depends on the extent to which firms can shift to consumers the
burden of regulation. This in turn depends on the elasticity of supply relative to the elasticity
of demand. A higher relative elasticity of supply implies a larger pass-through of compliance
costs into producer prices and a smaller gross loss of producer surplus. It also implies larger
potential rents relative to the gross loss of producer surplus, which in turn means that less
free allocation (or rents to be retained by firms) is needed to maintain profits. A second
factor is the extent of required abatement: at low levels of abatement, permit rents pC aef are
large relative to the gross loss of producer surplus p0bdpS, which suggests that relatively few
free allowances will be needed to preserve profit. On the other hand, low required abatement
generally is associated with lower allowance prices, which means that, other things equal,
more allowances must be freely offered to provide sufficient value to preserve profit. In the
numerical model employed in this paper, we vary parameters that relate to each of these
factors.

4

2.4 Trade-offs between Political Feasibility and Cost-Effectiveness
Free allocation may have attractions in terms of political feasibility. By allowing
producers to retain the rents created by the cap-and-trade system, free allocation not only can
preserve profits but indeed can cause profits to rise. This protection of profits can help build
political support from energy-related industries.
On the other hand, auctioning has a potential advantage over free allocation in terms
of cost-effectiveness. Under auctioning, the public sector avails itself of a particularly
efficient source of revenues – the proceeds from the auction. The base of the auction revenue
is inframarginal – it is economic rent – and carries no direct efficiency cost. In the case of
free allocation, the government forgoes this efficient source of revenue. Other things equal,
the government must instead rely more on ordinary, distortionary taxes (such as income,
sales, or payroll taxes) to meet its expenditures. Raising such taxes carries an efficiency cost.
This suggests a trade-off between enhancing political feasibility (through free
allocation) and maximizing cost-effectiveness (through auctioning). The trade-off might not
be severe, however. If (as suggested by the graph) profits can be maintained through free
allocation of a relatively small fraction of the allowances, then a significant amount of
auctioning is consistent with profit preservation. In these circumstances the sacrifice of
potential revenue would be considerably smaller than in the case of 100 percent free
allocation, and thus the sacrifice of cost-effectiveness need not be large – if the revenues
from the auction are used to finance cuts in distortionary taxes.
In the numerical simulations performed for this paper, we explore both the fraction of
allowances needed to preserve industry profits and the implications of allowance allocation
for overall economic cost. This model builds on the graphical analysis by introducing the
time dimension and allowing for general equilibrium interactions across industries.
However, the key themes from this simple graphical analysis still apply.

3. The Model
This paper employs an intertemporal general equilibrium model of the U.S. economy
with international trade. It generates paths of equilibrium prices, outputs, and incomes for
the U.S. and the rest of the world under specified policy scenarios. The key agents are
producers of various goods and services, a representative household, and the government.
The model captures the interactions among these agents, whose actions generate supplies and
demands for various commodities and productive factors. The model solves for all variables
at yearly intervals beginning in the benchmark year 2005. We focus on policy impacts

5

through the year 2030. 6 A detailed description of the structure of the model is in Goulder
and Hafstead (2009), which is available on request.
The model combines a fairly realistic treatment of the U.S. tax system with a detailed
representation of energy production and demand. Details on the tax system are important for
recognizing the significance of alternative ways to “recycle” auction revenues to the
economy. Details on energy production and demand are important for gauging the industry
impacts of cap and trade, given the major contributions of various energy uses to emissions
of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases.
The model divides U.S. production into the 24 industry categories listed in Table 1.
This division gives particular attention to energy-related industries, as it identifies separately
oil and natural gas extraction, coal mining, electricity transmission and distribution, coalfired electricity generation, non-coal fossil fuel electricity generation, non-fossil fuel
electricity generation, petroleum refining, and natural gas distribution. 7 The specification of
energy supply incorporates the nonrenewable nature of crude petroleum and natural gas and
the transitions from conventional to backstop fuels.

3.1 Producer Behavior
General Specifications. In each industry, a nested production structure is employed
with constant-elasticity of substitution (CES) functional forms at each nest. In all industries
except the oil and natural gas extraction industry (discussed further below), production
exhibits constant returns to scale. Each industry produces a distinct output (X), which is a
function of the inputs of capital (K), labor (L) an energy composite (E), a non-energy (or
materials) composite (M), and the level of investment (I) 8 :

X = f ( K , g ( L, h( E, M ))) - φ ( I / K ) • I

(1)

The energy composite is made up of the outputs of the nine energy industries, while the
materials composite consists of the outputs of the other industries:
E = E ( x1a + x1b , x2 , ..., x8 )

(2)

M = M ( x9 , ..., x24 )

(3)

6

Although we focus on outcomes over the next two decades, we need to perform simulations over a longer
period to generate long-term expectations for the model’s agents, who face infinite planning horizons. To
derive the necessary long-term information, under each policy experiment we first calculate steady-state
(terminal) conditions and then employ those conditions in performing simulations over an interval of 80 years,
by which time the economic path has converged very close to the steady-state (balanced) growth path.
7

Non-coal fossil fuel generators primarily consist of natural gas fired generators. Non-fossil fuel generators
include nuclear, hydro, solar, and wind generators.

8

In each industry, capital (K) is a CES aggregate of structures and equipment.

6

where xi is a composite of domestically produced good from industry i and its foreign
counterpart. 9 Industry indices correspond to those in Table 1. 10
Among economy-wide general equilibrium models, this model is unique in its
treatment of industry-level investment and capital dynamics. In each industry, managers
choose the level of investment to maximize the value of the firm. The investment decision
takes account of the adjustment (or installation) costs represented by φ (I / K) i I in equation
(1). φ is a convex function of the rate of investment, I/K,
(ξ / 2)( I / K − δ ) 2
φ (I / K ) =
I/K

(4)

where ξ and δ are adjustment cost parameters. 11 In particular, δ is the rate of economic
depreciation of the capital stock and ξ is the marginal adjustment cost. Adjustment costs
imply that capital is imperfectly mobile across sectors. As mentioned, this allows the model
to capture the different impacts of policy interventions on the profits of various industries.
The law of motion for capital stocks for each industry is given by Ks+1 = (1-δ)Ks + Is.
Oil&Gas Industry. The production structure of the oil and gas industry is somewhat
more complex to account for the nonrenewable nature of oil and gas stocks. The production
specification is:
X = γ ( Z ) • f ( K , g ( L, h( E, M )) ) - φ (I / K ) • I

(5)

where γ is a decreasing function of Z, the cumulative extraction through the beginning of the
period. Through γ we capture the fact that as reserves are depleted, it becomes more costly
to extract any remaining reserves. We use the following functional form for γ ,

γ t = ε1 ⎡⎢1 − ( Zt / Z ) 2 ⎤⎥
ε

⎣

(6)

⎦

where ε 1 and ε 2 are parameters and Z is total recoverable reserves (as measured in the
benchmark year. Z, the beginning of period cumulative extraction, follows the law of
motion: Z t +1 = Z t + X t . In making profit-maximizing extraction decisions, oil and gas
producers account for the effect of current production on future production costs.
9

The functions f, g, and h, and the aggregation functions for the composites E, M, and xi are CES and exhibit

constant returns to scale.
10

Indices “1a” and “1b” represent the oil&gas and synfuels industries, respectively. Only the oil&gas industry
is shown in Table 1 because synfuels production does not begin until 2025.

φ  captures the notion that there is an output loss associated with installing new capital as inputs are diverted
to install the new capital.

11

7

The model includes a backstop technology: the “backstop fuels industry” provides a
perfect substitute for oil and gas. As in other industries, in this industry producers choose
input and investment levels to maximize the equity value of the firm. The technology for
producing backstop fuels on a commercial scale is assumed to become known only in the
year 2025. We assume that backstop fuels have the same carbon content as oil and gas. 12
Prices. All domestic prices in the model are endogenous, except for the domestic
price of oil and gas, which is given by the exogenously specified world price of oil gross of
tariffs. The supply of imported oil and gas is perfectly elastic at the given world price. 13
Profits and the Value of the Firm. For a firm in a given industry and given period of
time, profits can be written as
π = (1 − τ a ) [ pX − w(1 + τ L ) L − EMCOST −iDEBT − TPROP + LS + pcα A]
+ τ a ( DEPL + DEPR )

(7)

where τa is the corporate tax rate (or tax rate on profits), p is the per unit output price net of
output taxes, w is the wage rate net of indirect labor taxes, τ L is rate of the indirect tax on
labor, EMCOST is the cost to the firm of energy and materials inputs, i is the gross-of-tax
interest rate paid by the firm, DEBT is the firm's current debt, TPROP is property tax
payments, LS is a lump-sum receipt (if applicable) by the firm, DEPL is the current gross
depletion allowance, and DEPR is the current gross depreciation allowance. TPROP equals
τ P pK ,s −1K s , where τ P is the property tax rate, pK is the purchase price of a unit of new
capital, and s is the time period. Current depletion allowances, DEPL, are a constant fraction
β of the value of current extraction: DEPL = β pX . Current depreciation allowances,

DEPR, can be expressed as δ T K T , where K T is the depreciable capital stock basis and δ T is
the depreciation rate applied for tax purposes. 14 pc denotes the price per ton of carbon
emissions, A denotes the economy-wide total allowances (or the aggregate emission cap),
and α represents the share of total allowances given free to the given industry.
In the presence of a binding aggregate emissions cap, pc will be positive. From the
firm’s point of view, p cαA , the total value of the allowances it receives free, is a lump-sum
12

In reality, some potential backstop alternatives (oil shale) have higher carbon content, while other alternatives
(biofuels) have lower carbon content.
13

As long as imports are the marginal source of supply to the domestic economy, domestic producers of oil and
gas receive the world price (adjusted for tariffs and taxes) for their own output. However, rising oil and gas
prices stimulate investment in backstop fuels. Eventually, backstop fuels production plus domestic oil and gas
supply together satisfy all domestic demand, and the domestic oil and gas price is determined by the backstop
fuels price.
14

For convenience, we assume that the accelerated depreciation schedule can be approximated by a schedule
involving a constant rate of exponential tax depreciation.

8

payment. Therefore the receipt of free allowances does not alter marginal costs or returns.
Thus, free allowances have no direct effect on a firm’s choices of labor, intermediate inputs,
and investment, although they do raise a firm’s profits. 15
The firm's sources and uses of revenues are linked through the cash-flow identity:
π + BN + VN = DIV + IEXP

(8)

The left-hand side represents the firm's sources of revenues: profits, new debt issue (BN), and
new share issues (VN). The uses of revenues on the right-hand side are investment
expenditure (IEXP) and dividend payments (DIV). Firms pay dividends equal to a constant
fraction, a, of profits gross of capital gains on the existing capital stock and net of economic
depreciation. They also maintain debt equal to a constant fraction, b, of the value of the
existing capital stock. Thus:

DIVs = a ⎡⎣π s + ( pK ,s − pK ,s −1 ) K s − δ pK ,s K s ⎤⎦

BN ≡ DEBTs +1 − DEBTs = b( pK ,s K s +1 − pK ,s −1K s )

(9)

(10)

Investment expenditure is expressed by:
IEXP s = ( 1 - τ K ) p K, s I s

(11)

where τK is the investment tax credit rate. Of the elements in equation (8), new share issues,
VN, are the residual, making up the difference between π + BN and DIV + IEXP. 16
Arbitrage possibilities compel the firm to offer its stockholders a rate of return
comparable to the rate of interest on alternative assets.
(1 - τ e ) DIV s + (1 − τ v ) ( V s + 1 − V s − VN s ) = ( 1 − τ b ) i s V s

(12)

The parameters τe, τv, and τb are the personal tax rates on dividend income (equity), capital
gains, and interest income (bonds), respectively. The return to stockholders consists of the
current after-tax dividend plus the after-tax capital gain (accrued or realized) on the equity
value (V) of the firm net of the value of new share issues. This return must be comparable to
the after-tax return from an investment of the same value at the market rate of interest, i.
Recursively applying equation (12) subject to the usual transversality condition ruling out
eternal speculative bubbles yields the following expression for the equity value of the firm:
15

As discussed in Section 2, free allowances can affect economic output through their impacts on the
government’s budget. The numerical simulations reported in Section 5 indicate that these fiscal impacts have
some slight effects on firms’ input and output decisions.
16

This treatment is consistent with the so-called old view of dividend behavior. For an examination of this and
alternative specifications, see Poterba and Summers (1985).

9

Vt =

⎡1 − τ e

∞

∑ ⎢1 − τ
s =t

⎣

v

⎤
DIVs − VN s ⎥ μ t ( s )
⎦

(13)

where
⎡
r ⎤
μt ( s ) ≡ ∏ ⎢1 + u ⎥
1−τv ⎦
u =t ⎣
s

−1

Equation (13) indicates that the equity value of the firm is the discounted sum of after-tax
dividends net of new share issues. In each period, firms choose investment levels as well as
cost-minimizing inputs of labor and intermediate inputs to maximize this equity value.

3.2 Household Behavior

Household behavior stems from decisions by an infinitely-lived representative agent
that chooses consumption, leisure, and savings in each period to maximize its intertemporal
utility subject to its budget constraint. In year t the household chooses a path of “full
consumption” C to maximize
Ut =

∞

∑ (1 + ω )

σu

t−s

σ u −1

s =t

σ u −1
σu

(14)

Cs

where ω is the subjective rate of time preference and σ u is the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution in full consumption. C is a CES composite of consumption of goods and
~
services C and leisure :
⎛ ν −1
Cν

Cs = ⎜
⎜
⎝

s

ν

1 ν −1 ν −1
⎞

+ αcν

ν

s

⎟⎟
⎠

(15)

ν is the elasticity of substitution between goods and leisure and αC is an intensity parameter
~

for leisure. C is a Cobb-Douglas composite of 17 consumer goods, Ci . 17 In turn, each

consumer good Ci is a CES composite of domestically and foreign produced goods. At each
nest in the household’s demand system, the household allocates its expenditure to obtain the
composite associated with that nest at minimum cost. Thus, for example, the household
allocates expenditure between the domestic and foreign produced goods of each type to
minimize the cost of obtaining the composite C i .
The household maximizes utility subject to the intertemporal budget constraint given
by the following condition governing the change in financial wealth, WK:

17

Consumer goods are produced by combining outputs from the 25 industries in fixed proportions.

10

~
WK t +1 − WK t = rtWK t + YLt + GTt − ~
pt Ct

(16)

In the above equation, r is the average after-tax return on the household's portfolio of
financial capital, YL is after-tax labor income, GT is transfer income, and p is the price
~
index representing the cost to the household of a unit of the consumption composite, C .

3.3 The Government Sector

The government collects taxes, distributes transfers, purchases goods and services
(the outputs of the 25 industries), and hires labor. Overall government expenditure is
exogenous and increases at a constant rate, g, equal to the steady-state growth rate of the
model. In the benchmark year, 2005, the government deficit is 1.9 percent of GDP. In the
reference (status quo) simulation, the deficit-GDP ratio is approximately constant. In the
policy experiments in this paper, we require that the real deficit and real government
spending follow the same path as in the reference case. The government’s real tax receipts
under a policy change thus must be the same as in the reference case. As discussed below,
some cap-and-trade systems would tend to raise revenues, while others would sacrifice
revenue. In most simulations revenue-neutrality is accomplished entirely through
adjustments to the marginal rates of individual income taxes. As discussed below, in some
simulations lump-sum adjustments to individual taxes also contribute to revenue-neutrality.

3.4 Foreign Trade

Except for oil and gas imports, which are perfect substitutes for domestically
produced oil and gas, imported intermediate inputs and consumer goods are imperfect
substitutes for their domestic counterparts. Import prices are exogenous in foreign currency,
but the domestic currency price changes with changes in the exchange rate. Export demands
are modeled as functions of the foreign price of U.S. exports and the level of foreign income
(in foreign currency). The foreign price is the price in U.S. dollars plus tariffs or subsidies,
converted to foreign currency through the exchange rate. We impose the assumption of zero
trade balance at each period of time. An exchange rate variable adjusts in each period to
reconcile the value of U.S. demands for imports with the value of foreign demands for U.S.
exports.

3.5 Cap-and-Trade Policies

The model offers a flexible treatment of cap and trade, allowing for alternative
specifications as to the time-profile of the overall cap, the points of regulation, and the nature
of allowance distribution.
The variable At (included in equation (7) above) represents the total tons of emissions
allowed (or total allowances circulated) in period t in sectors covered by the cap-and-trade
program. In the absence of offsets or provisions for the banking or borrowing of

11

allowances, 18 the endogenous price of CO2 emissions allowances, pc , adjusts to equate in
each period aggregate covered-sector emissions Ht with the aggregate supply of allowances
At.
Points of Regulation. Cap-and-trade policies can differ according to the points of
regulation, that is, the entities that must hold and submit allowances to validate the level of
emissions they generate within a given compliance period. The model considers both “fully
upstream” and “modified upstream” policies. Under a fully upstream policy, allowances are
required at the entry points for carbon in the economy: these are the wellhead for oil and
natural gas producers and the mine mouth for coal, as well as the port of entry for imports of
these fuels. Under a modified upstream policy, the points of regulation are various industrial
entities, at least some of which are further downstream from the initial suppliers of carbon to
the economy. While nearly any user of carbon-based fuels could be specified as a point of
regulation, many recent U.S. cap-and-trade proposals have focused on electric power
producers, refiners, and various large industrial emitters of CO2 as points of regulation.
(Section 5 below identifies the industries represented as points of regulation under the
modified upstream policies examined in this study.)
Under the fully upstream policy, fossil fuel suppliers must hold and submit emissions
allowances consistent with the emissions implied by the carbon content of each unit of fuel
they supply. This requirement functions like a tax on production. For these suppliers, the
producer (or net) price of output, pi , will reflect the market price of allowances, pc (since the
allowance price is the opportunity cost of emissions): 19
pi = pi (1 − τ 0i ) − pc ci
where pi is the gross price of output, τ0i represents any pre-existing ad valorem output taxes,
and ci is the carbon content per unit of fuel for the industry in question. Thus, under the fully
upstream policy, the price of allowances functions like a per-unit tax on the output of fuel
producers.
Under the modified upstream policy, industrial users of carbon must hold and submit
emissions allowances corresponding to the carbon content of each good they purchase. In
this case the cost of emissions allowances is a charge added to the price of carbon-based fuels
used as inputs to production. Let pkj represent the price of fossil fuel input k to industry j.
Then
pkj = pk (1 + τ kj ) + d j pc ck

18

The modeling of offsets and banking and borrowing is described below.

19

As indicated in Section 2, the opportunity cost of emissions is the same no matter whether the firm receives
allowances free or must purchase them at an auction.

12

where pk is the pre-tax price of fuel k, τ kj represents any pre-existing intermediate input
taxes on fuel k used by industry j, and dj is a dummy variable that equals one if industry j is a
point of regulation and zero otherwise.
Allowance Allocation. The model can consider any combination of auctioning and
free allocation of allowances, including the limiting cases of 100 percent auctioning and 100
percent free allocation. In addition, it is flexible as to how the free allowances are allocated
across various industries.
Recall from equation (7) in subsection 3.1 above that αiA is the number of
allowances allocated freely to industry i (in a given time period). Producers can use these
emissions allowances themselves or sell them at the market price to other industries covered
under the cap. Equation (7) indicates that from the firm’s point of view, allowances received
free are a lump-sum transfer: they do not affect firms’ marginal costs of production. Thus,
free allocation has no direct effect on firms’ pricing or output decisions.20
Banking and Borrowing. Provisions for banking and borrowing allow firms to equate
marginal abatement costs (in present value) over time, which reduces the present value of
abatement costs. Under a system with fully functioning banking and borrowing, in market
equilibrium the discounted allowance price will be the same in every period within the
interval where banking and borrowing is allowed. In simulations of cap-and-trade systems
involving banking and borrowing, we introduce this condition. In addition, we relax the
condition that in any given period, the initial aggregate supply of allowances must
correspond to aggregate emissions. We replace this condition with the requirement that the
cumulative supply of allowances over the interval that allows banking and borrowing must
equal cumulative emissions over that interval.

3.6 Equilibrium

Intratemporal Equilibrium
In each period, the following equilibrium conditions must hold:
(1) the aggregate demand for labor equals the aggregate supply;
(2) the demand for each industry’s output equals its supply;
(3) the aggregate demand by firms for funds (to finance private investment and
government borrowing) must equal the total private savings; and
(4) government expenditure must equal tax revenue less the exogenously specified
government deficit.

20

However, free allocation can affect prices and output by way of impacts on the fiscal system. These general
equilibrium effects are discussed in Section 5.

13

These conditions are met through adjustments in output prices, in the market interest
rate, and in lump-sum taxes or tax rates. 21 In simulations of cap-and-trade policies, an
additional condition applies in each period if there is no banking and borrowing: the
aggregate demand for allowances (given by aggregate emissions from covered sectors) must
equal the aggregate supply. If banking and borrowing is specified, an intertemporal demandsupply requirement replaces this condition: cumulative demand for allowances over a
specified interval must equal the cumulative supply of allowances over that interval, as
discussed above.
Intertemporal Equilbrium
Households and firms are forward-looking with perfect foresight. To solve for such
an equilibrium, we apply an algorithm similar to that of Fair and Taylor (1983). This
approach starts with posited values for “dynamic variables” that embody agents’
expectations. The posited dynamic variables include shadow values for capital in each
industry and for human wealth. We solve the model using the posited dynamic variables as
inputs. We then compare the values of these dynamic variables with the values of dynamic
variables that result from the simulation. If the values do not match, we adjust the posited
dynamic variables and solve the model again. We repeat this process until the posited and
derived dynamic variables match, at which point the model has attained perfect foresight.

4. Data and Parameters
Complete data and parameter documentation is in Hafstead, Mahoney, and Goulder
(2009), which is available on request. Here we sketch some main components and their
sources.
4.1 Data

Industry input and output flows were obtained primarily from the 2005 input-output
tables from the U.S. Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).
These tables were also the source for consumption, investment, government spending,
employment, import, and export values by industry. Data on capital stocks by industry
derive from BEA tables on the net stock of structures and equipment for each industry,
except for the four electricity sectors. The BEA industry capital data do not split out these
industries. For these industries we apply data from the Energy Information Administration of
the U.S. Department of Energy and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). 22
21

By Walras’s Law, the required number of equilibrating variables is one less than the number of equilibrium
conditions. The numeraire is the nominal wage.
22

Specifically, we calculate the average installation cost (net of depreciation) of 1 MW of nameplate capacity
by vintage for different generating technologies. We apply these average historical cost figures to the
distribution of 2005 generating capacity by generator type and vintage and aggregate by fuel to obtain capital
stocks for our generation industries. The residual stocks of structures and equipment implied by BEA

14

From the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency we obtained data on the energy factors and
carbon contents of oil, natural gas, and four main types of coal. From this information we
derive carbon dioxide emissions per unit of oil, natural gas, and coal used by industry.

4.2 Parameters

Production function elasticities of substitution for the model were derived from
estimates by Dale Jorgenson and Peter Wilcoxen. We translated the Jorgenson-Wilcoxen
estimates of parameters for translog cost functions into elasticities of substitution parameters
to make them compatible with the CES form of our model. The capital adjustment cost
parameters are based on Summers (1981).
Other important parameters apply to the household side of the model. The elasticity
of substitution in consumption between goods and leisure, υ, is set to yield a compensated
elasticity of labor supply of 0.4. 23 The intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption,
σ, equals .5. 24 The intensity parameter αC is set to generate a ratio of labor time to the total
time endowment equal to .44. These parameters imply a value of 0.19 for the interest
elasticity of savings between the current period and the next.

5. Results
Here we present and interpret simulation results from the numerical model. Cap-andtrade policies are announced in 2009, and are implemented in 2012. Because agents are
forward-looking, policies begin to have impacts at the time of their announcement.

5.1 Reference Case

To analyze cap-and-trade’s impacts, we first perform a reference case simulation.
This simulation assumes business-as-usual conditions and forms the reference path against
which we measure the effects of policy shocks.
In the reference case (as well as the policy cases discussed below), the economy
reaches a steady state in the long run: all quantities increase at an annual rate of two percent
(governed by the exogenously specified rate of labor-augmenting technological change), and
relative prices do not change. Two features of the model prevent steady-state or balanced
aggregates for the electric power industry are assigned to Electric Transmission and Distribution. Installation
cost data are obtained from 2005 FERC Form 1. Year 2005 capacity data are obtained from EIA form EIA-860
for 2006.
23

This lies midway in the range of estimates displayed in the survey by Russek (1996).

24

This value falls between the lower estimates from time-series analyses (e.g., Hall, (1988) and the higher ones
from cross-sectional studies (e.g., Lawrance, (1991)).

15

growth in the short and medium run along the reference path. First, the depletion of domestic
oil and gas reserves implies rising unit costs of domestic oil and gas supply. In addition, the
real prices of imported oil and gas are exogenously specified as increasing in real terms.
These features lead to reductions, over time, in the share of oil and gas consumption relative
to overall consumption.
Table 1 shows the levels of real output of each industry in the reference case in 2009,
in billions of 2005 dollars.

5.2 Cap-and-Trade Policies – Central Case Specifications

The cap-and-trade policies focus on carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, which
accounted for 86 percent of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions (in CO2 equivalents) in 2007, the
latest year for which public estimates are available. The other greenhouse gases are not
capped. Figure 2 displays the economy-wide emissions of CO2 that result from the model in
the reference case and under cap and trade. The emissions cap requires a reduction in
emissions of about three percent from 2005 levels by 2012, 17 percent by 2020, and 42
percent by 2030. This time-profile of the cap matches that proposed in HR 2454 (WaxmanMarkey), which was passed on June 26, 2009 by the U.S. House of Representatives. 25

Points of Regulation
The points of regulation represent a key design element of any cap-and-trade system.
Under a fully upstream policy, the points of regulation are the entry points of CO2 into the
economy: the mine mouth for coal and the wellhead for oil and gas, and the port of entry for
imported fossil fuels. Most actual policy proposals adopt a different, modified upstream
approach, in which the points of regulations are slightly further downstream. Our central
case involves a modified upstream approach. The points of regulation are electricity
generators, petroleum refiners, natural gas pipelines, and some industries that use carbonbased fuels intensively (chemical and primary metals manufacturers).26 This roughly
corresponds to the industries identified as points of regulation in HR 2454. 27 In subsection
5.4 below we compare results from this modified upstream policy with those from a fully
upstream system.

25

After 2030, we allow the cap to increase at the model’s steady-state growth rate of two percent per year, so
that the ratio of emissions to aggregate output becomes constant in the long run and the model attains balanced
growth.

26

Coal and oil&gas inputs to the production of the investment good composite (I) are also subject to the
emissions cap. See Goulder and Hafstead (2009) for details.
27

The points of regulation in HR 2454 accounted for 85 percent of US greenhouse gas emissions in CO2e terms
in 2005. Our modified upstream policy covers 88 percent of US CO2 emissions in the benchmark year of 2005.

16

Allowance Allocation
We assume that allowances are allocated (either auctioned or given out free) on an
annual basis. In our central case, we assume that allowances can only be applied to
emissions in the year in which they are allocated: they cannot be banked for use in future
years, nor can they be borrowed (used in years prior to the year in which they are allocated).
In subsection 5.4 below we examine impacts when allowance banking is allowed.
As mentioned above, the relative reliance on auctioning and free allocation, as well as
the division of free allowances across industries, critically affects the impacts of cap and
trade on profits of various industries. Indeed, the choice of allocation method is more critical
to the incidence across industries of a cap-and-trade system than the choice of points of
regulation.
Our central case simulations compare the following allocation approaches:
•

100 Percent Auctioning: All allowances are auctioned to the industries selected as
points of regulation.

•

Profit-Preserving Free Allocation: Some allowances are freely allocated to the eight
industries that would experience the most significant profit losses under 100 percent
auctioning. 28 Just enough allowances are freely allocated to these industries to
preserve the present value of their profits over the interval 2009-2030. The remaining
allowances are auctioned.

•

100 Percent Free Allocation: All allowances are freely allocated to the eight
industries that would experience the most significant profit losses under 100 percent
auctioning. Each industry’s share of the total allowances offered free in each year
corresponds to its share of the free allowances offered in the case of profit-preserving
allocation.

It is worth emphasizing that the potential burden of cap-and-trade policies is not
confined to the industries selected as points of regulation. Generally these industries will
shift some of the burden forward to their customers and backward to their suppliers. 29 Some
of the industries most vulnerable to cap and trade are outside the points of regulation. Thus
the set of industries receiving free allowances in the profit-preserving free allocation case
includes industries that are not points of regulation. These additional industries benefit from
the free allowances by selling their allowances to the industries that are points of regulation.
28

We choose the eight industries that under 100 percent auctioning would experience the largest percentage
reductions in profit over the interval 2009-2030. We exclude the water utilities industry (which otherwise
would rank in the top eight) from consideration because of its small size and low emissions relative to the
others.
29

Indeed, under the assumption of perfect competition and full information, mainstream (non-behavioral)
economic theory implies that the distribution of the burden of a cap-and-trade system is entirely independent of
the choice of points of regulation.

17

Revenue Use
In the absence of the income tax rate adjustments, the 100 percent auctioning case
and profit-preserving free allocation cases would be revenue-augmenting: the auction
revenue they bring in more than compensates for adverse revenue impacts from policyinduced reductions in the tax base. In contrast, the 100 percent free allocation case would be
revenue-losing: its adverse impact on the tax base is not offset by any auction revenue.
For the 100 percent auctioning and profit-preserving free allocation cases, we
consider two alternative ways of achieving revenue-neutrality: (1) through reductions in
personal income taxes and (2) via lump-sum tax rebates to households.30 In the 100 percent
free allocation case, which generates no auction revenue, revenue-neutrality is achieved
through (modest) increases in personal tax rates.

5.3 Central Case Results

Limiting Cases: 100 Percent Auctioning and 100 Percent Free Allocation
Table 2 shows the impacts of the cap-and-trade policy on the profits in various
industries for years 2015 and 2020, for the cases involving 100 percent auctioning and 100
percent free allocation. The profit impacts differ dramatically depending on the method of
allocation.
Under 100 percent auctioning, the carbon-intensive industries experience significant
losses of profit. The magnitudes of these losses are very similar across the two forms of
revenue-recycling (personal tax rate cuts and lump-sum rebates). The method of revenuerecycling affects households’ labor supply, saving and investment decisions. Although these
decisions are important for the overall economy, they tend to be spread across all industries
rather than be concentrated in the carbon-intensive industries. Thus, the impact on the
carbon-intensive industries is relatively minor, particularly in the short term. 31 Coal mining
and coal-fired electricity generation endure the largest losses, in keeping with the high carbon
intensity of their output (from coal mining) or fuel input (for coal-fired electricity generation.
Other carbon-intensive industries also experience significant profit losses. Note that the
losses of profit are not confined to the points of regulation (electricity generators, petroleum
refiners, chemical and primary metals producers, and natural gas distributors). Likewise,
30

The lump-sum tax rebate is set equal to the value of emissions allowances auctioned. This is in keeping with
recent proposals, which specify household rebates and other outlays as percentages of the gross value of
auction revenues, rather than as percentages of auction revenue net of the revenue loss from the reduction in the
tax base. To account for tax base impacts and thus achieve overall revenue neutrality, we adjust personal
income tax rates.
31

In the longer term, the choice of recycling method has a more perceptible impact on industry profits.
Recycling through cuts in marginal tax rates tends to stimulate investment more than lump-sum recycling does.
As a result, firms tend to enjoy larger profit increases, or suffer smaller losses, under the former recycling
method.

18

some of the points of regulation (in particular, non-fossil electricity generators and other
fossil generators) experience increased profits under 100 percent auctioning. Other fossil
generators are primarily natural gas combined cycle plants. The cap and trade policy
stimulates substitution away from coal-fired generation (which is exceptionally carbonintensive) toward other forms of electricity generation. The increased demand for these other
generation methods underlies the profit increases in these industries.
Under 100 percent free allocation, the results are very different. For each of the eight
industries that would suffer the largest percentage losses without free allocation or other
compensation, 100 percent free allocation yields increases – and often very large increases –
in profit. For coal mining, for example, in 2020 the 35 percent reduction in profit under 100
percent auctioning converts to a 141 percent increase under 100 percent free allocation. One
hundred percent free allocation overcompensates industries by giving them a quantity of
allowances whose value exceeds the policy-induced gross loss of producer surplus, as
defined in Section 2. To preserve profits, the government needs only to offer firms
allowances whose value corresponds to the portion of the policy burden that producers are
unable to shift to other industries or to consumers. One hundred percent free allocation
grants firms considerably more allowances than this..32
Table 3 offers another measure of profit impacts – the percentage change in the
present value of profits over the interval 2009-2030. The left pair of columns shows impacts
under 100% auctioning (with alternative revenue-replacement methods), while the far-right
column shows impacts under 100 percent free allocation. The numbers follow a similar
pattern to that described in Table 2 for the years 2015 and 2020.
Profit-Preserving Free Allocation
We now examine how much free allocation is necessary to preserve profits (in
present value, over the interval 2009-2030) in the eight most vulnerable industries. The
middle columns of Table 3 indicate the needed free allowances as a percentage of the total
allowances under the cap and trade system. 33 The coal mining and coal-fired electricity
generation industries require the largest number of free allowances: each would need about
three percent of all the covered emissions (or all the allowances) in the system. Coal-fired
electricity generators would receive about 24 percent of their needed allowances free.
32

In Phase I of the European Union’s Emissions Trading Scheme, more than 95 percent of the emissions
allowances were freely allocated to firms. Several interested parties have voiced concerns that this might have
led to windfall profits. Ellerman and Joskow (2008) point out, however, that the impact of the EU ETS on
profits in the electricity sector is difficult to gauge because of coincident changes in natural gas prices as well as
some countries’ regulations preventing utilities from raising electricity prices in parallel with allowance prices
(the marginal cost of emissions).
33

Because of general equilibrium interactions, a given industry’s requirement can depend on whether other
industries are being offered free allowances. The numbers shown are the required allowances when each of the
eight industries simultaneously receives the needed free allowances. In other simulations we have calculated
the required profit-preserving free allocation when free allocation is just offered to one industry. From such
simulations the requirements for any industry are very close to those reported for that industry in the table.

19

The other vulnerable industries require smaller shares of the system’s total
allowances, and their free allowances represent smaller fractions of their own emissions.
Importantly, the allowances needed by these industries together total less than 14 percent of
the cap-and-trade systems allowances. Thus, these simulations suggest that over 86 percent
of the allowances could be auctioned out. 34 Table 4 provides a closer look at the relative
contributions to emissions of the various industries to emissions under the cap and trade
policy, and the allowances required for profit-preservation, both in levels and as a percentage
of the economy-wide total.
The fact that profit-preservation is consistent with auctioning over 86 percent of the
allowances has important implications for the overall policy costs. As discussed in Section 2,
100 percent auctioning has the greatest potential for cost-effectiveness because it enables the
government to make use of a particularly efficient revenue source – auction proceeds – and
thus avoid relying as much on distortionary taxes to meet given expenditure requirements.
To the extent that the government utilizes free allocation, it foregoes the efficient revenue
source and must rely more on distortionary taxes. In our simulations, 100 percent auctioning
enables the government to simultaneously reduce marginal tax rates on labor income by 0.21
percentage points and on capital income by 0.32 percentage points. In contrast, 100 percent
free allocation compels the government to raise these marginal rates by 0.64 percentage
points and 0.97 percentage points, respectively. 35
The bottom row of Table 3 reveals the significance of the alternative allocation
methods for policy costs, here expressed as the reduction, relative to the reference case, in the
present value of GDP over the interval 2009-2030. The most cost-effective case is 100
percent auctioning with auction revenues used to finance cuts in the marginal rates of
personal income taxes. In this case, cap and trade has a GDP cost of about 0.57 percent. The
least cost-effective cases are those in which no policy-generated revenue is used to finance
cuts in marginal rates of individual income taxes. These include the case of 100 percent free
allocation and the case of 100 percent auctioning, with revenues recycled through lump-sum
rebates. In these cases, the GDP costs are very similar – 0.79 and 0.81 percent, respectively
– and about 65 percent higher than in the most cost-effective case.
The table also shows the GDP costs in the case of profit-preserving free allocation,
that is, where just enough allowances (about 14 percent of the total) are given out free to
preserve profits in the eight most vulnerable industries. Again the GDP costs depend on the
method of revenue recycling. Importantly, preserving profits need not substantially raise the
GDP costs. When the revenues from the auction component of this policy are used to
34

HR 2454 provides for limited use of auctioning in the early years of the cap-and-trade system, with roughly
80 percent of allowances allocated freely to various stakeholders. Many of these compensation programs phase
out over 2026-2030, however, with the result that roughly 70 percent of allowances are to be auctioned in 2030
and later.
35

Another possible use of auction revenues is to finance additional government spending. Farrow (1999) and
Parry and Oates (2000) offer analyses of the efficiency implications when environmental policy revenues are
employed in this way. Even after auctioning becomes the dominant method of allocation, most auction
revenues are designated for financing lump-sum rebates rather than reductions in marginal rates.

20

finance marginal income tax rate cuts, the GDP costs are increased by just nine percent
relative to the most cost-effective case. The costs in this case are about a third lower than the
previously mentioned cases involving no marginal rate cuts. If instead the revenues from the
auction component are recycled through lump-sum rebates, the GDP costs are very close to
those of the other cases involving no marginal rate cuts. 36
Two key messages emerge from these results. First, relatively little free allocation
suffices to prevent profit losses in major carbon-supplying and carbon-using industries.
Second, relative to the most cost-effective case involving no profit-preservation, the added
GDP cost of preventing profit losses is small, provided that revenues are recycled through
marginal income tax cuts. We will see that these results are quite robust to the alternative
policy designs examined below.
The finding that relatively few allowances are needed to preserve profits is consistent
with earlier findings by Bovenberg and Goulder (2001) and Smith and Ross (2002). These
studies considered only upstream cap-and-trade systems and concentrated on preserving
profits in the coal mining and oil&gas extraction industries. Bovenberg and Goulder found
that freely allocating about 10 percent of the allowances sufficed to preserve profits in those
industries. Smith and Ross found that 9-21 percent would be sufficient to preserve these
industries’ profits. In a subsequent study, Smith, Ross, and Montgomery (2002) claimed
that considerably higher fractions of allowances must be freely allocated to preserve
profits. 37

36

Employment impacts tend to correlate with the GDP impacts. In particular, in the cases of 100 percent
auctioning as well as 100 percent free allocation with revenues recycled lump-sum, cap and trade causes a
reduction of 0.1 percent in aggregate employment in 2020. In contrast, under 100 percent auctioning with
revenues devoted to marginal income tax cuts, there is a slightly positive (0.1 percent) impact on aggregate
employment.
37

The authors make two main arguments to support the claim that a larger percentage is needed. One is that
free allocation must take place over a relatively short period of time, and yet compensate for potential profit
losses over an infinite time horizon. Clearly the shorter the time-interval for free allocation relative to the
interval over which losses are calculated, the larger the required free allocation. To us it seems most
informative to use the same interval of time for profit calculations and the free allocation of allowances: that is,
to consider the profit losses of some given interval of time, and then to determine how much free allocation,
within that same time interval, is needed to prevent those profit losses.
A second argument is that more free allocation is needed once one accounts for the heterogeneity of producers
within industries. Consider the case where the cap-and-trade program would increase the profits of some firms
within an industry that, on average, suffers a profit loss from the policy. In this case the average loss to the
“losing” firms exceeds the average loss for the industry as a whole. Hence greater compensation would indeed
be needed than what the industry-average profit loss suggests. Thus, in our analysis, to the extent that some of
the firms in a losing industry experience profit-increases as a result of cap and trade, our results understate the
amount of free allocation needed to compensate the losing firms. However, it is hard to imagine that this issue
has much empirical significance. The claimed bias requires that some of the firms in a losing industry actually
experience profit increases from cap and trade. Within any of the eight most vulnerable industries we consider,
one might expect some heterogeneity across firms in the magnitude of profit losses under 100 percent
auctioning. But it seems highly doubtful that many or indeed any firms within those industries would enjoy
increased profits as a result of the cap-and-trade program.

21

5.4 Alternative Program Designs

The cap-and-trade program described thus far excludes several potential costreducing features, such as provisions for offsets and for allowance banking and borrowing –
features included in many recent proposals.38 We now explore how such provisions affect
the impact of alternative allowance allocation approaches.

Including Allowance Banking and Borrowing
Several analysts emphasize that cost-effectiveness can be enhanced further through
provisions for intertemporal trading of allowances – or allowance banking and borrowing. 39
Allowance trading helps promote equality of marginal abatement costs across various
sources at given points in time. This helps lower policy costs. A cost-minimizing firm
would have an incentive to bank an allowance (save it for future use) if it expected its
marginal abatement costs to be especially high in the future (in present value) relative to its
current abatement costs. Banking thus allows the firm to substitute relatively inexpensive
current-period abatement for more costly future-period abatement. Likewise, a firm will
have an incentive to borrow allowances if its current abatement costs were considerably
higher than its expected future abatement costs (in present value).
Here we modify the original cap-and-trade program to allow for allowance banking
and borrowing over the interval 2012-2030. We require firms to have a zero bank balance
(that is, use up all banked allowances or redeem all borrowed ones) by 2030. 40
Figure 3 displays the time-path of emissions in the absence and presence of bankingborrowing provisions. 41 This path is flatter under banking and borrowing: emissions fall
short of annual caps in the short term, and exceed annual caps later on. Figure 4 compares
the paths of allowance prices in the central and banking/borrowing scenarios (as well as other
scenarios to be described below). In the central case, the marginal abatement costs (and
allowance prices) rise considerably faster than the rate of interest. This fast-rising price
38

For example, HR 2454 provides for both carbon offsets (to cover up to 2 billion metric tons CO2e of
emissions each year) and intertemporal banking and borrowing.

39

See, for example, Kling and Rubin (1997) and Leiby and Rubin (2000).

40

In equilibrium, in the presence of banking and borrowing, discounted marginal abatement costs (and thus
allowance prices) will be equated across time. Hence allowance prices rise at the rate of interest. We model
intertemporal banking by identifying the unique time-profile of allowance prices that meets two conditions: (1)
allowance prices rise at the rate of interest, and (2) cumulative emissions over the period 2012-2030 (a function
of the height of the time-path) match the cumulative emissions allowed by the yearly aggregate caps over this
time interval. The latter condition assures that firms bring their bank balances to zero by 2030.
41

The figure shows results under 100 percent auctioning of allowances, with revenues devoted to cuts in
marginal income tax rates. In fact the emissions impacts under banking and borrowing are very similar under
other allocation methods or other uses of policy revenues.

22

trajectory stems from the relatively steep decline in the time profile for the aggregate
emissions caps employed in this study (which is the time-profile under HR 2454). Under
these conditions, firms have incentives to bank allowances and thereby avoid the especially
high future abatement costs: they undertake extra emissions reductions in the near term
(thus, bringing aggregate emissions below the short-term caps) and carry out fewer
reductions in the future (thus causing aggregate emissions to exceed the longer-term caps).
These adjustments imply a significantly flatter time-profile for emissions allowance prices
compared with the central case (see Figure 4). The differences in prices in the post-2020
period are especially dramatic.
Table 5 presents the impacts of alternative allocation methods in the presence and
absence of the banking provisions. The lower abatement costs afforded by these provisions
are reflected in lower GDP costs. Similarly, in many industries the losses of profit under 100
percent auctioning are smaller. Correspondingly, in most industries the required value of
allowances needed to preserve profits is smaller, as indicated in Figure 5a. At the same time,
providing for banking has a relatively small impact on the numbers of allowances needed to
prevent profit losses (Table 5 and Figure 5b). This reflects two offsetting effects. On the one
hand, the banking provisions imply lower abatement costs which, in the absence of changes
in allowance prices, would imply that fewer allowances are needed to preserve profits. On
the other hand, these provisions lead to a lower present value of abatement costs and
allowance prices 42 , which means that to generate a given value of allowances (or
compensation), more allowances must be offered. Because of these offsetting effects, the
quantities of allowances needed to maintain profits (the numbers in parentheses in Table 5)
do not change much when firms are given opportunities to bank allowances.

Incorporating Offsets
Here we consider the profit impacts under a modified program in which points of
regulation are allowed to substitute carbon offsets for an equal number of allowances. By
purchasing offsets, firms can avoid high emissions abatement costs. 43 Domestic firms
included among the points of regulation will choose to purchase offsets up to the point where
the price of the marginal offset equals the marginal abatement cost. In equilibrium, the
prices of allowances and offsets are equal.
In order to explore the effects of offsets, we introduce a domestic and foreign offset
supply function. There is great uncertainty as to the costs of offset supply. Our domestic
42

As seen from Figure 4, allowance prices are higher in the short term but lower in the longer term. The
present value of these prices is lower than in the central case, in keeping with the fact that banking reduces the
present value of abatement costs.
43

Offsets are controversial because of the difficulties of determining “additionality,” that is ascertaining
whether the emissions reducing or carbon-sequestering activities financed by offset purchases would not have
taken place in the absence of such financing. This issue is beyond the scope of the present paper. We cannot
claim that the offset scenario is equivalent to other scenarios in terms of CO2 concentrations over the 2009-2030
interval.

23

supply curve is based on EPA (2005) estimates of potential greenhouse gas abatement in U.S.
agriculture and forestry under alternative carbon price regimes. We assume that the supply
curve for international offsets is the same as that for domestic offsets, and that the supply
curve is fixed over time. 44 In our smoothly rising offset supply function, the yearly quantity
supplied is 805 million tons at a real (2005$) price of price of $10, 1,124 million tons at $15,
and 1,384 million tons at $20.
Table 5 also displays the impacts of alternative allocation approaches in the presence
of offsets. As expected, under 100 percent auctioning the profit losses are considerably
smaller than in the central case. The average percentage loss of profit for the eight most
vulnerable industries is about 1.7 percent, as compared with 5.0 percent in the central case.
Including offsets also reduces GDP costs considerably.
In keeping with the smaller losses of profit, the value of allowances needed to prevent
these profit losses is considerably lower when offsets are allowed, as shown n Figure 5a.
However, as indicated in Figure 5b and Table 5, the number of allowances that must be
freely allocated to preserve profits is higher in this case. The reason is that offsets
substantially reduce allowance prices (see Figure 4). Hence more allowances are needed to
provide a given value of compensation.

A Fully Upstream Program
Here we consider a fully upstream system: where the points of regulation are the
mine mouth for coal, the wellhead for oil and natural gas, and the port of entry for imports of
these fuels. 45 For comparability, for this case we apply the same time-profile for the
aggregate emissions cap as in the central case. In addition, we designate the same industries
as potential recipients of free allowances.
As shown in Table 5, under 100 percent auctioning the profit impacts tend to be
slightly smaller in this case than in our central case. For the eight most vulnerable industries,
the average profit loss is 4.3 percent, as compared with 5.0 percent in the central case. The
difference reflects the fact a fully upstream system allows for somewhat more comprehensive
coverage than the modified upstream system. It implies higher prices of carbon-based fuels
for all industries rather than only for the six principal carbon-using industries listed in
subsection 5.2.
GDP costs are also smaller in the fully upstream case. This too reflects the fact that
abatement costs are spread more widely, so that an individual firm takes on a smaller share of
the total effort required to meet the aggregate abatement target.

44

Clearly this is a crude approach, but it is partly necessitated by the large uncertainties about international
offset supply, where economic, administrative, and political factors are both significant and hard to predict.

45

For a discussion of administrative and efficiency issues relevant to the choice between fully upstream,
modified upstream, and downstream cap-and-trade systems, see Stavins (2007).

24

5.5 Further Sensitivity Analysis

Table 6 indicates how changes in key parameters affect results under the central case
scenario.
Panels B and C examine the implications of more and less stringent time-profiles for
the aggregate emissions cap. Here we increase or decrease in each year the required
emissions reductions relative to the central case reductions for that year. More stringent caps
imply larger losses of profit. However, they also imply higher allowance prices and reduce
the number of allowances needed to prevent a profit loss, as can be seen from figures 6a and
6b. More stringent caps also raise GDP costs.
Panels D and E reveal the significance of alternative values for the elasticity of
demand for energy. The high-elasticity case involves a doubling in each industry of the
elasticities of substitution between the energy composite E and the materials composite M,
as well as the elasticity of substitution between different forms of energy. The low-elasticity
case halves each of these elasticities in each industry. Higher elasticities are a boon for
carbon users but a bane for carbon suppliers: they imply that more of the policy burden can
be shifted from users to suppliers. The industries in Table 6 are both users and suppliers.
We find that the former impact tends to dominate, as higher elasticities are associated with
smaller losses of profit. 46
Panels F and G consider alternative assumptions for the elasticity of supply. We
regulate this elasticity by altering the parameter ξ in the adjustment cost function (equation
(4) above) for the primary suppliers of carbon – the coal mining and oil and gas industries. A
higher value of ξ implies higher adjustment costs and a lower elasticity of supply. This in
turn implies that the primary suppliers are less able to shift the burden of climate policy to
carbon-using industries downstream. In Table 6 we find that the carbon-using industries
suffer smaller losses of profit in this case, and that the requirements for free allowances for
these industries are smaller as well.
In nearly all of the cases considered in Table 6, the total allowances required to
preserve profits in the eight most vulnerable industries is below 15 percent. This total is
never above 25 percent.

6. Conclusions
This study applies a numerical general equilibrium model to assess the impacts of
alternative cap-and-trade policies on profits of U.S. industries and the overall economy. The
46

However, for the coal mining and coal-fired electricity generation industries, higher elasticities are associated
with larger requirements for free allowances. Allowance prices are lower in the high elasticity case, which
implies that more allowances are needed yield a given value of compensation.

25

model’s close attention to the dynamics of physical capital makes it especially well-suited to
evaluate the profit impacts.
We find that freely allocating a relatively small fraction of the emissions allowances
generally suffices to prevent profit losses among the eight industries that, without free
allowances or other compensation, would suffer the largest percentage losses of profit.
Under a wide range of cap-and-trade designs, freely allocating less than 15 percent of the
total allowances prevents profit losses to these most vulnerable industries. Allocating 100
percent of the allowances substantially overcompensates these industries, in many cases
causing more than a doubling of profits.
The fact that profit preservation requires relatively little free allocation and leaves
considerable room for auctioning has important implications for economy-wide policy costs.
When just enough free allocation is offered to compensate (but not overly compensate) the
most vulnerable industries, considerable auction revenue is generated, yielding significant
opportunities to avoid distortionary taxation. In our simulations, when such revenues are
used to finance cuts in marginal income tax rates, the resulting GDP costs are about one third
lower than in the case where all allowances are freely allocated and no auction revenue is
generated. In contrast, when these auction revenues fund lump-sum rebates, there are no cost
savings relative to the case of 100 percent free allocation.
The finding that a small percentage of free allowances suffices to maintain profits is
robust, emerging under policy designs that differ according to the presence or absence of
provisions for offsets or intertemporal banking of allowances, or in terms of policy
stringency. It also emerges under more stringent policies that raise policy costs. When the
overall cap is tighter, firms need to receive free a higher value of allowances to maintain
profits. However, greater stringency also leads to higher allowance prices (the value of each
allowance is greater). Hence the number of free allowances that firms require to attain
needed allowance value does not change much with the stringency of cap-and-trade policy.
It should be recognized that the simulation experiments in this paper consider only a
subset of the provisions contained in recent federal cap-and-trade proposals. In particular,
they do not incorporate border-tax adjustments or other forms of industry assistance not
achieved through free allowance allocation. These provisions clearly can influence the profit
impacts and economy-wide costs of cap and trade. Notwithstanding these qualifications, the
present analysis offers a unique quantitative assessment of the relationship between free
allocation and profits in U.S. industries, and the implications of such allocation for overall
economic cost.

26

References
Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Lawrence H. Goulder, 2001. "Neutralizing the Adverse Industry Impacts of
CO2 Abatement Policies: What Does It Cost?," in Behavioral and Distributional Effects of
Environmental Policy. C. Carraro and G. Metcalf ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 4585.
Burtraw, Dallas, Karen Palmer, Ranjit Bharvirkar, and Anthony Paul, 2002. "The Effect on Asset
Values of the Allocation of Carbon Dioxide Emission Allowances." Discussion Paper 02-15.
Washington, D.C.: Resources for the Future.
Burtraw, Dallas and Karen Palmer, 2007. "Compensation Rules for Climate Policy in the Electricity
Sector." Discussion Paper 07-41. Washington, D.C.: Resources for the Future.
Ellerman, A. Denny and Paul L. Joskow, 2008. "The European Union's Emissions Trading System in
Perspective." Report Prepared for the Pew Center on Global Climate Change. Washington, D.C.,
May.
Fair, Raymond and John Taylor, 1983. "Solution and Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Dynamic
Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models." Econometrica 51(4):1169-85.
Goettle, Richard J., Mun S. Ho, Dale W. Jorgenson, Daniel T. Slesnick, and Peter Wilcoxen, 2007.
"IGEM, an Inter-temporal General Equilibrium Model of the U.S Economy with Emphasis on
Growth, Energy, and the Environment." Working paper, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass.
Goulder, Lawrence H. and Marc A. C. Hafstead, 2009. "A Numerical General Equilibrium Model for
Evaluating U.S. Energy and Environmental Policies: Model Structure." Working paper, Stanford
University, Stanford, Calif.
Hafstead, Marc A. C., Neale Mahoney, and Lawrence H. Goulder, 2009. "A General Equilibrium
Model for Evaluating U.S. Energy and Environmental Policies: Data Documentation." Working
paper, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif.
Hall, Robert, 1988. "Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption." Journal of Political Economy
96(2):339-57.
Kling, Catherine and Jonathan Rubin, 1997. "Bankable Permits for the Control of Environmental
Pollution." Journal of Public Economics 64:101-15.
Lawrance, Emily, 1991. "Poverty and the Rate of Time Preference: Evidence from Panel Data."
Journal of Political Economy 99(1):54-77.
Leiby, Paul and Jonathan Rubin, 2000. "Intertemporal Permit Trading for the Control of Greenhouse
Gas Emissions." Environmental and Resource Economics 2000.
Paltsev, S., J.M. Reilly, H.D. Jacoby, R.S. Eckhaus, J. McFarland, M. Sarofim, M. Asadoorian, and
M. Babiker, 2005. "The MIT Emissions Prediction and Policy Analysis (EPPA) Model: Version 4."
Report 125, MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change, Cambridge, Mass.

27

Parry, Ian W. H., 2003. "Fiscal Interactions and the Case for Carbon Taxes over Grandfathered
Carbon Permits." Oxford Review of Economic Policy 19:385-99.
Poterba, James M. and Lawrence H. Summers, 1985. "The Economic Effects of Dividend Taxation,"
in Recent Advances in Corporate Finance. E. Altman and M. Subramanyam eds. Homewood, Ill:
Irwin.
Ramseur, Jonathan L., 2008. "Emission Allowance Allocation in a Cap-and-Trade Program: Options
and Considerations." CRS Report for Congress. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Congressional Budget
Office.
Ross, Martin T., 2007. "Documentation of the Applied Dynamic Analysis of the Global Economy
(ADAGE) Model." Research Triangle Park, NC: Research Triangle Institute.
Russek, Frank S., 1996. "Labor Supply and Taxes." Working paper, Macroeconomics Division,
Congressional Budget Office, Washington, D.C.
Smith, Anne E., Martin E. Ross, and W. David Montgomery, 2002. "Implications of Trading
Implementation Design for Equity-Efficiency Tradeoffs in Carbon Permit Allocations." Working
paper. Washington, D.C.: Charles River Associates.
Smith, Anne E. and Martin T. Ross, 2002. "Allowance Allocation: Who Wins and Loses under a
Carbon Dioxide Control Program?" Discussion Paper, Charles River Associates, Washington, D.C.
Stavins, Robert N., 2007. "A US Cap-and-Trade System to Address Global Climate Change."
Discussion paper 2007-13, The Hamilton Project. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.
Summers, Lawrence H., 1981. "Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q-theory Approach."
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:67-127.

28

Figure 1: Allowance Allocation, Rents, and Profits

S1
pC

a

r
f
c

p0
pS

S0
e

b

d
D
X1

X0

Output

Figure 2: Covered Sector and Economy-Wide Carbon Dioxide Emissions, 20122030

7

6

Billion t CO2

5

4

3

2

All Sectors, Reference Case
Covered Sectors, Reference Case

1

0
2012

Covered Sectors, Cap and Trade Policy

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

Year

2024

2026

2028

2030

Figure 3: Economy-Wide CO2 Emissions with and without Banking/Borrowing,
2012-2030

6

5

Billion t CO2

4

3

2
Cap−and−Trade Policy, No Banking and Borrowing
Cap−and−Trade Policy with Banking and Borrowing

1

0
2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

Year

2024

2026

2028

2030

Figure 4: Allowance Prices Under Alternative Policy Designs, 2012-2030

160

140

$ per t CO2 (2005$)

120

Central Case
Unlimited Banking
Offsets Included
Fully Upstream System

100

80

60

40

20

0
2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

Year

2024

2026

2028

2030

Figure 5: Value and Number of Allowances Necessary to Preserve Present Value
of After Tax Profits under Alternative Policy Designs
70

$ Billion (2005$), Present Value

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
Coal Mining

Coal Fired
Electricity
Generation

Petroleum
Refining

Central Case

(a)

Chemicals

Primary
Metals

Unlimited Banking

Railroads

Electricity Natural Gas
Transmission Distribution
and
Distribution

Offsets Included

Present Value (2012-2030) of Freely Allocated Allowances

6

Billion Allowances (2012-2030)

5

4

3

2

1

0
Coal Mining

Coal Fired
Electricity
Generation

Petroleum
Refining

Central Case

(b)

Chemicals

Primary
Metals

Unlimited Banking

Railroads

Electricity Natural Gas
Transmission Distribution
and
Distribution

Offsets Included

Total Quantity (2012-2030) of Freely Allocated Allowances

Figure 6: Sensitivity Analysis: Value and Number of Allowances Necessary to
Preserve Present Value of After-Tax Profits under More and Less Stringent Caps
80

70

$ Billion (2005$), Present Value

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
Coal Mining

Coal Fired
Electricity
Generation

Petroleum
Refining

Less Stringent Caps

(a)

Chemicals

Primary
Metals

Central Case

Railroads

Electric
Natural Gas
Transmission Distribution
and
Distribution

More Stringent Caps

Present Value (2012-2030) of Freely Allocated Allowances

3

Billion Allowances (2012-2030)

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
Coal Mining

Coal Fired
Electricity
Generation

Petroleum
Refining

Less Stringent Caps

(b)

Chemicals

Primary
Metals

Central Case

Railroads

Electric
Natural Gas
Transmission Distribution
and
Distribution

More Stringent Caps

Total Quantity (2012-2030) of Freely Allocated Allowances

Table 1: Net Output* in 2009 by Industry in Reference Case

Net Output

Pct. of Total
Net Output

Oil&Gas Extraction
Coal Mining
Coal Fired Electricity Generation
Other Fossil Electricity Generation
Non Fossil Electricity Generation
Electricity Transmission/Distribution
Natural Gas Distribution
Petroleum Refining
Agriculture
Non Coal Mining
Water Utilities
Construction
Food/Tobacco
Textiles
Wood/Paper Products
Chemicals
Primary Metals
Machinery
Motor Vehicle Production
Transportation
Railroads
Information
Services
Owner Occupied Housing

329.6
44.9
66.3
55.5
45.0
422.9
153.4
424.5
442.6
57.3
45.0
1767.2
825.7
219.7
434.0
1177.6
266.9
2364.6
930.0
836.9
102.5
1127.1
13642.6
2729.8

1.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
1.5
0.5
1.5
1.6
0.2
0.2
6.2
2.9
0.8
1.5
4.1
0.9
8.3
3.3
2.9
0.4
4.0
47.8
9.6

Total

28511.4

100.0

Industry

* in billions of 2005 dollars.

639.0

Other Industry Average

862.0

311.3
25.3
25.8
30.3
38.7
229.2
29.2
30.4
164.9
49.7
56.1
0.1

0.4
-18.8
-11.2
8.8
9.0
-0.7
-0.9
-1.2
-0.8
-1.0
-1.0

Rate Cuts

Marginal

-0.8

-0.3
-18.6
-11.5
7.8
8.0
-1.3
-0.9
-1.9
-1.5
-1.5
-1.7

Rebates

Lump-Sum

2015

-0.2

1.2
-35.3
-29.0
19.8
25.6
-1.9
-2.2
-3.6
-2.5
-3.0
-2.6

-0.9

0.8
-35.0
-28.8
18.8
24.3
-2.3
-2.2
-4.1
-3.0
-3.4
-3.0

Rebates

Lump-Sum

2020
Rate Cuts

Marginal

100% Auction

* Figures for reference case are in billions of 2005 dollars. Other figures are percentage changes from reference case.

261.9
18.1
18.2
24.7
27.8
170.1
21.9
23.2
122.4
35.8
41.6

Oil&Gas Extraction
Coal Mining
Coal Fired Electricity Generation
Other Fossil Electricity Generation
Non Fossil Electricity Generation
Electricity Transmission/Distribution
Natural Gas Distribution
Petroleum Refining
Chemicals
Primary Metals
Railroads

Industry

Reference
Case
2015 2020

Cap and Trade Policy

Table 2: Percent Change in Profits by Industry under Alternative Allocation Methods*

-0.8

-0.4
59.4
68.1
7.9
8.1
5.2
6.1
10.6
7.4
8.1
4.9

-0.9

0.7
141.4
148.6
18.8
24.4
12.8
14.4
26.1
17.9
18.5
12.4

100% Free
Allocation
2015 2020

-0.2
0.47

All Industries

GDP Cost**

0.81

-0.0

-4.5
0.4

-28.0
-27.8
-4.3
-2.9
-3.0
-2.0
-2.0
-1.4

Lump-Sum
Rebates

0.52

0.2

0
0.2

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
(13.7)

(3.2)
(3.2)
(0.7)
(2.4)
(0.8)
(0.6)
(2.5)
(0.3)

Marginal
Rate Cuts

0.81

0.4

0
0.4

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
(13.7)

(3.2)
(3.2)
(0.7)
(2.4)
(0.8)
(0.6)
(2.5)
(0.3)

Lump-Sum
Rebates

* Percentage change in the present value of profits over the interval 2009-2030. In the columns labeled
“Profit-Preserving Free Allocation” the numbers in parentheses indicate, for each of eight industries,
the percentage of economy-wide allowances that need to be freely allocated to preserve profits.
** Percentage change in the present value of GDP over the interval 2009-2030.

-5.0
0.1

-28.7
-28.4
-4.7
-3.2
-3.5
-2.5
-2.5
-2.8

Marginal
Rate Cuts

100% Auctioning

All Industries Above
All Other Industries

Percentage Change in Profits*
Coal Mining
Coal Fired Electricity Generation
Petroleum Refining
Chemicals
Primary Metals
Railroads
Electricity Transmission/Distribution
Natural Gas Distribution

Industry

Profit-Preserving
Free Allocation

0.79

2.7

31.6
0.4

178.8
177.2
29.4
20.7
22.2
15.6
15.5
17.5

100% Free
Allocation

Table 3: Profit and GDP Impacts under Alternative Allocation Methods

95.1
24.3

Subtotal

Other Industry Average

24.1

67.4

2.5
10.5
30.6
8.6
4.5
0.0
0.0
7.1

-0.7

-29.2

-31.6
-57.5
-9.9
-20.2
-51.2
-1.8
0.0
-10.1

0.1

-5.0

-28.7
-28.4
-4.7
-3.2
-3.5
-2.5
-2.5
-2.8

n.a.

10.7

2.5
2.5
0.5
1.9
0.6
0.5
1.9
0.3

n.a.

13.7

3.2
3.2
0.7
2.4
0.8
0.6
2.5
0.3

Percent Change
in Profits
Percent
under 100%
Total
of Total
Auctioning
2012-2030 Allowances

* Emissions are in millions of metric tons. Profit impacts and allowance requirements are from simulations
in which auction revenues are used to finance reductions in the marginal rates of individual income taxes.

3.7
24.8
34.0
10.8
9.3
0.0
0.0
7.9

Reference

Coal Mining
Coal Fired Electricity Generation
Petroleum Refining
Chemicals
Primary Metals
Railroads
Electricity Transmission/Distribution
Natural Gas Distribution

Industry

Cap and
Percent
Trade
Reduction

CO2 Emissions 2012-2030

Allowances Required
for Compensation

Table 4: Emissions Reductions by Industry and Allocations Necessary to Preserve Present Value of After Tax
Profits 2009-2030*

-0.2
0.47

All Industries

GDP Cost**

0.52

0.2

0
0.2

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
(13.7)

(3.2)
(3.2)
(0.7)
(2.4)
(0.8)
(0.6)
(2.5)
(0.3)

0.79

2.7

31.6
0.4

178.8
177.2
29.4
20.7
22.2
15.6
15.5
17.5

0.43

-0.2

-4.9
0.1

-31.7
-27.7
-4.0
-2.8
-3.3
-2.6
-2.3
-2.5

0.48

0.2

0
0.2

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

(14.7)

(3.9)
(3.5)
(0.6)
(2.3)
(0.8)
(0.7)
(2.5)
(0.3)

0.74

2.5

28.7
0.4

185.8
162.2
23.5
16.5
19.2
15.3
13.7
14.5

Banking and Borrowing Allowed
ProfitPreserving
100%
Free
100% Free
Auctioning Allocation Allocation

* Percentage change in the present value of profits over the interval 2009-2030. In the columns labeled
“Profit-Preserving Free Allocation” the numbers in parentheses indicate, for each of eight industries,
the percentage of economy-wide allowances that need to be freely allocated to preserve profits.
** Percentage change in the present value of GDP over the interval 2009-2030.

-5.0
0.1

-28.7
-28.4
-4.7
-3.2
-3.5
-2.5
-2.5
-2.8

All Industries Above
All Other Industries

Percentage Change in Profits*
Coal Mining
Coal Fired Electricity Generation
Petroleum Refining
Chemicals
Primary Metals
Railroads
Electricity Transmission/Distribution
Natural Gas Distribution

Industry

Central Case
ProfitPreserving
100%
Free
100% Free
Auctioning Allocation Allocation

Table 5: Profit and GDP Impacts under Alternative Policy Designs

-0.3
0.43

All Industries

GDP Cost**

0.47

0.1

0
0.1

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
(14.5)

(4.4)
(3.3)
(0.5)
(2.1)
(0.8)
(0.7)
(2.4)
(0.3)

0.68

2.1

25.3
0.3

187.1
135.6
18.8
13.5
16.8
12.9
11.5
12.9

0.12

0

-1.7
0.1

-13.8
-9.9
-1.1
-0.7
-1.0
-0.9
-0.7
-0.6

0.13

0.1

0
0.2

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

(20.2)

(6.7)
(5.0)
(0.6)
(2.3)
(1.0)
(1.0)
(3.3)
(0.4)

0.19

0.7

6.7
0.2

54.5
39.2
4.2
2.8
4.1
3.5
3.0
2.7

Offsets Allowed
ProfitPreserving
100%
Free
100% Free
Auctioning Allocation Allocation

* Percentage change in the present value of profits over the interval 2009-2030. In the columns labeled
“Profit-Preserving Free Allocation” the numbers in parentheses indicate, for each of eight industries,
the percentage of economy-wide allowances that need to be freely allocated to preserve profits.
** Percentage change in the present value of GDP over the interval 2009-2030.

-4.3
0.0

-32.2
-23.3
-3.2
-2.3
-2.8
-2.3
-1.9
-2.1

All Industries Above
All Other Industries

Percentage Change in Profits*
Coal Mining
Coal Fired Electricity Generation
Petroleum Refining
Chemicals
Primary Metals
Railroads
Electricity Transmission/Distribution
Natural Gas Distribution

Industry

Fully Upstream Implementation
ProfitPreserving
100%
Free
100% Free
Auctioning Allocation Allocation

Table 5: Profit and GDP Impacts under Alternative Policy Designs, Continued

Table 6: Sensitivity Analysis: Change in Profits, Value of Allowances Required
for Compensation, and GDP Cost

Coal Mining
A. Central Case
100% Auctioning*
100% Free Allocation
Value of Allowances Needed to
B. More Stringent Caps
100% Auctioning
100% Free Allocation
Value of Allowances Needed to
C. Less Stringent Caps
100% Auctioning
100% Free Allocation
Value of Allowances Needed to
D. Lower Demand Elasticities
100% Auctioning
100% Free Allocation
Value of Allowances Needed to
E. Higher Demand Elasticities
100% Auctioning
100% Free Allocation
Value of Allowances Needed to
F. Higher Adjustment Costs
100% Auctioning
100% Free Allocation
Value of Allowances Needed to
G. Lower Adjustment Costs
100% Auctioning
100% Free Allocation
Value of Allowances Needed to

Coal Fired
Electricity Petroleum
Generation Refining
Chemicals

Primary
Metals

Preserve Profit**

-28.1
171.9
51.6

-27.7
170.5
52.8

-4.6
27.5
10.6

-3.2
19.1
39.7

-3.5
20.6
12.6

Preserve Profit

-31.7
218.3
64.0

-34.1
236.1
71.4

-6.9
46.5
17.5

-4.8
31.4
63.7

-4.6
30.6
18.2

Preserve Profit

-23.8
129.4
44.2

-20.9
113.8
40.1

-3.0
15.9
7.0

-2.1
11.2
26.6

-2.5
13.7
9.5

Preserve Profit

-30.1
281.6
79.5

-30.6
287.8
80.5

-6.9
62.3
23.5

-5.5
49.7
97.3

-5.2
47.3
27.5

Preserve Profit

-19.7
58.3
36.4

-15.5
45.9
30.0

-1.9
5.3
3.4

-0.8
2.0
8.8

-1.3
3.5
4.3

Preserve Profit

-27.9
190.2
54.5

-27.9
190.3
52.4

-4.5
29.7
10.3

-3.2
21.0
39.2

-3.4
22.5
12.3

Preserve Profit

-27.9
83.1
27.9

-28.2
86.5
30.2

-4.5
25.4
9.8

-3.1
26.4
52.2

-3.4
30.2
17.4

* Percentage change in the present value of profits over the interval 2009-2030.
** Present Value ($ Billion 2005$) of allowances freely allocated over the interval 2012-2030.

Table 6: Sensitivity Analysis: Change in Profits, Value of Allowances Required
for Compensation, and GDP Cost, Continued

Electric
Transmission &
Railroads
Distribution
A. Central Case
100% Auctioning***
100% Free Allocation
Value of Allowances Needed to
B. More Stringent Caps
100% Auctioning
100% Free Allocation
Value of Allowances Needed to
C. Less Stringent Caps
100% Auctioning
100% Free Allocation
Value of Allowances Needed to
D. Lower Demand Elasticities
100% Auctioning
100% Free Allocation
Value of Allowances Needed to
E. Higher Demand Elasticities
100% Auctioning
100% Free Allocation
Value of Allowances Needed to
F. Higher Adjustment Costs
100% Auctioning
100% Free Allocation
Value of Allowances Needed to
G. Lower Adjustment Costs
100% Auctioning
100% Free Allocation
Value of Allowances Needed to

Natural Gas
Distribution

Total*

GDP Cost**

Preserve Profit****

-2.5
14.2
10.0

-2.4
14.1
39.9

-2.8
16.1
5.6

-5.0
29.6
222.8

0.47
0.79
n.a.

Preserve Profit

-3.0
19.1
13.1

-3.2
20.8
57.5

-3.9
26.5
9.0

-6.4
42.8
314.4

0.70
1.13
n.a.

Preserve Profit

-2.0
10.7
8.5

-1.8
9.8
31.5

-1.9
11.0
4.3

-3.7
20.1
171.6

0.31
0.55
n.a.

Preserve Profit

-3.8
33.7
22.0

-1.1
7.9
22.4

-3.6
31.2
10.6

-5.6
51.0
363.2

0.81
1.27
n.a.

Preserve Profit

-0.7
1.7
2.5

-1.2
3.2
19.0

-1.4
3.9
2.4

-2.5
7.0
106.8

0.15
0.24
n.a.

Preserve Profit

-2.5
16.1
10.1

-1.2
6.9
18.3

-2.8
18.0
5.6

-4.5
29.9
202.6

0.47
0.77
n.a.

Preserve Profit

-2.5
25.7
16.7

-1.1
21.6
54.9

-2.8
24.9
8.3

-4.4
29.4
217.5

0.44
0.75
n.a.

* Percentage change in total profits for all industries reported in this table.
** Percentage change in the present value of GDP over the interval 2009-2030.
*** Percentage change in the present value of profits over the interval 2009-2030.
**** Present Value ($ Billion 2005$) of allowances freely allocated over the interval 2012-2030.

