                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              EXPLAINING THE PRICE OF VOLUNTARY CARBON OFFSETS

                                          Marc N. Conte
                                         Matthew J. Kotchen

                                        Working Paper 15294
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15294


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2009




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2009 by Marc N. Conte and Matthew J. Kotchen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Explaining the Price of Voluntary Carbon Offsets
Marc N. Conte and Matthew J. Kotchen
NBER Working Paper No. 15294
August 2009
JEL No. Q2,Q42,Q5

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper investigates factors that explain the large variability in the price of voluntary carbon offsets.
We estimate hedonic price functions using a variety of provider- and project-level characteristics as
explanatory variables. We find that providers located in Europe sell offsets at prices that are approximately
30 percent higher than providers located in either North America or Australasia. Contrary to what
one might expect, offset prices are generally higher, by roughly 20 percent, when projects are located
in developing or least-developed nations. But this result does not hold for forestry-based projects.
We find evidence that forestry-based offsets sell at lower prices, and the result is particularly strong
when projects are located in developing or least-developed nations. Offsets that are certified under
the Clean Development Mechanism or the Gold Standard, and therefore qualify for emission reductions
under the Kyoto Protocol, sell at a premium of more than 30 percent; however, third-party certification
from the Voluntary Carbon Standard, one of the largest certifiers, is associated with a price discount.
Variables that have no effect on offset prices are the number of projects that a provider manages and
a provider’s status as for-profit or not-for-profit.


Marc N. Conte
Woods Institute for the Environment
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5020
mconte@stanford.edu

Matthew J. Kotchen
School of Forestry & Environmental Studies
Yale University
195 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
matthew.kotchen@yale.edu
1. Introduction

There is widespread agreement on the need to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in order

to mitigate the effects of global climate change, and attention is now focused on setting emission

targets and designing policies to help achieve them. The unique and difficult challenges associ-

ated with the design and implementation of GHG policies are well-known and have given rise to

a substantial academic literature (see, for example, Aldy and Stavins 2007). Among the signifi-

cant challenges that must be overcome are concerns about the high costs of compliance and dis-

tributional equity. In response to these concerns, nearly all GHG policies—regardless of whether

they are implemented at the regional, national, or international level—allow offsets to count to-

ward emission reductions.

       Offsets are based on the idea that agents need not reduce their own emissions in order to

reduce the amount of GHGs in the atmosphere; instead, they can pay someone else to reduce

emissions and achieve the same effect on atmospheric concentrations. Agents prefer offsets, of

course, if the payment required is less than their own abatement costs. Offsets work in principle

because GHGs are uniformly distributed pollutants in the global atmosphere, and the location of

emissions (or reductions) has no effect on the impact of climate change. Only the net effect on

overall GHG emissions is what matters. Typically, offsets arise through investments in renewable

energy, energy efficiency, reforestation, or other projects that reduce emissions or sequester

GHGs. Though usually referred to as “carbon offsets,” many projects focus on other GHGs, such

as projects based on biomass and industrial methane capture, and emission reductions are meas-

ured in carbon dioxide equivalent units (CO2e).

       Carbon offsets provide the basis for two of the Kyoto Protocol’s primary mechanisms for

reducing GHG emissions in the context of an international environmental agreement. Under

Joint Implementation (JI), industrialized nations can purchase carbon credits (effectively offsets)

from emission-reducing projects located in other industrialized nations or nations with transition




                                                  1
economies.1 Under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), industrialized countries can pur-

chase offsets in much the same way, though CDM credits are acquired through the finance of

projects in developing nations. 2 Questions about offsets are also playing a pivotal role in deter-

mining the future of the Waxman-Markey bill, which sets emissions targets and seeks to establish

a national cap-and-trade program in the United States. Recent drafts of the legislation allow busi-

nesses to offset up to 30 or 63 percent of their emissions.3

        Beyond the regulatory setting, efforts to reduce GHG emissions are also being undertaken

around the globe voluntarily. It is increasingly common for businesses, organizations, and indi-

viduals to voluntarily purchase carbon offsets. According to Hamilton et al. (2009), the number

of offsets traded in the voluntary, over-the-counter market increased 87 percent from 2007 to

2008, and transactions totaled 124.3 million metric tons of CO2e. While the quantity of GHG re-

ductions from voluntary offsets is relatively modest, representing 3 percent of the offsets traded

in regulated markets, the money being spent is not trivial. Expenditures in the voluntary market

totaled more than US$700 million in 2008 alone, and forecasts predict further expansion of the

market. Among businesses, organizations, and individuals, the motives for voluntary offsets

range from the development of strategies for corporate environmental management, the pursuit

of public relations or reputation benefits, and even the desire for guilt alleviation (see Kotchen

2009a, 2009b). But along with the increased popularity of voluntary offsets have come calls for

more oversight of the market. In the United States, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has be-




1
  See Michaelowa (1998, 2002) for discussion of the challenges facing JI projects, with particular emphasis on base-
line definition and information asymmetry between buyers and sellers.
2
 See Victor (2005), Wara (2007), and Victor and Wara (2008) for a series of papers that describe and critique the
Kyoto’s Protocol’s CDM.
3
  Further along in the United States are state and regional policies, including the noteworthy examples of Califor-
nia’s AB 32 and the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) of 10 Northeastern and Mid-Atlantic states. While
negotiations are still underway about the amount of offsets that will be allowed under California’s AB 32, partici-
pants in the RGGI are allowed to offset up to 10 percent of their emission reductions, depending on the price of
permits in a cap-and-trade program.


                                                         2
gun investigating concerns about the market and whether there is a need for greater consumer

protection.

       In both regulatory and voluntary settings, offsets generate controversy. Despite the cost

savings, there are those who object in principle to the idea of paying someone else to reduce

emissions, rather than doing it oneself. More pragmatic concerns tend to focus on whether car-

bon offsets are additional, permanent, and credible. Offsets are additional only if the project re-

duces emissions relative to an established baseline level of emissions, typically meaning that the

reductions would not have occurred without the offset payment. Though the idea of establishing

additionality is simple in theory, the practice of determining baseline trends against which to

compare offset projects is a challenging problem without clear guidelines. There are also con-

cerns about the permanence of emission reductions or sequestration, particularly when it comes

to forestry-based offsets, which are subject to future uncertainty about land use, forest health, and

the risk of fire. These issues have led some to argue that the price of forestry-based offsets should

be discounted to reflect the inherent uncertainty of such projects (Pfaff et al. 2000; Kim, McCarl

and Murray 2008). Further issues arise because of asymmetric information. Offset providers

know a lot about the projects in which they invest, but offset buyers know only what the provid-

ers tell them. The asymmetry gives rise to a standard source of market failure. Consequently,

many third-party organizations have emerged to set standards, audit projects, and verify whether

offset providers are delivering on the quality and quantity of their claims.

       The present paper seeks to further the understanding of underlying patterns in the market

for voluntary carbon offsets. We focus on a fundamental question: What explains the price of vo-

luntary carbon offsets? The rationale for carbon offsets is that they provide a mechanism to re-

duce GHG emissions at a lower cost. Moreover, because a unit of GHG reductions has the same

effect regardless of where and how it takes place, at least from the perspective of climate change,

one might expect the market to converge to the law of one price. But, as we will show, the price

of carbon offsets is highly variable. One explanation for the price variability is that carbon off-



                                                 3
sets are impure public goods, meaning that they contain both private and public characteristics

that may affect supply and demand (Kotchen 2006). For instance, people may be inclined to pur-

chase carbon offsets because of co-benefits associated with poverty alleviation or biodiversity

conservation, giving rise to offsets sometimes referred to as “charismatic carbon.”

       To help explain the variability in offset prices, we estimate hedonic price functions that

focus on characteristics of offset providers and offset projects themselves. Characteristics of the

offset providers that we consider include geographic location, status as for-profit or not-for-

profit, and size in terms of the number of projects being managed. Detailed data on specific off-

set projects include the nation in which the project is located, different types of third-party certi-

fication, and the mechanism by which the project reduces emissions (wind, solar, biomass, for-

estry, etc.). Our primary source of data is the Carbon Catalog (CC), which is an online directory

that provides detailed information on carbon offset providers and projects worldwide. The com-

plete dataset consists of information on 97 offset providers and 280 offset projects.

        By identifying key determinants of carbon offset prices, this paper will inform continu-

ing debate about the appropriate role of offsets in a regulatory context, as well as ongoing con-

troversy in the voluntary market. Some of the main findings of our econometric analysis include

the following: Providers located in Europe sell offsets at prices that are approximately 30 percent

higher than providers located elsewhere. Contrary to what one might expect, offset prices are

higher, by roughly 20 percent, when projects are located in developing or least-developed na-

tions. We find evidence that forestry-based offsets sell at lower prices, and the result is particu-

larly strong when the projects are located in developing or least-developed nations. Offsets that

are certified to qualify under the Kyoto Protocol sell at a premium of more than 30 percent, while

third-party certification from the Voluntary Carbon Standard (VCS), one of the largest certifiers,

is associated with a price discount of nearly 25 percent.

       In the next section, we describe the data used in our analysis and report descriptive statis-

tics that characterize the market for carbon offsets. Section 3 describes our empirical methods



                                                  4
and the results of our econometric analysis at both the provider- and project-level. We then dis-

cuss, in Section 4, a range of possible explanations for the empirical findings, along with more

general policy implications. Finally, Section 5 summarizes the main results and concludes.



2. Data

The Carbon Catalog (CC) is our primary source of data. CC is a publicly-available, online direc-

tory that provides the most comprehensive and up-to-date information on carbon offset providers

and projects worldwide.4 CC is a freely available service that does not sell carbon offsets and

whose mission is to simply increase transparency in the market. Our dataset includes all provid-

ers and projects listed on CC through December 2008. The complete dataset includes observa-

tions on 97 offset providers and 280 offset projects.

        The offset providers are located in three different regions of the world: Europe (43%),

North America (40%), and Australasia (16%). Among all providers, 34 percent are listed as hav-

ing not-for-profit status, and it might be of interest that the percentage of not-for-profit providers

differs substantially between Europe (29%) and North America (41%).5 The majority of provid-

ers manage more than one offset project. In particular, the average number of projects per pro-

vider is 3.6, ranging from a low of 1 to a high of 28. Among all providers, 35 percent manage a

single project, and fewer than 5 percent manage 10 projects or more. Offset prices are reported at

the provider level and represent the cost in 2007 US dollars of offsetting one tonne of CO2e. The

price is highly variable among providers, as shown in Figure 1, and ranges from a low of $2.55

to a high of $69.2. The average price is $18.15, with the majority falling between $10 and $25

per tonne.


4
  All information about Carbon Catalog (CC), including most of the data used in this paper, is available at the fol-
lowing url: http://www.carboncatalog.com.
5
  A possible explanation for the difference between Europe and North America is that the European Union Green-
house Gas Emission Trading System (EU ETS) has capped industrial emissions for several years, while allowing the
purchase of offsets, as explained previously. One would expect this to have increased demand for carbon offsets and
therefore increase the incentive to establish for-profit offset providers.


                                                         5
        CC provides further information about the 280 specific projects listed on its website. Va-

riables central to our analysis are the project’s geographic location, mechanism for offsetting

emissions, and status regarding selected third-party certification. Figure 2 illustrates how the pro-

jects are distributed across nations. Asia and North America each host approximately 30 percent

of the individual projects, while Australia, Europe, and South America are each host to between 7

and 9 percent. We also see that nations with a particularly high number of offset projects are Bra-

zil, China, India, and the United States. For purposes of our analysis, we categorize projects as

being located in industrialized, developing, or least-developed nations based on the Organisation

for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) classification system. The proportion in

each category is reported in the upper-left panel of Figure 3. Roughly the same number of pro-

jects, about 44 percent, are found in industrialized and developing nations, while 11 percent are

located in least-developed nations.

        The upper-right panel of Figure 3 illustrates the breakdown of project type in terms of the

mechanism whereby CO2e emissions are offset. Projects associated with reforestation, and possi-

bly avoided deforestation, are most common, comprising 34 percent of all offset projects. Other

categories with a substantial number of projects are biomass methane capture (16%), wind gen-

erated electricity (14%), and industrial methane capture (9%). All other types comprise near or

below five percent of all projects. In the order of prevalence, the categories include projects

based on fuel efficiency, hydropower, fuel substitution, solar power, efficient lighting, environ-

mental building, material substitution, public transportation, geothermal power, and heat electric-

ity cogeneration. A final category, referred to as market-based, does not have a specified type be-

cause it is based on created markets in which offsets are bought and sold from projects of various

types. Only a small number of observations fall in this last category and include emission allow-

ances from the Chicago Climate Exchange (CCX), New South Wales Greenhouse Gas Abate-

ment Scheme (GGAS), and European Union Greenhouse Gas Emission Trading System (EU

ETS).



                                                 6
        The final panel in Figure 3 illustrates data on selected third-party certification of offset

projects. CC considers only three types of certification: the Clean Development Mechanism

(CDM), the Gold Standard (GS), and the Voluntary Carbon Standard (VCS). CDM projects are

those that qualify as part of the Kyoto Protocol as satisfying criteria so that industrialized nations

can receive credit for emission reductions through the finance of offset projects in developing

nations. The GS certification goes above and beyond the CDM in setting high-end offset criteria

that promote sustainable development and focus on renewable energy and energy efficiency. The

VCS is an independent classification standard that aims to set a quality threshold for the purpose

of standardizing and stimulating innovation in the voluntary offset market. The CDM, GS, and

VCS certifications account for twelve, two, and eight percent of the projects in the dataset.6

While 80 percent of the projects in the dataset are not certified by any of these three systems, we

do not know whether they are completely uncertified or certified by some other standard. As re-

viewed by Hamilton et al. (2009), there are several other certification standards, but the three

considered by CC are the most common.

        In addition to the variables described above, we sought to incorporate several other pro-

vider- and project-level attributes into our analysis. At the provider-level, we have data on the

self-reported efficiency of the operation, which records the percentage of the price that goes to

fund the offset-producing project. At the project level, we have data on both the size of the pro-

ject, in terms of the quantity of GHGs offset, and the time horizon over which the project would

operate. The additional variables described in this paragraph, however, are based on data of ques-

tionable quality and/or are only available for a subset of the providers and projects in the overall

data set. For these reasons, and because we never found meaningful results based on these vari-

ables, we do not include them in the results reported here.




6
 One additional clarification is necessary about double counting of three GS projects that are also CDM projects,
which is to be expected since GS applies a more rigorous standard. There are, however, two GS projects that are not
CDM, and this is because these projects qualify for Joint Implementation (JI) under the Kyoto Protocol.


                                                        7
3. Methods and Results

The primary objective of our empirical analysis is to determine which variables explain variabil-

ity in the price of carbon offsets. We estimate hedonic price functions at two different levels of

data aggregation. We begin at the provider level and then consider the more disaggregated pro-

ject level.



3.1. Provider-Level Analysis

Data on the price of carbon offsets are available at the provider level, so it is natural to begin our

analysis with models that seek to explain the price of carbon offsets as a function of general cha-

racteristics of the offset providers. We consider whether offset prices differ systematically based

on where the provider is located and whether it has for-profit or not-for-profit status. We also in-

vestigate the effect on offset price of the number of projects under management, whether the pro-

jects are located in non-industrialized nations, whether projects are based on forest carbon se-

questration (distinctions based on other project types are made in the next subsection), and

whether projects are certified as valid under the Kyoto Protocol.

        We estimate regression models with the general form

                Pi = f (locationi, nonprofiti, numprojectsi, nonindusti, forestryi, kyotoi) + εi,

where Pi is the price of carbon offsets per tonne of CO2e offered by provider i, locationi is a

categorical variable indicating the region where the provider is located (Australasia, North Amer-

ica, Europe), and nonprofiti is a dummy variable indicating not-for-profit status. The other vari-

ables characterize general features of the projects that each provider manages: numprojectsi is the

number of offset projects under management, nonindusti is the proportion of projects located in

either developing or least-developed nations, forestryi is the proportion of projects with forestry-

based carbon sequestration, and kyotoi is the proportion of projects that have CDM or GS certifi-




                                                   8
cation. 7 Finally, εi is an error term assumed to be normally distributed. We estimate linear and

log-linear specifications using ordinary least squares (OLS). For reasons described below, we

also estimate models in which the project-related variables are defined in an alternative way as

dummy variables indicating, respectively, whether the provider manages more than one project,

whether all projects are located in non-industrialized nations, whether all projects are forestry-

based, and whether all projects qualify for inclusion in the Kyoto Protocol.

        Table 1 reports the results of all provider-level regression models. The linear and log-

linear models in column (a) are the specifications with project-level variables as defined initially.

We find evidence that a provider’s location does have an effect on the price it charges. Offset

providers based in North America sell offsets at lower prices than those based in Europe. The

difference is statistically significant and, according to the two models, suggests a price discount

in North America of $6.91 on average, or a difference of 29 percent. We also find evidence, with

statistical significance in the linear specification, that prices charged by providers located in Aus-

tralasia are lower than those located in Europe. In this case, the difference is roughly $5.94, or 25

percent on average. There is no statistically significant difference between offset prices of pro-

viders located in North American and Australasia.

        Another result with statistical significance relates to the effect of CDM or GS certifica-

tion, which as described above, implies that a project meets certification standards and generates

offsets that qualify for emission reductions under the Kyoto Protocol. Based on the linear model,

the result is interpreted such that a 10-percent increase in the proportion of a provider’s projects

that are CDM- or GS-certified is associated with a $1.33 increase in the provider’s price. It is

important to note, however, that the comparison group here includes offset projects that may, or

may not, have obtained some other certification; but in either case, the offsets would not qualify

for emission reductions under the Kyoto Protocol. The corresponding result in the log-linear

7
  We do not account for VCS certification in the provider-level analysis. The reason is that CC does not report a
transparency measure for providers that includes VCS certification. We did, however, separately collect data from
CC on VCS certification and include it in our subsequent project-level analysis.


                                                       9
model is that the same 10-percent increase in the proportion of certified projects is associated

with a 5.9-percent increase in the provider’s price.

       All other coefficient estimates of interest are not statistically significant, though some at-

tention to their signs is warranted, as it helps to motivate our subsequent project-level analysis.

Not-for-profit providers tend to have higher prices. Providers overseeing more projects tend to

have lower prices. If a greater proportion of the projects are forestry-based, prices tend to be

lower. Finally, the effect of a provider having a greater proportion of its projects in developing or

least-developed nations has an unclear effect on price.

       The models in column (b) differ because of variable definitions. As described above, we

redefine numprojectsi as a dummy variable indicating more than one project, and the variables

nonindusti, forestryi, and kyotoi are indicators for whether 100 percent of the provider’s projects

satisfy the respective categorization. We estimate these models to test whether prices are differ-

ent for the providers with more uniform criteria for their projects. The information presented for

transparency on CC is also formatted in this way. When compared with the models in column

(a), the results also provide a robustness check. In general, both sets of models produce very sim-

ilar results in terms of the sign and statistical significance of coefficient estimates. The new

specifications produce larger magnitudes on the provider location results, but none of the rede-

fined variables comes through differently with statistical significance. The interpretation of the

coefficient on kyotoi, however, has a sharper interpretation: providers that obtain CDM or GS

certification for all their projects, compared to those that obtain it for some or none of their pro-

jects, set offset prices higher by $15.44. Based on the log-linear specification, this is an average

mark-up of 65 percent.



3.2. Project-Level Analysis

The price of a carbon offset is determined at the provider level, but as we have seen, the majority

of providers manage more than one offset project, with the average being 3.6. We now estimate



                                                 10
hedonic price functions that take advantage of the more detailed data on individual offset pro-

jects.

         We begin with estimation of regression models that have the general form

                               Pi = f (offsettypeij, OECDij, kyotoij, VCSij) + εij,

where the subscript i continues to index providers and j indexes projects. offsettypeij is a cate-

gorical variable indicating a project’s mechanism for offsetting emissions, which we aggregate

into seven categories: forestry, industrial methane, biomass methane, wind, hydropower, solar,

and other.8 OECDij is a categorical variable indicating whether the project is located in a nation

with the OECD’s classification of industrialized, developing, or least-developed. kyotoij is a

dummy variable for whether the project has CDM or GS certification, and therefore qualifies for

emission reductions under the Kyoto Protocol. VCSij is a dummy variable for whether the project

has obtained third-party certification from the Voluntary Carbon Standard. Finally, εij is a nor-

mally distributed error term. We again estimate and report both linear and log-linear specifica-

tions. For the project-level analysis, however, we report standard errors that are clustered at the

provider level. This accounts for the fact that each project is not an entirely independent observa-

tion, in large part because prices are available at the provider level only. 9

         The first set of models in column (a) of Table 2 includes only the categorical variables on

offset type, with forestry projects as the omitted category. All coefficient estimates are positive,

providing evidence that forestry-based offsets sell at lower prices. In both specifications, statisti-

cally significant coefficients are those on the project types of biomass methane, hydropower, so-

lar, and wind. All four have magnitudes that are very similar and are not statistically different

from one another. The general pattern in these models is that offsets of these four types, com-



8
  The miscellaneous other category includes offsets in the categories mentioned previously as fuel efficiency, hydro-
power, fuel substitution, efficient lighting, environmental building, material substitution, public transportation, geo-
thermal power, heat electricity cogeneration, and market-based.
9
  It is worth mentioning, as one might expect, that clustering results in substantially larger standard errors, making
statistical inference of the coefficient estimates more conservative.


                                                          11
pared to those based on forestry, sell for higher prices between five and eight dollars more on

average. The difference in price ranges between 40 and 50 percent.

       The models in column (b) of Table 2 include the variables on the level of development in

the nation where the offset project is located and the different types of third party certification.

When we include these additional variables, the results on differences between forestry and other

offset types are weaker. While all coefficients remain positive, only the one for solar continues to

have statistical significance, such that offsets from solar-power projects sell for an average pre-

mium, compared to those based on forestry, of $6.09 or 49 percent. We do find statistically sig-

nificant differences between offset prices from projects in industrialized and non-industrialized

nations. Those based in developing or least-developed nations sell for higher prices on average,

between three and four dollars per tonne of CO2e, or roughly 20 percent. In these models, the

differences between the prices in developing and least-developed countries are not statistically

significant. Finally, the models show some differences in price as a result of third-party certifica-

tion. While the coefficient on VCS is not statistically different from zero, the coefficient on CDM

or GS certification is positive and different from zero with a high degree of statistical signifi-

cance, in parallel with the results of the provider-level analysis. Projects with certification that

qualifies them for emissions reductions under the Kyoto Protocol sell for an average premium of

$8.12 or approximately 41 percent.

       We now focus the analysis on forestry-based offsets. We do so because, as discussed pre-

viously, forestry-based offsets are very common and tend to be rather controversial. Furthermore,

the results thus far suggest systematic differences in the price of forestry-based offsets. We report

regression models in column (a) of Table 3 that are similar to those in column (b) of Table 2, but

for the fact that we account for differences in the offset type with only a dummy variable for

whether the project is forestry-based. While the estimated coefficient is negative, it is not statisti-

cally different from zero. The results for whether projects are located in developing or least-

developed nations are very similar to those shown previously, as are those for CDM or GS certi-



                                                  12
fication. The main difference between specifications is that the coefficient on VCS certification

is now statistically significant. Compared to the unspecified category of other third-party certifi-

cation or no certification, projects with VCS certification—the largest certifier—are associated

with a price discount of approximately $4.24 or 19 percent.

       The final set of models that we report include interactions between whether the offset

project is forestry based and is located in a developing or least-developed nation. Both of these

interactions have coefficients that are negative and highly statistically significant. The results in-

dicate that forestry-based projects that are located in non-industrialized nations are associated

with substantial price discounts. Compared to those located in industrialized nations, forestry-

based offsets in developing nations sell for prices that are lower by $5.46 on average, or ap-

proximately 39 percent. The difference is even greater for forestry-based projects in least-

developed nations, where the average discount compared to industrialized nations is $11.16, or

nearly 70 percent. The forestry-based difference between developing and least-developed na-

tions is also statistically significant (F = 4.46, p = 0.038), indicating an average price difference

of $4.70. In these specifications, we also find that the non-forestry difference between develop-

ing and least-developed nations is statistically significant (F = 3.01, p = 0.087). Considering all

other offset types, average offset prices are $2.83 or 17 percent higher in least-developed nations

compared to developing nations, and both remain significantly higher than the average price in

industrialized nations.



4. Discussion

We now broaden our discussion of the main empirical findings to explore possible explanations.

Before doing so, however, we acknowledge that interpretation of our results is susceptible to the

classic identification problem that arises when estimating hedonic price functions (see Freeman

1993). In theory, each of the prices we observe for carbon offsets are consistent with the intersec-

tion of supply and demand, but the identification problem means that variability in prices cannot



                                                 13
be definitively attributed to either shifts in demand or supply. In practice, this means that, for ex-

ample, a variable associated with higher prices in the hedonic price function could be operating

through an increase in costs (decrease in supply) or greater willingness to pay on the part of con-

sumers (increase in demand). With this caution in mind, we turn to mechanisms that might ex-

plain the main results.

       Among the more robust findings of our analysis is that the location of both providers and

projects has a significant effect on offset prices. All providers included in the dataset are located

in industrialized nations, but those located in Europe sell offsets for an average premium of near-

ly 30 percent. Many factors may be contributing to this price differential. Both awareness about

climate change and agreement on the need to take action are perhaps greater in Europe than an-

ywhere else in the world. Moreover, as discussed previously, GHG emissions are regulated

throughout the European Union, and offsets are allowed as part of both industrial and national

compliance strategies. Each of these factors, along with a potential preference for more regional

offset providers, may contribute to an increase in demand, and therefore price, of carbon offsets

sold by European providers.

       Somewhat more surprising is the way that the location of projects themselves affects

prices. When considering all types of offset projects, we find that projects occurring in develop-

ing and least-developing nations are significantly more expensive than those taking place in in-

dustrialized nations, by an average of nearly 20 percent. Assuming that these nations do not have

the most current technology in place, one might expect the cost of emissions abatement in these

nations to be lower than that in industrialized nations. This is, after all, the economic rationale for

the Kyoto Protocol’s CDM. But our empirical results, which show higher prices in non-

industrialized nations, are not consistent with this line of reasoning. One possible explanation for

the price premium associated with offsets in non-industrialized nations is the desire for wealth

redistribution, i.e., poverty alleviation, on the part of offset buyers in voluntary carbon markets.

The plausibility of this explanation is strengthened even further by the fact that in some specifi-



                                                  14
cations, we also find significantly higher offset prices when projects are located in least-

developed nations compared to developing nations. It is also the case that establishing and man-

aging offset projects in non-industrialized nations can have further challenges that increase the

cost due to weaker institutional arrangements.10

         Among all the types of offset projects considered in the dataset, forestry-based projects

are the most common. It is also the case that forestry-based projects are the most controversial.

As discussed previously, concerns tend to focus in particular on whether projects that seek to

avoid deforestation or promote reforestation are legitimately additional, permanent, or both. At

the same time, forestry-based projects are frequently promoted because of associated co-benefits.

In addition to carbon sequestration, standing forests provide additional benefits in the form of

wildlife habitat and ecosystem services more generally (Foley et al. 2005; Myers 1997). 11 We

nevertheless find some evidence that forestry-based offsets sell for lower prices than offsets of

other types, perhaps reflecting greater uncertainty about additionality and permanence. The

stronger result, however, is that forestry-based offsets sell for substantially lower prices than off-

sets of other types when projects are located in non-industrialized nations, with average prices

lower by 40 and 70 percent in developing and least-developed nations, respectively. With respect

to uncertainty, these results may reflect how these nations often lack the institutions required to

ensure the quality of forestry offsets, such as secure property rights, good governance, and moni-

toring infrastructure. Furthermore, lower prices in non-industrialized nations may be related to

the lower opportunity costs of land in developing and least-developed nations when kept in for-


10
   Though not reported in the paper, we also estimated project-level regression models that included a variable for
the level of corruption in the host nation. The corruption variable was based on Transparency International’s 2008
Corruption Perceptions Index, available at www.icgg.org. Though we did not find that corruption is associated with
higher offset prices, the results for price differences based on OECD classification continue to hold after controlling
for corruption.
11
   We also estimated, though do not report, project-level regression models that included a variable that attempted to
capture the biodiversity benefits associated with the forestry-based projects. This indicator variable was created
from the project descriptions on the CC website, based on appearance of the terms “native species,” “native forest,”
or “restoration” in the description. We were unable to identify any impact on price due to the type of forestry project
pursued.


                                                         15
ests. Distinguishing between these potential explanations for the lower price of forestry-based

offsets in non-industrialized nations is critical, as there is significant international momentum to

incorporate reduced emissions from deforestation and degradation (REDD) offsets in the next

round of climate negotiations, and these decisions will have important implications for both

GHG emissions and land use in the future (see, for example, Miles and Kapos 2008).

       Demonstrating that offsets represent actual reductions in GHG emissions is essential for

the long-term viability of offsets in both a regulatory and voluntary setting. In order to address

the information asymmetry that exists between offset providers and buyers, emphasis is increas-

ingly being placed on the importance of developing standards and establishing third-party certifi-

ers to ensure the credibility of provider claims. Such certification might be expected to increase

the price of offsets for reasons related to both supply and demand. Obtaining certification and/or

complying with standards is not only costly; the additional information conveyed through certifi-

cation might also increase a buyer’s willingness to pay. Our results, however, suggest that the

impact of certification on offset prices depends on the certifier.

       A robust finding is that CDM or GS certification has a positive effect on offset prices,

with estimates of the premium ranging between 30 and 65 percent. Whether this is driven by

greater costs or greater willingness to pay is unclear, but a unique feature of these two certifica-

tions is that the offsets qualify for emission reductions under the Kyoto Protocol. This feature

clearly has an additional benefit in a regulated setting, and to the extent that offsets with this cer-

tification are selling in the voluntary market, the premium indicates that offset buyers do in fact

attach value to CDM and GS certification. We do not find a similar result for VCS certification.

In fact, we find some evidence that VCS certification, the largest non-regulatory certifier, is as-

sociated with lower offset prices, when compared to offset projects that are either uncertified or

certified by some unspecified other third-party. We do not have a good explanation for this result,

though it is consistent with simple descriptive statistics reported in Hamilton et al. (2009), where

prices are lower for VCS certified projects than for projects with other third-party certification or



                                                  16
no certification. One potential explanation for the VCS discount is that VCS certification, com-

pared to other certifications or no certification, may not allay concerns about additionality, per-

manence, and verifiability. Other possible explanations range from low costs of compliance with

potentially weak VCS standards, an omitted variable in our analysis that is correlated with VCS

certification and associated with lower prices, and the general possibility, discussed more below,

that prices are not closely related to marginal costs because of a thin market.



5. Summary and Conclusion

The primary aim of this paper is to investigate factors that help explain the large variability in the

price of voluntary carbon offsets. Using data listed on the Carbon Catalog (CC), we estimate he-

donic price functions using a variety of provider- and project-level characteristics as explanatory

variables. We find that providers located in Europe sell offsets at prices that are approximately 30

percent higher than providers located in either North American or Australasia. Contrary to what

one might expect, offset prices are generally higher, by roughly 20 percent, when projects are

located in developing or least-developed nations. But this result does not hold for forestry-based

projects. We find evidence that forestry-based offsets sell at lower prices, and the result is par-

ticularly strong when projects are located in developing or least-developed nations. Offsets that

are Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) or Gold Standard (GS) certified, and therefore qual-

ify under the Kyoto Protocol, sell at a premium of more than 30 percent, while third-party certi-

fication from the Voluntary Carbon Standard (VCS), one of the largest certifiers, is associated

with a price discount. Variables that do not have a significant effect on offset prices are the num-

ber of projects that a provider manages and a provider’s status as for-profit or not-for-profit.

       We base our analysis on offset providers and projects listed on CC, which to our knowl-

edge is the most comprehensive listing of sellers in the voluntary, over-the-counter offset market.

While the CC dataset continues to expand and others will surely emerge, future research should

take advantage of greater sources of data. We expect that such centralized listings that increase



                                                 17
transparency will also promote more competition in the offset market, the potential lack of which

is a limitation of the analysis carried out here. Despite several robust findings, the market for

carbon offsets is still relatively new, and one might reasonably question whether the market is

thick enough for competitive pressures to be driving price differences. We also recognize, at least

in the voluntary offset market, that the motives of buyers may range from a desire to alleviate

personal guilt, to purchase so-called “charismatic carbon,” to redistribute wealth, or to pursue

strategies for corporate environmental management. Also at play are other important variables

that we cannot measure directly, such as continuing concerns about additionality, permanence,

and credibility. In conclusion, we emphasize that carbon offsets should be considered a bundle of

characteristics well suited to hedonic analysis, and understanding what drives prices in this mar-

ket is increasingly important. In this paper we have made a first attempt, one we hope spurs fu-

ture research that keeps up with a growing market and takes advantage of expanded sources of

data.




                                                18
References

Aldy, J. E. and R. N. Stavins (2007). Architectures for Agreement: Addressing Global Climate
       Change in the Post-Kyoto World. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge, Massachu-
       setts.

Foley, J.A., R. DeFries, G.P. Asner, C. Barford, G. Bonan, S.R. Carpenter, F. S. Chapin, M.T.
       Coe, G.C. Daily, H.K. Gibbs, J.H. Helkowski, T. Holloway, E.A. Howard, C.J. Kucharik,
       C. Monfreda, J.A. Patz, I.C. Prentice, N. Ramankutty, and P.K. Snyder. (2005). “Global
       Consequences of Land Use.” Science. 309: 570-574.

Freeman, A. M. (1993). The Measurement of Environmental and Resource Values: Theory and
      Methods. Washington, D.C.: Resources For the Future.

Hamilton, K., M. Sjardin, A. Shapiro, and T. Marcello (2009). “Fortifying the Foundation: Sate
      of the Voluntary Carbon Markets 2009.” A Report by Ecosystem Marketplace and New
      Carbon Finance.

Kim, M., B. A. McCarl, and B. C. Murray (2008). “Permanence Discounting for Land-Based
      Carbon Sequestration.” Ecological Economics. 64:763-769.

Kotchen, M. J. (2006). “Green Markets and Private Provision of Public Goods.” Journal of Po-
      litical Economy. 114(4): 816-834.

Kotchen, M. J. (2009a). “Voluntary Provision of Public Goods for Bads: A Theory of Environ-
      mental Offsets” Economic Journal. 119:883-899.

Kotchen, M. J. (2009b). “Offsetting Green Guilt.” Stanford Social Innovation Review. 7(2):26-
      31.

Michaelowa, A. (1998). “Joint Implementation—The Baseline Issue.” Global Environmental
      Change. 8: 81-92.

Michaelowa, A. (2002). “The AIJ Pilot Phase as Laboratory for CDM and JI.” International
      Journal of Global Environmental Issues. 2:260-287.

Miles, L. and V. Kapos. (2008). “Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Deforestation and
       Forest Degradation: Global Land-Use Implications,” Science. 320:1454-1455.

Myers, N. (1997). “The World's Forests and Their Ecosystem Services,” Chapter 12 in Nature's
       Services. Societal Dependence on Natural Ecosystems. G. C. Daily. Washington, D.C.,
       Island Press: 215-235.

Pfaff A., S. Kerr, R.F. Hughes, S. Liu, A. Sanchez, D. Schimel, J. Tosi, V. Watson (2000). “The
       Kyoto Protocol and Payments for Tropical Forest: An Interdisciplinary Method for Esti-




                                              19
       mating Carbon-Offset Supply and Increasing the Feasibility of a Carbon Market under
       the CDM.” Ecological Economics. 35(2):203-221.

Victor, D.G., J. House, and S. Joy. (2005). “A Madisonian Approach to Climate Policy.” Sci-
        ence. 309:1820-21.

Wara, M. (2007). “Is the Global Carbon Market Working?” Nature. 445: 595-596.

Wara, M. W. and D. G. Victor (2008). “A Realistic Policy on International Carbon Offsets.”
      Working Paper #74, Program on Energy and Sustainable Development, Stanford Univer-
      sity.




                                            20
Figure 1: Histogram of carbon offset prices ($2007s/CO2e) for providers
                       listed on Carbon Catalog




                                  21
Figure 2: Distribution among nations of offset projects listed on Carbon Catalog




                                      22
Figure 3: Breakdown of Carbon Catalog offset projects by nation’s OECD classification, certification, and type



                                                     23
                                   Table 1: Provider-level regression results

                                                              (a)                                      (b)
Variable                                          Linear            Log-linear             Linear            Log-linear
North America                                   -6.909**             -0.285**            -7.487***            -0.309**
                                                 (2.670)              (0.131)              (2.567)             (0.127)
Australasia                                      -5.936*              -0.248              -7.061**             -0.291
                                                 (3.383)              (0.166)              (3.326)             (0.164)
Europe                                              --                   --                   --                  --

Nonprofit                                           1.324               0.096                1.728               0.115
                                                  (2.290)              (0.112)              (1.353)            (0.116)
Multiple projects                                  -1.183              -0.054                -0.842             -0.045
                                                  (2.356)              (0.115)              (2.419)            (0.119)
Projects in non-industrialized nations†            -0.333               0.034                0.158               0.075
                                                   3.027)              (0.148)              (2.479)            (0.122)
Forestry-based projects†                           -1.385              -0.164                -1.406             -0.172
                                                  (2.654)              (0.130)              (2.577)            (0.127)
Kyoto (CDM or GS certification)†                 13.293***            0.586***            15.435***           0.652***
                                                  (3.343)              (0.164)              (3.937)            (0.194)
Constant                                         20.910***            2.862***            21.404***           2.881***
                                                  (3.340)              (0.164)              (3.162)            (0.156)
R-squared                                           0.319               0.308                0.291               0.269
N                                                     85                  85                   85                  85
Notes: Dependent variable is offset price. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Multiple projects is defined as
the actual number of projects managed by the provider in column (a), while in column (b) the variable is a dummy
for more than one project. Variables denoted with † are defined in column (a) as the percentage of the provider’s
projects that satisfy the criteria, while in column (b) the variables are defined as dummies indicating that all or none
of the projects satisfy the criteria. Three, two, and one asterisk(s) indicate statistical significance at the 99-, 95- and
90-percent levels, respectively.




                                                           24
                          Table 2: Project-level regression results for offset type

                                                            (a)                                    (b)
Variable                                       Linear             Log-linear           Linear            Log-linear
Industrial methane                              0.156               0.126               0.844              0.158
                                               (2.190)             (0.226)             (2.125)            (0.211)
Biomass methane                               7.708***             0.518**              3.875              0.325
                                               (2.913)             (0.235)             (2.349)            (0.208)
Hydropower                                     5.516*              0.456*               2.716              0.311
                                               (2.871)             (0.246)             (2.384)            (0.214)
Solar                                          6.159*              0.486*              6.091*             0.490*
                                               (3.192)             (0.252)             (3.616)            (0.272)
Wind                                           5.312*              0.428*               3.167              0.318
                                               (2.681)             (0.234)             (2.592)            (0.223)
Other                                           2.519               0.294               2.742              0.308
                                               (2.264)             (0.221)             (2.277)            (0.227)
Forestry                                          --                  --                  --                 --

Developing nation                                 --                   --              3.307**            0.172**
                                                                                       (1.319)            (0.083)
Least-developed nation                            --                   --              3.802*             0.208*
                                                                                       (1.981)            (0.105)
Industrialized nation                             --                   --                 --                 --

Kyoto (CDM or GS certification)                   --                   --                 8.115***           0.407***
                                                                                           (2.430)            (0.119)
VCS                                                  --                   --                -2.728            -0.046
                                                                                           (1.649)            (0.125)
Constant                                       14.225***              2.445***           12.258***           2.335***
                                                 (1.970)               (0.214)             (1.973)            (0.212)
R-squared                                         0.097                 0.131               0.222              0.213
N                                                  319                   319                 319                319
Notes: Dependent variable is offset price. Standard errors clustered at the provider level are reported in parentheses.
Three, two, and one asterisk(s) indicate statistical significance at the 99-, 95- and 90-percent levels, respectively.




                                                         25
             Table 3: Project-level regression results focused on forestry-based projects

                                                            (a)                                    (b)
Variable                                       Linear             Log-linear           Linear            Log-linear
Forestry                                       -3.725               -0.385              -0.286            -0.152
                                               (2.633)             (0.261)             (2.429)            (0.239)
Developing nation                             3.689***             0.193**            5.498***           0.322***
                                               (1.264)             (0.082)             (1.533)            (0.083)
Least-developed nation                         3.740*              0.202*             8.330***           0.488***
                                               (1.889)             (0.104)             (2.126)            (0.105)
Industrialized nation                             --                   --                 --                 --

CDM/GS certified                              7.783***             0.356***               7.444***           0.326***
                                               (2.451)              (0.114)                (2.364)            (0.108)
VCS                                           -4.236**             -0.192**              -4.956***          -0.241***
                                               (1.654)              (0.087)                (1.604)            (0.080)
Forestry × Developing nation                      --                   --                -5.459***          -0.394***
                                                                                           (1.963)            (0.140)
Forestry × Least-developed nation                    --                   --            -11.156***          -0.697***
                                                                                           (2.773)            (0.164)
Constant                                       15.323***              2.654***             14.149            2.575***
                                                 (1.372)               (0.079)             (1.386)            (0.078)
R-squared                                         0.218                 0.225               0.252              0.263
N                                                  319                   319                 319                319
Notes: Dependent variable is offset price. Standard errors clustered at the provider level are reported in parentheses.
Three, two, and one asterisk(s) indicate statistical significance at the 99-, 95- and 90-percent levels, respectively.




                                                         26
