                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        KATRINA'S CHILDREN:
 EVIDENCE ON THE STRUCTURE OF PEER EFFECTS FROM HURRICANE EVACUEES

                                           Scott Imberman
                                          Adriana D. Kugler
                                           Bruce Sacerdote

                                         Working Paper 15291
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15291


We are grateful to HISD NATIONAL
                            for givingBUREAU      OFthe
                                       us access to   ECONOMIC
                                                        Houston dataRESEARCH
                                                                         and to the Louisiana Department
                                      1050  Massachusetts    Avenue and to Data Recognition Corporation
of Education’s Division of Standards, Assessment and Accountability
for allowing access to the Louisiana data.Cambridge,  MA 02138
                                           We are especially grateful to Ms. Luellan Bledsoe for answering
                                              August
our queries about the HISD data and to Dr. Fen Chou    2009
                                                          and Ms. Ann Payne for answering our queries
about the Louisiana data. We are also grateful to Ms. Carla Stevens for her help in accessing the HISD
data and for detailed comments on our work. We thank a number of anonymous principals and teachers
who provided valuable insights about the process of absorption of the evacuees in the receiving schools.
We are especially grateful to Josh Angrist for extensive discussions and advice. We also thank Eric
Bettinger, Steven Craig, David Francis, Giacomo DeGiorgi, Peter Hinrichs, Andrea Ichino, Elaine
Liu, Kevin Lang, Michael Lovenheim, Phil Oreopoulos, Paul Oyer, Andrew Reschovsky, Douglas
Staiger, and seminar participants at the Harris School at the University of Chicago, Stanford University,
Texas A&M University, University of California at Merced, University of Houston, University of
Texas at Austin, the Dallas Fed and the New York Fed. Further, we thank participants at the American
Economic Association, the American Education Finance Association, the Econometric Society North
American Summer Meetings, the NBER Economics of Education Program meetings, and the Society
of Labor Economists meetings. Support for this research from the University of Houston New Faculty
Research Grant program is gratefully acknowledged. This research was conducted independently and
is neither endorsed by nor supported by the Houston Independent School District. Any views or opinions
expressed here are solely those of the authors and do not reflect the views of HISD, its employees,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Scott Imberman, Adriana D. Kugler, and Bruce Sacerdote. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Katrina's Children: Evidence on the Structure of Peer Effects from Hurricane Evacuees
Scott Imberman, Adriana D. Kugler, and Bruce Sacerdote
NBER Working Paper No. 15291
August 2009
JEL No. H23,I21,J24

                                             ABSTRACT

In 2005, hurricanes Katrina and Rita forced many children to relocate across the Southeast. While
schools quickly enrolled evacuees, receiving families worried about the impact of evacuees on non-evacuee
students. Data from Houston and Louisiana show that, on average, the influx of evacuees moderately
reduced elementary math test scores in Houston. We reject linear-in-means models of peer effects
and find evidence of a highly non-linear but monotonic model - student achievement improves with
high ability and worsens with low ability peers. Moreover, exposure to undisciplined evacuees increased
native absenteeism and disciplinary problems, supporting a "bad apple" model in behavior.


Scott Imberman                                      Bruce Sacerdote
University of Houston                               6106 Rockefeller Hall
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
204 McElhinney Hall                                 Dartmouth College
Houston, TX 77204-5019                              Hanover, NH 03755-3514
simberman@uh.edu                                    and NBER
                                                    Bruce.I.Sacerdote@dartmouth.edu
Adriana D. Kugler
University of Houston
Department of Economics
204 McElhinney Hall
Houston, TX 77204-5019
and NBER
adkugler@uh.edu
1.     Introduction

       On August 29, 2005, Hurricane Katrina made landfall in Southeast Louisiana.

Katrina was one of the five deadliest hurricanes in the U.S. causing about 2,500 deaths. It

was also the most destructive and costliest hurricane ever in the U.S., with a total

estimated damage of over $80 billion (Knabb, Rhome and Brown, 2006). The storm

surge caused flooding in 80% of New Orleans as well as large areas of the coasts of

Mississippi and Alabama. Federal disaster declarations covered 90,000 square miles of

the U.S. Just a few weeks later, Hurricane Rita hit Louisiana and East Texas. Rita was the

most powerful storm ever recorded in the Gulf and while it hit a less populated area, there

was still substantial damage as a result of the storm.

       Katrina and Rita caused over a million people to evacuate from the Central Gulf

coast to other areas of the U.S.; one of the greatest migrations of children and their

families in U.S. history (Ladd, Marzalek and Gill, 2008). Some areas of Louisiana

received large numbers of evacuees. Baton Rouge received over 15,000 evacuees and

Hammond received over 10,000 evacuees, nearly doubling their populations. However,

many evacuees left the affected states. Houston, Texas received 75,000 people, which

was the largest number of evacuees received by any city (McIntosh, 2008).

       As a result of the migration, many children were uprooted. Given that schools

were probably the best way to bring back stability into children’s lives, school districts

mounted substantial efforts to enroll the evacuees in their schools as quickly as possible.

Districts in Louisiana not affected by the hurricanes took in about 196,000 children (Pane

et. al, 2007). Houston area schools took nearly 20,000 evacuee children since hurricanes




                                              3
Katrina and Rita struck, with the Houston Independent School District enrolling over

5,000 students.

        While Baton Rouge, Houston and other cities were seen as great examples of

solidarity, the influx of large numbers of kids into the schools created concerns among

the non-evacuee population. Evacuee children came from some of the worst-performing

schools in the country and parents worried that their children would be negatively

affected by the disruption caused by the influx of poor performing students. Disruption

due to student turnover is a concern even under ordinary circumstances. For instance,

Hanushek, Kain and Rivkin (2004) report that about a third of all students in Texas move

at least once in elementary and middle school and that these moves adversely affect the

academic performance of the movers’ new classmates. 1 Moreover, the negative spillovers

from disruptive behavior have been considered by Figlio (2005) and Carrell and Hoekstra

(Forthcoming), who show (respectively) that the presence of boys with female sounding

names or children exposed to domestic violence decreases the academic achievement of

their peers.

        In this paper, we use administrative data from the Houston Independent School

District and the Louisiana Department of Education to examine whether the influx of

Katrina and Rita students adversely affected the academic performance, attendance and

discipline of their new peers. 2 Much of the literature on peer effects for higher education

finds modest positive peer effects on GPA (e.g., Carrell, Fullerton and West, 2008; Lyle,

1
  Hanushek et al. (2004) also report that these moves are particularly prevalent among low income and
minority students and that the adverse effects of turnover for black and Hispanic receiving students are
about seven and five times larger, respectively, than the effect for whites.
2
  Other work has considered the impact of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita on evacuees themselves. Sacerdote
(2008) shows that evacuee students had improved test scores in the medium-term from attending new
schools. Vigdor (2008, 2007), Groen and Polivka (2008), and Belasaen and Polachek (2008) look at the
economic impacts of the Hurricanes on New Orleans and evacuee labor supply. Paxson and Rouse (2008)
look at what caused evacuees to return to New Orleans.


                                                   4
2007; Sacerdote, 2001; Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2006; and Zimmerman, 2003),

but results for elementary and secondary education are more mixed with some studies

finding little or no effects (e.g., Angrist and Lang, 2004; Burke and Sass, 2008; Hanushek

et al., 2003; Vigdor and Nechyba, forthcoming) and others finding large effects (e.g.,

Hoxby, 2000; and Hoxby and Weingarth, 2006; Lavy and Schlosser, 2007; Lavy,

Paserman and Schlosser, 2008). In contrast, evidence on peer effects on social outcomes

shows consistently large effects (e.g. Aizer, 2008; Carrell, Malmstrom and West, 2008;

Case and Katz, 1991; Gaviria and Raphael, 2001; Lavy and Schlosser, 2007).

        An advantage of our study is that we can exploit the exogenous influx of new

students into the Houston and Louisiana schools to examine peer effects. In fact, many

evacuees were evacuated on buses without knowing where they were going. Others were

able to drive but had very limited options in terms of where to go, often residing in

shelters, motels, or with friends and family. Thus, since the parents of Katrina children

were hardly able to self-select into schools, our identification strategy helps overcome the

usual selection problem present in peer effects specifications. Moreover, we are able to

overcome the reflection problem, since evacuees’ prior achievement is exogenous to

native students. 3 Our natural experiment is closest to the studies by Boozer and Cacciola

(2001), Hoxby (2000), Hoxby and Weingarth (2006), Lavy and Schlosser (2007) and

especially to Angrist and Lang (2004), but has two advantages. First, the incoming

students in our quasi-experiment are more alike in racial composition and economic

status to the receiving students than the bused and receiving students in the Boston Metco

study. Second, we have good measures of behavior (including discipline and attendance


3
  On the other hand, like most of the literature, we will be capturing both endogenous and exogenous peer
effects, as defined by Manski (1993).


                                                   5
data), which allow us to examine the impacts of peers on behavior using administrative

data rather than self-reported data, so that our results are less likely to be subject to

measurement error bias.

       On average, we find that the influx of evacuees had little impact on native student

achievement or discipline - only math for Houston elementary students shows a

statistically significant drop of 0.09 standard deviations for a 10 percentage point increase

in Katrina/Rita share in the school. We also find drops in attendance rates of Houston

middle and high school black natives of 1.3 percentage points for a 10 percentage point

increase in Katrina/Rita share. These results are robust to validity tests using instrumental

variables and placebo experiments.

       In addition to establishing whether there are peer effects by exploiting exogenous

changes in peer composition, an important contribution of this paper is our focus on the

structure of peer effects. With the exceptions of Hoxby and Weingarth (2006) who

consider various models of peer effects and Lavy, Paserman and Schlosser (2008) who

investigate how having low-achieving peers affects teacher behavior, most of the

previous literature focuses solely on the difficult task of establishing whether peer effects

exist. Here, we, also examine the mechanisms through which peer effects work. In

particular, we contrast monotonicity, linear-in-means, boutique, invidious comparison,

and bad apple models of peer effects (see, e.g., Hoxby and Weingarth (2006), and

Sacerdote (forthcoming)).

       We find strong evidence in favor of the monotonicity model and against the

invidious comparison model, in the sense that all students benefit from having higher

quality peers and are hurt by having low quality peers. In addition, we establish that these




                                             6
monotonic effects are non-linear, thus rejecting linear-in-means models that are common

in the literature. We also find some evidence, albeit weak, of the benefits of tracking

students, or the so-called boutique model, since in some cases students appear to benefit

from being with peers of the same academic level. These results are consistent with

Hoxby and Weingarth (2006) who also find support of the boutique and monotonicity

models and reject linear-in-means.

       Moreover, we find support for the bad apple model in terms of behavior as

described by Lazear (2001) - the presence of even a few disruptive students in the

classroom can have large negative effects on discipline and attendance of native kids. On

the other hand, we do not find evidence that children with disciplinary problems worsen

academic performance of natives. Rather, peer effects on test scores seem to be working

through the academic performance of peers, given the differential impacts of poor and

highly performing peers.

       Finally, we address some other potential avenues through which evacuees may

affect native students. In particular, we consider the impact of Katrina/Rita share on class

sizes, per-student expenditures, average teacher experience, and native student switching.

These results, for the most part, show no statistically significant impacts with the notable

exception that in Houston elementary schools average teacher education and certification

rates seemed to increase. This evidence combined with the fact that we see very different

impacts across achievement levels of natives and evacuees strongly suggest that our

estimates are picking up peer effects rather than other changes.




                                             7
2.     Katrina’s Children and School Responses

       Hurricanes Katrina and Rita caused one of the largest displacements of children in

the history of the U.S. About 400,000 students were forced to enroll in new schools as a

result of these hurricanes (U.S. Department of Education, 2007). School districts across

the country acted quickly to open their doors to evacuated students as required under the

McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Improvement Act (Edwards, 2007).

       Within Louisiana, people mostly evacuated to places where they had family and

friends. However, evacuees to East Baton Rouge were mainly living on FEMA assistance

and went to cheap hotels and apartments. While in 2005-06 many schools in Louisiana

received no evacuees at all, the average and greatest evacuee enrollment in our analysis

sample which excludes schools outside the affected areas and those with more than 70%

evacuees were 3.1% and 56%, respectively. Figure 1 displays a map of the percentage of

Katrina student evacuees in Louisiana schools, which shows substantial variation in terms

of exposure to the evacuee children.

       Many students, however, went outside of the state - Texas alone received 50,000

students. In Houston, many students and their families were housed in shelters, which

included 30,400 residents housed in the Reliant Park complex (Reliant Center, News

Release), the largest evacuation shelter in U.S. history. Many more evacuees were housed

in the George R. Brown Convention Center and Red Cross shelters throughout the city.

By August 31, 2005, just two days after Hurricane Katrina made landfall, HISD was

already admitting evacuees into the district’s schools while providing school bus stops at

shelters to transport the children. Initially, displaced students in the stadium complex and

convention center were placed in schools close to the shelters and with available spots.




                                             8
Students residing in other locations were mostly sent to the school zoned to their address.

Figure 2 shows the map of Houston ISD. This map shows that some schools in Houston

received no evacuees at all, while in others evacuees comprised of up to 25% of the

student population in October 31, 2005, showing substantial variation in the influx of

Katrina students across the district. The mean percentage of evacuees in HISD at the time

was 2.5%.

       While the receiving school districts made a great effort to accommodate the

thousands of new students, some worried about the financial burden on the taxpayers of

the receiving areas. For example, one news report provided said that HISD would face an

extra $20 million in costs over the 2005-2006 school year (Klein, 2006). However, given

that districts were enrolling homeless students, they were eligible for federal education

grants. Also, after three months Congress passed the Hurricane Education Recovery Act

(HERA) to provide impact aid for districts enrolling displaced students and to provide aid

to restore educational facilities which had been damaged by the hurricanes. The amount

per student from HERA was set to cover $6,000 per displaced student (Radcliffe, 2006).

With regards to reduced resources, a main concern was that schools receiving many

evacuees would experience a sharp rise in the student/teacher ratio. However, below we

present evidence showing that evacuees generated no statistically significant increase in

class sizes or expenditures per student.

       In addition to funding issues, teachers and parents of non-evacuee students were

concerned that some evacuees were years behind in terms of academic achievement. In

our interviews with teachers and principals in Houston, many indicated that Katrina

students were on average one or several years below grade level. Aside from issues




                                            9
related to academic performance, in middle and high-school, there were reports that feuds

between students became more common after the arrival of the evacuees. In response to

this, in the 2006-2007 school year, police presence was increased by 10% in 18

secondary schools.

           In what follows, we discuss the strategy we use to estimate peer effects of Katrina

and Rita evacuees on the academic performance and discipline of non-evacuee students,

and to uncover the structure and channels through which peer effects work.

3.         Identification Strategy

           We estimate the direct impact of the influx of Katrina and Rita evacuees into

Louisiana’s and Houston’s schools on native students as follows,

    Yigjt = α + βKatrina_Fractionjt + ΩXigjt + ПGradeg + ГYeart + ФGradeg×Yeart + κj + εigjt,

                                                                                                  (1)

where Yigjt is the academic or disciplinary outcome of individual i in grade g attending

school j at time t, Katrina_Fractionjt is the number of Katrina and Rita evacuees divided

by the total number of students in school j in March of year t+1 for Louisiana and in

October of year t for Houston, where this fraction is zero before the 2005-2006 academic

year. Xigjt are observable characteristics of individual i in grade g attending school j at

time t, including indicators for whether the student is female, white, Black, Hispanic,

Asian, Native American, and whether the student gets free-lunch, reduced-priced lunch or

is classified as being otherwise economically disadvantaged. 4 Gradeg and Yeart are grade

and year effects and κj are school-fixed effects. The addition of school and year effects

makes this a difference-in-differences specification in which changes in outcomes before



4
    The other economic disadvantage and Native American categories are only available for HISD.


                                                    10
and after the storm for schools that received a lot of evacuees are compared to changes

for schools that received few evacuees.

        The impact of the influx of Katrina evacuees could capture externalities of the

evacuees on native kids, but it could also capture reduced per-student resources or exiting

of the best students from these schools. To check whether the effects of the evacuees on

academic and disciplinary outcomes are due to reduced resources or attrition of the best

students, we run a similar specification to regression (1) for the probability of moving to

other schools one year later as well as for class size, expenditures per student, and teacher

experience at the school level.

        Throughout the paper we use the share of evacuees in the entire school rather than

within grade as our measure of exposure. We do this for a two reasons. First, due to the

limited number of grades tested in LA prior to 2005-06, using grade level evacuee share

restricts our sample size considerably in non-linear models. 5 Second, it is likely that

native students were exposed to many evacuees outside their grade especially in middle

and high school where many classes have students from multiple grades. Nonetheless,

results using grade-level Katrina/Rita share (available upon request) show the same

patterns as school-level results.

        In addition to estimating reduced-form models as in equation (1), we follow a

similar approach to Hoxby and Weingarth (2006) to examine non-linear peer effects, but

using quartiles rather than deciles since our data has less variation. For native students in

both Houston and Louisiana, along with evacuees in Louisiana, we classify students by

their pre-Katrina test-score quartiles. We do not have pre-Katrina test scores for Houston


5
 When generating the school-level Katrina/Rita share we extrapolate the share in the grades where students
have pre-Katrina tests to the entire school so as not to lose observations.


                                                   11
evacuees, thus we use their 2005-2006 scores. We estimate specifications in which we

regress fully saturated models of the test score of native students in each quartile,

Q2004=1,2,3,4, where the quartile is based on their test scores in 2004-2005, on the

percentages of evacuees in their school who fall in each quartile on the basis of their test

scores in 2004-2005 as follows, 6

         E(Yigjt|Q2004)= α + β1Katrina_FractionQ1_2004jt + β2Katrina_FractionQ2_2004jt

                   + β3Katrina_FractionQ3_2004jt + β4Katrina_FractionQ4_2004jt

                  + ΩXigjt + ПGradeg + ГYeart + ФGradeg×Yeart + κj + εigjt.

                                                                                                      (2)

        This specification lets us compare differential effects of the influx of Katrina

evacuees in each quartile on natives from each quartile. More importantly, this non-linear

specification also allows us to test different models of peer effects. The monotonicity

model posits that the higher the quality of the peers the greater the positive effect and the

lower the quality of peers the bigger the negative effect on natives. Thus, our test of

monotonicity requires that each quartile estimate is greater than all of the estimates for

lower quartiles - β4 > β3, β4 > β2, β4 > β1, β3 > β2, β3 > β1, and β2 > β1,• An alternative, albeit

weaker, test would also be to simply see if β4 > β1; i.e. that the extremes of the evacuee

distribution produce monotonic effects. By contrast, the invidious comparison model says

that having higher quality peers reduces the academic performance of other students who

may loose confidence or enter in invidious comparisons. Likewise, having low

performing peers may actually raise the academic performance of other students. Thus, a



6
 Since our pre-Katrina data in Louisiana is limited to grades 4, 8, and 10 in 2003-04 and 2004-05, we use
pre-Katrina test-scores for whichever of those two years the student is observed to identify the student’s
quartile for all years.


                                                   12
test of the invidious comparison model is the opposite from the monotonicity model, i.e.,

β4 < β1, and so on.

        Another popular model of peer effects is the boutique model which says that a

student will do better when he is surrounded by peers with a similar level. The idea is that

if the student is surrounded by similar students then teachers can best cater to their type.

The boutique model, thus, emphasizes the potential benefits of tracking students by

academic level. 7 A test of the boutique model thus requires that the impact of those in

one’s own quartile be greater than the impact of peers in any other quartile. Hence, we

test whether βi > βj for all i ≠ j where i is the native student’s quartile. We also test the

linear-in-means model by checking whether the impact for those in the lowest quartile is

the opposite impact from that for those in the highest quartile of the native distribution,

i.e., where βij is the estimate for native quartile i and evacuee quartile j, we test β44 = -β14 ,

β43 = -β13, β42 = -β12 and β41 = -β14.

        Since we have less variability in terms of the quality of the evacuees in Houston,

we estimate a similar regression but splitting the evacuee shares only by whether they fall

above or below the median in terms of test scores or attendance. Also, because we do not

observe test scores or attendance for evacuees before Katrina, we use 2005-2006 data to

determine this split. Thus, for Houston we estimate fully saturated models of test scores

or attendance for native students in each quartile, Q2004=1,2,3,4, where the quartile is

based on their test scores in 2004-2005, on the percentages of evacuees in their school

who fall below or above the median on the basis of their test scores in 2005-2006 as

follows,

7
 The explicit benefits of tracking are still highly controversial and research in the US has generally not
been able to establish causal estimates. Nonetheless, Duflo, Dupas, and Kremer (2008) conduct a tracking
experiment in Kenya and find that it increases test scores at all levels of the ability distribution.


                                                   13
E(Yigjt|Q2004)= α + β1Katrina_FractionBelowMedian_2005jt + β2Katrina_FractionAboveMedian_2005jt

                + ΩXigjt + ПGradeg + ГYeart + ФGradeg×Yeart + κj + εigjt.

                                                                                            (3)

Like the quartile regressions for LA, we also use these results to test the models described

above.

         We also test a version of the “bad apple” model which suggests that a small

number of disruptive kids can generate large negative effects on other students. In

particular, we check whether the increase in the share of evacuees with disciplinary

problems have negative effects on academic performance and behavior of natives over

and above the effect of the increase in the share of all evacuees. That is, we estimate the

following regression:

Yigjt = α + βKatrina_Fractionjt + γKatrina_Fraction*Avg_Evac_Infractionjt +jt + ΩXigjt +

                      ПGradeg + ГYeart + ФGradeg×Yeart + κj + εigjt,

                                                                                            (4)

where Katrina_Fraction*Avg_Evac_Infractionjt is the interaction of evacuee share with

the average evacuee infraction rate in 2004-05 for Louisiana and in the current year for

Houston. In Houston, where we have information about evacuee allocation to different

classrooms, we also test whether the presence of only a few disciplined evacuees in the

classroom has a substantial effect on native students.

         Given the initial chaos and uncertainty facing the evacuees, the initial assignment

to schools was plausibly exogenous, so we interpret the coefficient on “Katrina_Fraction”

as capturing the causal effect of the influx of Katrina and Rita evacuees on non-evacuee

students. However, after a few months some evacuees moved to apartment complexes




                                              14
and more permanent residences and may have also moved schools. While this may

generate endogenous selection into schools, many students remained in temporary

residences and those that found permanent residences often moved to places that would

allow their children to attend their initially assigned schools. Given that we are exploiting

within school variation over time, to address this concern we use the initial fraction of

Katrina/Rita evacuees in a school on September 13, 2005 as an instrument for the fraction

of Katrina evacuees in the last week of October of each year in Houston which may be

contaminated by self-selection of students to schools over time. 8 Using this instrumental

variable strategy, the first-stage is

       Katrina_Fractionjt = δ0 + δ1Initial_Katrina_Fractionj2005 + СXigjt + РGradeg +

                               ТYeart + УGradeg × Yeart + λj + νigjt,

                                                                                                      (5)

And where the second stage is as in equation (1), but the fraction of Katrina evacuees is

substituted for the predicted fraction of Katrina evacuees based on initial assignment to

schools. The exclusion restriction imposes that, conditional on school fixed-effects and

student characteristics, academic performance and disciplinary measures are independent

of the initial fraction of displaced students.

        Also, since one may worry that Katrina evacuees may be moving to school with

pre-existing negative trends in the academic performance of the native kids, we perform a

placebo experiment in which we regress pre-Katrina test scores and attendance on the

future share of Katrina evacuees in a school.



8
  “Initial_Katrina_Fraction” excludes students who were residing at the stadium complex or convention
center, as almost all of these students switched to new schools within two weeks. Unfortunately, we do not
have similar instruments for Louisiana, so the IV analysis is limited to HISD data.


                                                   15
4.     Data Description

4.1.   Louisiana Department of Education Data

       Louisiana testing data comes from the Department of Education Division of

Standards, Assessment and Accountability via Data Recognition Corporation and covers

all students in the state who took the state criterion-referenced exams from the 2003-2004

year to the 2006-2007 academic year. The data are at the student-level and include

information on gender, race/ethnicity, free\reduced price lunch status and, most

importantly, achievement. Test scores are available for grades 3 - 10 after Katrina, but

only for grades 4, 8 and 10 before Katrina. In addition, we obtained data from the

Louisiana Department of Education on the number of both in-school and out-of-school

suspensions and expulsions - which we combine into a single measure of disciplinary

infractions - for all students who take the LEAP/iLEAP exam.

       The Louisiana data allows us to describe where evacuees came from and where

they went. The parishes most affected by Hurricane Katrina were Orleans, Jefferson,

Plaquemines, and Saint Bernard. These parishes comprise most of the Greater New

Orleans Metropolitan Statistical Area. Ninety percent of the students in the affected

parishes become evacuees and, of the Katrina evacuees, 93% come from the most

affected parishes. Even after the hurricanes, the bulk of Katrina evacuees who remain in

Louisiana attended a school in one of the four most affected parishes. The percentage of

evacuees who attend schools in the affected parishes is 93% in the 2003-2004 and 2004-

2005 school years, before the hurricanes. However, the following academic year, this

dips to 68% in the spring, but rises back to 76% by the 2006-2007 school year.




                                           16
        In our analysis, we exclude schools in the areas directly affected by hurricanes

Katrina and Rita. Thus, we exclude schools in the parishes of Orleans, Jefferson, Saint

Bernard, and Plaquemines, which were directly affected by hurricane Katrina, as well as

the parishes of Cameron and Calcasieu which were affected by hurricane Rita. We also

exclude all schools with more than 70% evacuees, since these were likely schools in the

affected areas or so close to the affected parishes that they essentially became schools

exclusively for evacuee children. We further exclude observations in 2006-07 for

students who are not observed in 2005-06 as their evacuee status is unknown for these

students. This leaves us with 341,179 observations, including 14,628 evacuee

observations.

        Table 1 shows descriptive statistics for evacuees and non-evacuees in the both the

Louisiana and Houston samples. It is noteworthy that evacuees in LA are more likely to

be black and economically disadvantaged. Non-evacuees are 44% African-American

while evacuees are 59% African-American. Also, evacuees are more likely to be

economically disadvantaged. Of the evacuees 81% are eligible for free lunch, while 57%

of non-evacuees qualify.

        Our main outcome measures are test results for math and English language arts

(ELA) which combines reading and language. 9 Under Louisiana's accountability

program, students in grades 4, 8, and 10 were tested in March of each year prior to 2005.

These tests are known as the LEAP or Louisiana Educational Assessment Program

(grades 4 and 8) and the GEE or Graduation Exit Examination (grade 10). The LEAP and




9
 Science and social studies are tested as well; however as is common in the literature we only consider
math and reading.


                                                  17
GEE tests are high stakes tests which must be passed to be promoted to the next grade. 10

High stakes testing policies were suspended for all 4th and 8th grade students during the

2005-2006 school year due to the hurricanes.

        In 2005-06, in response to the No Child Left Behind Act of 2003, Louisiana

expanded the testing regime to include grades 3, 5, 6, 7 and 9 for math and ELA. 11

Unlike LEAP these exams are based on the Iowa Test of Basic Skills and with questions

added to align the test to criterions required by state and Federal law. In addition, while

the iLEAP contributes to determining whether the school meets “adequate yearly

progress” under the NCLB act, it is a “low-stakes” exam for students in that their scores

do not affect grade advancement. We include LEAP, iLEAP, and GEE in our analysis.

        Test scores are measured as standard deviation within a grade and year, including

all test-takers. Table 1 shows that LA evacuees are about one-quarter of a standard

deviation below non-evacuee students. Table 2 reports differences in test scores after

controlling for individual characteristics and school effects. Pre-Katrina math and ELA

test scores of evacuees in primary schooling are 0.12 and 0.14 of a standard deviation

lower than those of non-evacuees with similar post-storm scores. In middle-school and

high-school, pre-storm test scores of evacuees are 0.07 and 0.11 standard deviations

lower than those of non-evacuees again with post-storm scores showing similar

differences. Figure 3 shows the position of evacuees relative to natives in the same

schools in 2004-2005. This figure shows that evacuees are much more likely to be in the



10
   To be promoted to the next grade, students in grades 4 and 8 must score “Basic” on at least one of the
math and ELA tests and at least “Approaching Basic” on a specified subject exam. In order to be eligible
for a standard high school diploma, high school students must receive “Approaching Basic” or better on
both the ELA and math exams and “Approaching Basic” or better on either of the science or social studies
exams.
11
   Grades 3, 5, 6, and 7 were also added for science and social studies


                                                   18
first decile compared to their native counter-parts, while they are as likely or less likely to

be in deciles 2 through 10. This is important especially when we consider the non-linear

models below.

         Table 1 also shows that LA evacuees are more likely have disciplinary problems,

although Table 2 shows a more nuanced picture after controlling for individual

characteristics and school effects. In particular, evacuees have more disciplinary

infractions before the hurricanes, lower or the same in the year the hurricanes hit, and

higher again in 2006-2007. A likely explanation for this is that in the year of the

hurricanes, schools were more lax in terms of discipline with the evacuee children.

4.2.     Houston Independent School District Data

         HISD provided us with student-level administrative records from 2003-2004 to

2006-2007. The data includes basic demographic characteristics, including race, gender,

economic disadvantage status, and immigration status, and whether they qualify as gifted

and talented, as having limited English proficiency, or require special education. In

addition, we have information on math and reading scores from the Texas Assessment of

Knowledge and Skills (TAKS) Exam, which is the exam used in Texas for accountability

purposes. 12 Students in grades 3 - 11 take TAKS and, as in Louisiana, TAKS is “high

stakes” in certain grades and subjects and “low stakes” in others. 13 In addition, while

evacuees had to take the TAKS exams in 2005-06, their performance did not count

towards the school’s accountability rating, although by 2006-07 evacuees scores were


12
    Less than 1% of students have multiple math and 4% have multiple reading scores in a given year due to
retakes. Since we cannot identify which score refers to a student’s first exam we instead use the student’s
lowest score in each subject for that academic year.
13
    State law requires that students must pass the reading test in 3rd grade as well as both reading and math in
5 and 8th grades to be promoted. HISD also requires students in grades 4, 6, and 7 to pass math and
  th

reading TAKS for promotion. Students also need to pass the 11th grade exit-level exams in math, English
and language arts, science, and social-studies in order to graduate.


                                                      19
included in accountability calculations. 14 Moreover, we also have information for each

student in grades 1 - 12 on the number of disciplinary infractions resulting in an in-school

suspension or more severe punishment and the attendance rate. As in LA, we drop

students in 2006-07 who are not observed in 2005-06 leaving us with 171,659 native and

4,986 evacuee observations in grades 1 - 12.

           Returning to Table 1 we see that, as in Louisiana, evacuees in Houston are more

likely to be African-American and economically disadvantaged. The majority of non-

evacuee students are Hispanic and African-American, with these two groups accounting

for 88% of the student population and White and Asian students accounting for the

remainder. By contrast, about 90% of the evacuees are African-American, and only 10%

White, Hispanic and Asian combined. This is important to keep in mind if one believes

that displaced students are more likely to interact and generate peer effects for non-

evacuees of their same race/ethnicity. About 69% of the HISD native students are

identified as receiving free lunch and as being at-risk. This fraction contrasts with about

97% of the evacuees who qualify for free lunch and 94% who are identified as being at-

risk. 15

           The scores for TAKS, which we convert from scale scores to standard deviations

within grade and year using information on all non-evacuee test-takers during that year,

show evacuees with substantially lower scores than natives in both reading and math.

Evacuees also have far lower attendance rates - the average attendance rate of natives is

around 95%, while it is only 83% for evacuees. Disciplinary infractions are also

14
   One principal we spoke with noted that, while the evacuee scores did not count, the schools still put
substantial effort into bringing the evacuees up to proficiency in anticipation of their scores counting the
following year.
15
   At-risk status is defined as being over-aged for your grade, having a difficult situation at home (e.g.,
pregnant, foster child) or having low academic performance (below the 40th percentile).


                                                    20
considerably higher amongst Houston evacuees. Table 2 shows that the test scores of

Houston evacuees are one-fifth to two-fifths of a standard deviation lower in elementary

and about half a standard deviation lower in middle and high school compared to native

students in the same schools and with the same characteristics. 16 Moreover, the influx of

evacuees did not simply reduce average test scores but also increased heterogeneity

within schools. Figure 4 shows the evacuees position relative to natives in the same

school in 2005-2006. This figure shows that evacuees are greatly over-represented in the

three lowest deciles of the test-score and and attendance distributions and under-

represented in the upper deciles.

        In addition, Table 2 shows that, controlling for school effects and observables, the

attendance rate for Houston evacuees is 6 percentage points and 13 percentage points

lower among primary and secondary evacuee students, respectively. In terms of

disciplinary infractions, Houston evacuees follow a similar pattern to those in Louisiana -

they tend to have fewer infractions initially then more the subsequent year. This coincides

with interviews of school administrators and teachers indicating that school officials were

initially more lenient with students who were viewed as going through a process of

adaptation.

5.      Effects of Evacuees on Native Students’ Academic Performance

        We begin by examining the effect of the influx of Katrina and Rita students on the

academic performance of their peers. This is a reduced form regression, since there are a

number of possible reasons why the academic performance of non-evacuees students may

be affected by the arrival of evacuees at a school. The first is a peer effect story, where


16
  It is interesting to point out that the differences between evacuee and non-evacuee test scores were a lot
bigger in Houston than in Louisiana.


                                                    21
one’s classmates influence the learning process of each student. We consider peer effects

to encompass an achievement effect that works through peer test scores; a behavior effect

that works through peers’ disruptive behavior in the classroom as in Figlio (2005) and

Carrell and Hoekstra (Forthcoming), and a disruption effect from students entering and

exiting the classroom as in Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2004).

       The second reason why the influx of evacuees may reduce native performance is

if the entry of new students takes resources away from native students. Third, it could be

that schools hired new teachers to help absorb the evacuees and that these teachers were

of lower quality than the existing teachers. Finally, native students may respond to the

influx of evacuees by moving to another school or leaving the school district and this

would change average test scores by simply changing the composition of the remaining

students. While in this section we present reduced form results that could capture any of

these four channels, in section 7 we present results from regressions of class size,

expenditures per student, teacher experience and the probability of moving schools or

leaving the district on the share of Katrina evacuees which provide evidence that our

reduced-form estimates are likely capturing the first channel.

       This section also presents results of non-linear models, which allow us to test

different models of peer effects. In addition, since non-linearities are more consistent

with peer effects than with the other three stories which should generate similar effects

throughout the distribution of natives, these models further help us to separate peer

effects from the alternative explanations.




                                             22
5.1.   Reduced-Form Models

       We use both HISD and Louisiana data to estimate equation (1). Table 3 presents

the estimates of the evacuee share on math and language scores of non-evacuee students.

Panels A and B present results for Louisiana and Panels C and D present results for

HISD, for elementary schools and middle and high schools, respectively. Column (1)

reports the results for the overall sample, while Columns (2), (3), (4) and (5) report

results of fully saturated models for African-Americans, Hispanics, boys and girls. These

results show mainly negative but insignificant effects in Louisiana.

       The results for Houston, reported in Panels B and C, instead show significantly

negative effects on math test scores for elementary students. Column (1) of panel C

shows that for all elementary students an increase of 10 percentage points in the influx of

Katrina students reduces math test scores for all non-evacuee children by 0.09 of a

standard deviation. Measuring this effect in the schools that received the highest share of

evacuees (i.e., 25%) suggests that the influx of evacuees reduce average test scores of a

native student’s peers by 0.19 of a standard deviation and this, in turn, generates a decline

in native test scores of 0.23 of a standard deviation. The results show even bigger effects

for blacks and girls. An increase of 10 percentage points in the influx of Katrina students

reduces math scores by 0.12 and 0.11 for blacks and girls, respectively, with only the

latter being significant. Similarly, reading test scores of non-evacuee elementary school

children decrease with the influx of Katrina children but the decrease is not significant.

By contrast, the results in Panel D show that test scores of middle- and high-school

students show no statistically significant effects from the entry of evacuees into their

schools.




                                             23
5.2.   Robustness Checks

5.2.1. Placebo Experiment: Pre-Katrina Impacts

       In Column (6) of Table 3 we present the results from a falsification test in the

spirit of Angrist and Krueger (1999) by regressing the pre-Katrina outcomes on the post-

Katrina shares of evacuees in the schools as if these shares corresponded to 2004-2005.

The idea is that if we are simply capturing pre-existing trends in the schools, then the

coefficients in the share of evacuees should show up as being significant. Thus we set

Katrina share to zero in 2003-04 and to the 2005-06 value for observations2004-05, then

estimate using only data from 2003-04 and 2004-05. The results from this falsification

test show that the coefficients on the evacuee shares are not significant for elementary nor

for middle-school and high-school in either Louisiana or Houston, suggesting that we are

not simply capturing pre-existing differences in trends before the actual influx of the

evacuees.

5.2.1. IV Results: Houston

       Since there is some movement across schools as evacuees settle into more

permanent residences, we address the potential self-selection of evacuees by exploiting

the initial exogenous allocation and the fact that many people stayed in their initially

assigned schools. We believe that, even if there is resorting, this initial allocation is

exogenous conditional on school fixed-effects because of the uncertainty and chaos under

which evacuees found housing. Indeed, a large proportion of evacuees were living in

shelters and many continued to live in shelters months after the storm.

       Column (7) of Table 3 reports second-stage results for Houston where the

instrument used is the Katrina/Rita share on September 13, 2005 - only two weeks after




                                            24
Katrina - excluding students from the stadium complex and convention center. 17 As with

the difference-in-difference results presented above, the second-stage results in Column

(7) of Table 3 only show a negative effect of the influx of Katrina children on the math

test scores of elementary school children in Houston. The IV estimate is slightly bigger in

magnitude and significant at the 10% level. Nonetheless, none of the estimates are

statistically significantly different from each other, thus providing further evidence of the

validity of the difference-in-differences specifications.

5.3.    Non-Linear Models

        Panels A and B of Table 4 report results of non-linear models as in equation (2)

for elementary and middle and high schools in Louisiana, respectively. The results show

that the arrival of low academic performance Katrina evacuees hurt natives in all

quartiles of the pre-Katrina test score distribution in terms of their math and language

scores. Curiously, the results also show that the ones hurt the most by the presence of low

achieving evacuees were those at the higher end of the distribution, while natives at the

lower end of the ability distribution were hurt the least by the arrival of low achieving

peers. Our findings suggest that an increase of say 6.1 percentage points in bottom

quartile evacuees - the 95th percentile of schools in 2005-06 - decreases native ELA test

scores by 0.17 and 0.24 of a standard deviation for native elementary and middle/high

school students at the top quartile of the achievement distribution, but has no statistically

significant effect on those at the lowest quartile of the achievement distribution. The

results for elementary math results are not as clear cut, but the effect of a similar increase

17
  Almost all evacuees in the stadium and convention center were relocated to other shelters and temporary
housing by October 2005, thus we exclude them to increase the power of the instrument. The first-stage
results (not shown here) show that the Katrina/Rita share on September 13, 2005 is significant at the 1%
level. An increase in Katrina/Rita children of 10% on September 13, 2005 increases the share Katrina/Rita
on October 28, 2005 by 9.8% in elementary and by 9.6% in middle- and high-school.


                                                   25
in low achieving evacuees would cause an insignificant decline of 0.05 a standard

deviation for math test scores of top-quartile native students in elementary school and a

significant decline of 0.12 of a standard deviation for middle/high-school. A possible

explanation for these results is that the arrival of low achieving evacuees forced teachers

to focus their teaching time to help low achieving students and this hurt high ability more

than low ability students.

       By contrast, the arrival of evacuees in the top quartile of the academic distribution

benefits natives regardless of their previous performance, but the effects are bigger as

natives move up in the ability distribution. Thus, these results suggest complementarities

between high-achieving peers. For example, having a top quartile evacuee share in the

95th percentile (2.5%) generates an increase in ELA test scores of 0.06 of a standard

deviation for both elementary and middle and high school natives in the top quartile of

the achievement distribution, but no significant effect on those in the bottom quartile. A

similar increase in the share of high achieving evacuees generates an increase in math test

scores of 0.11 and 0.06 for high achieving natives in elementary and middle and high-

school, but by only 0.05 for low-achieving natives in middle and high-school with no

significant impact on low-achieving natives in elementary school. A likely explanation

for this is that the increase in high achieving evacuees in the class forced teachers to raise

the level of the class more towards high-ability students. This may be consistent with a

“boutique” model of peer effects as described by Hoxby and Weingarth (2006) where

students benefit from having similar peers in their classroom regardless of their own

abilities. At the same time, the fact that low ability natives benefited more from having




                                             26
high-ability than low-ability evacuees suggests that a monotonicity model where peer

impacts are increasing in peer ability is also occurring at the same time.

       We test these and other models formally. As explained above, we conduct a

“strong monotonicity” test by testing whether all estimates of higher quartiles are greater

than the estimates of the lower quartiles, i.e., βi > βj. The invidious comparison model is

the mirror image of this model, i.e., βi < βj. Figure 5 shows a histogram of the frequency

of t-statistics from pair wise tests of equivalence of higher and lower quartiles using the

regressions in Table 4. We consider t-statistics that exceed 1.645, so that the higher

quartile is significantly greater than the lower quartile at the 10% level, as providing

support for monotonicity. Likewise, for tests where the t-statistics are between 1.645 and

-1.645 we cannot reject the null hypothesis of equality. Finally, tests where the t-statistics

are lower than -1.64 provide support for the hypothesis of invidious comparisons at the

10% level. Figure 5 shows that the distribution is skewed towards t-stats above 1.645. In

particular in 42% of the cases we find t-stats above 1.645, which far exceeds the 10% that

we would expect to find at random. In addition, the fact that 83% of the tests have

positive t-statistics provides further evidence of monotonicity. We also reject the

alternative hypothesis of invidious comparisons since only 2% of the cases have t-stats

below -1.64. An alternative test, which we refer to as “weak monotonicity” is whether

exposure to evacuees in the top quartile generates a significantly greater impact on

natives of all quartiles than exposure to evacuees in the bottom quartile. In this case, we

fail to reject the null that the two estimates are the same in 75% of cases at the 5% level

and in 81% cases at the 10% level, far exceeding the expected failure rate under random

chance and again providing strong support for the monotonicity model of peer effects.




                                             27
        Next, we provide a formal test of the boutique model by testing whether the

impact of peers in the same quartile as the native student is greater than the effect when

peers are in other quartiles. Figure 6 shows the histogram of the counts of t-statistics of

from pair wise tests of equality between exposure to evacuees from natives’ own and

other quartiles. T-statistics larger than 1.645 provide support for the boutique model at

the 10% significance level. While the evidence here is less conclusive than the evidence

of monotonicity, 27% of all cases have a t-stat greater than 1.64, although most of these

are for natives in the 3rd and 4th quartile where the boutique and monotonicity models

overlap.

        Finally, we do a test of the linear-in-means model. An implication of linear-in-

means is that the impact of evacuee share from a given quartile on a native student in the

1st quartile should be exactly opposite to the impact on a native student in the 4th quartile.

Thus, using a seemingly unrelated regression combining the regressions in each panel of

Table 4, we test the null that βi1 = -βi4 where i is the evacuee quartile and “1” and “4” are

the lowest and highest native quartiles, respectively. For this test, accepting the null for

90% of all cases would be consistent with a linear in means model at the 10% level of

statistical significance, but we can only accept the null in 44% of the cases. Thus, we

interpret this to be a clear rejection of the linear-in-means model.

        Table 5 shows results for Houston. 18 These are also consistent with a

monotonicity story, but less so with a boutique model and clearly reject the invidious



18
   We must make a note of caution with regards to the Houston results, however, as we do not have pre-
Katrina test scores on the evacuees. This forces us to use the concurrent scores for evacuees to determine
whether they are above or below median, which may introduce bias. Nonetheless, the fact that the Houston
results are consistent with the LA results makes us confident that we are indeed identifying true models of
peer effects.


                                                   28
comparison model. 19 In Houston, the arrival of low achieving peers hurts all native

students, but this effect is more negative for low achieving natives in elementary and high

achieving natives in secondary schools. By contrast, the arrival of high achieving

evacuees benefits everyone, though the biggest benefit is for the low achieving natives. In

this case, we test monotonicity by checking whether exposure to above median evacuees

has a larger impact than being exposed to below median evacuees. The null for this test

can be rejected at the 5% level in 50% of the cases providing clear support for the

monotonicity model. On the other hand, none of the point estimates are negative, hence

we can clearly reject the invidious comparison model. These tests also provide us with a

boutique story similar to that in LA. We only find evidence of boutiqueing in higher

native quartiles, a result that overlaps with monotonicity. Finally, we also conducted the

Houston equivalent of the linear-in-means test described above. We are able to reject

linear-in-means at the 10% level in 3 out of 8 cases. While this is not as strong as the

results for LA, they nonetheless exceed random chance.

        The results from non-linear models also show patterns which are more consistent

with peer effects than with alternative stories of the impact of Katrina evacuees on

schools. For example, if the influx of Katrina evacuees reduced school resources (either

by increasing class size, by reducing expenditures per student, or by reducing the quality

of teachers), both high achieving and low achieving evacuees should reduce native

performance. Instead, we find that high achieving evacuees increase native performance

and low achieving evacuees reduce native performance.




19
  We also conducted a classroom level analysis with student fixed-effects which had qualitatively similar
results and is available upon request.


                                                   29
6.     Effects of Evacuees on Native Students’ Behavior

       Our detailed administrative data also allows an examination of the effects of peers

on attendance and discipline. Moreover, the data on behavioral outcomes allows us to

examine whether the impact we observe on academic performance is working through

peer achievement or through disciplinary disruptions.

6.1.   Peer Effects on Attendance

       Aside from the impact that students may have on others’ academic performance,

they may also affect behavior and willingness to accept and follow rules. Our interviews

with principals and teachers in Houston, indicated that even basic rules such as showing

up to school on time or at all were problematic with some of the evacuees. News reports

at the time indicated that while many evacuee students may have been enrolled in

schools, they may not have been attending regularly (Garza, 2006) and, indeed, our

results in Table 2 for Houston suggest this. Moreover, news reports as well as our own

interviews pointed to bigger behavioral problems related to the evacuees. For example, in

our interviews with elementary school teachers, some indicated that the evacuees were

more likely to “talk back to the teachers” and that some of the non-evacuee children

imitated this behavior. At the secondary school level, the differences in behavior between

evacuee and non-evacuee students, according to the teachers, manifested more in terms of

truancy, fighting and engaging in risky behaviors.

       The HISD data allows us to measure the impact of the influx of hurricane

evacuees on attendance. Table 6 presents difference-in-differences results of the effects

of the influx of Katrina students on the attendance rate. Panel A presents results for

elementary students and Panel B presents results for middle and high school students.




                                           30
The results in Table 6 show a clear increase in absenteeism in middle and high-school.

An increase in the influx of Katrina students of 10 percentage points reduces attendance

in secondary schools by 0.7 percentage points. 20 Attendance is a particularly substantial

problem for African-American native students after the influx of Katrina students, with a

10 percentage point influx of Katrina students generating a reduction in the attendance

rate of 1.3 percentage points in middle and high-schools. 21

6.2.    Effects of Misbehaving Peers

        Aside from asking if the arrival of hurricane evacuees affected adversely the

behavior of native kids, we also ask whether the presence of “problematic” kids and, in

particular, kids with disciplinary problems generates the adverse effects on academic

performance and behavior of native kids. That is, low native academic achievement may

be due to the presence of low-performing evacuees who lower the level of the class or

require more attention from the teacher or due to the presence of disruptive kids who

simply do not allow for the regular class functioning to continue. To explore this latter

channel through which peer effects may be working, we estimate regressions like

equation (4) for test scores, attendance and counts of disciplinary infractions.

        Table 7 presents the results of these regressions. Surprisingly, the presence of

undisciplined kids does not seem to make a difference in terms of academic achievement

and disciplinary infractions in Louisiana. 22 Similarly, for Houston, we do not find any

effect of having poorly behaving kids on math and ELA test scores. This suggests that

20
   While the IV coefficient in Column (7) is positive it is also very imprecise. Results from the placebo
experiment are also insignificant.
21
   Similar regressions of disciplinary infractions for Houston and Louisiana (not shown here but available
upon request) show no statistically significant average effect of the influx of hurricane evacuees on the
discipline of their peers except for Hispanics and boys in Houston middle and high-school, though this is
only significant at the 10% level. However, below we show that having a larger share of disciplined
evacuees does affect native discipline.
22
   We find similar results (available upon request) in non-linear specifications.


                                                   31
peer effects in our context are working through academic achievement rather than

through disciplinary disruptions. On the other hand, we do find that having more

misbehaved children increases disciplinary problems in both elementary schools and in

middle and high schools. 23 This suggests that peer effects in terms of discipline are only

relevant when the peers are misbehaved and the natives can learn these behaviors.

         In Table 8 we further explore the impact of having undisciplined children in a

classroom by using the Houston data, in which we can identify the students in each

classroom. 24 In particular, we try to get at the “bad apple” model by testing whether the

presence of even 1 or 2 disruptive evacuee children affect the academic achievement and

behavior of natives. Since this analysis is done at the classroom level, we may be

concerned about endogenous sorting across classrooms. Thus, to address this issue we

have added student fixed-effects to the regressions. The results for academic achievement

only show that having many undisciplined children in a classroom lowers math test

scores. By contrast, the results for discipline and attendance do show that it is enough to

have 1 or 2 misbehaving evacuee children to worsen the attendance and behavior of

native kids in elementary schools. In middle- and high-schools, only having many

undisciplined kids in a classroom worsens native behavior. Thus, we take this as

supportive evidence of the “bad apple” model for elementary school kids but only in

terms of behavior and not in terms of achievement.



23
   One caveat to this analysis is that we are limited to using concurrent infractions as our behavior measure
in Houston. Thus it is, admittedly, possible that these results reflect school specific policies on how they
disciplined evacuees and natives after the storms.
24
   HISD high schools operate on a semester schedule. Thus, for middle- and high-schools, we average
evacuee shares across students’ classes in both semesters. In addition, the estimates for math and reading in
middle- and high-school are identified using only exposure in math and reading/English classes,
respectively. Attendance and discipline use exposure in all classes. Further, the middle- and high-school
regressions are limited to 2004-05 and 2005-06 due to data limitations.


                                                    32
7.      Effects of Katrina Evacuees on Resources and Student Attrition

        The reduced-form effects of the influx of Katrina evacuees on test-scores,

attendance and discipline could be due to the externalities of evacuees on natives.

However, another possibility is that the influx of evacuees reduced the resources

available for natives or that the best native students were leaving the schools and districts

with evacuees.

7.1. Effects on Resources

        The influx of evacuees could have affected the resources available to evacuees by

increasing class-size, reducing operating and instructional expenditures per employee and

reducing teacher quality if the composition of teachers changed.

        Table 9 reports results of regressions like equation (1), but where the dependent

variable is class size at the school level. 25 Panel A reports results for Louisiana while

Panel B reports results for Houston. For Louisiana we do not have the exact average

class-size in each school but rather the percent of classes with sizes between 1 and 20,

between 21 and 26, or higher than 26. These results for Louisiana show little change in

class sizes for elementary students. For middle-school and high-school there is a shift

from classes of 20 or fewer students to classes of 21 - 26 students. However, this shift is

relatively small. A 10 percentage point increase in evacuee share only shifts between 2

and 3 percent of classrooms to the higher category. In addition, there is no evidence of an

increase in the share of classes that are over 26 students. By contrast, for Houston we

have the exact average class size per grade in elementary school and by subject for


25
   Since we cannot include grade fixed effects in these regressions, as schools span multiple grades, in
Houston we include the percent of students in the school in each grade as covariates and interact with year
dummies. We also include the percent black, Hispanic, Asian, Native American, and economically
disadvantaged as covariates. These variables are not available for Louisiana.


                                                    33
middle-school and high-school. These results show no statistically significant effect of

the fraction of evacuees on class-size in elementary schools. In middle and high-schools

there is little evidence that the influx of evacuees significantly increased class-size,

except for class-sizes in social studies which shows a marginally significant effect.

           Table 10 shows results of regressions of operating and instructional expenditures

per student and average teacher experience on the evacuee share in Houston. 26 The

results once again show no statistically significant effect of the influx of evacuees on

either operating or instructional expenditures per student. This is likely because the

Federal and State Governments seemed to have reimbursed schools and districts almost

fully. Also, interviews with principals in Houston, suggested that schools received

substantial aid from a number of foundations around the country.

           Since class-size increases in response to the evacuees were, at worst, minor, it is

likely that new classes were being created as students came in. This means that the

quality of teachers could have changed as a result. Thus, we look at how evacuees

affected average teacher experience, education, and certification. While there is no

significant effect on these teacher quality measures in middle/high schools or on teacher

experience in elementary schools, the graduate education and certification rates of

teachers actually improve in elementary schools. A 10 percentage point increase in

evacuee share increases the share of teachers with a graduate degree and the share

certified by 3 percentage points each. This could be explained by HISD likely having

more applicants for jobs from amongst the evacuees than spaces available, and thus the

district chose more experienced and certified teachers. Nonetheless, if anything this

result would bias us against finding peer effects which we find in both linear and non-
26
     This data is not available for Louisiana.


                                                 34
linear models in Houston elementary schools, thus it is unlikely that these changes in

teacher characteristics would have a meaningful impact on our estimates.

         Another concern is that one may worry that evacuees were all assigned to the

same classes together so that there may had been little room for spillovers. However,

when we looked at the distribution of the number of evacuees by class in Houston, where

we have classroom level data, virtually all classrooms with evacuees also had native

students and the vast majority of classrooms with evacuees had between one and four

evacuees.

7.2. Effects on Native Student Mobility

         Another reason why test scores and behavior could have changed in response to

the influx of Katrina evacuees is if the best students moved in response to the arrival of

evacuees. To test this we run a regression like equation (1) but in which the dependent

variable is the probability of switching school the following year as well as the

probability of leaving the district in the case of Houston. 27

         Panel A of Table 11 shows results for mobility in Louisiana, while Panel B shows

results of mobility for Houston. The results show no statistically significant change in the

mobility of students from schools with a high share of evacuees to schools with a low

share of evacuees in either Louisiana or Houston. 28 Similarly, we find no effect on

mobility out of the district for middle-school and high-school students in Houston. We do

find a reduction in HISD district leavers at the elementary level, but it is only marginally

significant.

27
   To avoid switching and leaving due to normal progression to middle and high-school and due to
graduation, we limit the school switching estimates to students who are not in the maximum grade for their
school. We also limit the district leaver regressions to students in grades 1 - 11.
28
   Due to only grades 4, 8, and 10 being available prior to Katrina in LA, and to grade 8 being a transition
year from middle to high school, we are limited to grades 4 and 10 in this analysis for LA.


                                                    35
       Thus, overall we find little evidence that the impacts from the influx of Katrina

evacuees is likely to have worked either through reduced resources or through changes in

the composition of native students.

8.     Conclusion

       In this paper we examine the impact of an exogenous influx of low-socio-

economic background students on the academic performance and behaviors of their

peers. We exploit the influx of evacuees from Hurricanes Katrina and Rita into school

districts in Louisiana that were unaffected by the storms and into the Houston

Independent School District to estimate their impact on non-evacuee (native) peers.

       We use student-level data from Louisiana’s Department of Education and from

the Houston Independent School District to estimate the impact on math and language

test scores as well as on disciplinary infractions and absenteeism in the case of Houston.

We find that, on average, evacuees had little impact on native outcomes with the

exception of a negative impact on math scores in elementary schools and attendance in

middle/high schools in Houston. However, linear models hide a substantial amount of

variation across achievement levels of natives and evacuees. Non-linear models show that

high achieving natives are significantly positively affected by high achieving evacuees

and significantly negatively impacted by low achieving evacuees. Low achieving natives

also generally benefit from high achieving evacuees and are hurt by low achieving

evacuees in terms of their own test scores, though this effect is muted in Louisiana.

       Using these non-linear models we are able to explicitly test a variety of peer

effects models identified in Hoxby and Weingarth (2006). We find strong evidence in

support of monotonic peer effects where students benefit more from having higher




                                            36
achieving peers. We also see some, albeit weaker, evidence that students benefit from

being around peers of the same achievement level - a boutique model. Nevertheless, we

clearly reject the linear-in-means model and the invidious comparison model where

students benefit from being amongst lower performing peers. Moreover, we test the “bad

apple” theory where having a only a handful of disruptive peers in a classroom is

detrimental to other students. While we see no evidence of this in terms of test scores, we

do find that having a few misbehaving evacuees in an elementary classroom appears to

worsen behavior of native students both in terms of attendance and disciplinary

infractions.

       We interpret these results as being largely due to peer effects, since we find no

statistically significant effects of the influx of Katrina/Rita evacuees on class size except

for a small increase in middle/high schools in Louisiana, on expenditures per student, on

average teacher quality or on mobility of students, which would be the other potential

explanations. In addition, the fact that evacuees of various achievement and behavior

levels affect natives differently is consistent with peer effects driving our results and

inconsistent with the alternative explanations described above.




                                             37
References

Aizer, Anna. 2008. “Peer Effects and Human Capital Accumulation: The Externalities of
ADD.” NBER Working Paper No. 14354.

Angrist, Joshua and Alan Krueger. 1999. “Empirical Strategies in Labor Economics.”
Handbook of Labor Economics, 3A: 1277-1366.

Angrist, Joshua and Kevin Lang. 2004. “Does Schooling Integration Generate Peer
Effects? Evidence from Boston’s Metco Program,” American Economic Review, 94(5):
1613-1634.

Belasen, Ariel and Solomon Polacheck. 2008. “How Hurricanes Affect Wages and
Employment in Local Labor Markets,” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings, 98(2): 49 -53.

Boozer, Michael and Stephen Cacciola. 2001. “Inside the Black Box of Project Star:
Estimation of Peer Effects,” Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper No. 832.

Burke, Mary and Tim Sass. 2008. “Classroom Peer Effects and Student Achievement,”
Calder Urban Institute Working Paper No. 18.

Carrell, Scott, Richard Fullerton and James West. 2008. “Does Your Cohort Matter?
Measuring Peer Effects in College Achievement,” NBER Working Paper No. 14032.

Carrell, Scott, and Mark Hoeksta. Forthcoming. “Externalities in the Classroom: How
Children Exposed to Domestic Violence Affect Everyone’s Kids,” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics.

Carrell, Scott, Frederick Malmstrom and James West. 2008. “Peer Effects in Academic
Cheating,” Journal of Human Resources, 43: 173-207.

Case, Anne and Lawrence Katz. 1991. “The Company You Keep: The Effects of Family
and Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths,” NBER Working Paper No. 3705.

Duflo, Esther, Pascaline Dupas and Michael Kremer. 2008. “Peer Effects and the Impact
of Tracking: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Kenya,” NBER Working Paper
No. 14475.

Edwards, George E. 2006. “International Human Rights Law Violations Before, During
and After Hurricane Katrina: An International Law Framework for Analysis,” Thurgood
Marshall Law Review, 31(353).

Figlio, David. 2005. “Boys Named Sue: Disruptive Children and Their Peers,” NBER
Working Paper No. 11277.




                                         38
Gaviria, Alejandro and Steven Raphael. 2001. “School-Based Peer Effects and Juvenile
Behavior,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 83: 257-268.

Groen, Jefrey and Anne Polivka. 2008. “The Effect of Hurricane Katrina on Labor
Market Outcomes of Evacuees,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
98(2): 43-48.

Hanushek, Eric, John Kain, and Steven Rivkin. 2004. “Disruption Versus Tiebout
Improvement: The Costs and Benefits of Switching Schools.” Journal of Public
Economics, 88(9-10): 1721- 1746.

Hanushek, Eric, John Kain, Jacob Markman, and Steven Rivkin. 2003. “Does Peer
Ability Affect Student Achievement?,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 18(5): 527-544.

Hoxby, Caroline. 2000. “Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race
Variation,” NBER Working Paper No. 7867.

Hoxby, Caroline and Gretchen Weingarth. 2006. “Taking Race Out of the Equation:
School Reassignment and the Structure of Peer Effects.” Presented at the 2006 American
Economics            Association             Annual             Meetings            at
http://www.aeaweb.org/annual_mtg_papers/2006/0108_1300_0803.pdf.

Klein, Alyson. 2006. “Schools Get Katrina Aid, Uncertainty: $645 Million May Not
Cover Costs of Displaced Students,” Education Week, March 29 at
http://www.edweek.org/ew/articles/2006/03/29/29impact.h25.html?qs=katrina.

Knabb, Richard, Jamie Rhome and Daniel Brown. 2005. “Tropical Cyclone Report:
Hurricane Katrina: 23-30 August 2005 at National Hurricane Center’s website,
http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/pdf/TCR-AL122005_Katrina.pdf.

Ladd, Anthony, John Marszalek and Duane Gill. 2008. “The Other Diaspora: New
Orleans Student Evacuation Impact and Response Surrounding Hurricane Katrina,” at
http://www.ssrc.msstate.edu/katrina/publications/katrinastudentsummary.pdf.

Lavy, Victor, Daniele Paserman and Analia Schlosser. 2008. “Inside the Black Box of
Ability Peer Effects: Evidence from Variation in High and Low Achievers in the
Classroom,” NBER Working Paper No. 14415.

Lavy, Victor and Analia Schlosser. 2007. “Mechanisms and Impacts of Gender Peer
Effects at School,” NBER Working Paper No. 13292.

Lazear, Edward. 2001. “Educational Production,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116:
777-803.




                                         39
McIntosh, Molly. 2008. “Measuring the Labor Market Impacts of Hurricane Katrina
Migration: Evidence from Houston, Texas,” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings, 98(2): 54-57.

Lyle, David. 2007. “Estimating and Interpreting Peer and Role Model Effects from
Randomly Assigned Social Groups at West Point,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
89: 289-299.

Manski, Charles F, 1993. “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection
Problem,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 60: 531-542.

Paxson, Christina and Cecilia Rouse. 2008. “Returning to New Orleans after Hurricane
Katrina,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 98(2): 38-42.

Radcliffe, Jennifer. 2006. “Texas Schools Taking a Hit On Katrina Aid / First Federal
Installment Cut in Half; TEA Plans to Keep Much of it to Repay Itself,” Houston
Chronicle, March 3.

Reliant Center (Joint Information Center). 2005. “Hurricane Katrina, Houston Response,”
News Release, September 5, 2005, 3:00 p.m.

Sacerdote, Bruce. Forthcoming. “Peer Effects in Education: How Might They Work,
How Big are They and How Much do we Know thus Far?” Journal of Economic
Perspectives.

Sacerdote, Bruce. 2008. “When the Saints come Marching In: Effects of hurricanes
Katrina and Rita on Student Evacuees,” NBER Working Paper No. 14385.

Sacerdote, Bruce. 2001. “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results from
Dartmouth’s Roommates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116.

Stinebrickner, Todd and Ralph Stinebrickner. 2006. “What Can be Learned about Peer
Effects using College Roommates? Evidence from New Survey Data of Students from
Disadvantaged Backgrounds,” Mimeo.

U.S. Census Bureau (U.S. Government Accountability Office). 2006. “Gulf Coast
hurricanes: Lessons Learned from Protecting and Educating Children,” at
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d06680r.pdf.

U.S. Department of Education. 2007. “Hurricane              Help   for   Schools,”   in
http://hurricanehelpforschools.gov/0916-factsheet.html.

Vigdor, Jacob. 2007. “The Katrina Effect: Was There a Bright Side to the Evacuation of
Greater New Orleans?” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 7(1).




                                          40
Vigdor, Jacob. 2008. “The Economic Aftermath of Hurricane Katrina,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 22(4): 135-154.

Vigdor, Jacob and Thomas Nechyba. Forthcoming. “Peer Effects in Carolina Public
Schools,” in L. Woessmann and P. Peterson, eds., Schools and the Equal Opportunity
Problem. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Zimmerman, David. 2003. “Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence from A
Natural Experiment,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(1): 9-23.




                                       41
          Table 1: Characteristics of Evacuees and Native Louisiana & Houston Students - 2005-06

                                                                    A. Louisiana                       B. Houston
                                                            Natives         Evacuees             Native          Evacuees
                                                      Demographics

Female                                                       0.489            0.483               0.490            0.492
                                                            (0.500)          (0.500)             (0.500)          (0.500)
White                                                        0.537            0.379               0.093            0.039
                                                            (0.499)          (0.485)             (0.290)          (0.192)
Hispanic                                                     0.015            0.018               0.585            0.039
                                                            (0.121)          (0.133)             (0.493)          (0.193)
Black                                                        0.439            0.588               0.290            0.903
                                                            (0.496)          (0.492)             (0.454)          (0.296)
Asian                                                        0.010            0.015               0.032            0.019
                                                            (0.097)          (0.122)             (0.177)          (0.137)
Free/Reduced Price Lunch                                     0.567            0.807               0.787            0.968
                                                            (0.495)          (0.394)             (0.409)          (0.175)
At-Risk                                                         -                  -              0.691            0.941
                                                                -                  -             (0.462)          (0.235)
Fraction Katrina/Rita Evacuee in School                      0.041            0.089               0.027            0.066
                                                            (0.042)          (0.072)             (0.031)          (0.051)
Observations                                               326,551          14,628               171,659           4,986
                                       Test Scores, Discipline, and Attendance
Math (Standard Deviations)                                   0.026            -0.240              0.000            -0.742
                                                            (0.996)          (1.040)             (1.000)          (1.026)
Observations                                                300,216          10,708              112,241           2,151
English & Language Arts (Standard Deviations)                0.018            -0.205              0.000            -0.582
                                                            (0.994)          (1.049)             (1.000)          (1.063)
Observations                                                301,797          10,760              113,977           2,307
Disciplinary Infractions                                     0.295            0.335               0.629            0.893
                                                            (0.585)          (0.624)             (1.698)          (1.987)
Observations                                                302,640          10,776              171,659           4,986
Attendance                                                      -                  -              94.55            83.30
                                                                -                  -              (8.97)          (18.00)
Observations                                                    -                  -             171,659           4,986
Standard deviations in parentheses. Includes students in grades 3 - 10 for LA and 1 - 12 for Houston. Houston testing only
covers grades 3 - 11. The sample in LA is limited to schools where there are < 70% evacuees and excludes schools in Orleans,
Jefferson, St. Bernard, Plaquemines, Cameron, and Calcasieu parishes. Disciplinary infractions total number of suspensions and
expulsions in a year in LA and the total number of infractions resulting in an in-school suspensions or more severe punishment
in Houston.
                Table 2: Regressions of Katrina/Rita Evacuee Status on Test Scores
                                                    A. Louisiana                           B. Houston
                                                                    Elementary
                                         2005-06
                                                        2005-06        2006-07       2005-06        2006-07
                                         (lagged)
Math (LEAP & TAKS)                    -0.12***          -0.14***       -0.09***      -0.41***       -0.15***
                                        (0.03)            (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.05)         (0.05)
Observations                             40,601         120,901        118,377        43,886         38,345
English Language Arts/                -0.14***          -0.11***       -0.07***      -0.22***       -0.19***
Reading (LEAP & TAKS)                   (0.03)            (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.05)         (0.06)
Observations                             40,611         120,903        118,351        45,073         39,149
Disciplinary Infractions                  0.043     -0.023***       0.038***           -0.03           0.02
                                         (0.028)      (0.007)        (0.014)           (0.03)         (0.03)
Observations                             37,614         120,934        118,416        83,455         71,058
Attendance                           -              -              -                 -6.00***       -2.19***
                                     -              -              -                   (0.33)         (0.29)
Observations                         -              -              -                  83,455         71,058
                                                                   Middle / High
                                         2005-06
                                                        2005-06        2006-07       2005-06        2006-07
                                         (lagged)
Math (LEAP & TAKS)                       -0.07**        -0.11***       -0.09***      -0.49***       -0.26***
                                          (0.03)          (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.06)         (0.05)
Observations                             40,674         190,020        186,622        70,506         61,404
English Language Arts/                -0.11***          -0.08***       -0.06***      -0.53***       -0.41***
Reading (LEAP & TAKS)                   (0.03)            (0.02)        (0.01)         (0.08)         (0.06)
Observations                             39,621         191,651        186,892        71,211         61,954
Disciplinary Infractions                 0.14***        -0.005      0.040***          -0.12*         0.41***
                                          (0.05)        (0.010)      (0.009)          (0.07)          (0.13)
Observations                             35,748         192,479        187,200        93,190         79,254
Attendance                                                                          -12.90***       -4.05***
                                                                                      (1.17)          (0.64)
Observations                                                                          93,190         79,254
Standard errors are provided in parentheses and clustered by school. Regressions include student's race, gender,
free/reduced price lunch status, and school fixed-effects. LEAP scores are standard deviations of scale scores
within grade and year for all students. TAKS scores standard deviations of scale scores within grade and year
excluding evacuees. *, **, and *** reflect significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
   Table 3: Difference in Differences Estimates of Evacuee Share of Enrollment in School on Native Test Scores

                                     All            Black         Hispanic          Boys            Girls         Placebo          2SLS
                                     (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)

                                                              A. Louisiana - LEAP Exams, Elementary

Math                                 0.16            -0.20             -             0.18            0.14           -0.10             -
                                    (0.12)          (0.17)             -            (0.14)          (0.14)         (0.34)             -
Observations                      315,719         141,232              -          162,266         153,453          83,287             -

English & Language Arts              -0.03           0.22              -             0.02            -0.08          -0.00             -
                                    (0.10)          (0.17)             -            (0.12)          (0.12)         (0.23)             -
Observations                      315,710         141,242              -          162,253         153,457         140,866             -

                                                             B. Louisiana - LEAP Exams, Middle/High

Math                                 -0.13           0.07              -             -0.19           -0.08          0.11              -
                                    (0.14)          (0.17)             -            (0.15)          (0.14)         (0.40)             -
Observations                      505,543         209,474              -          251,013         254,530          83,302             -

English & Language Arts              -0.09           -0.18             -             -0.22           0.03           -0.09             -
                                    (0.12)          (0.17)             -            (0.14)          (0.13)         (0.17)             -
Observations                      504,131         208,164              -          250,762         253,369         137,620             -

                                                              C. Houston - TAKS Exams, Elementary

Math                               -0.91**           -1.22           -0.17           -0.71         -1.07**          -0.21         -1.02*
                                    (0.45)          (0.75)          (0.50)          (0.48)          (0.46)         (0.56)         (0.60)
Observations                      170,727          45,921          104,831         85,611          85,116          89,207        170,727

Reading                              -0.37           -0.70           -0.03           -0.40           -0.36          0.00            -0.00
                                    (0.28)          (0.51)          (0.38)          (0.35)          (0.28)         (0.38)          (0.45)
Observations                      171,520          47,903          103,261         86,712          84,808         146,062        171,520

                                                             D. Houston - TAKS Exams, Middle/High

Math                                 0.40            0.22            0.52            0.55            0.23           0.03            0.79
                                    (0.37)          (0.61)          (0.38)          (0.46)          (0.32)         (0.47)          (0.65)
Observations                      276,378          81,790          155,919        137,064         139,314          88,084        267,378

Reading                              0.06            -0.14           -0.16           0.10            -0.02          -0.30           0.72
                                    (0.40)          (0.53)          (0.48)          (0.48)          (0.34)         (0.34)          (0.56)
Observations                      278,606          82,217          157,461        138,159         140,447         147,140        278,606
Standard errors are provided in parentheses and clustered by school. Regressions cover 2003-04 - 2006-07 and include student's race,
gender, free/reduced price lunch status, and school fixed-effects. TAKS scores are standard deviations of scale scores within grade and year
excluding evacuees. When students have multiple scores for a single subject in a given year we use the lowest score. LEAP scores are
standard deviations of scale scores within grade and year for all students. Placebo regresions are limited to pre-Katrina years and apply the
2005-06 evacuee shares to 2004-05 observations. 2SLS regressions use Katrina/Rita share on 9/13/05 as an instrument for evacuee share.
Elementary is defined as any student in grades 3 - 5. Middle/High is any student in grade 6 - 11 for Houston or 6 - 10 for Louisiana. Prior
to 2005 only grades 4, 8, and 10 were tested in Louisiana. *, **, and *** reflect significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
              Table 4 - Nonlinear Models of Evacuee Share in School and Evacuee Achievement on Native Achievement - Louisiana
                                                                   A. Elementary                                                   B. Middle/High
2003 or 2004 LEAP Quartile                         1               2              3               4                 1               2              3              4
                                                                                                         Math
Katrina/Rita Share in Quartile 1                  -0.36          -0.16         -2.03**          -0.82             -0.78*        -1.44***         -1.20        -2.00**
                                                 (0.32)         (0.43)          (0.87)         (1.07)             (0.41)          (0.53)        (0.76)         (0.83)
Katrina/Rita Share in Quartile 2                  -0.31        -1.86**           -2.03        -4.04**              -0.18        -1.93***       -1.84**          -0.46
                                                 (0.61)         (0.91)          (1.25)         (1.63)             (0.69)          (0.73)        (0.87)         (1.01)
Katrina/Rita Share in Quartile 3                  -0.66          0.25            0.53           1.45               -0.44           0.87          1.10           0.37
                                                 (0.89)         (1.07)          (1.36)         (1.59)             (0.81)          (0.61)        (0.77)         (0.84)
Katrina/Rita Share in Quartile 4                  0.94         2.18**          4.95***        4.54***             1.80**        2.36***          1.52         2.29***
                                                 (0.99)         (1.07)          (1.28)         (1.16)             (0.89)          (0.77)        (0.94)         (0.85)
Observations                                     30,674         30,970         31,647          32,483             58,534         79,443         89,686         95,586
                                                                                                         ELA
Katrina/Rita Share in Quartile 1                  0.09           -0.55        -2.57***        -2.83***             -0.28        -1.72***       -2.42***       -3.99***
                                                 (0.36)         (0.42)          (0.88)          (0.94)            (0.62)          (0.46)         (0.71)         (0.80)
Katrina/Rita Share in Quartile 2                -1.09**          -1.13         -1.76*            -0.15             0.96            -0.80          -1.31          -0.59
                                                 (0.55)         (0.82)          (1.00)          (1.16)            (0.99)          (0.61)         (0.86)         (0.84)
Katrina/Rita Share in Quartile 3               -1.98***          -0.62           -1.04           -0.67             -0.41           0.03           0.23           0.84
                                                 (0.72)         (0.88)          (1.12)          (1.28)            (1.02)          (0.67)         (0.81)         (0.96)
Katrina/Rita Share in Quartile 4                  0.95           1.09          1.96**         2.35***              0.48         1.77***        2.19***        2.26***
                                                 (0.76)         (0.82)          (0.85)          (0.73)            (1.04)          (0.67)         (0.73)         (0.70)
Observations                                     30,853         30,774         31,629          32,543             59,085         79,340         88,123         94,606
Standard errors are provided in parentheses and clustered by school. Regressions cover 2003-04 - 2006-07 and include student's race, gender, free lunch status, and school
fixed-effects. LEAP scores are standard deviations of scale scores within grade and year for all students. Elementary is defined as any student in grades 3 - 5.
Middle/High is any student in grade 6 - 11 for Houston or 6 - 10 for Louisiana. Quartiles for both evacuees and natives are within grade across the state data and
determined from their 2003-04 or 2004-05 score depending on which is available since prior to 2005-06 only grades 4, 8, and 10 were tested. *, **, and *** reflect
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                         Table 5 - Nonlinear Models of Evacuee Share in School and Evacuee Achievement on Native Achievement in Houston
                                                                                     A. Elementary                                                     B. Middle/High
2004 Quartile                                                       1                2               3                4                1               2                3               4

                                                                                                                            Math
Katrina/Rita Share Below Median Score in Grade                    -0.77          -1.07**          -1.08*            -0.11           -0.89            -0.66            -0.75           -1.28
                                                                 (0.77)           (0.45)          (0.59)           (0.31)          (1.31)           (0.75)           (0.50)          (0.80)
Katrina/Rita Share Above Median Score in Grade                    3.17             2.25            -0.83            0.02          22.20***          8.20**          8.03***          8.88**
                                                                 (6.32)           (3.78)          (4.75)           (4.43)          (8.03)           (3.95)           (2.89)          (3.42)
Observations                                                     29,837          30,554           30,688           27,858          54,980           61,872           61,196          62,431

Share Above Median - Share Below Median                           3.94             3.31             0.24            0.13       23.09**              8.86**          8.77***         10.15**
                                                                 (6.53)           (3.84)           (4.78)          (4.39)       (8.87)              (4.49)           (3.23)          (4.01)
                                                                                                                         Reading
Katrina/Rita Share Below Median Score in Grade                    -0.85           -0.79*            -0.09           0.31            -1.13            -0.75         -2.03***         -2.26***
                                                                 (1.30)           (0.40)           (0.44)          (0.72)          (1.63)           (0.61)          (0.48)           (0.59)
Katrina/Rita Share Above Median Score in Grade                    3.38           5.48***            3.86            0.24           15.96*          6.84***         9.12***          8.05***
                                                                 (4.93)           (1.97)           (2.57)          (5.38)          (9.42)           (2.49)          (1.69)           (2.29)
Observations                                                     27,975          31,081           28,034           24,675          55,266           64,024           61,849          61,050

Share Above Median - Share Below Median                           4.23           6.27***            3.95            -0.07           17.08           7.59**         11.15***         10.32***
                                                                 (5.81)           (2.21)           (2.89)          (6.00)          (10.48)          (2.97)          (2.06)           (2.78)
Standard errors are provided in parentheses and clustered by school. Regressions cover 2003-04 - 2006-07 and include student's race, gender, free/reduced price lunch status, and school fixed-
effects. TAKS scores are standard deviations of scale scores within grade and year excluding evacuees. When students have multiple scores for a single subject in a given year we use the lowest
score. Quartiles for natives are from 2004-05. Above and below medians for evacuees are calculated from 2005-06 data based on the district-wide distribution within each grade. Elementary is
defined as any student in grades 1 - 5. Middle/High is any student in grade 6 - 12. *, **, and *** reflect significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
     Table 6 - Difference-in-Difference Estimates of Evacuee Share of Enrollment on Native Attendance Rates in Houston

                              All              Black            Hispanic             Boys               Girls           Placebo           2SLS
                                                                                                                          Test
                              (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)              (6)              (7)
                                                                             A. Elementary
Attendance Rate              -0.82             -1.16               -0.42            -1.44              -0.14              -0.39            0.84
                             (0.83)            (1.89)             (0.86)            (1.10)             (0.79)            (0.78)           (1.28)
Observations               322,524             88,005           197,948            165,651            156,873           170,092         322,524
                                                                             B. Middle/High
Attendance Rate             -6.95*           -13.05***             -3.82            -6.67             -7.06**             -4.84           -3.38
                            (3.90)             (3.75)             (6.48)            (4.83)             (3.33)            (2.92)           (6.25)
Observations               353,484            108,778           196,031            178,644            174,840           184,408         353,484
Standard errors are provided in parentheses and clustered by school. Regressions cover 2003-04 - 2006-07 and include student's race, gender,
free/reduced price lunch status, and school fixed-effects. 2SLS estimates use Katrina/Rita share on 9/13/05 excluding students living at the stadium
complex or covention center as the excluded instrument. The placebo test in column (7) include 2003-04 and 2004-05 only and apply 2005-06
Katrina/Rita share to 2004-05 observations. Elementary is defined as any student in grades 1 - 5. Middle/High is any student in grade 6 - 12. *, **,
and *** reflect significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                  Table 7 - Impact of Evacuee Behavior on Native Outcome
                                                                                                 A. Louisiana
                                                               I. Elementary                                                    II Middle/High
                                       LEAP Math LEAP ELA Disciplinary                                    LEAP Math LEAP ELA Disciplinary
                                                          Infractions                                                        Infractions

Katrina/Rita Share                         0.190           -0.054           0.005                            -0.106          -0.067          -0.032
                                          (0.135)          (0.113)         (0.103)                           (0.141)         (0.121)         (0.115)

Katrina/Rita Share *                      -0.013            0.213           0.145                            -0.001          -0.006          -0.120
 Avg Evac Infracs in 2004-05              (0.074)          (0.179)         (0.098)                           (0.105)         (0.083)         (0.085)
Observations                              293,011         292,998          293,102                          497,295          495,885         501,234

                                                                                                 B. Houuston
                                                               I. Elementary                                                    II Middle/High
                                           TAKS            TAKS         Disciplinary Attendance              TAKS             TAKS        Disciplinary Attendance
                                           Math           Reading       Infractions                          Math            Reading      Infractions
Katrina/Rita Share                        -0.590           -0.372          -0.623*          -0.843            1.526           0.304           -3.57*        -10.383**
                                          (0.765)          (0.451)         (0.364)          (1.419)          (1.015)         (0.917)         (2.004)          (4.935)
Katrina/Rita Share *                      -0.598            0.008          1.005**           0.048           -0.557          -0.122          2.55***           1.727
 Avg Evac Infracs                         (0.883)          (0.586)         (0.471)          (1.593)          (0.396)         (0.917)         (0.646)          (2.529)

Observations                              170,727         171,520          322,524         322,524          276,378          278,606         353,484          353,484
Disciplinary infractions in LA is the number of suspensions or expulsions a student incurs in a year. Disciplinary infractions in Houston is the number of times in a year
the student was given an in-school suspension or more severe punishment. Standard errors are provided in parentheses and clustered by school. Regressions cover 2003-04
- 2006-07 and include student's race, gender, free/reduced price lunch status, and school fixed-effects. LEAP scores are standard deviations of scale scores within grade
and year for all students. TAKS are standard deviations within grade excluding evacuees. Elementary is defined as any student in grades 1 - 5. Middle/High is any student
in grade 6 - 12. *, **, and *** reflect significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                           Table 8 - Tests of "Bad Apple" Models Using Houston Classroom Level Data

                                                                 A. Elementary                                              B. Middle/High
                                                 Math        Reading    Attendance       Disciplinary       Math         Reading   Attendance         Disciplinary
                                                                           Rate          Infractions                                   Rate           Infractions

> 1 and < 3 Evacuees with Any Infraction         -0.016        -0.015      -0.162**        0.068***         0.001         0.008           -0.33          0.03
                                                (0.025)       (0.021)       (0.065)         (0.022)        (0.016)       (0.015)         (0.21)         (0.08)
>= 3 Evacuees with Any Infraction               -0.100*        0.020         0.002           0.103          0.053         0.026           -1.27         0.93**
                                                (0.057)       (0.060)       (0.495)         (0.085)        (0.037)       (0.048)         (1.02)         (0.45)
> 1 and < 3 Evacuees                             0.006         0.012         0.031          0.002           0.005       -0.031***        -0.48**          -0.06
                                                (0.016)       (0.012)       (0.033)        (0.008)         (0.016)       (0.011)          (0.20)         (0.07)
>= 3 Evacuees                                    -0.024        0.025        0.198**         -0.013          -0.034        -0.026        -1.51***          -0.09
                                                (0.033)       (0.021)       (0.083)        (0.022)         (0.036)       (0.023)          (0.43)         (0.14)
Class Size                                     -0.004**        -0.000        0.002          -0.000          -0.000        -0.001          0.00            -0.00
                                                (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.003)        (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.01)          (0.00)
Observations                                   160,687       160,547        296,899        296,899        128,420        129,989        167,379         167,379
Test of >= 3 Evacuees with Any Infraction       -0.083*        0.035         0.164          0.035           0.052         0.017           -0.93         0.91**
vs. > 1 and < 3 Evacuees with Any               (0.050)       (0.052)       (0.496)        (0.086)         (0.036)       (0.043)         (1.00)         (0.42)

Evacuee counts and shares in middle and high school are averages over all math classes a student takes for math regressions, all reading and english classes for
reading regressions, and all reading, math, science, social studies, and english classes for attendance and discipline. Standard errors are provided in parentheses
and clustered by school. Elementary regressions cover 2003-04 - 2006-07 and middle/high regressions cover 2004-05 and 2005-06. Regressions include student's
race, gender, free/reduced price lunch status, and school fixed-effects. Student fixed effects are added to address potential sorting across classrooms. TAKS
scores are standard deviations of scale scores within grade and year excluding evacuees. When students have multiple scores for a single subject in a given year
we use the lowest score. Disciplinary infractions are the number of times in a year the student was given an in-school suspension or more severe punishment.
Elementary is defined as any student in grades 1 - 5. Middle/High is any student in grade 6 - 12. *, **, and *** reflect significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.
                                                   Table 9: Effect of Evacuee Share on Class Sizes

                                                 A. Louisiana - % of Classes in Given Size Range
                                  Elementary 1 to 20              Elementary 21 - 26                Elementary 27+
Katrina/Rita Fraction                      0.18                           -0.17                           -0.01
                                          (0.11)                          (0.13)                          (0.08)
Observations                              2191                             2191                           2191
                                   Mid/High 1 to 20                Mid/High 21 - 26                  Mid/High 27+
Katrina/Rita Fraction                    -0.27*                           0.22**                          -0.01
                                         (0.14)                           (0.09)                          (0.09)
Observations                              1571                             1571                           1571

                                                              B. Houston - Average Class Size By Grade or Subject
                                     Kindergarten                        Grade 1                         Grade 2                         Grade 3
Katrina/Rita Fraction                      0.30                           -12.77                          -0.39                          -13.61
                                          (9.11)                          (7.78)                          (8.17)                         (10.33)
Observations                               695                             706                             713                             713
                                        Grade 4                          Grade 5                    Grade 6 (Elem)                 Mid/High English
Katrina/Rita Fraction                      0.94                          -14.69                           1.08                            48.83
                                          (8.84)                         (14.20)                         (33.04)                         (33.23)
Observations                               713                             701                             273                             327
                                    Mid/High Math                  Mid/High Science            Mid/High Social Studies          Mid/High Foreign Lang
Katrina/Rita Fraction                     19.40                           23.17                          34.99*                          -34.71
                                         (18.29)                         (20.62)                         (19.72)                         (36.15)
Observations                               328                             326                             318                             265
Unit of observation is the school-year. Regressions cover 2003-04 - 2005-06 and include school fixed-effects and year dummies. Houston regressions also
include % of school at each grade level as well as % black, Hispanic, asian, Native American, and economically disadvantaged. Elementary is defined as any
school covering at least one of grades KG - 5. Middle/High is any covering at least one of grades 6 - 12. *, **, and *** reflect significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels, respectively.
                    Table 10: Effect of Evacuee Share on School Resources and Staffing in Houston
                                                                       Elementary
                        Operating             Instructional           Avg Teacher            % of Teachers w/ % of Teachers w/
                       Expenditures           Expenditures            Experience              Grad Degree       Certification

Katrina/Rita                -1,787                  342                    -3.02                 0.337**                0.313*
Fraction                   (5,087)                (3,856)                 (5.86)                 (0.169)                (0.168)
Observations                 791                    791                     763                    763                    763
                                                                      Middle/High
                        Operating             Instructional           Avg Teacher            % of Teachers w/ % of Teachers w/
                       Expenditures           Expenditures            Experience              Grad Degree       Certification
Katrina/Rita               12,748                  8,411                  -1.66                   -0.567                 0.602
Fraction                  (13,717)                (9,764)                (13.00)                 (0.345)                (0.561)
Observations                 492                    492                     464                    464                    464

Unit of observation is the school-year. All expenditures are per-student. Regressions cover 2003-04 - 2005-06 and include school fixed-
effects and year dummies, % of school at each grade level as well as % black, Hispanic, asian, Native American, and economically
disadvantaged. Elementary is defined as any school covering at least one of grades KG - 5. Middle/High is any covering at least one of
grades 6 - 12. *, **, and *** reflect significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                               Table 11: School Switching in Response to Evacuee Shares
                                              A. Louisiana                         B. Houston
                                                 Grade 4               Elementary              Middle/High
                                               Switches in             Switches in             Switches in
                                                year t + 1                       †                       †
                                                                       year t + 1              year t + 1

                    Katrina/Rita                   0.204                  0.293                   0.064
                    Fraction                      (0.414)                (0.234)                 (0.073)
                    Observations                  51,047                 209,302                 206,205

                                                Grade 10               Elementary              Middle/High
                                               Switches in          Leaves HISD in           Leaves HISD in
                                                year t + 1                      ‡                        ‡
                                                                      year t + 1               year t + 1
                    Katrina/Rita                   0.433                 -0.099*                  -0.032
                    Fraction                      (0.486)                (0.055)                 (0.092)
                    Observations                  38,282                 252,239                 248,456
                    † Limited to students not in the maximum grade for a school in year t.
                    ‡ Excludes grade 12.
                    Standard errors are provided in parentheses and clustered by school. Regressions cover 2003-
                    04 - 2006-07 and include student's race, gender, free/reduced price lunch status, and school
                    fixed-effects. Elementary is defined as any student in grades 1 - 5. Middle/High is any
                    student in grade 6 - 12. *, **, and *** reflect significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
                    respectively.
Figure 2: Hurricane Katrina and Rita Evacuees in HISD
                  by School, 2005-06
                                           Figure 3: Distribution of Evacuees's Lagged Test Scores in Same School Native Distribution -
                                                                                 Louisiana, 2005-06




                                20%
                                18%
                                16%
          Percent of Students




                                14%
                                12%
                                10%
                                 8%
                                 6%
                                 4%
                                 2%
                                 0%
                                           1             2          3           4           5         6          7          8         9       10
                                                                          Decile of 2004 Within-School Distribution


                                                             LEAP Math                                               LEAP ELA
                                 Each bar shows the percent of evacuee students in 2005 who's 2004-05 test scores are in the listed decile of the native
                                 distribution of 2004-05 test scores in the 2005-06 school.




                                        Figure 4: Position of Evacuees in Same-School Native Test Score and Attendance Distributions -
                                                                              Houston, 2005-06




                                50%
                                45%
                                40%
Percent of Evacuees




                                35%
                                30%
                                25%
                                20%
                                15%
                                10%
                                5%
                                0%
                                          1          2          3           4           5         6          7          8         9         10
                                                                        Decile of Native Within-School Distribution

                                          TAKS - Math                               TAKS - Reading                     Attendance Rate
                 Each bar shows the percent of native or evacuee students in 2005-06 who are in the listed decile of the within-school native
                 students' distribution in their 2005-06.
                              Figure 5 - T-Statistics for Pairwise Tests
    10
    8                         of Monotonicity & Invidious Comparison
Percent
    4
    2
    06




              -5                   -3         -1.645      0         1.6455           3                      5
                                                        T-statistic



                    Strong Invidious Comparison
                                                                                       Strongly Monotonic




                                Figure 6 - T-Statistics for Pairwise Tests
                                             of Boutiqueing
              6
              4
    Percent
              2
              0




                   -5               -3        -1.645     0         1.645     3                   5
                                                       T-statistic


                                                                                 Boutiqueing
