NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND U.S. NATIONAL SECURITY IN THE 1930S AND
TODAY
Martin S. Feldstein
Working Paper 15290
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15290

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2009

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Martin S. Feldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Economic Conditions and U.S. National Security in the 1930s and Today
Martin S. Feldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 15290
August 2009
JEL No. E6,H0,H56
ABSTRACT
This paper comments on the experience of the U.S. economy in the 1930s, its lessons for managing
the current economic downturn, and the relation of U.S. economic conditions to our future national
security. Some of the conclusions are: (1) Although the current recession will be long and very damaging,
it is not likely to deteriorate into conditions similar to the Depression of the 1930s. Policy makers now
understand better than they did in the 1930s what needs to be done and what needs to be avoided. (2)
The focus on domestic economic policies in the 1930s and the desire to remain militarily neutral delayed
the major military buildup that eventually achieved the economic recovery. (3) A well-functioning
system of bank lending is necessary for economic expansion. We have yet to achieve that in the current
situation. (4) Raising taxes, even future taxes, can depress economic activity. The administration's
budget proposes to raise tax rates on higher income individuals, on dividends and capital gains, on
corporate profits and on all consumers through the cap and trade system of implicit CO2 taxes. (5)
Inappropriate trade policies and domestic policies that affect the exchange rate can hurt our allies,
leading to conflicts that spill over from economics to impair national security cooperation. Reducing
long-term U.S. fiscal deficits would reduce the risk of inflation and thereby reduce the fear among
foreign investors that their dollar investments will lose their purchasing power. (6) The possibilities
for domestic terrorism and of cyber attacks creates risks that did not exist in the 1930s or even in more
recent decades. The scale and funding of the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security is not
consistent with these new risks.

Martin S. Feldstein
President Emeritus
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
msfeldst@nber.org

ASG2009‐4

Economic Conditions and U.S. National Security in the 1930s and Today
Martin Feldstein∗
In his annual report to the Congress, the new Director of National
Intelligence identified the global economic crisis as the primary current threat to
U.S. national security. He focused on the risk that falling incomes and rising
unemployment in emerging market economies could destabilize those countries
politically, a reminder of how the global economic downturn in the 1930s
contributed to the rise of the Nazis in Germany and the fascists in Italy.
His surprising focus on an economic issue also understandably raised
interest in the more general subject of the relation between economic conditions
and U.S. national security. The organizers of this Aspen Strategy Group meeting have
asked me to comment on the experience of the U.S. economy in the 1930s, its
lessons for managing the current economic downturn, and the relation of U.S.
economic conditions to our future national security.
The current economic downturn is the most severe recession since the
1930s, already longer than any of the 11 previous postwar recessions and likely to
involve a substantially greater loss of GDP. It is more damaging and more difficult to
end because its basic cause was different from that of previous recessions. Those
downturns occurred after the Federal Reserve raised the real short‐term interest
∗

Professor of Economics, Harvard University. This paper was prepared as a
background document for the August 2009 meeting of the Aspen Strategy Group.
1

rate to deal with an inflation problem. When the Fed concluded that the higher
interest rate had slowed the economy sufficiently to deal with inflation, it reversed
its policy and lowered the rate of interest enough to end the downturn.
In contrast, the current downturn was caused by a general underpricing of
risk in financial markets and in other asset markets, leading to an excessive rise in
leverage. While the defaults on subprime mortgages gave the first warning that this
was about to end, the need to reprice assets was much more general. Unwinding the
high leverage and the mispriced risk has left us with a financial system that remains
dysfunctional and that is therefore not providing the credit that the economy needs
for economic growth.
But despite these unusual problems, the current downturn is, as of now, far
less severe than the Depression of the 1930s. Even the most pessimistic forecasters
are not expecting a repeat of that experience. The level of real GDP has declined
about 5 percent since this recession began. In contrast, real GDP fell 10 percent in
the first year of the recession that began in 1929 and eventually declined more than
30 percent before it began a long slow recovery. The unemployment rate is now
approaching 10 percent but rose to 25 percent in the 1930s despite a large number
of public employment programs. Current systems of unemployment insurance,
Social Security, and Medicaid mean that there is far less personal hardship than
there was in the 1930s.
The current situation also differs from the 1930s in several other specific
ways that reduce the risk that today’s economy will deteriorate into a major
2

Depression. I will note just three of them. First, in the 1930s, banks were the
primary source of credit while now the capital markets and various nonbank
institutions play major roles in credit creation. Second, Federal government
insurance of bank deposits means that a bank failure no longer destroys the wealth
of the depositors and the fear of bank failures no longer leads to bank runs as it did
in the 1930s. Third, the expansion of federal government spending since the 1930s
provides a large stable component of aggregate national demand.
Against these favorable conditions is one important negative difference since
the 1930s. Because financial wealth was much more concentrated in the 1930s than
today, the collapse of the stock market had a direct effect on many fewer households
than it does in today’s economy, characterized by 401k plans and IRAs.
Nevertheless, unless our economic policies are very badly managed in the coming
year, we will not slide into a downturn of the scale of the 1930s.
U. S. Economic Experience in the 1930s
One reason for optimism about current economic policies is that professional
thinking about economic policy is very different today than it was in the 1930s.
Policy officials should therefore be able to avoid the mistakes that turned the
recession that began in August 1929 into the great Depression.
Thanks to the work of John Maynard Keynes and of Milton Friedman, we now
have a better understanding of how governments can (at least in principle) reduce
the severity of major economic downturns. Keynesian economics taught us that
government spending can raise GDP and reduce unemployment. Friedman’s work
3

taught us that temporary tax cuts and transfers that temporarily raise personal
incomes are relatively ineffective (unless they change the incentive to spend) while
permanent tax increases (even if their starting date is delayed) will depress current
spending.
Friedman’s analysis of monetary policy in the depression also taught us that
maintaining or expanding the “money supply” (i.e., the volume of currency and bank
deposits) is important for sustaining and growing aggregate demand. The
contraction of the money supply in the 1930s was particularly damaging because
the supply of bank money was also the basis for the supply of credit to businesses
and households.
Because these lessons were not known in the 1930s, the depression lasted
longer and was deeper that it could otherwise have been. The Federal Reserve
actually reduced the money supply by 30 percent between 1928 and 1933. The
Roosevelt administration flailed around with a variety of counterproductive
microeconomic policies (the NRA, WPA, CCC, Wagner Act, etc). The scope for
expansionary fiscal policy was very limited. Since federal government spending was
only 3.4 percent of GDP in 1930, even the 40 percent rise in nominal federal
government spending that resulted from the various Roosevelt spending programs
was only equivalent to two percent of GDP.
There was also little room for a permanent tax cut since federal tax revenue
was only 4 percent of GDP. Quite remarkably, the government actually doubled tax
rates on high‐income individuals between 1929 and 1932 and then raised them
4

further in 1936! The only successful macroeconomic policy was the result of
temporarily leaving the gold standard in 1933, and then returning at a higher price
of gold the following year, an action that automatically caused an increase in the
money supply. The unemployment rate remained at more than 17 percent as late as
1939 and declined substantially only when the government began a serious military
buildup after the U.S. formally entered the war on the Axis powers in 1941.
Current Macroeconomic Policies
Friedman’s lessons about the importance of money and credit helped to
shape Fed policies in the current downturn. In addition, the Federal Reserve and
the Treasury have acted forcefully in an attempt to extend credit in the economy. In
addition to policies to help the banks, they supported credit through money market
mutual funds, commercial paper, Fannie and Freddy mortgages, and even various
consumer loans. But the banks have restricted their lending because the rising rate
of defaults on mortgages and other loans creates uncertainty about the value of
their existing assets and therefore of their capital. The Treasury’s TARP program
and the more recent Public Private Investment Partnerships (PPIP) are attempts to
resolve the banks’ problems but, for a variety of reasons, they have not been
successful in removing the toxic assets from the banks’ balance sheets. It is not clear
whether the administration and Congress will agree on the steps needed to fix the
PPIP program in a way that will lead to a recovery of bank lending.
The Obama administration recognized the need for a Keynesian fiscal
stimulus but underestimated the amount of stimulus and the speed of action that
5

was needed to offset the combined effect of reduced consumer outlays and the fall in
residential investment. Because of the specific design of the stimulus package it
delivered relatively little increase in GDP per dollar of increased national debt.
Only about 25 percent of the increased national debt will be an increase in
federal government purchases of goods and services in 2009 through 2011. The
remaining 75 percent will reductions in taxes and increases in transfers to
households or increases in transfers to state and local governments. Consumers
have responded to transfers and temporary cuts in taxes by saving most of the
resulting increase in income. For example, the most recent rise in personal income
of $180 billion between April and May 2009 led to a rise in consumer spending of
only $25 billion with the rest going to pay debts or accumulate financial assets. A
substantial portion of the transfers to states will be saved or used to finance
spending that would otherwise have been financed with available revenues.
In short, although the basic conceptual lessons that followed from the
experience of the 1930s caused a fundamental qualitative shift in monetary and
fiscal policies, the magnitude of the government’s actions have not been adequate to
the problems that we now face. The fiscal stimulus will cause a temporary
reduction in the rate of economic decline in the second and third quarters of 2009,
but is unlikely to do enough to start a sustained expansion this year. Without
knowing what new policies will be adopted, it is impossible to know when a
sustained recovery will actually begin.
International Issues: Trade and the Dollar
6

International trade and exchange rates are controversial issues in the best of
times but can become a source of serious conflict when the economy is weak. Trade
conflicts can at a minimum make it difficult to achieve cooperation on other
international security policies. Although we are now likely to avoid the blatant
protectionist policies of the 1930s and the resulting reciprocal tariff wars, some of
the policies that are now being considered could have the same effect of creating
trade conflicts. It is therefore worth understanding what happened in the 1930s
and where similar trade conflict risks lie in current policies.
The value of the dollar and its role as a reserve currency has already become
a source of friction between the United States and China. The administration has yet
to enunciate a policy in response to its critics and is pursuing domestic policies that
could exacerbate this issue.
This section looks first at the trade issues and then at the current exchange
rate problem.
The centerpiece of America’s international trade policy in the 1930s was the
Smoot‐Hawley tariff, enacted in 1930 to reduce imports by causing American firms
and households to shift their purchases to American made goods. Because the tariff
rates were related to physical volumes of imports (e.g., $1.12 per ton of pig iron),
the sharp fall in the U.S. price level (down 29 percent from 1929 to 1932) caused
the implied effective tariff rate to rise rapidly. While the Smoot‐Hawley bill initially
only raised the already high average tariff rate from 38 percent to 41 percent at the

7

time of passage, the decline in the price level eventually caused the average tariff
rate to rise to 60 percent.
The passage of Smoot‐Hawley hurt the exports of foreign countries. That led
to retaliatory increases in foreign tariffs that reduced US exports by more than U.S.
producers gained from the “buy American” effect of the Smoot‐Hawley tariff.
Fortunately, since international trade was then only a small part of the U.S.
economy, the depressing effect on economic activity was also relatively small. The
net exports of the United States fell by less than one percent of GDP. But the passage
of the Smoot‐Hawley tariff not only depressed U.S. economic activity but also
reinforced a sense of economic nationalism among our trading partners and led
them to conclude that the U.S. did not care about their economic hardship.
Although the post‐war tradition of GATT rules and WTO conventions will
probably prevent a repeat of the 1930s style unapologetically protectionist tariffs,
there is a danger that some of the recent U.S. policies and proposed future policies
will lead to harmful reductions in trade and to increases in trade conflict. The “Buy
American” provision of the recent fiscal stimulus act requires that all products paid
for by the stimulus funds be made in America unless doing so would violate
international agreements. In practice, state and local governments and others using
stimulus funds have focused on the injunction to buy American, inducing retaliation
and threats of retaliation by foreign governments and firms. This is likely to become
a much bigger problem as the volume of purchases funded by the stimulus package
grows.

8

The Administration’s cap and trade policy for reducing CO2 emissions may, if
enacted, lead to a more serious problem of explicit tariff increases and retaliation by
foreign governments. Any cap and trade policy would raise the prices of American‐
made CO2‐intensive consumer goods. Those higher prices would put American
products at a competitive disadvantage relative to similar goods produced in other
countries. If the cap and trade policy becomes law, American firms will ask for
“border adjustment” tariff increases and for export subsidies to achieve what they
will call a “more level playing field.”
Surprisingly, WTO officials have already said that such tariffs and subsidies
could be WTO compatible, perhaps by analogy with VAT border adjustments. But
the product‐by‐product price increases caused by cap and trade would be vastly
more difficult to estimate than the impact of value added taxes, especially in a
system like the Waxman‐Markey bill with permit giveaways and a wide range of
allowable purchased “offsets”. The legislation would therefore create ample
opportunities for all firms to claim protection and export assistance and for foreign
governments to argue that all such adjustments were inappropriately large. This
could cause significant trade frictions with our trading partners, especially with
China, India, and other emerging market countries that will not impose similar cap
and trade policies or other comparable carbon taxes.
Such trade frictions would make it more difficult to achieve cooperation on
other aspects of economic policy, especially security related trade policies like the
imposition of tariffs and embargoes on a country like Iran.

9

A declining dollar could be a further source of economic conflict and political
disagreement between the United States and other countries. The real trade
weighted value of the dollar fell by 25 percent between 2002 and 2008, primarily
because of the enormous U.S. trade deficit. Since then it rose by about 13 percent,
leaving a net decline since 2002 of 15 percent. The rise of the dollar since early 2008
reflected the desire of American and foreign investors to hold dollars because of the
extreme uncertainty caused by the financial crisis.
As economic conditions stabilize, portfolio investors in the United States and
elsewhere – including governments and non‐government investors – are likely to
want to shift more of their foreign exchange from dollars to other currencies.
Recent comments by senior officials in Russia, China, and India – all major holders of
dollars – indicate that such portfolio shifts may occur in the next few years.
A fall in the value of the dollar relative to other currencies is a natural and
necessary response to the massive trade imbalances. A lower dollar will make U.S.
products more attractive in foreign markets and U.S. goods and services relatively
more attractive in the United States. But if this occurs at a time of economic
weakness abroad, the rise in imports of U.S. products and the fall in exports to the
United States could lead foreign governments to adopt policies to restrict U.S.
imports and to promote foreign exports. That in turn could lead to increased
conflicts over trade policy.
Foreign governments with large dollar investments are understandably
nervous about the value of the dollar. Although their criticisms are about the role of
10

the dollar as a reserve currency, the dollar investments of the Chinese and other
major holders of dollars are far greater than traditional reserve balances. These are
major forms of national investment, whether held in sovereign wealth funds or
other accounts.
The legitimate concern of the Chinese, for example, is not about the future
exchange rate between the dollar and the Chinese yuan but about the future
purchasing power of the dollar, i.e., about future inflation in the United States. They
worry that the massive U.S. budget deficits and the explosion of reserves at the
commercial banks could lead to future inflation that makes their dollars buy fewer
U.S. goods.
If they act on these worries, they will shift more of their foreign exchange
investments from dollars to other currencies. That would lower the value of the
dollar and increase U.S. inflation. It would also cause long‐term U.S. interest rates to
rise, reducing the value of the bonds and hurting the U.S. economic recovery. It is
not clear what retaliatory policies the United States might contemplate under those
circumstances. But foreign investors may fear a modern‐day equivalent of closing
the gold window to deny foreign investors the free access to sell their dollar
balances.
A policy that would reassure foreign investors of the future purchasing value
of their dollar assets would involve reducing future fiscal deficits and making clear
that the Federal Reserve will prevent domestic inflation even if that requires raising

11

interest rates during the early stage of the recovery when unemployment rates are
still quite high.

U. S. Economic Conditions and National Security Issues in the 1930s
The Hoover and Roosevelt administrations were so focused on domestic
economic weakness until the late 1930s that they essentially ignored the
deteriorating security conditions in Europe and in the Far East that would
eventually drag the United States into war with Germany, Italy, and Japan. In
retrospect, the great irony of the economic policies of the Roosevelt administration
was that the isolationist focus on domestic issues postponed the very policies of
military assistance and U.S. mobilization that eventually brought the United States
to a full recovery.
Economic considerations conditioned the way that the U.S. reacted to specific
foreign events. The United States did nothing substantive to respond to the
aggressive actions of Germany in central and eastern Europe, of Italy in Ethiopia,
and of Japan in China. While the U.S. protested the Japanese invasion of Manchuria,
it muted its protests because of the importance of U.S.‐Japan trade. The U.S. refused
to admit Jewish refugees from Hitler’s Germany because of (or rationalized by) a
concern about the impact of immigrants on the employment of Americans at a time
of very high unemployment.

12

The isolationist sentiment in the United States and the decision to focus on
the U.S. domestic economy led to the Neutrality Acts of 1935, 1936, and 1937 that
restricted the sale of munitions to any of the belligerents. This effectively helped
Germany and Japan because they had the domestic manufacturing capacity that was
lacking in Britain, France, and China.
Budget deficits were a political constraint on military expenditures,
reinforcing the political desire to belittle the risks to the United States of the events
on the other sides of the two oceans. The federal budget shifted from a small
surplus in 1930 ($800 million or 0.8 percent of GDP) to a deficit of $2.8 billion or 4
percent of GDP just two years later. The primary reason for the deficit was the drop
in tax revenue caused by the economic downturn. Nominal GDP fell by one‐third
between 1930 and 1932, causing federal tax revenue to decline from $4.1 billion in
1930 (4.2 percent of GDP) to less than half that amount in 1932 ($1.9 billion or 2.8
percent of the reduced GDP.) This revenue decline occurred despite – or perhaps
partly because of – a doubling of the income tax rates: the top tax rate (on incomes
over $1 million) rose from 25 percent in 1929 to 63 percent in 1932, the rate at
$100,000 rose from 25 percent to 56 percent, and even at an income of $10,000 the
marginal tax rate rose from 6 percent to 10 percent.
Despite the foreboding events in Europe and Asia, U.S. military spending
began to rise only after 1936 and the increase was slow until war was declared in
1941. Spending on the Army and Navy (there was no airforce until after World War
II) actually fell from $831 million in 1931 (1.1 percent of GDP) to $705 million in

13

1934, also about 1.1 percent of GDP. Even as late as 1939, the combined Army and
Navy outlays totaled just $1.4 billion or 1.5 percent of GDP. But mobilization was
underway in 1941, raising Army‐Navy spending to $6.3 billion (or 5.0 percent of
GDP), four times the 1939 level. And by 1943 the Army‐Navy spending had
increased another ten‐fold to $63.3 billion or 32 percent of GDP.
The rise in military spending created the demand that pulled the economy
out of the Depression. The Keynesian “multiplier” process meant that the total rise
in GDP was more than enough to finance the increased Army and Navy budgets. By
1943, the nonmilitary GDP had increased to $136 billion, nearly 50 percent higher
than in 1939. Even after adjusting for the price level increase, the real nonmilitary
spending had increased by 14 percent.
U.S. Economics and National Security Today
The current national security situation of the United States is, of course,
fundamentally different from the one that we faced 75 years ago. Yet there is a risk
that we will again underestimate the dangers abroad and therefore will devote too
little of our GDP to military spending and other forms of national security. And as in
the 1930s, national security spending today could actually stimulate overall
economic activity.
With the collapse of the Soviet Union, the U. S. nuclear umbrella no longer
induces the kind of cooperation and support for U.S. policies among our traditional
allies that it did in the earlier postwar decades. We are now part of a multipolar

14

world in which the European Union, Japan, China, and Russia are independent
actors pursuing their own national interests.
The Chinese are rapidly becoming a global economic power and potentially a
global military power. Although China’s per capita income is still low by western
standards, China’s population of 1.3 billion people is more than four times that of
the United States. If China’s annual rate of real aggregate GDP growth continues to
exceed that of the U.S. by just five percentage points (less than the gap in recent
years), China’s total real GDP (now nearly $8 trillion at purchasing power parity
prices) will exceed that of the US by 2025. While China’s per capita income will still
be relatively low, its large total GDP will allow it to support military and foreign
policy activities comparable to that of the U.S. and Europe. By devoting a larger
share of its national income to these activities, China would be able to do so even
earlier than 2025.
The financial crisis has amplified the voices of those who criticize capitalism
in general and globalization (free trade and capital movements) in particular. The
very visible success of the Chinese economy and the destructive effects of the IMF
policies in Asia and Latin America in the late 1990s have called into question the
“Washington consensus” guidelines for emerging market economies. There is a
further danger, as the DNI’s testimony earlier this year indicated, that the declining
levels of income and employment in emerging market economies could destabilize
the political regimes in those countries.

Political actors like Chavez and

Ahmadinejad are using their oil resource income to support governments and

15

nongovernment groups working against U.S. interests. American spending on
foreign assistance, on helping our natural allies, and on supporting programs that
strengthen market economies could help to counter those threats.
Another source of risk to the United States is our position as a major
international debtor, dependent on other countries to finance our large annual
current account deficit and continually roll over our vast outstanding international
debt. Foreign investment in the United States (including foreign ownership of U.S.
businesses as well as portfolio investments in U.S. equities and bonds) is now more
than $20 trillion and now exceeds U.S. investments in the rest of the world by more
than $3 trillion. The additional 2009 current account deficit (the sum of the trade
deficit and the net investment payments owed to foreign investors) that needs to be
financed by foreign governments and foreign private investors is now running at
about $400 billion and is likely to rise in response to the recent increase in the price
of oil.
Although we will inevitably attract foreign funds to finance the additional
borrowing as long as we have a current account deficit, the risk is that foreign
investors will be willing to provide those funds only at higher interest rates. A rise
in interest rates caused by reduced foreign demand for U.S. securities would depress
U.S. economic activity in the short run and economic growth over the longer term.
One way to reduce this dependence is to cut our long‐term fiscal deficits by limiting
the projected growth of government spending.

16

A further source of U.S. dependence on other countries is the increase in the
relative volume of oil imports. The share of imports in total U.S. oil consumption has
gone from about 15 percent in 1955 and 40 percent in 1975 to 65 percent today.
The suppliers of that oil are not reliable allies. Since it is clear that we will not
significantly reduce our dependence on oil imports any time soon, we must have the
naval and other military capabilities to be able to protect our access to that oil in the
middle east and the shipping of that oil in international waters.
The military threats facing the United States have also become more complex
and more worrisome because of changes in technology and in the nature of our
adversaries. In the 1930s we felt well protected by the distance of the United States
from potential adversaries in Europe and Asia. The Soviet development of
intercontinental ballistic missiles changed that after World War II. Today we face
not only nuclear weapons but also biological and chemical weapons of mass
destruction. We are only beginning to understand the potential destruction that
could be caused by cyber attacks.
We now face three different kinds of adversaries. There are the traditional
major powers (Russia and China) that could attack the United States with
conventional or nuclear weapons. An increasing number of rogue states and
regional powers (including North Korea, Iran, and potentially Pakistan) are
developing similar capabilities. Nonstate terrorist actors like Al Qaeda could acquire
and deliver a nuclear weapon or other weapon of mass destruction. All three types
of adversaries have or could develop the ability to use cyber attacks.

17

Despite the massive increase in threats to the United States, we have reduced
our commitment to defense spending. The share of GDP devoted to defense declined
from 9.1 percent in 1960 to 4.9 percent in 1980. After a temporary rise under
President Reagan (to 6.2 percent of GDP), defense spending fell to 4.9 percent of
GDP in 2008 (including the spending on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.)
The recent budget submitted to Congress by the administration significantly
reduces the GDP share devoted to defense over the next decade. Defense outlays are
projected by the Administration to decline from 4.9 percent of GDP to 3.8 percent in
2019. In real terms, defense spending would rise less than one percent a year.
The failure to support a more robust defense is a matter of political choice
rather than economic necessity. The growth of the entitlement programs (i.e., of the
so‐called “mandatory programs”) and the unwillingness to raise the tax share of
GDP have together forced a large reduction in the share of GDP available for defense.
More specifically, total federal tax revenue was 19.7 percent of GDP in 1969 and is
projected in the Obama budget to be nearly the same (20.3 percent) in 2019. During
the same half century, the mandatory “entitlement” programs rose from 5.6 percent
of GDP in 1969 to 11.2 percent of GDP this year and are projected to increase to 13.2
percent in 2019. That 7.6 percent of GDP rise in entitlements between 1969 and

18

2019 will come primarily from reduced defense spending, down by 5.3 percent of
GDP.∗
The share of GDP spent on defense could be increased permanently without
cutting entitlements or raising marginal tax rates by reducing some of the special
“tax expenditure” features of the federal income tax. For example, eliminating the
current exclusion of employer payments for health insurance would raise more than
$100 billion a year in additional revenue, an amount equal to about 0.8 percent of
current GDP and more than 20 percent of defense spending.
The decision to include virtually no defense spending in the stimulus package
(only $13 billion of the $787 billion stimulus bill) reflected the political resistance to
increasing defense outlays. I suggested in a Wall Street Journal article (“Defense
Spending Would Be Great Stimulus,” Wall Street Journal December 24, 2008) that a
temporary surge in defense outlays would be an effective way to stimulate GDP in
the current situation. That article led to discussions with each of the four service
chiefs who confirmed that, as a result of several years of conflict in Iraq and
Afghanistan, they had equipment that needed to be repaired and supplies and
equipment that needed to be replaced. Such spending would not raise the defense
∗

The remaining 2.3 percent of GDP increase in entitlements and the 1.7 percent of

GDP rise in interest on the national debt are balanced by for the increase in the fiscal
deficit (up from a surplus of 0.3 percent of GDP in 1969 to the administration’s
projected deficit of 4.4 percent of GDP in 2019.)

19

budget baseline but would simply bring forward in time the spending that would
eventually have to be done.
The military leaders with whom I spoke also indicated that they could do
substantial infrastructure spending on their bases in the United States. Such outlays
could begin immediately because they would not need the kinds of local approvals
that are required for civilian construction projects.
The defense services could also increase recruiting, training the new recruits
with civilian skills and returning them to the private economy at the end of two or
three years. Although these temporary recruits would not have performed useful
military work during that time, they would have had valuable education and would
be available as future members of the armed forces reserves.
I was surprised to learn that the services had been told by transition team
members and later by the new White House officials that, because the recession had
reduced national income, they would have to cut back their military spending. This
of course has the economic logic exactly backward. Because of the economic
weakness, a temporary rise in military spending would not require cutting back on
other forms of public and private spending. It made no economic sense to tell the
services that they had to cut back while the government was searching for other
ways to spend money as part of the stimulus package.
The recent decision to establish a new Cybercommand is a clear recognition
of the risks of cyber attacks as well as of cyber based military and industrial
espionage. Foreign governments and government related actors use cyber
20

espionage to steal military and industrial secrets. These governments or their
agents have also planted “bugs” in the systems of U.S. public utilities (including the
electric grid, city water systems, and transportation control systems) that could
allow them to cause those systems to malfunction or to completely stop functioning.
Unfortunately, the ability of the Cybercommand and of the Department of
Homeland Security to develop a robust defense against cyber espionage and cyber
attacks is being restrained by concerns about the invasion of privacy. Now that the
cyber risks are explicitly recognized, there are likely to be substantial national
security and economic benefits from working with other nations to develop ways of
preventing a dangerous escalation of cyber attacks.
Finally there is the problem of preventing organized terrorist activity in the
United States, including future events like the 9‐11 attacks. Substantial progress has
been made in recent years to shift the mandate of the FBI from its traditional crime
fighting role to a broader focus that emphasizes counter‐terrorism. Changing the
culture of an organization like the FBI is of course very difficult and some of its
rules, procedures, and organizational structures are still more suited to crime
fighting than to counterterrorism. Although some of the legal restrictions on FBI
activities have been modified to allow it to be more effective in counterterrorism,
the FBI is still restricted in ways that do not hinder the British MI5. Moreover, the
FBI budget process and the magnitude of its resources have not expanded in line
with its increased responsibilities.

21

A Concluding Comment
While it is difficult to summarize the complex economic and national security
lessons of the 1930s, several points seem clear.
(1) Although the current recession will be long and very damaging, it is not
likely to deteriorate into conditions similar to the Depression of the 1930s. Policy
makers now understand better than they did in the 1930s what needs to be done
and what needs to be avoided.
(2) The focus on domestic economic policies in the 1930s and the desire to
remain militarily neutral delayed the major military buildup that eventually
achieved the economic recovery. The administration’s current budget point to a
one‐fifth reduction in the share of GDP devoted to defense over the next decade. In
light of the increased range of adversaries and threats that the nation now faces,
there are likely to be substantial national security benefits to increasing the share of
GDP devoted to defense and other aspects of international security.
(3) A well‐functioning system of bank lending is necessary for economic
expansion. We have yet to achieve that in the current situation.
(4) Raising taxes, even future taxes, can depress economic activity. The
administration’s budget proposes to raise tax rates on higher income individuals, on
dividends and capital gains, on corporate profits and on all consumers through the
cap and trade system of implicit CO2 taxes.

22

(5) Inappropriate trade policies and domestic policies that affect the
exchange rate can hurt our allies, leading to conflicts that spill over from economics
to impair national security cooperation. Reducing long‐term U.S. fiscal deficits
would reduce the likelihood of future inflation and thereby reduce the fear among
foreign investors that their dollar investments will lose their purchasing power.
(6) The possibilities for domestic terrorism and of cyber attacks creates risks
that did not exist in the 1930s or even in more recent decades. The scale and
funding of the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security is not consistent with
these new risks.

Cambidge, MA
July 2009

23

