                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DO UNIVERSITIES GENERATE AGGLOMERATION SPILLOVERS? EVIDENCE
                     FROM ENDOWMENT VALUE SHOCKS

                                          Shawn Kantor
                                        Alexander Whalley

                                       Working Paper 15299
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15299


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2009




We thank the TIAA-CREF Institute Research Grant Program for financial support and Julie Cullen,
Martin Dooley, Caroline Hoxby, and Enrico Moretti for helpful comments and discussions. We also
thank Michael Greenstone, Richard Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti for providing their CPS employment
transitions data. Justin Hicks and Nolan Noble provided outstanding research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of TIAA-CREF or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Shawn Kantor and Alexander Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Do Universities Generate Agglomeration Spillovers? Evidence from Endowment Value Shocks
Shawn Kantor and Alexander Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 15299
August 2009
JEL No. I2,O3,R1

                                               ABSTRACT

In this paper we quantify the extent and magnitude of agglomeration spillovers from a formal institution
whose sole mission is the creation and dissemination of knowledge -- the research university. We
use the fact that universities follow a fixed endowment spending policy based on the market value
of their endowments to identify the causal effect of the density of university activity on labor income
in the non-education sector in large urban counties. Our instrument for university expenditures is based
on the interaction between each university's initial endowment level at the start of the study period
and the variation in stock market shocks over the course of the study period. We find modest but statistically
significant spillover effects of university activity. The estimates indicate that a 10% increase in higher
education spending increases local non-education sector labor income by about 0.5%. As the implied
elasticity is no larger than what previous work finds for agglomeration spillovers arising from local
economic activity in general, university activity does not appear to make a place any more productive
than other forms of economic activity. We do find, however, that the magnitude of the spillover is
significantly larger for firms that are technologically closer to universities in terms of citing patents
generated by universities in their own patents and sharing a labor market with higher education.


Shawn Kantor
School of Social Sciences, Humanities and Arts
University of California, Merced
5200 N. Lake Road
Merced, CA 95343
and NBER
skantor@ucmerced.edu

Alexander Whalley
School of Social Sciences, Humanities, Arts
University of California, Merced
5200 N. Lake Road
Merced, CA 95343
and NBER
awhalley@ucmerced.edu
1        Introduction

The geographic concentration of economic activity is a salient feature of developed economies.
There are a number of reasons to suspect that the positive externalities associated with the
clustering of labor and capital in urban areas accounts for the dramatic economic density we ob-
serve. For example, density allows producers to access suppliers more easily and inexpensively,
enables them to reach customers more efficiently, and raises the prospects of hiring high-quality
workers in a thick labor market. Furthermore, the thick labor market that a city offers mutually
benefits workers who can mitigate their unemployment risk and raise their own chances for a
quality employer-match.1 Economists have also devoted significant attention to understanding
the importance that knowledge spillovers play in contributing to the increasing returns of ge-
ographic density.2 According to Marshall (1890, 332), when productive people locate closely
“The mysteries of the trade become no mysteries; but are as it were in the air . . . Good work
is rightly appreciated, inventions and improvements in machinery, in processes and the general
organization of the business have their merits promptly discussed; if one man starts a new idea
it is taken up by others and combined with suggestions of their own; and thus becomes the
source of yet more new ideas.”

        While Marshall seems to have emphasized the organic nature in which knowledge is trans-
ferred and is developed, in this paper we seek to measure the extent and magnitude of agglom-
eration spillovers from a formal institution whose sole mission is the creation and dissemination
of knowledge – the research university.3 In other words, since research universities exist and are
heavily subsidized to “spill knowledge,” it seems natural to look here first to understand the
importance of knowledge spillovers in agglomeration economies in general.4 Despite the promi-
    1
        There is a voluminous and growing literature measuring the determinants and magnitudes of agglomeration
spillovers. While not an exhaustive account of the literature, see for example Lucas (1988), Romer (1990),
Krugman (1991a,b), Rauch (1993), Audretsch and Feldman (1996, 2004), Ciccone and Hall (1996), Ellison and
Glaeser (1997, 1999), Black and Henderson (1999), Glaeser (1999), Glaeser and Mare (2001), Rosenthal and
Strange (2001, 2003, 2004, 2008), Dumais, Ellison, and Glaeser (2002), Davis and Weinstein (2003), Henderson
(2003), Duranton and Puga (2004), Moretti (2004 a,b,c), Ottaviano and Thisse (2004), Ciccone and Peri (2006),
Shapiro (2006), Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr (2007), Glaeser and Kerr (2009), and Iranzo and Peri (2009).
  2
    For a recent review of this strand of the agglomeration literature, see Henderson (2007).
  3
    Of course, more recently research universities have been engaged in the commercialization of their knowledge
creation.
   4
     The public subsidy to higher education in the U.S. to create and disseminate knowledge is significant. In
FY 2008 public universities received $85 billion from state and local governments for their wide-ranging activities
from teaching, research, to outreach (SHEEO 2009, Table 6). The federal government, in FY 2007, contributed
$30.4 billion to the research and development activities of colleges and universities (NSF 2009). In addition,


                                                        3
nence of high-profile university-industry partnerships in Silicon Valley and along the Route 128
corridor, there is a relatively small but growing body of empirical research that has attempted
to measure the role that universities play in contributing to economic growth at the relatively
local level. Following Jaffe (1989; see also Acs, Audretsch, and Feldman 1991) much of the
research has explored the spillover effects of academic research on such outcomes as patents,
innovations, business start-ups, or employment changes.5 While the prior research has shown
the importance of academic research to the development of specific local industries, such as
pharmaceuticals or electrical and electronic equipment, and that the productivity gains from
academic research tend to be highly localized, we still have little understanding of the extent to
which research university activities contribute to broad-based regional economic development.6

    This paper seeks to address this question directly. We focus specifically on relatively large
counties from 1981 to 1996 and examine how research university activity in these urban counties
affected the wages that were paid to workers outside the higher education sector. The main
challenge we face is that university activity does not occur randomly. For example, the research,
teaching, and outreach activities of Stanford University both influences, and is influenced by,
the productivity and income of firms and workers in the surrounding Silicon Valley (Santa
Clara County). The endogeneity arises because the activities of universities themselves may be
directly affected by the presence of highly productive and innovative firms in a region. Highly
productive firms may provide the intellectual or physical capital needed for a university-industry
partnership to be successful. In addition, if knowledge spillovers are present, then they are
likely to flow in both directions. Universities benefit from the presence of highly productive
many individuals, foundations and firms donate large sums to universities, often to enhance the performance of
institutions they support or to sponsor specific research endeavors. In FY 2008 universities received $31.6 billion
in voluntary support from non-governmental sources (CAE 2009).
   5
     See, for example, Bania, Eberts, and Fogerty (1993), Audretsch and Feldman (1996), Anselin, Varga, and Acs
(1997, 2000), Zucker, Darby, and Brewer (1998), Varga (2000), Adams (2002), Cohen, Nelson, and Walsh (2002),
Woodward, Figueiredo, and Guimarães (2006), Abramovsky, Harrison, and Simpson (2007), Toole (2007), Furman
and MacGarvie (2007), and Andersson, Quigley, and Wilhelmsson (2009). Beeson and Montgomery (1993) took
a broader approach and tested whether the quality of a university had an impact on regional employment growth
rates, the percentage of the labor force employed as scientists and engineers, regional income, employment, net
migration, or the share of employment in high-tech industries.
  6
    Aghion, Boustan, Hoxby, and Vandenbussche (2009) consider the impact of research university activity on
state economies in an endogenous-growth framework. Their study finds that exogenous increases in research
university activity has a greater impact on economic growth in states close to the technological frontier. Part of
the reason for this disproportionate benefit is that potential beneficiaries of such education migrate to the frontier
states and away from the distant-frontier states. They also find that innovation, in the form of patent activity,
increases as a result of the exogenous shocks to higher education.




                                                          4
and innovative neighboring firms and workers, much as innovative firms do from the presence
of a research university. Furthermore, the presence of highly-productive firms may increase the
local demand for workers trained in a university setting who transition to local jobs – that is,
graduating undergraduate and graduate students, as well as former postdoctoral researchers.
Thus, naively examining the cross-sectional correlation between university activity and labor
income of workers in the neighboring area may lead one to conclude that universities generate
agglomeration spillovers, when in fact the causal link is unclear. Our estimation strategy seeks
to isolate the spillover effects of research universities’ activities on their local economies.

       To address the endogeneity concern we develop a new instrumental variables strategy based
on the fact that universities are legally bound to spend a fixed fraction of the market value of
their endowments in each year.7 We take advantage of the facts that shocks to stock market
returns occur at the national level and that the initial market values of university endowments
in a county are exogenous to the future economic activity that may occur in their respective
counties.8 As urban counties across the U.S. had universities with different levels of initial
endowments, when interacted with stock price fluctuations the instrument will capture variation
in university activity that is exogenous to changes in local income. Using this method we can
estimate the casual effect of university activity on local labor income in non-education sector
firms, which is the parameter of interest.

       To conduct our analysis we use previously under-explored data on each institution’s annual
expenditures and initial endowment values, matched to annual data on county-level, industry-
level income from 1981 to 1996.9 We draw our institutional-level information on research univer-
sities from the U.S. Department of Education’s Higher Education General Information Survey
(HEGIS) and the Integrated Postsecondary Educational Data System (IPEDS) which provide
an annual census of all colleges and universities in the U.S. Among the numerous variables that
are reported in the HEGIS/IPEDS data, our specific interest lies in the institutions’ overall ex-
   7
       A similar strategy to examine the effect of university spending on university innovation is used in Whalley
and Hicks (2009).
   8
     Conceptually, our instrumental variables strategy of using exogenously-determined price changes to gain
information on local exposure to an economic phenomenon is very similar to that recently used by Black, Daniel,
and Sanders (2002) to estimate the effect of local economic activity on disability program participation using the
coal boom and bust, and Acemoglu, Finkelstein and Notowidigdo (2009) who estimate the effect of local income
on health spending using oil price shocks.
   9
     Our choice to end the sample period in 1996 is driven by data constraints. The U.S. Department of Education
has not released the 1997 to 1999 institutional-level financial data. In addition, beginning with the 2000 data, the
nature of the accounting standards used to measure expenditures by universities changed, thus rendering these
data non-comparable with the earlier years.


                                                         5
penditures and initial endowment market values, the key endogenous and instrumental variables
needed for this study. Our outcome variable – average labor income in non-education sectors –
is drawn from the U.S. Census Bureau’s County Business Patterns (CBP) dataset. These data
provide measures of average annual labor income in every industry in each U.S. county.

       Our empirical analysis reveals that research university activity results in modest, but statis-
tically significant, agglomeration spillovers. Our estimates indicate that a 10 percent increase
in higher education spending in an urban county increases local non-education sector labor in-
come by about 0.5 percent. We also find that these effects are persistent, as the initial response
to university activity is very similar to the five-year lagged response. The magnitude of our
results is notable in that they are consistent with other estimates of agglomeration spillovers
from economic activity in general. Using a variety of approaches, Glaeser and Gottlieb (2009,
24-25) estimate the elasticity of the density of economic activity (city size) on local labor income
to be between 0.04 and 0.13. On the other hand, our estimates are significantly smaller than
those recently estimated by Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti (2008) for large manufacturing
plants. The similarity of our results with many previous findings and the fact that they are
smaller than the localized effects of large capital-intensive manufacturing plants indicates that
universities generate no more productivity gains than other sources of economic density.

       While the spillover effects from universities appear rather modest, we further investigate
whether closer economic links between universities and local industries magnifies the effect, as
the prior research on academic research spillovers would suggest. We consider three linkage mea-
sures.10 First, we look at how frequently industry patents cite a patent issued by a university
to measure industry-specific utilization of higher education knowledge. Second, we measure the
degree to which each industry employs college graduates – the other primary output of local
universities. Finally, we examine whether industries that pool labor markets with the higher
education sector receive larger spillovers. This measure is based on workers’ two-way transitions
out of (into) higher education and into (out of) other industries. We find little evidence that
technologically closer industries disproportionately benefitted from enhanced university activi-
ties in the short term, but such industries benefited much more at the five-year horizon. We find
that the impact on labor income in industries that used university knowledge (patents) more
intensively or that were more likely to share a labor market with universities was 1.5 to 2 times
greater than the impact in industries that were technologically more distant from universities.
  10
       We follow Moretti (2004b), Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr (2007), and Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti (2008)
in measuring disparate spillover effects based on different measures of economic proximity to higher education.




                                                         6
2         Conceptual Framework

In this section we discuss the conceptual framework that underlies our empirical analysis of
the agglomeration effects of university activity on non-education local labor markets.11 The-
oretically, both wages and land rents would be required to estimate the effect of the spillover
effects of university activity (see Roback, 1982). However, as Moretti (2004c) and Rosenthal and
Strange (2008) point out, nominal income differences across locations are sufficient to estimate
the agglomeration effect on the marginal product of labor. To see why, consider an adaptation
of the open-city model from Rosenthal and Strange (2008). The model is based on the concept
of spatial equilibrium, where firms and workers are indifferent across locations. In the model,
firms and workers make decisions about where to locate. Spatial equilibrium wages and rents
are determined by two indifference conditions. First, real wages must adjust so that workers are
indifferent across locations with different amenities. Second, nominal wages must adjust so that
they are equal to differences in the value of the marginal product of labor across locations.

         To understand the effect of the presence of university activity on equilibrium wages and land
rents, consider two different locations with and without a university. Suppose that universities
enhance local workers’ productivity, but do not directly affect workers’ utility.12 In equilibrium,
when universities generate agglomeration spillovers, firms will expand until the unit cost of
production is equalized across locations. As land is an immobile factor some of the productivity
gains from agglomeration will be capitalized into higher land rents. In this case, the impact of
agglomeration on wages is a lower bound on the productivity gains from agglomeration, holding
rents constant, even though the impact of agglomeration on wages is an exact measure of the
influence of agglomeration on the marginal productivity of labor.

         With this framework in mind, a natural estimating equation is:

(1)                             lnwageit = α1 Uit + Sit α2 + Ait α3 + yeart + uit ,

where lnwageit is the average non-education sector income in area i at time t, Uit is university
    11
         Our discussion closely follows that in Rothenthal and Strange (2008) who examine evidence for human capital
spillovers in nominal wages.
  12
     Of course, it is also possible that locations with and without a university presence have different levels of
amenities that workers value. Shapiro (2006) recently estimated that 60 percent of the growth rate in employment
across metropolitan areas from 1940 to 1990 can be attributed to the agglomeration effects associated with the
enhanced productivity of college graduates in a city. The remainder can be attributed to the notion that more
highly educated areas experience more rapid growth in quality of life, which in turn contributes to growth in
employment, wages, or rents.


                                                           7
activity in area i in period t, Sit is a vector measuring the average skill level of workers in area
i in period t, Ait is vector of attributes that affect worker utility and firm productivity in area
i in period t, and uit is the error term. Our central parameter of interest is α1 which measures
the responsiveness of local non-education sector nominal wages to university activity.

    A central challenge in estimating the casual effect of university activity on wages, as repre-
sented in equation (1), is that many elements of Sit and Ait are unobserved. More importantly,
university activity does not occur at random. University location and scale are likely to be
correlated with the unobservable elements of Sit and Ait . For example, universities are likely to
locate and expand where the demand for skill or potential for research collaboration is greatest.
If these areas also have the most productive firms, then they would pay higher wages anyway. It
is also possible that university communities contain attributes that workers are likely to value,
such as the presence of vibrant arts, cultural, or athletic amenities. If workers value such ameni-
ties, then, all else constant, firms would be able to offer lower wages. Furthermore, as a central
output of universities is college graduates, we might expect that areas with a university would
attract skill-intensive industries, and thus would have a workforce that is higher skilled than the
average location. Thus, the endogenous nature of university activity is likely to bias estimates
of α1 in a simple cross-sectional OLS regression.



3    Empirical Approaches

We implement three strategies to address the endogenous nature of university activity. Our first
strategy is to restrict our analysis to counties with a research university presence, so our focus
will be on how changes in the scale of university activity affects local non-education sector labor
income. Therefore, our estimate of the effect of university activity will not be confounded by the
inherent differences between the types of counties that have or do not have a research university
presence. Our second strategy is to difference-out time-invariant characteristics of counties and
industries, which addresses a wide class of potential selection problems. Any permanent differ-
ences across counties that are correlated with the scale of university activity such as university
quality, the presence of Silicon Valley, or a highly skilled labor force is factored out in the differ-
encing. Moreover, permanent differences in the location of industries, which may be correlated
with university activity, are also effectively controlled. Thus, cross-sectional differences in uni-
versity activity, or factors associated with universities, across counties do not contribute to the
identification. Our results are identified from within-county changes in university activity over


                                                  8
time. To allay further concerns that we have not effectively dealt with endogeneity, our third
strategy is to adopt an instrumental variables approach.



3.1     First Differences


Our goal is to estimate the responsiveness of changes in labor income to changes in university
expenditures in a county using a first-differences specification. We estimate the model as,

(2)                         ∆Yijt = α1 ∆U Eit + α2 t + α3 ∆SMt−1 + "ijt ,

where ∆Yijt is the first-difference in the logarithm of average non-education sector labor income
in county i, sector j, in year t, ∆U Eit is the first difference in per capita total expenditures
by universities in county i in year t, t is a linear time trend, ∆SMt−1 is the first-difference in
the Standard and Poor’s 500 Stock index in year t − 1, and "ijt is the error term. We add a
control for non-linear stock market trends, ∆SMt−1 , in our baseline first-difference model to
be consistent with the IV specification below. Our parameter of interest is α1 .

      The first-difference specification in equation (2) effectively addresses concerns that time-
invariant county and industry characteristics might bias our estimates of the true impact of
university activity. However, two concerns remain. Changes in university scale do not occur
randomly. Many local productivity shocks are unobservable and are likely to affect both local
wages and university activity. For example, if a local firm produces an innovation that increases
its productivity and also leads to an increase in the demand for collaboration on future research
projects with a local university, this unobservable innovation shock would affect both the level
of wages and the extent of university activity.

      The second concern with equation (2) arises because there is likely to be measurement error
in the level of university expenditures in a county. Estimating the model in first-differences mag-
nifies any problems that measurement error in university expenditures poses for the estimation
of the effect on labor income. If the measurement error in university activity is classical, α1
will be biased towards zero and we will underestimate the effect of university activity on local
labor income. This attenuation effect may well be important, as Rosenthal and Strange (2008)
demonstrate in the context of education externalities. Thus, we hope to mitigate any concerns
that measurement error will bias our estimates of α1 .




                                                  9
3.2      Instrumental Variables


To address concerns that university activity might be endogenously related to unobservable de-
terminants of wages and that university activity is measured with error, we also estimate an
IV specification. Our empirical strategy attempts to identify potentially exogenous sources of
variation in university expenditures in a county. We develop our instrument by taking advan-
tage of the fact that universities were (and still are) legally constrained to use simple spending
formulas based on the market value of their endowments to determine how much of their en-
dowments were spent in a given year. This requirement allows us to instrument for overall
university expenditure by exploiting differential impacts of stock price changes across counties
where universities had different levels of endowments. In particular, we instrument for ∆U Eit
in equation (2) with the first-stage specification,

(3)                     ∆U Eit = β1 (∆SMt−1 ∗ IEi ) + β2 t + β3 ∆SMt−1 + "2it ,

where ∆U Eit is the first-difference in per capita university expenditures in county i in year
t, ∆SMt−1 ∗ IEi is the first difference in the Standard and Poor’s 500 Stock index in year
t − 1 (∆SMt−1 ) interacted with the initial, per capita market value of the endowments of all
universities in county i (IEi ), t is a linear time trend, ∆SMt−1 is the first-difference in the
Standard and Poor’s 500 Stock index in year t − 1, and "2it is the error term.

      The intuition behind our identification strategy is straightforward. Universities spend a fixed
fraction of the market value of their endowments in any year because of legal constraints on the
spending of endowment resources held in trust. As Ehrenberg (2000 and 2009) notes, many
universities follow a rule of spending 4 to 5 percent of the market value of their endowments
each year. The fixed-spending rule emerged in the early 1970s as a result of efforts to maximize
the long-term value of endowment portfolios and to increase their long-term effectiveness as a
source of revenue.13 Prior to the publication of an influential 1969 Ford Foundation report,
there was significant uncertainty about whether state and federal laws allowed universities to
spend any of the capital gains realized from their endowments’ appreciation. Most universities
adopted a very cautious policy in response to the uncertainty and only spent the current income
– rent, interest, and dividends – their endowments generated, while leaving the principal and
capital gains untouched. The cautious policy, however, led universities to heavily weight their
portfolios with assets, such as bonds, that paid out current-year income. Many commentators
and universities became concerned that the excessive focus on bonds meant that universities
 13
      The discussion below draws extensively from Yoder’s (2004) excellent overview of university endowment
management.


                                                     10
were foregoing potential capital gains from investing in equities, which could have had significant
negative consequences for long-term endowment growth.

       The Ford Foundation study clarified the legal constraints on endowment spending policies.
Importantly, the study argued that is was legally permissible for endowment managers to take
advantage of the higher returns of equities, while at the same time generating income for current
expenditures.14 The report concluded that universities could indeed spend capital gains. The
report also recommended that universities follow a total-return spending policy based on a
three-year moving average of their endowments’ market values, regardless of whether endowment
income came from capital gains or distributions.

       Yoder (2004, 10) notes that the average spending rate for all universities in 1999 was 4.7
percent of the market value of their endowments, with the most highly endowed spent 4.1 percent
and the least endowed spent 4.8 percent. To see why the 4 to 5 percent spending rule has become
a standard among universities, consider that a typical endowment portfolio of 70 percent stocks
and 30 percent bonds would be expected to yield an average annual return of 9 percent over
the long-term. With an historic inflation rate for university costs of 4 percent, this leaves a real
return of 5 percent. Thus, spending 5 percent of the market value of an endowment ensures the
long-term sustainability of an endowment’s real value. Universities may have different target
spending rates depending on the composition of their portfolios, their investment returns, their
preferences for intergenerational equity, or their desires to increase the long-term real growth
rate of their endowments, but in practice there is very little variation among institutions.15

       Because universities seek the long-term sustainability of their endowments, they do not
arbitrarily adjust their spending rule to short-term fluctuations in economic conditions, whether
unusually favorable or negative. In other words, universities reinvest excess returns in one year
  14
       To further clarify the exact legal parameters of endowment management, a proposed Uniform Management
of Institutional Funds Act (UMIFA) was presented to state legislatures in 1972 and was widely adopted.
  15
     While differences across institutions in their target spending rates are small, differences in the rate of return
they experience may well be larger. Lerner, Schoar and Wang (2008) show that the colleges and universities in
the top quartile of the SAT admission distribution experienced a 1.4 percent greater return on their endowments
from 1992 to 2005 than those of a median SAT institution. Much of the difference in the rates of return are
explained by different portfolio allocations, with asset selection and management differences explaining a smaller
portion. One change that has generated much discussion recently is the increasing allocation toward relatively
new, alternative assets such as hedge funds, private equity, and venture funds. This change is quite recent and
many institutions still have very small holdings in these asset classes. Lerner, Schoar and Wang (2008) note that
in 1992 these types of assets accounted for only 1.1 percent of all assets, but grew to 8.1 percent in 2005. Thus, in
our sample period of 1981 to 1996, these alternative assets made up only a small portion of endowment portfolios.



                                                         11
in order to weather below-normal returns in another. The fixed nature of the spending rule has
generated substantial controversy. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, especially, the fact that
university spending from endowment funds was far below the returns they were able to achieve
in financial markets led to congressional hearings on the nature of the spending policies and
whether the favorable tax treatment of endowment income should continue. More recently, with
the collapse in endowment values due to the 2008 financial crisis, universities have faced pressure
from faculty and students to increase the spending rate from the endowment to preserve the
academic quality of the institution. The fact that universities have by and large held firm on
their spending policy in the face of significant pressure is largely due to the legal responsibility
they have to protect the principal value of gifts to their endowments.16

       Since universities all generally follow a similar percentage spending rule and all have different
endowment values, exogenous stock market shocks will lead to variation in the amount of en-
dowment income each university will be able to spend in any one year. As stock market shocks
and the level of the initial endowment are exogenous to trends in local economic activity across
counties, this variation provides a compelling source to identify the effects of overall university
expenditures on local economies.



3.3       Potential Challenges to the Identification Strategy


Our identifying assumption is that absent stock price changes, labor income in counties with
different levels of initial university endowments would have grown at similar rates. This assump-
tion is reasonable since both stock market prices and the level of initial endowment should not
be correlated with changes in a county’s level of economic activity. Of course, counties with
different initial levels of university endowment may differ in other ways that could affect local
labor income, such as the skill level of the population, the productivity of local firms, or the
availability of valuable amenities. Any such differences that are time-invariant will be differenced
out in the first-differences model. Only differential trends in income across counties driven by
  16
       See Salem (1992). It is worth noting that while we have discussed endowments as if they were one entity, in
practice each separate gift has a separate endowment account. Many endowment gifts are restricted to funding a
certain chair, scholarship, or building at an institution and universities are legally bound to disburse the money
of the endowment in accordance with the donor’s intent. While many gifts to university endowments have strings
attached, endowment disbursements are largely fungible. That is, donors typically provide gifts to support the
core activities of the university, such as hiring faculty and offering student aid, so the restrictions that donors
place on gifts are unlikely to substantively alter the composition of a university’s expenditures. A university could
always decline gifts that were inconsistent with its mission or strategic plans.


                                                         12
unobservables that are correlated with the level of initial endowment could pose a threat to our
identification strategy. While it seems reasonable that our assumption is valid, it is instructive
to consider cases where it might be violated.

       First, it is possible that stock market shocks affect firms differentially. For example, small
firms that are more credit constrained may be more sensitive to cyclical conditions (see, e.g.,
Moscarini and Postel-Vinay 2009). If the location of credit constrained firms is correlated with
the initial endowment of universities in a county, then our identification assumption may be
threatened. We address this and other potential concerns with firms’ differential exposure to
stock market shocks by estimating additional models where we allow for changes in labor income
in each industry to be differentially correlated with changes in stock prices. We also estimate
models where we allow changes in labor income to be differentially correlated with changes in
the stock market depending on initial characteristics of the county. To the extent that we can
include variables that at least partially reflect differences in productivity, this specification serves
as an additional check for whether differential firm exposure to stock market shocks is driving
the results. The variables we interact with the stock price fluctuations are the initial housing
rent and percentage of the population who were college graduates in the county in 1980.

       Second, it is possible that stock market shocks affect universities differentially. For example,
the student tuition revenue that higher-quality universities receive may be more exposed to stock
market fluctuations, independent of their endowment values. As higher-quality institutions are
more likely to have larger endowments, this may undermine our identification strategy.17 To
address this concern we estimate models where we allow changes in labor income in each county
to be differentially correlated with changes in the stock market depending on the average quality
of universities in the county. To measure institutional quality we use the average of the 1991
U.S. News and World Report quality rankings of the institutions within a county.18

       In sum, while we cannot completely rule out the possibility that some of the effect reported
below reflects time varying county-specific changes in unobserved labor productivity within a
county, it appears that many sources of spurious correlation are controlled.
  17
       It is also possible that higher-quality universities hold a different portfolio of assets in their endowments
(see Lerner, Schoar, and Wang, 2008). As higher-quality institutions are more likely to hold assets that are less
correlated with stock market shocks, this will weaken our first stage for this group of universities.
  18
     As relative institutional quality is very stable over time and the 1991 issue of USNWR was the first to include
all national colleges in the rankings algorithm, we treat these data as time invariant measures of quality.




                                                          13
3.4     Other Estimation Considerations


Clarity about the timing of our variables is especially important given the fact that we are
identifying our parameter of interest off of changes in the variables. Many universities use the
previous year’s market value of endowment to determine how much is spent from the endowment
in the next year. To be consistent with this fact we estimate the first stage of our IV models
using one lag of stock market changes interacted with the initial endowment. In addition, the
county-industry labor income variable we use is reported based on March activity. To allow for
university expenditure to have time to impact local wages we also lag university spending by
one year. Thus, to take account of differences across the variables in the timing of reporting and
behavior we implement our first difference model in (2) as,

(4)                        ∆Yijt = α1 ∆U Eit−1 + α2 t + α3 ∆SMt−2 + "ijt .

The first stage for the IV model above becomes,

(5)                  ∆U Eit−1 = β1 (∆SMt−2 ∗ IEi ) + β2 t + β3 ∆SMt−2 + "2it ,

where∆U Eit−1 is the first difference in per capita university expenditure in county i lagged by
one year, ∆SMt−2 ∗ IEi is the first difference of the Standard and Poor’s 500 stock index lagged
two years (∆SMt−2 ) interacted with the initial per capita endowment level in county i (IEi ),
t is a linear time trend, ∆SMt−2 is the first difference of the Standard and Poor’s stock index
lagged two years, and "2it is the error term. As stock prices follow a random walk process, we
do not include stock price changes that are contemporaneous with ∆Yijt as they will not impact
our parameter of interest α1 .

      A few other estimation details are worth noting. First, we cluster the standard errors at the
county level to address the fact that university expenditure is measured at the county level and
the same expenditure is impacting all industries within the county (see Moulton 1986). This
clustering also allows us to address the concern that changes in labor income may by serially
correlated within a county-industry cell. Second, we weight all of the industry-county cells by
their employment level in 1981. Our estimates, then, represent the effect of university activity on
the income of the average worker, not on the average industry-county cell. Third, in measuring
the scale of university activity we use total university spending from all revenue sources, ranging
from tuition, state support, federal grants, to endowment income.

      Fourth, we estimate alternative versions of (4) and (5) where we allow for a five-year lag in
the response to changes in university activity. Differences in estimates of α1 between models

                                                 14
with different response lags help us to understand whether any spillovers are persistent or only
transitory. We choose to examine a five year lag in the response of labor income to a change
in university activity to better capture potential migration responses to changes in university
activity. As twenty percent of Americans change counties about every five years (Glaeser and
Gottleib 2009, 7), the five-year lagged responses may better capture those discussed in the spatial
equilibrium literature.

    Finally, we probe the validity and robustness of our estimates with a number of alternative
specifications. For example, as noted in the previous section, we investigate whether differences
in the impact that stock market shocks had on different types of industries, universities, or
counties influence our reported results.



4    Data

The primary data needed to implement the empirical analysis are overall university expendi-
tures, initial endowment market value, and local labor income in the non-education sector. We
obtain annual data on each university’s expenditures, endowment market values, and character-
istics from the U.S. Department of Education’s Higher Education General Information Survey
(HEGIS) and Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) from 1981 to 1996.
The HEGIS/IPEDS data provide a census of all four-year colleges and universities in the U.S.
and reports information on revenue, expenditure, enrollment, and institutional characteristics
from each institution. HEGIS was replaced with the IPEDS survey in 1984. We choose to end
our analysis in 1996 because the U.S. Department of Education has unfortunately not released
the institutional financial data from the 1997 to 2000 surveys. In addition, there were significant
changes in the accounting methods used to report expenditure and revenue beginning with the
2000 survey, thus making it difficult to compare to the earlier data.

    Our second central data source is the U.S. Census Bureau’s County Business Patterns (CBP)
dataset that contains information on annual labor income by industry for each county, which
is the primary outcome variable we study. We also use baseline demographic information on
counties from the U.S. Census Bureau’s 1983 County and City Data Book (CCDB). As a measure
of the quality of each institution, we use the U.S. News and World Report (USNWR) College
Rankings from 1991. Lastly, our instrumental variable uses annual data on the Standard and
Poor’s 500 (S&P 500) stock market index.


                                                15
       We form our analysis sample by first limiting the set of institutions to the leading research
colleges and universities. We define the population of research institutions as those classified
as Research I, Research II, Doctoral I, or Doctoral II in the 1994 Carnegie Classification of
Higher Education Institutions. This initial sample contains 235 institutions. Since we restrict
our attention to counties with populations above 250,000 and exclude the District of Columbia,
the resulting sample of colleges and universities is 140 institutions. We impose this geographic
restriction as we are interested in estimating the effect of research-university activity in large,
diversified local economies that contain the broadest representation of industries. In addition,
to preserve confidentiality, the CBP data masks industry-county cells with a small number
of establishments, which are more likely to occur in relatively small counties. This sample
restriction results in the loss of a few prominent research universities that are located in small
counties, such as Duke University. Further, we are forced to drop nine institutions have missing
endowment market values in 1981 and another three institutions that do not report expenditures
in at least 15 years of our 16-year sample period.19 For 14 institutions that are missing only one
year of expenditure data, we impute the missing expenditure for the missing year by inflating the
institution’s prior year expenditure by the national growth rate in all institutions’ expenditures.
The final sample consists of 128 colleges and universities located in a total of 81 counties.20

       We aggregate the institution-level data to the county-level. We keep all SIC 2-digit indus-
tries in the CBP data, but drop tobacco manufacturing (2100) as it is a highly geographically
concentrated industry. We also drop the education sector (SIC 8200) and agriculture, minerals
and mining (SIC of less than 1500) from the analysis. As there is some entry and exit of small
county-industry cells in the CBP data, likely caused by the masking of confidential information,
we restrict our analysis to the industries that are reported consistently over time within a county.
There are a potential 58 industries, across 81 counties, over 15 years included in the dataset,
although not all industries are reported in each county.

       We construct our instrument by interacting the initial (1981) endowment market value in
  19
       In eliminating the nine universities without initial endowment data, we are forced to drop five counties from
our sample because five of the institutions were the only research universities in their respective counties. The two
most prominent losses include SUNY-Buffalo (Erie County, NY) and the University of Utah (Salt Lake County,
UT). The four other counties are considered in our analysis, but without the influence of the university that
was dropped because of the missing endowment information. As a result of dropping the three universities with
missing expenditure data, we were forced to drop one county that only had the single research university (Rutgers
(New Brunswick) – Middlesex County, NJ). For the other two universities, their counties remain in the sample.
  20
     To illustrate the range of universities and counties in the sample, Appendix Table A1 shows a list of the top
and bottom 10 counties in terms of initial endowments.



                                                          16
each county with the change in the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index in each year, appropriately
lagged (see equation (5)). We normalize the S&P 500 Index so that the 1981 value is one. As
university expenditure is reported for the fiscal year from July to June, we use the average value
of the S&P Index over the fiscal year so that the timing of stock market shocks line up with the
timing of university expenditures.

   Columns (1) and (2) of Table 1 show the means and standard deviations of various county
characteristics, computed over all large counties (populations greater than 250,000) in the first
year of the sample, dividing large counties by whether or not they have a university. Column
(3) presents t-statistics for a test of differences in the means between columns (1) and (2).
The comparison yields a number of interesting results. First, nominal labor income in non-
education industries is statistically significantly higher in research university counties than in
non-university counties. Second, university counties are much larger and have higher crime rates.
There is little difference in the education level of the work force, per capita income, or housing
rents across the sets of counties, however. Third, there are also significant differences in the
industry distribution of the workforce. University counties have less employment concentrated in
retail trade, and more employment concentrated in transportation and communications, finance,
insurance, real estate services, and other services. Table 1 demonstrates that the differences
between university and non-university counties in non-education sector labor income could be
due to a number of observable differences. As there are also likely significant differences in
unobservable determinants of nominal income between university and non-university counties,
our central empirical analysis focuses on university counties alone.

   Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for the subsample of 81 urban (populations greater than
250,000) counties that have research university activity. Columns (1) and (2) show the means
and standard deviations of various county characteristics, dividing the sample counties based
on whether their university expenditures in 1981 fell above or below the median value. Column
(3) presents t-statistics for a test of differences in the means between columns (1) and (2). The
table reveals that counties with above- and below-median university expenditures do differ on
a number of key observables, but the exact differences are quite different from those identified
in Table 1. First, nominal labor income in non-education sectors does not differ between above-
and below-median university expenditure counties. In contrast to Table 1, this cursory look
would suggest little marginal impact of university activity. Second, counties with higher levels
of university expenditures have a significantly larger university sector, are more likely to have
higher-quality institutions. In addition, there are significant differences between the two groups
in terms of the size and average skill level of the populations. As these characteristics are likely


                                                17
to affect county wage levels independently of university spending, and likely correlated with
important unobservables, this comparison demonstrates the value of using an IV strategy to
achieve a causal estimate of the impact of university activity.

      Table 2 also reveals that above- and below-median university activity counties differ in terms
of how their labor forces are distributed across industries. Counties with above-median university
expenditures have a larger fraction of the labor force in finance, insurance, real estate services
than those with below-median university activity. This difference suggests, like Table 1, that
the unobserved characteristics of firms are likely to differ across counties with varying levels
of university activity. As the location and scale of high productivity-firms may well determine
university activity, this comparison again demonstrates the value of using an IV approach.



5      Regression Results


5.1     Cross-Sectional Results


We first consider cross-sectional models of the relationship between university activity and local
non-education sector labor income. In these models, we consider two different samples of coun-
ties. First, we examine the full sample of large counties to test whether counties with universities
had higher levels of labor income in non-education industries. Our measure of university pres-
ence in this context is a simple dummy variable taking the value of 1 if the county had a research
university, 0 otherwise. Second, we restrict our sample to those counties with a university and
test whether relatively higher levels of university expenditures were associated with higher levels
of non-education industry labor income.

      The models we estimate can be expressed as an extended version of the model in equation
(1),
(6)                       lnIncomeijt = α1 Uit + α2 Si + α3 Ai + α4 t + "ijt ,

where lnIncomeit is the log of the average non-education sector income in area i, industry j,
at time t, Uit is a variable measuring university activity in area i in period t, Si and Ai are
matrices containing skill and amenity characteristics of county i, including the percentage of
the population who are college graduates, the crime rate, and the percentage of service receipts
received by amusement providers, t is a linear time trend, and "ijt is the error term. The
variables in Si and Ai are fixed over time as they come from the 1983 County and City Data

                                                  18
Book. The parameter of interest is α1 , which measures the responsiveness of local labor income
to university activity.

   We estimate two versions of equation (6). The first version does not contain any of the
controls in Si and Ai , while the second one does. To the extent that university activity occurs
in areas where workers are likely to receive higher incomes regardless of university activity, and
the observable measures capture the relevant variation, we would expect α1 to be larger in the
unconditional model than in the regression-controlled model.

   Table 3 displays the results from the estimation of equation (6) with the two different mea-
sures of university activity, both with and without socioeconomic controls. The results of a
single regression are displayed in each column. In column (1) we can see that workers in the
non-education sector in large counties with a university receive about 10 percent more labor
income than those in counties without a university. In column (2) of Table 3, we show that
adding observable measures of the skill level or amenities of the county reduces the estimate.
With the additional controls the estimated coefficient indicates that university activity increases
non-education sector labor income by about eight percent. The estimate remains statistically
different from zero at the 1% level.

   In columns (3) and (4) we restrict our attention to those large counties that had research
university activity. While the magnitude of the coefficient in column (3) is close to the one in
column (1), the coefficient is not statistically significant. Adding the location characteristics in
column (4) causes the coefficient to be very close to zero and is statistically insignificant.

   The results in Table 3 demonstrate that the magnitude and existence of a relationship be-
tween university activity and non-education sector labor income are sensitive to basic specifi-
cation changes. The fact that we only obtain statistically significant results in the first two
columns may reflect the fact that variation in spending levels across university counties – or
variations with-in a county over time – may have a smaller effect on local labor income than the
actual presence of a university itself. Alternatively, the results in Table 3 may indicate that the
location of universities is endogenously determined by unobserved differences in productivity
across areas, whereas university scale is not. The fact that adding observable measures of pop-
ulation skill and amenities shifts our estimate of α1 toward zero suggests that other unobserved
measures are also likely to affect the precise estimate of α1 . With this in mind, we turn to our
first-difference and IV estimates.




                                                19
5.2       Main Results


We adopt the difference and IV models to address the concern that time-invariant unobservable
determinants of university activity, which are also correlated with the level of labor income,
could bias the estimated relationship between university activity and labor income.

       First Stage. Our IV strategy exploits variation in university activity across counties arising
from the fact that counties had varying levels of initial research university endowments that
were all exposed to similar financial market shocks over time. In Table 4 we present the results
from estimating the first-stage model in equation (5). The estimates in Table 4 show that the
coefficient on the interaction between initial endowment and stock market fluctuations results
in a strong first stage. The F-statistic on the excluded instruments in the first stage is well
above the threshold level of 10 that has been established as key to reducing the finite sample
bias inherent in IV methods (Bound, Jaeger, and Baker, 1995).

       The coefficient estimate of the instrument’s impact on the change in university expenditures
reported in Table 4 translates into a .3 cent marginal effect. It is important to note that our
first-stage estimate of β1 will not yield the typical endowment spending policy of four to five
percent of the marginal change in the endowment’s market value. The lower coefficient estimate
is likely the result of the fact that our first-stage model estimate is a different parameter than
the one we would need to estimate to uncover the exact spending rule that universities follow.21
In our first stage we are using only the initial level of the endowment interacted with stock
market shocks, whereas universities determine their endowment spending income based on the
current year’s market value. Thus, as endowment levels grow over time because of compounded
returns and new donations, we will increasingly underestimate the market value of each year’s
  21
       With data on the market values of universities’ endowments and expenditures in each year, we estimate a
spending rule that is very close to that suggested in the text above. When we examine these data we estimate
that research universities typically spend 4.4 percent of the previous year’s endowment market value in a given
year. To uncover the de facto spending rule we estimated the following model,

(7)                               EndowIncit = γ1 M arketV alueit−1 + γ2 t + "it ,

where EndowIncit is university expenditure from endowment income in county i in year t, and M arketV alueit
is the market value of the university endowment in county i in year t, and "it is the error term. The parameter γ1
provides an estimate of the endowment spending rule. We also examine whether other additional lagged years of
market value predict endowment income given the three-year-moving-average policy noted above would indicate.
We find some evidence that earlier lags of endowment market value do predict spending from the endowment, but
they are typically weaker than the market value in the year prior. As we are seeking to estimate our model using
a just-identified strategy we do not make use of these additional, though weaker, potential exclusion restrictions.


                                                        20
endowment and, thus, underestimate the coefficient. Further, we are estimating changes in
university expenditures not only on initial endowments, but also on fluctuations in stock market
returns. To the extent that universities invested in a wide portfolio of assets, not just equities,
our estimate of β1 will be biased toward zero. Nonetheless, despite the shortcomings in using
our instrument to uncover a precise estimate of the rule that universities use when deciding
how much endowment income to spend, it performs powerfully as an instrument for university
expenditures.

       We also report the first-stage estimates for the models that add additional interactions
between the fixed characteristics of the county and stock market shocks in Appendix Table
A2. Even with these additional stock market interactions, our central exclusion restriction has
significant explanatory power in explaining changes in university expenditures. Also, the lowest
F-statistic on the excluded instrument(s) is above 10, indicating that the additional interactions
do not lead to a significant weak instrument problem.

       First Differences. Table 5 reports the central results of the paper. We divide the table into
two panels. The top panel presents the results for the short-run response to university activity
by estimating equation (4). The bottom panel presents models where we allow a five-year lag in
the response to changes in university activity.22 Again, each column presents the results from
one estimation. Column (1) presents OLS estimates of the first-differences model and column
(2) presents the IV estimates of the first-differences model.

       In column (1) of the top panel of Table 5, the OLS estimate indicates that a one-standard-
deviation increase in university activity (0.95) statistically significantly increases non-education
labor income by six percent. In column (1) of the bottom panel, the estimated effect remains
statistically significant at the five-year horizon, though the magnitude is about two-thirds of the
short-run effect. That the effect decays indicates that little of the estimated response is due to
delayed investment responses by local firms. Further, as the effect does not decay completely,
the results suggest that spillovers from university activity are persistent.

       Instrumental Variables. In column (2) of Table 5 we present the IV estimates. In the top
  22
       The exact model we estimate is,

(8)                               ∆Yijt = α1 ∆U Eit−6 + α2 t + α3 ∆SMt−7 + "ijt ,

where∆U Eit−6 is the first difference of per capita university expenditures in county i lagged by six years, t is a
time trend, ∆SMt−7 is the first difference of the S&P 500 stock index lagged seven years, and "ijt is the error
term. For the IV models we also estimate (5) with similar lag structure.


                                                        21
panel the estimate indicates that a one-standard-deviation increase in university activity (0.95)
increases non-education labor income by 10 percent. This estimate is statistically significantly
different from zero at the 10 percent level. In the lower panel the IV estimate of the five-year
effect is approximately three-fourths the magnitude of the short-term effect and is statistically
significant at the one percent level.

       A few points are worth noting in comparing the estimates thus far. First, the magnitudes of
the IV estimates of the difference models in Table 5 are strikingly similar to the unconditional
cross-sectional estimates in Table 3. This similarity suggests that unobservable determinants of
local non-education sector labor income are not as strongly correlated with the level of university
activity as we may have feared. Second, both the first-difference IV and cross-sectional estimates
are larger than the first-difference OLS estimates. This finding indicates that problems with
measurement error in university activity may be attenuating the first-difference results toward
zero. Third, while the five-year first-difference OLS result is about two-thirds the magnitude of
the one-year response, the IV results show that the five-year impact of university expenditures
is more lasting.

       Estimate Magnitudes. Expressing our coefficient estimates in Table 5 as elasticities helps
to compare our results with others in the agglomeration literature. From our structural equation
(1), a one-unit change in the level of university activity can be expressed in terms of our estimated
coefficient as: α1 ∗      countypopulation∗1,000 .   Taking the average population of a university county
                                    1

from Table 1 as 985 thousand people and the estimate of α1 = 0.083 from column (2) of the
bottom panel of Table 5, we can compute the effect of a 10 percent change in university activity
on non-education sector labor income. Given that the average level of university activity in
a county in the full sample is $660 million, the implied elasticity of a 10 percent increase in
this level of university activity is 0.56 percent.23 Comparing our results on the spillover from
university activity with other estimates of agglomeration effects in general suggests that our
implied elasticity fits within the lower end of the range that has been estimated previously.
Glaeser and Gottleib (2009, 24-25) estimate that the elasticity of the density of economic activity
(as measured by city size) on local labor income is 0.04 to 0.13.24

       In addition, it is useful for compare our elasticity measure to that recently estimated for
million dollar plants by Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti (2008). They measure the impact
  23                                  1                                        1
       That is, ∆Uit x α1 x countypopulation∗1,000 = 66,000,000 x .083 x 985,000∗1,000 = .00556
  24
       See also Glaeser and Gottlieb (2008). Their estimates are based on replicating the methods developed by Ci-
ccone and Hall (1996), Rosenthal and Strange (2003), and Combes, Duranton, Gobillon, and Roux (forthcoming).



                                                          22
of opening a million dollar plant on local labor income as 2.7 percent (p. 34). On average,
they estimate that a million dollar plant increases the level of economic activity in a county by
8.6 percent (p. 45). Thus, a 10 percent increase in the activity of million dollar plants results
in an increase in county labor income of 3 percent. Spillovers from million dollar plants are
evidently much larger than those from university activity, no doubt stemming from the fact that
the production processes in higher education and manufacturing are quite different. The two
principal outputs of universities – skilled labor and knowledge creation – and inputs – faculty
and capital – are highly mobile factors that can migrate across markets at relatively low cost. In
contrast, large manufacturing establishments often utilize inputs and produce outputs that are
expensive to move across markets. As Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti (2008) argue, the fact
that the location decisions of million dollar plants generate bidding from local governments may
indicate that they are especially likely to generate large positive spillovers to incumbent firms.
Universities, on the other hand, receive financial support from higher-levels of government. In
any case, our results indicate there is little evidence that non-education spillovers from university
activity are significantly larger than those of other types of economic activities that increase the
density of economic activity.



5.3     Additional Stock Market Exposure Controls


In this section we examine whether our results are robust to allowing labor income in different
industries and counties to be differentially correlated with stock market shocks. If, for example,
firms that are more sensitive to cyclical conditions are located in counties with relatively high
levels of initial university endowments, then our IV strategy would be weakened. To test for
these possibilities we estimate various versions of the models in equations (4) and (5) where
we allow the effect of stock market shocks to affect labor income through other time-invariant
characteristics of industries and counties. Specifically, we extend models (4) and (5) as,

(9)        ∆Yijt = α1 ∆U Eit−1 + α2 t + α3 ∆SMt−2 + α4 Ci,j + α5 (∆SMt−2 ∗ Ci,j ) + "ijt .


      The first stage of the IV model then becomes,

(10)∆U Eit−1 = β1 (∆SMt−2 ∗ IEi ) + β2 t + β3 ∆SMt−2 + β4 Ci,j + β5 (∆SMt−2 ∗ Ci,j ) + "2it ,

where∆U Eit−1 is the first difference of per capita university expenditures in county i lagged by
one year, ∆SMt−2 is the first difference of the S&P stock index lagged two years, Ci,j is the


                                                 23
additional initial characteristic in county i or industry j we include, and "ijt and "2it are the
error terms.

   Measures. We consider four measures of relevant differences across industries and counties.
The first measure of Ci,j is a set of industry dummy variables. This approach allows each
industry to be differentially impacted by stock market shocks. While this method does not seek
to explain why labor income in some industries is more or less correlated with stock market
shocks, it is very flexible. If differences across industries in the sensitivity of labor income to
stock market shocks explain our results, then we would expect to observe that our estimate of α1
to be significantly altered from the one reported above when we include the additional controls.

   We also consider three county-level characteristics as measures of Ci,j . We consider the
average quality of the universities within the county, the average level of housing rent, and the
fraction of the population that were college graduates in a county. Average university quality
is measured in 1991 and the two other county characteristic variables were measured in 1980.
Each characteristic remains constant over the course of the estimation and is interacted with
stock market fluctuations.

   Results. The results for models with these additional stock market shock interactions are
displayed in Table 6. There are a number of notable findings in the table. First, the results in
Columns (1) and (2) demonstrate that the inclusion of industry-specific interactions with stock
market shocks has little effect on the statistical significance of the main results, though the
magnitude of the effect is somewhat smaller than in Table 5. For instance, the IV estimate of
the five-year effect is 58 percent the size of the estimate in Table 5. Thus, while allowing changes
in labor income in each industry to be differentially correlated with stock market shocks does not
change conclusions about the sign of the relationship, it does weaken the response somewhat.

   We show the results for additional county characteristic interactions in columns (3) through
(8). In columns (3) to (6) we see that allowing income in counties with different levels of college
quality and housing rent levels to be differentially correlated with stock market shocks does little
to alter the main results. This finding is important given the potential concern that universities
and firms in research-university counties might be differentially exposed to stock market shocks,
independent from the levels of university endowment in the local economies. Moreover, the
magnitudes of the estimates are largely the same as their counterparts in Table 5. In columns
(7) and (8) of the table, we show that allowing counties with different levels of education to be
differentially correlated with stock market shocks does alter the main results on non-education


                                                24
labor income. The coefficient estimates, while still positive, are lower than those in Table 5 and
all but the one-year OLS estimate are imprecisely estimated. These results could be caused by
the fact that we are only examining 81 large counties with research universities, so perhaps the
average skill of the population is highly correlated with university activity, thus confounding a
separate measure of the universities’ effects.



6         Does Technological Distance Matter?

In this section we seek to shed light on the mechanisms underlying the spillover effects we have
identified. A number of theories of agglomeration spillovers suggest that the magnitude of the
spillover effect is related to input and output linkages or the pooling of labor markets (see
Moretti 2004b, Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr 2007, and Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti 2008).
Therefore, we test for evidence of heterogeneous responses depending on how technologically
close an industry is to the higher education sector. We consider two measures of how intensively
an industry uses the output of universities. First, we look at how frequently industry patents
cite a patent issued by a university to measure industry-specific utilization of higher education
knowledge.25 Second, we measure the intensity of each industry’s employment of college gradu-
ates. The measure is based on the fraction of workers in each industry who are college graduates,
as calculated from the 1980 IPUMS Census micro-date. Finally, we examine whether industries
that pool labor markets with the higher education sector receive larger spillovers. This measure
is based on workers’ transitions out of (into) higher education and into (out of) their pooling
industry counterparts. Our labor market pooling measure is constructed from CPS data on the
frequency of transitions of workers between higher education and other industries.26

         In Table 7 we present the results where we stratify by industry patent citation intensity.27
There is very little difference in the impact of university activity across above-median and below-
median patent citation industries in the short term. The magnitudes of the IV estimates in the
top panels of columns (2) and (4) correspond very closely with those in Table 5. The five-
    25
         We construct our industry patent citation measure from the NBER patent database (Hall, Jaffe, and Trat-
jenberg, 2001). For each industry we calculate the fraction of citations to other patents that were issued to
universities. For this particular measure, we consider all patents issued by universities, not just the sample of
universities located in urban areas that are considered in the paper.
  26
     We thank Enrico Moretti and Richard Hornbeck for sharing their CPS transitions data.
  27
     As many industries do not issue patents, the sample size here is necessarily smaller than the full sample used
above.



                                                         25
year effects, however, show some differences. The IV estimates for the above-median industries
reported in column (2) in the bottom panel is about 1.5 times as large as the estimate for the
below-median industries in the bottom panel of column (4). This result suggests that larger,
medium-term spillover effects tend to accrue in counties more heavily populated with industries
that utilize university knowledge more intensively in their own innovation processes.

   In Table 8 we present results where we stratify industries based on the degree of their college-
graduate employment. We find little evidence that industries that use college-educated labor
receive larger spillovers. In the short-term, industries with high- and low-levels of college gradu-
ate intensity receive similar spillovers from universities. In the bottom panel of Table 8, however,
we see a stronger five-year spillover effect among industries that employ fewer college graduates.
One possibility is that given that our employment of college graduates is measured before the
time period of the analysis, perhaps university growth provided the necessary local talent that
enabled these industries to achieve convergence with their counterparts that were already em-
ploying relatively better educated workers beforehand. On the other hand, perhaps industries
that employed relatively fewer college-educated workers relied more heavily on a robust univer-
sity sector for technical assistance and innovative ideas and, thus, benefited disproportionately
when universities expanded. In any case, Table 8 provides little evidence that spillovers from
universities accrue primarily to skill-intensive industries.

   Finally, in Table 9 we present results where we stratify by the degree to which industries pool
labor with the higher education sector. Increases in university activity in the short term and at
five years are more likely to benefit those workers who are employed in industries that experience
a robust two-way labor market relationship with higher education. There are persistent differ-
ences in the magnitudes of the estimates across the different types of industries. The industries
that are more likely to pool labor with universities have more than twice the responsiveness
to university activity than the low-pooling intensity industries. The finding that the five-year
impact of university activity is significantly greater for the high-intensity pooling industries is
difficult to explain as purely the operation of a standard labor market. To the extent that higher
education competes for the same set of workers as these high-intensity pooling industries, the
higher labor income spilling over into those sectors makes economic sense. An expanding higher
education sector, all else constant, would bid up wages in the county in the short-term. By
the five-year horizon, however, we would expect that as workers migrate across labor markets,
differences in wages would converge to the spatial equilibrium and wage differences across coun-
ties would again reflect productivity differences. Thus, we view the five-year results in Table 9
as consistent with university agglomeration spillovers accruing disproportionately to industries


                                                 26
that pool a labor market with universities.



7    Conclusion

In this paper we demonstrate that university activity does indeed generate persistent spillovers
to local firms and workers. The estimated effects are quite modest, however. The estimates
indicate that a 10 percent increase in university activity in a county increases local labor income
in other sectors by 0.5 percent. Our estimates imply very similar elasticities to those calculated
in Glaeser and Gottlieb (2008 and 2009) for local agglomeration effects from city size in general.
This comparison is important in that it suggests that university activity, at least from the
typical local firm’s perspective, does not offer unique spillovers despite the fact that research
universities focus on producing basic knowledge and innovation, and a skilled workforce. The
spillovers are perhaps relatively small because such outputs are highly mobile across geographic
areas. Our estimates are substantially smaller than those recently estimated by Greenstone,
Hornbeck and Moretti (2008) who measured the spillovers from large manufacturing plants.
Our implied elasticity of local labor income’s responsiveness to university activity is less than
a fifth of what they find for large manufacturing plants. One explanation is that spillovers
from universities accrue to larger geographic regions, while manufacturing plants provide direct
employment and offer ancillary contracting opportunities for the local area. The differences
in what type of governments subsidize universities – federal and state – versus manufacturing
plants – local – corroborates the findings that local spillovers from manufacturing plants tend
to be larger than those from universities.

    We also find evidence that the spillovers are larger for firms that are technologically close to
research universities in terms of using patents generated by universities in their own patents and
sharing a labor market with higher education. In our models estimating the spillover effect after
five years, we found that firms in these technologically close industries enjoy a spillover that is
more than 50 percent larger than that of the typical firm that is not close. Our findings tend
to confirm previous research that knowledge spillovers from universities tend to be concentrated
on particular local industries, such as pharmaceuticals or electronics, and are not broad based.

    There are several directions for future work. First, as the results here reveal that univer-
sities have much smaller spillover effects than those estimated for large manufacturing plants,
similar studies using exogenous variation in the density of economic activity in other industries


                                                27
would be worthwhile. As we learn more about the size of spillovers from different types of in-
dustries with very different production processes, we will learn more about the driving forces
behind agglomeration spillovers in general. Second, we examine labor income alone, yet future
work could examine establishment level data with more detailed productivity measures. This
alternative dataset would allow for the estimation of the effect of university activity on total
factor productivity. Understanding how industries that are closely related to higher education
in terms of innovation and shared labor markets respond to the presence of nearby university
activity would help to shed light on the pathways through which university activity impacts its
neighbors.

   The paper also introduces a new strategy to estimate the casual spillover effect that non-
profit organizations have on local economic activity. The strategy of measuring variation in non-
profit organization activity based on shocks to endowment returns could be profitably applied to
estimate the economic impact of the non-profit sector more generally. For example, estimating
the effect of local hospitals or arts organizations on local economies could be estimated in a
similar manner as many of these non-profits also rely on endowment income to fulfill their
missions.




                                               28
8   References

Acemoglu, Daron, Amy Finkelstein and Matthew J. Notowidigdo, “Income and Health Spending: Evi-
    dence from Oil Price Shocks,” National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 14744, 2009.

Acs, Zoltan J., David B. Audretsch, and Maryann P. Feldman, “Real Effects of Academic Research:
    Comment,” American Economic Review 82 (Mar. 1991), 363-67.

Adams, James D., “Comparative Localization of Academic and Industrial Spillovers,”Journal of Eco-
    nomic Geography 2 (July 2002), 253-78.

Abramovsky, Laura, Rupert Harrison, and Helen Simpson, “University Research and the Location of
    Business R&D,” Economic Journal 117 (Mar. 2007), C114-C141.

Aghion, Philippe, Leah Boustan, Caroline Hoxby, and Jerome Vandenbussche, “The Causal Impact of
    Education on Economic Growth: Evidence from U.S.,” working paper (2009).

Andersson, Roland, John M. Quigley, and Mats Wilhelmsson, “Urbanization, Productivity, and Inno-
    vation: Evidence from Investment in Higher Education,” Journal of Urban Economics 66 (July
    2009), 2-15.

Anselin, Luc, Attila Varga, and Zoltan Acs, “Local Geographic Spillovers between University Research
    and High Technology Innovations,”Journal of Urban Economics 42 (Nov. 1997), 422-48.

Anselin, Luc, Attila Varga, and Zoltan Acs, “Geographic Spillovers and University Research: A Spatial
    Econometric Perspective,” Growth and Change 31 (Fall 2000), 501-15.

Audretsch, David B., and Maryann P. Feldman, “R&D Spillovers and the Geography of Innovation and
    Production,” American Economic Review 86 (June 1996), 630-40.

Audretsch, David and Maryann Feldman “Knowledge Spillovers and the Geography of Innovation,” in J.
    Vernon Henderson and Jacques-Francois Thisse, ed., Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics
    4, (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2004).

Bania, Neil, Randall W. Eberts, and Michael S. Fogerty, “Universities and the Startup of New Compa-
    nies: Can We Generalize from Route 128 and Silicon Valley,” Review of Economics and Statistics
    75 (Nov. 1993), 761-66.

Beeson, Patricia, and Edward Montgomery, “The Effects of Colleges and Universities on Local Labor
    Markets,” Review of Economics and Statistics 75 (Nov. 1993), 753-61.

Black, Dan, Kermit Daniel, and Seth Sanders, “The Impact of Economic Conditions on Participation
    in Disability Programs: Evidence from the Coal Boom and Bust,” American Economic Review 92
    (Mar. 2002), 27-50.

Black, Duncan, and Vernon Henderson, “A Theory of Urban Growth,” Journal of Political Economy
    107 (Apr. 1999), 252-84.




                                                29
Bound, John, David A. Jaeger, and Regina M. Baker, “Problems With Instrumental Variables Estima-
    tion When the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogenous Explanatory Variables
    Is Weak,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 90 (June 1995), 443-50.

Ciccone, Antonio, and Robert E. Hall, “Productivity and the Density of Economic Activity,” American
    Economic Review 86 (Mar. 1996), 54-70.

Ciccone, Antonio, and Giovanni Peri, “Identifying Human Capital Externalities: Theory with Applica-
    tions,” Review of Economic Studies 73 (Apr. 2006), 381-412.

Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, Laurent Gobillon, and Sébastien Roux, “Estimating Ag-
    glomeration Economies with History, Geology, and Worker Effects,” in Edward L. Glaeser, ed.,
    The Economics of Agglomeration (forthcoming).

Cohen, Wesley M., Richard R. Nelson, and John P. Walsh, “Links and Impacts: The Influence of Public
    Research on Industrial R&D,” Management Science 48 (Jan. 2002), 1-23.

Council for Aid to Education (CAE), “Contributions to Colleges and Universities Up 6.2 Percent to
    31.60 Billion,” February 2009, accessed at www.cae.org.

Davis, Donald R., and David E. Weinstein, “Bones, Bombs, and Break Points: The Geography of
    Economic Activity,” American Economic Review 92 (Dec. 2002), 1269-89

Dumais, Guy, Glenn Ellison, and Edward L. Glaeser, “Geographic Concentration as a Dynamic Process,”
    Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (May 2002), 193-204.

Duranton, Giles and Diego Puga “Micro-Foundations of Urban Agglomeration Economies, ” in J. Ver-
    non Henderson and Jacques-Franois Thisse, ed., Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics 4,
    (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2004).

Ehrenberg, Ronald G., Tuition Rising: Why College Costs So Much (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
    sity Press, 2000).

Ehrenberg, Ronald G., “Demystifying Endowments,” Cornell Higher Education Research Institute work-
    ing paper 118, 2009.

Ellison, Glenn and Edward L. Glaeser “Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manufacturing Industries: A
    Dartboard Approach,” Journal of Political Economy, 105 (October 1997): 889-927.

Ellison, Glenn, and Edward L. Glaeser, “The Geographic Concentration of Industry: Does Natural
    Advantage Explain Agglomeration?” American Economic Review 89 (May 1999), 311-16.

Ellison, Glenn D., Edward L. Glaeser, and William R. Kerr, “What Causes Industry Agglomeration?
    Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns,” American Economic Review (forthcoming), National
    Bureau of Economic Research working paper 13068, 2007.

Furman, Jeffrey L., and Megan J. MacGarvie, “Academic Science and the Birth of Industrial Research
    Laboratories in the U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
    63 (Aug. 2007), 759-76.


                                               30
Glaeser, Edward L., “Learning in Cities,” Journal of Urban Economics 46 (Sept. 1999), 254-77.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Joshua D. Gottlieb, “The Economics of Place-Making Policies,” Brookings
    Papers on Economic Activity (Spring 2008), 155-253.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Joshua D. Gottlieb, “The Wealth of Cities: Agglomeration Economies and
    Spatial Equilibrium in the United States,” National Bureau of Economic Research working paper
    14806, 2009.

Glaeser, Edward L., and William R. Kerr, “Local Industrial Conditions and Entrepreneurship: How
    Much of the Spatial Distribution Can We Explain?” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy
    18 (Fall 2009), 623-63.

Glaeser, Edward L., and David C. Mare, “Cities and Skills,” Journal of Labor Economics 19 (Apr.
    2001), 316-42.

Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck and Enrico Moretti, “Identifying Agglomeration Spillovers:
    Evidence from Million Dollar Plants,” National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 13833,
    2008.

Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, “The NBER Patent Citation Data File:
    Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools,” National Bureau of Economic Research working paper
    8498, 2001.

Henderson, J. Vernon, “Marshall’s Scale Economies,” Journal of Urban Economics 55 (Jan. 2003), 1-28.

Henderson, J. Vernon, “Understanding Knowledge Spillovers,” Regional Science and Urban Economics
    37 (July 2007), 497-508.

Iranzo, Susana, and Giovanni Peri, “Schooling Externalities, Technology, and Productivity: Theory and
    Evidence from U.S. States,” Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (May 2009), 420-31.

Krugman, Paul, Geography and Trade (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991a).

Krugman, Paul, “Increasing Returns and Economic Geography,” Journal of Political Economy 99 (June
    1991b), 483-99.

Jaffe, Adam B., “Real Effects of Academic Research,” American Economic Review 79 (Dec. 1989),
    957-70.

Lerner, Josh, Antoinette Schoar, and Jialan Wang, “Secrets of the Academy: The Drivers of University
    Endowment Success,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 22 (Summer 2008), 207-22.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics
    22 (July 1988), 3-42.

Marshall, Alfred, Principles of Economics (New York: Macmillan, 1890).

Moscarini, Giuseppe, and Fabien Postel-Vinay, “Large Employers Are More Cyclically Sensitive,” Na-
    tional Bureau of Economic Research working paper 14740, 2009.


                                                31
Moretti, Enrico, “Estimating the External Return to Higher Education: Evidence from Cross-sectional
     and Longitudinal Data,” Journal of Econometrics 120 (July-Aug. 2004a), 175-212.

Moretti, Enrico, “Workers’ Education, Spillovers and Productivity: Evidence from Plant-Level Produc-
     tion Functions,” American Economic Review 94 (June 2004b), 656-90.

Moretti, Enrico, “Human Capital Externalities in Cities,” in J. Vernon Henderson and Jacques-Franois
     Thisse, ed., Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics, volume 4 (Amsterdam: North-Holland,
     2004c), 2243-91.

Moulton, Brent R., “Random Group Effects and the Precision of Regression Estimates,” Journal of
     Econometrics 32 (Aug. 1986), 385-97.

National Science Foundation (NSF), “Academic Research and Development Expenditures: Fiscal Year
     2007,” Report 09-303, March 2009, accessed at http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/nsf09303/pdf/nsf09303.pdf.

Ottaviano, Gianmarco and Jacques-Franois Thisse “Agglomeration and Economic Geography,” in J.
     Vernon Henderson and Jacques-Franois Thisse, ed., Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics
     4, (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2004).

Rauch, James E., “Productivity Gains from Geographic Concentration of Human Capital: Evidence
     from the Cities,” Journal of Urban Economics 34 (Nov. 1993), 380-400.

Roback, Jennifer, “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life,” Journal of Political Economy 90 (Dec. 1982),
     1257-78.

Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technical Change,” Journal of Political Economy 98 (Oct. 1990), S71-
     S102.

Rosenthal, Stuart S., and William C. Strange, “The Determinants of Agglomeration,” Journal of Urban
     Economics 50 (Sept. 2001): 191-229.

Rosenthal, Stuart S., and William C. Strange, “Geography, Industrial Organization, and Agglomera-
     tion,”Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (May 2003), 377-93.

Rosenthal, Stuart S., and William C. Strange, “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomera-
     tion,” in J. Vernon Henderson and Jacques-Franois Thisse, eds., Handbook of Urban and Regional
     Economics, vol. 4 (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2004), 2119-171.

Rosenthal, Stuart S., and William C. Strange, “The Attenuation of Human Capital Spillovers,” Journal
     of Urban Economics 64 (Sept. 2008), 373-89.

Salem, David, “Endowment Management,” in Deirdre McDonald Greene, College and University Busi-
     ness Administration, fifth edition (Washington, DC: National Association of College and University
     Business Officers, 1992).

Shapiro, Jesse M., “Smart Cities: Quality of Life, Productivity, and the Growth Effects of Human
     Capital,” Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (May 2006), 324-35.



                                                 32
State Higher Education Executive Officers (SHEEO), State Higher Education Finance Early Release FY
    2008, accessed at http://www.sheeo.org/finance/shef/SHEF%20FY08%20Early%20Release%202.pdf,
    2009

Toole, Andrew A., “Does Public Scientific Research Complement Private Investment in Research and
    Development in the Pharmaceutical Industry?” Journal of Law and Economics 50 (Feb. 2007),
    81-104.

U.S. Census Bureau, County Business Patterns (CBP), 1981-1996.

U.S. Census Bureau, County and City Data Book (CCDB), 1983.

U.S. Department of Education, Higher Education General Information Survey (HEGIS) and the Inte-
    grated Postsecondary Educational Data System (IPEDS), 1981-1996.

U.S. News and World Report, “America’s Best Colleges 1991,” 1990.

Varga, Attila, “Local Academic Knowledge Transfers and the Concentration of Economic Activity,”
    Journal of Regional Science 40 (May 2000), 289-309.

Whalley, Alexander, and Justin Hicks, “Estimating the Effect of Research Spending on Knowledge
    Production in Universities,” University of California, Merced working paper, 2009.

Woodward, Douglas, Octávio Figueiredo, and Paulo Guimarães, “Beyond Silicon Valley: University
    R&D and High-Technology Location,” Journal of Urban Economics 60 (July 2006), 15-32.

Yoder, Jay A., Endowment Management: A Practical Guide (Washington, DC: Association of Governing
    Boards of Universities and Colleges, 2004).

Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Marilynn B. Brewer, “Intellectual Human Capital and the
    Birth of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises,” American Economic Review 88 (March 1998), 290-306.




                                                  33
TABLE 1: Baseline County Characteristics – University and Non-University Locations


                                                   University    Non-University   (1) - (2)
                                                   Counties        Counties         t-stat
                                                      (1)             (2)            (3)
(1) Outcome:
Average Annual Labor Income                         $16,225         $15,554         3.07
in Non-Education Sector (1981)                      ($1,455)        ($1,453)
(2) University Characteristics:
University Expenditure                                 $0.67           --            --
(per ‘000 population; 1981)                           ($0.95)
University Endowment Market Value                      $0.16           --            --
(per ’000 population; 1981)                           ($0.39)
Fraction Public (1981)                                  0.59           --            --
                                                       (0.44)
Average Quality Ranking (1991)                          2.28           --            --
                                                       (1.10)
(3) Economic and Demographic Characteristics (1980):
Population                                           985,591        445,942         4.84
                                                   (1,029,325)     (185,484)
Per Capita Income (1980 $)                           $11,521        $11,200         1.20
                                                     ($1,526)       ($1,969)
% College Graduate                                       16             15          1.17
                                                         (4)            (5)
% Black                                                  16              9          4.25
                                                        (14)            (9)
Average Rent                                            $255          $258         -0.54
                                                       ($35)          ($40)
Crime Rate (Per ‘000 Population)                       7,292          5,989         3.97
                                                      (2,489)        (1,897)
% Service Spending on Amusements                         11              9          1.15
                                                        (18)           (12)
(4) Industry Distribution of Labor Force (1980; %):
Construction                                            0.06          0.06         -0.53
                                                       (0.02)        (0.04)
Manufacturing                                           0.23          0.26         -1.31
                                                       (0.08)        (0.11)
Transportation and Communications                       0.07          0.06          2.47
                                                       (0.03)        (0.02)
Wholesale Trade                                         0.07          0.07          0.86
                                                       (0.02)        (0.03)
Retail Trade                                            0.20          0.23         -3.45
                                                       (0.04)        (0.05)
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate                     0.08          0.07          3.24
                                                       (0.03)        (0.02)
Services                                                0.27          0.25          2.56
                                                       (0.04)        (0.06)

Number of Counties                                     81             98



                                              34
Notes and Sources: Labor income data are from U.S. Census Bureau County Business Patterns;
data relating to university expenditures, endowments, and ownership status are from the U.S.
Department of Education Higher Education General Information Survey (HEGIS) and the
Integrated Postsecondary Educational Data System (IPEDS); and college and university quality
data are from U.S. News & World Report (1991). Socioeconomic county characteristics are from
the U.S. Census Bureau County and City Data Book (1983) and industrial distribution of the
labor force are from U.S. Census Bureau County Business Patterns. The sample contains one
observation for each county. The main entries in columns (1) and (2) are the means of the
selected variable. The entries in parentheses in columns (1) and (2) are the standard deviation of
the selected variables. Reported t-statistics are obtained from a regression of university county
indicator on the selected variable. All reported monetary amounts are in nominal dollars.




                                               35
TABLE 2: Baseline County Characteristics for University Counties, by University
Expenditure Level

                                                Above Median    Below Median
                                                  University      University      (1) - (2)
                                                 Expenditure     Expenditure        t-stat
                                                  Per Capita      Per Capita
                                                      (1)             (2)           (3)
(1) Outcome:
Average Annual Labor Income                         $16,290       $16,158           0.40
in Non-Education Sector                             ($1,406)      ($1,519)
(2) University Characteristics:
University Expenditure                                 $1.13        $0.20           5.07
(per ‘000 population)                                 ($1.16)      ($0.10)
University Endowment Market Value                      $0.29        $0.03           3.14
(per ’000 population)                                 ($0.51)      ($0.04)
Fraction Public                                         0.64         0.54           1.01
                                                       (0.43)       (0.44)
Average Quality Ranking                                 2.77         1.78           4.54
                                                       (0.99)       (0.98)
(3) Economic and Demographic Characteristics (1980):
Population                                           701,658      1,221,947        -2.34
                                                    (427,275)    (1,358,519)
Per Capita Income (1980 $)                           $11,613       $11,428          0.54
                                                     ($1,549)      ($1,516)
% College Graduate                                       17            14           3.84
                                                         (4)           (3)
% Black                                                  19            14           1.59
                                                        (15)          (11)
Average Rent                                            $251         $258          -0.94
                                                       ($32)         ($38)
Crime Rate (Per ‘000 Population)                       7,391         7,191          0.36
                                                      (2,432)       (2,574)
% Service Spending on Amusements                         13             9           0.87
                                                        (24)           (8)
(4) Industry Distribution of Labor Force (1980; %):
Construction                                            0.06        0.05            0.76
                                                       (0.03)      (0.02)
Manufacturing                                           0.23        0.24           -0.60
                                                       (0.09)      (0.07)
Transportation and Communications                       0.07        0.07           -0.55
                                                       (0.02)      (0.03)
Wholesale Trade                                         0.07        0.08           -0.74
                                                       (0.02)      (0.02)
Retail Trade                                            0.20        0.21           -0.95
                                                       (0.04)      (0.04)
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate                     0.09        0.07            2.41
                                                       (0.04)      (0.02)
Services                                                0.28        0.27            1.09
                                                       (0.05)      (0.04)
Number of Counties                                       41          40


                                              36
Notes and Sources: See Table 1. The sample contains one observation for each county. The
main entries in columns (1) and (2) are the mean of the selected variable. The entries in
parentheses in columns (1) and (2) are the standard deviation of the selected variables. Reported
t-statistics are obtained from a regression of the selected variable on an indicator variable for
counties in the above-median-university-expenditure category. All reported monetary amounts
are in nominal dollars.




                                               37
  TABLE 3: University Activity and Local Labor Income: Cross-Sectional Estimates, 1981-
  1996

  Dependent Variable = log (Annual Labor Income in Non-Education Sector)

                                                      (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)
                                                                                     --           --
 University County dummy variable                 0.105***       0.078***
                                                   (0.032)        (0.021)
 University Expenditure Per Capita                    --             --            0.080        0.001
                                                                                  (0.061)      (0.018)
 Location Controls                                   No               Yes           No           Yes
 Number of Observations                                     120,766                      41,782

Notes and Sources: See Table 1. The estimates presented are for alternative versions of model (6).
The unit of observation is at the county-industry-year level. The sample for columns (1) and (2) is
all urban counties with populations greater than 250,000. The sample for columns (3) and (4) is
restricted to those counties with a research university, as defined in the text. The models in
columns (2) and (4) also control for percentage college graduate, crime rate, and the percentage of
service receipts received by amusement providers at the county level. All estimates are weighted by
the level of employment in the industry-county cell in 1981. The entries in parentheses in columns
(1)-(4) are the standard errors of the respective coefficients clustered at the county level.

* indicates significantly different from zero at the 10% level of significance;
** indicates significantly different from zero at the 5% level of significance;
*** indicates significantly different from zero at 1% level of significance.




                                                   38
TABLE 4: The Effect of Stock Market Shocks Interacted with the Value of Initial
Endowments on University Expenditures, 1981-1996

Dependent Variable = ! University Expenditure Per Capita (period t)

                                                                                     (1)

! Stock Index (t-1) x                                                             0.0031***
Initial Market Value of Endowment                                                  (0.0008)

! Stock Index (t-1)                                                                -0.0393
                                                                                  (0.0191)
F-Statistic:
! Stock Index (t-1) x                                                               13.77
Initial Market Value of Endowment                                                 [0.0004]

Number of Observations                                                             41,782

Notes and Source: See Table 1. The stock market index is the Standard & Poor’s 500 Stock
Index. The estimates presented are for model (5) in the text. The unit of observation is at the
county-industry-year level. ! University Expenditure (t-x) is measured as the spending rate per
‘000 county population. Initial Market Value of Endowment is measured as the portfolio value
per ‘000 county population. All estimates are weighted by the level of employment in the
industry-county cell in 1981. The entries in parentheses in column (1) are the standard errors of
the coefficient estimates clustered at the county level. The entries in the third row report the F-
Statistic for the test of whether the excluded instrument is zero. The test statistic value is reported
in the main entry and the p-value of test is reported in square brackets.

* indicates significantly different from zero at the 10% level of significance;
** indicates significantly different from zero at the 5% level of significance;
*** indicates significantly different from zero at 1% level of significance.




                                                  39
TABLE 5: The Effect of University Activity on Local Labor Income, 1981-1996

Dependent Variable = ! log (Annual Labor Income in Non-Education Sector (period t))

                                                         OLS                           TSLS
                                                          (1)                           (2)

                                     Model l: Initial Effect

! University Expenditure Per Capita (t-1)               0.065***                    0.108*
                                                         (0.022)                    (0.055)
! Stock Index (t-2)                                    -0.039***                  -0.039***
                                                         (0.004)                    (0.004)

F-Statistic: ! Stock Index (t-2) x                                                      13.77
Initial Market Value of Endowment                                                     [0.0004]

Number of Observations                                                41,782

                                   Model 2: Five Year Effect

! University Expenditure Per Capita (t-6)               0.042**                   0.083***
                                                        (0.019)                    (0.034)
! Stock Index (t-7)                                    0.088***                   0.088***
                                                        (0.005)                    (0.005)

F-Statistic: ! Stock Index (t-7) x                                                      13.96
Initial Market Value of Endowment                                                     [0.0003]

Number of Observations                                                28,926

Notes and Sources: See Table 1. The estimates presented are for model (4) in the text. The unit
of observation is at the county-industry-year level and the sample includes all large university
counties. ! University Expenditure (t-x) is measured as spending rate per ‘000 county population.
The main entries in columns (1) and (2) are coefficient estimates. All estimates are weighted by
the level of employment in the industry-county cell in 1981. The entries in parentheses in
columns (1) and (2) are the standard errors of the coefficient estimates clustered at the county
level. The entries in the third row and sixth row report the F-Statistic for the test of whether the
excluded instrument is zero. The test statistic value is reported as the main entry, and the p-value
of test is reported in square brackets.

* indicates significantly different from zero at the 10% level of significance;
** indicates significantly different from zero at the 5% level of significance;
*** indicates significantly different from zero at 1% level of significance.




                                                 40
TABLE 6: The Effect of University Activity on Local Labor Income: Additional Stock Market Exposure Controls, 1981-1996

Dependent Variable = ! log (Annual Labor Income in Non-Education Sector (period t))

                                              OLS          TSLS          OLS            TSLS           OLS     TSLS         OLS        TSLS
                                               (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)     (6)          (7)        (8)

                                                              Model l: Initial Effect

! University Expenditure Per Capita         0.054***      0.086**       0.067**        0.116**    0.065***      0.099*     0.048***      0.057
(t-1)                                        (0.016)      (0.040)        (0.024)        (0.058)     (0.023)     (0.056)     (0.014)     (0.054)
! Stock Index (t-2)                           0.026        0.026       -0.042***      -0.042***   -0.088***   -0.085***   -0.041***   -0.041***
                                             (0.031)      (0.031)        (0.008)        (0.008)     (0.026)     (0.026)     (0.011)     (0.010)

F-Statistic: ! Stock Index (t-2) x                          14.76                       10.06                   13.64                   10.34
Initial Market Value of Endowment                         [0.0002]                    [0.0021]                [0.0004]                [0.0019]
Number of Observations                                                                        41,782

                                                            Model 2: Five Year Effect

! University Expenditure Per Capita         0.029***     0.048***       0.043**        0.089**     0.042**     0.079**      0.008       0.009
(t-6)                                        (0.012)      (0.018)       (0.022)        (0.034)     (0.020)     (0.034)     (0.013)     (0.022)
! Stock Index (t-7)                          0.080*       0.080*       0.084***       0.083***    0.101***    0.103***    0.093***    0.093***
                                             (0.044)      (0.044)       (0.010)        (0.010)     (0.021)     (0.022)     (0.018)     (0.018)

F-Statistic: ! Stock Index (t-7) x                          14.82                       10.14                   13.78                   8.98
Initial Market Value of Endowment                         [0.0002]                    [0.0021]                [0.0004]                [0.0036]
Number of Observations                                                                        28,926

Additional Linear Terms and ! Stock Index (t-1)/(t-6) Interactions:
Industry Fixed Effects                      Yes            Yes            No            No             No       No          No          No
College Quality Rankings                     No             No            Yes           Yes            No       No          No          No
Average Monthly Rent                         No             No            No            No             Yes      Yes         No          No
Fraction College Graduate                    No             No            No            No             No       No          Yes         Yes




                                                                          41
Notes and Sources: See Table 1. The estimates presented are for model (8) in the text. The unit of observation is at the county-industry-year level
and the sample includes all university counties. ! University Expenditure (t-x) is measured as spending rate per ‘000 county population. The
main entries in columns (1) to (8) are coefficient estimates. All estimates are weighted by the level of employment in the industry-county cell in
1981. The entries in parentheses in columns (1) to (8) are the standard errors of the coefficient estimates clustered at the county level. The entries
in the third row and sixth row report the F-Statistic for the test of whether the excluded instrument is zero. The test statistic value is reported as the
main entry, and the p-value of test is reported in square brackets.

* indicates significantly different from zero at the 10% level of significance;
** indicates significantly different from zero at the 5% level of significance;
*** indicates significantly different from zero at 1% level of significance.




                                                                           42
TABLE 7: The Effect of University Activity on Local Labor Income: By the Intensity of
Industry’s Patent Citations of University Patents, 1981-1996

Dependent Variable = ! log (Annual Labor Income in Non-Education Sector (period t))

Industry University Patent Citation        Above Median Intensity        Below Median Intensity
Intensity:
                                             OLS               TSLS        OLS               TSLS
                                              (1)               (2)         (3)               (4)

                                        Model l: Initial Effect

! University Expenditure Per               0.050***           0.092*     0.045***           0.093**
Capita (t-1)                                (0.017)           (0.047)     (0.013)           (0.034)

! Stock Index (t-2)                       -0.049***       -0.049***      -0.032***      -0.032***
                                            (0.005)         (0.005)        (0.007)        (0.007)

F-Statistic: ! Stock Index (t-2) x                              17.56                         22.71
Initial Market Value of Endowment                             [0.0001]                      [0.0000]

Number of Observations                                8,853                         9,100

                                      Model 2: Five Year Effect

! University Expenditure Per                 0.017            0.100*       0.029            0.067***
Capita (t-6)                                (0.014)           (0.053)     (0.019)            (0.021)

! Stock Index (t-7)                        0.092***           0.092***   0.090***           0.090***
                                            (0.008)            (0.008)    (0.009)            (0.009)

F-Statistic: ! Stock Index (t-7) x                              16.92                         18.27
Initial Market Value of Endowment                             [0.0001]                      [0.0001]

Number of Observations                                6,129                         6,300

Notes and Sources: See Table 1. The estimates presented are for model (4) in the text. The unit
of observation is at the county-industry-year level. The sample for the entries in columns (1) and
(2) includes above-median university patent citation industries in all university counties. The
sample for the entries in columns (3) and (4) includes below-median university patent citation
industries in all university counties. ! University Expenditure (t-x) is measured as spending rate
per ‘000 county population. All estimates are weighted by the level of employment in the
industry-county cell in 1981. The main entries in columns (1) to (4) are coefficient estimates.
The entries in parentheses in columns (1) to (4) are the standard errors of the coefficient estimates
clustered at the county level. The entries in the third row and sixth row report the F-Statistic for
the test of whether the excluded instrument is zero. The test statistic value is reported as the main
entry, and the p-value of test is reported in square brackets.

* indicates significantly different from zero at the 10% level of significance;
** indicates significantly different from zero at the 5% level of significance;
*** indicates significantly different from zero at 1% level of significance.


                                                    43
TABLE 8: The Effect of University Activity on Local Labor Income: By Industry
Educational Attainment, 1981-1996

Dependent Variable = ! log (Annual Labor Income in Non-Education Sector (period t))

Industry Fraction College Graduate:                 High                            Low

                                           OLS              TSLS           OLS              TSLS
                                            (1)              (2)            (3)              (4)

                                      Model l: Initial Effect

! University Expenditure Per             0.068**            0.092**      0.059**            0.112*
Capita (t-1)                             (0.019)            (0.041)      (0.025)            (0.051)

! Stock Index (t-2)                     -0.021***          -0.021***    -0.056***         -0.056**
                                          (0.004)            (0.004)      (0.005)          (0.005)

F-Statistic: ! Stock Index (t-2) x                           15.31                          13.08
Initial Market Value of Endowment                          [0.0002]                       [0.0005]

Number of Observations                             21,580                          18,213

                                   Model 2: Five Year Effect

! University Expenditure Per             0.035**             0.046       0.046**          0.132***
Capita (t-6)                             (0.019)            (0.045)      (0.017)           (0.032)

! Stock Index (t-7)                      0.076***          0.076***     0.101***          0.101***
                                          (0.005)           (0.005)      (0.005)           (0.005)

F-Statistic: ! Stock Index (t-7) x                           15.96                          13.12
Initial Market Value of Endowment                          [0.0001]                       [0.0005]

Number of Observations                             14,940                          12,609

Notes and Sources: See Table 1. The estimates presented are for model (4) in the text. The unit
of observation is at the county-industry-year level. The sample for the entries in columns (1) and
(2) is for above-median fraction college graduate industries in all university counties. The sample
for the entries in columns (3) and (4) is for below-median fraction college graduate industries in
all university counties. ! University Expenditure (t-x) is measured as spending rate per ‘000
county population. The main entries in columns (1) to (4) are coefficient estimates. All estimates
are weighted by the level of employment in the industry-county cell in 1981. The entries in
parentheses in columns (1) to (4) are the standard errors of the coefficient estimates clustered at
the county level. The entries in the third row and sixth row report the F-Statistic for the test of
whether the excluded instrument is zero. The test statistic value is reported as the main entry, and
the p-value of test is reported in square brackets.

* indicates significantly different from zero at the 10% level of significance;
** indicates significantly different from zero at the 5% level of significance;
*** indicates significantly different from zero at 1% level of significance.


                                                  44
TABLE 9 : The Effect of University Activity on Local Labor Income: By Industry Based on
Labor Market Pooling With Education Sector, 1981-1996

Dependent Variable = ! log (Annual Labor Income in Non-Education Sector (period t))

Industry Fraction Labor Market                      High                            Low
Pooling With Education:
                                           OLS              TSLS           OLS              TSLS
                                            (1)              (2)            (3)              (4)

                                     Model l: Initial Effect

! University Expenditure Per             0.074**            0.104*      0.035***          0.079***
Capita (t-1)                             (0.025)            (0.062)      (0.011)           (0.027)

! Stock Index (t-2)                     -0.045***          -0.045***    -0.034***         -0.034***
                                          (0.005)            (0.005)      (0.004)           (0.004)

F-Statistic: ! Stock Index (t-2) x                           10.65                          26.27
Initial Market Value of Endowment                          [0.0016]                       [0.0000]

Number of Observations                             23,478                          15,792

                                   Model 2: Five Year Effect

! University Expenditure Per             0.044**            0.086**       0.017             0.036*
Capita (t-6)                             (0.022)            (0.035)      (0.014)            (0.019)

! Stock Index (t-7)                      0.091***          0.091***     0.086***          0.086***
                                          (0.005)           (0.005)      (0.009)           (0.009)

F-Statistic: ! Stock Index (t-7) x                           10.77                          26.83
Initial Market Value of Endowment                          [0.0015]                       [0.0000]

Number of Observations                              16,254                         10,926
Notes and Sources: See Table 1. The estimates presented are for model (4) in the text. The unit
of observation is at the county-industry-year level. The sample for the entries in columns (1) and
(2) is for above-median education sector labor market transition industries in all university
counties. The sample for the entries in columns (3) and (4) is for below-median education sector
labor market transition industries in all university counties. ! University Expenditure (t-x) is
measured as spending rate per ‘000 county population. The main entries in columns (1) to (4) are
coefficient estimates. All estimates are weighted by the level of employment in the industry-
county cell in 1981. The entries in parentheses in columns (1) to (4) are the standard errors of the
coefficient estimates clustered at the county level. The entries in the third row and sixth row
report the F-Statistic for the test of whether the excluded instrument is zero. The test statistic
value is reported as the main entry, and the p-value of test is reported in square brackets.

* indicates significantly different from zero at the 10% level of significance;
** indicates significantly different from zero at the 5% level of significance;
*** indicates significantly different from zero at 1% level of significance.


                                                  45
TABLE A1: Countries with Largest and Smallest University Endowment Per Capita

  County       State                                    University Names                                       Endowment           Expenditure
  Name                                                                                                          Per Capita          Per Capita
                                                                                                                  1981                1981

(1) Top 10 Endowment Counties:
    Travis     TX    University of Texas at Austin                                                               2898.63             788.40
   Mercer      NJ    Princeton University                                                                        1779.20             655.28
 Middlesex     MA Boston College, Brandeis University, Harvard University, Massachusetts Institute of            1562.71             874.54
                     Technology, Tufts University, University of Massachusetts Lowell
 New Haven     CT    Yale University                                                                              888.38             393.99
 New York      NY CUNY, Columbia, New School for Social Research, New York University,                            642.85             773.66
                     Rockefeller University, Yeshiva University
  De Kalb      GA Emory University                                                                                550.32             465.72
   Monroe      NY University of Rochester                                                                         540.03             382.91
 Santa Clara   CA Stanford University                                                                             496.20             418.17
 Washtenaw     MI    University of Michigan-Ann Arbor                                                             478.29            2382.91
  Davidson     TN    Tennessee State University, Vanderbilt University                                            328.04             520.69

(2) Bottom 10 Endowment Counties:
    Lucas      OH University of Toledo                                                                             2.36              137.42
  Maricopa     AZ Arizona State University                                                                         1.89              108.38
   Brevard      FL  Florida Institute of Technology                                                                1.21               76.21
  Jefferson    CO Colorado School of Mines                                                                         1.15               71.74
   Shelby      TN   Memphis State University                                                                       1.05               87.66
  Broward       FL  Nova University                                                                                0.23               19.39
   Suffolk     NY State University of New York at Stony Brook                                                      0.14              116.32
   Albany      NY State University of New York at Albany                                                           0.13              382.24
 Multnomah     OR Portland State University                                                                        0.11               89.93
  Baltimore    MD University of Maryland Baltimore County                                                          0.03               46.72

Notes and Sources: See Table 1. Baltimore County does not include the city of Baltimore, which is measured as a separate county.




                                                                      46
TABLE A2: The Effect of Stock Market Shocks to Endowment Value on University
Expenditure: Additional Stock Index Interactions

Dependent Variable = ! University Expenditure (period t)

                                                     Added Interactions
                               Industry                            Fraction           University
                            Fixed Effects      Average Rent     College Grad            Quality
                                   x                 x                x                    x
                            ! Stock Index      ! Stock Index    ! Stock Index        ! Stock Index
                                  (1)               (2)              (3)                  (4)

! Stock Index (t-1) x        0.0030***           0.0031***            0.0022***        0.0030***
1977 Market Value of          (0.0008)            (0.0008)             (0.0007)         (0.0009)
Endowment

! Stock Index (t-1)           -0.0459*             -0.0792             0.0518            -0.0043
                              (0.0241)            (0.0619)            (0.0335)          (0.0303)

Added Interactions:
! Stock Index (t-1) x                              0.0002
Monthly Rent                                      (0.0003)
! Stock Index (t-1) x                                                 -0.4906*
Fraction College Grad                                                 (0.2728)
! Stock Index (t-1) x                                                                    -0.0154
University Quality                                                                      (0.0107)
Ranking
! Stock Index (t-1) x
Industry Fixed Effects           Yes                   No                No                No

F-Statistic:
Index (t-1) x                    14.76              13.64               10.34             10.06
1977 Market Value of           [0.0002]           [0.0013]            [0.0036]          [0.0021]
Endowment

Observations                                                 41,782

Notes and Sources: See Table 1. The estimates presented are for model (9) in the text. The unit
of observation is at the county-industry-year level and the sample is all large university counties.
All estimates are weighted by the level of employment in the industry-county cell in 1981. !
University Expenditure (t-x) is measured as spending rate per ‘000 county population. The main
entries in columns (1) - (4) are coefficient estimates. All estimates are weighted by the level of
employment in the industry-county cell in 1981. The entries in parentheses in columns (1) - (2)
are the standard errors of the coefficient estimates clustered at the county level. The entries in the
seventh row report the F-Statistic for the test of whether the excluded instruments are zero. The
test statistic value is reported as the main entry, and the p-value of test is reported in square
brackets.

* indicates significantly different from zero at the 10% level of significance;
** indicates significantly different from zero at the 5% level of significance;
*** indicates significantly different from zero at 1% level of significance.


                                                  47
