                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   HOW LARGE ARE THE EFFECTS OF TAX CHANGES?

                                           Carlo Favero
                                        Francesco Giavazzi

                                       Working Paper 15303
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15303


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2009




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Fernando Alvarez, Marios Angeletos, Olivier Blanchard, Eric Leeper,
Guido Lorenzoni and Roberto Perotti for helping us clarify the problem we were addressing. We also
received very useful comments from participants in seminars at MIT, Boston College, the Federal
Reserve Banks of Boston and Chicago and the 2009 Texas Monetary Conference. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Carlo Favero and Francesco Giavazzi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
How large are the effects of tax changes?
Carlo Favero and Francesco Giavazzi
NBER Working Paper No. 15303
August 2009
JEL No. E62,H60

                                              ABSTRACT

We use the time series of shifts in U.S. Federal tax liabilities constructed by Romer and Romer to
estimate tax multipliers. Differently from the single-equation approach adopted by Romer and Romer,
our estimation strategy (a Var that includes output, government spending and revenues, inflation and
the nominal interest rate) does not rely upon the assumption that tax shocks are orthogonal to each
other as well as to lagged values of other macro variables. Our estimated multiplier is much smaller:
one, rather than three at a three-year horizon. When we split the sample in two sub-samples (before
and after 1980) we find, before 1980, a multiplier whose size is never greater than one, after 1980
a multiplier not significantly different from zero. Following the findings in Bohn (1998), we also experiment
with a model that includes debt and the non-linear government budget constraint. We find that, while
in general not very important, the non-linearity that arises from the budget constraint makes a difference
after 1980, when the response of fiscal variables to the level of the debt becomes stronger.


Carlo Favero
Department of Finance
Bocconi University and IGIER
Via Röntgen, 1
20136 Milano, ITALY
carlo.favero@uni-bocconi.it

Francesco Giavazzi
Department of Economics
Bocconi University and I.G.I.E.R
room 5-D1-07
Via. G. Rontgen 1
20136, Milan Italy
and NBER
francesco.giavazzi@unibocconi.it
1        Introduction
In some recent papers the estimated eﬀects on output (using post World War II data)
of a shift in U.S. federal tax liabilities imply a multiplier significantly greater than
one. Romer and Romer (forthcoming, R&R in what follows) find that tax increases
are highly contractionary: according to their estimates a tax increase equivalent to 1
per cent of U.S. GDP reduces output over the next three years by nearly 3 per cent.
The eﬀect is highly statistically significant.
        R&R use the narrative record, such as presidential speeches and Congressional
reports, to identify the size, timing, and principal motivation for all major postwar
tax policy actions. This analysis allows them to separate legislated changes into those
taken for reasons related to prospective economic conditions and those taken for more
exogenous reasons–for instance for philosophical reasons or to reduce an inherited
budget deficit. Their estimates of the eﬀects on output of shifts in taxes use only
these more exogenous changes. Thus they avoid the omitted variable bias that aﬀects
regressions of output on aggregate measures of tax changes, many of which are not
legislated at all, but occur automatically because the tax base varies with the overall
level of income, or because of changes in stock prices, inflation, and other non-policy
forces. An additional advantage of the R&R ”narrative approach” to the identification
of ”tax shocks” is that it allows to separate tax changes that are anticipated from
those that caught the economy by surprise. Mertens and Ravn (2008) use the R&R
measure of shifts in taxes and distinguish between those that were anticipated from
those that were not. Their findings confirm the large multiplier reported by R&R and
show that anticipated and unanticipated shifts in taxes have similar eﬀects–though
anticipated tax cuts, before they are implemented, tend to have a contractionary
eﬀect on output.
        The size of these multipliers surprises even the authors and are much larger than
those obtained in other studies. Blanchard and Perotti (2002) use U.S. data starting
in 1960, and thus exclude the first 15 years of the R&R sample: they estimate a
multiplier for tax changes which is statistically significant, but whose size (1.3) is
less than a half.        1   R&R suggest that these diﬀerences are the result of the failure
of structural VAR’s–the technique used in Blanchard and Perotti (2002), Perotti
    1
        Interestingly, Perotti (2008) shows that the result for the entire sample (1960 to 2001) averages
very diﬀerent values of the multiplier before and after 1980. In the first part of the sample tax cuts
have a positive and significant eﬀect on output, with a multiplier only slightly smaller compared
with R&R (around 2.6 at a three year horizon). After 1980, however, the eﬀect turns around: the
multiplier becomes negative and signiifcant and its absolute value remains similar.


                                                     2
(2008) and in similar studies–to identify truly exogenous shifts in taxes.2
       In this paper we assess the robustness of the evidence of a large tax multiplier
using the measure of exogenous shifts in taxes constructed by R&R but a diﬀerent
econometric specification.
       First, we show that the equation R&R estimate to compute the eﬀects of a shift
in taxes can be interpreted as the moving average representation of the equation for
output growth in a VAR model which includes a larger set of variables: along with
output growth, government revenues, government spending, inflation and nominal in-
terest rates. This representation however is truncated and yields consistent estimates
of the tax multiplier under the assumption that tax shocks are not only orthogonal
to each other, but that they are also orthogonal to any other macro shock (produc-
tivity shocks, shifts in government spending, or in monetary policy, etc.) and to the
excluded lags of the macro variables that belong in the VAR. When we relax this
assumption we find multipliers whose size is much smaller than that estimated by
R&R. When we split the sample in two sub-samples (before and after 1980) we find,
before 1980, multipliers whose size is never greater than one per cent of GDP; after
1980 multipliers not significantly diﬀerent from zero.
       We have included in our VAR this particular list of variables (output growth, gov-
ernment revenues, government spending, inflation and nominal interest rates) because
these are the variables that belong in the government intertemporal budget constraint.
In Section 3 we explain why the eﬀects of tax shocks should be estimated recognizing
that the government is subject to such a constraint and what diﬀerence it makes in
practice. We start from the findings by Henning Bohn (1998) which suggests that
U.S. fiscal policy reacts to the level of the debt ratio. If fiscal variables respond to the
level of the debt, then the analysis of the impact of tax shocks should be conducted by
   2
       The identification strategy followed in Blanchard and Perotti (2002) uses institutional informa-
tion about the tax and transfer systems and the timing of tax collections to identify the automatic
responses of taxes and spending to activity, and, by implication, to infer exogenous fiscal shocks.
Recently, the validity of this identification approach has been questioned on the argument that it
cannot take properly account of fiscal foresight. Leeper et al. (2008) point out that legislative and
implementation lags provide private agents with clear signals about the tax rates they will face in the
future. Paired with the forward looking behavious of agents, this produces equilibrium time series
with a non-invertible moving average component (see Hansen and Sargent, 1991, Lippi and Reichlin,
1994). As a consequence of the misalignament between the agents’ and the econometrician’s informa-
tion sets, economically meaningful shocks to taxes cannot be extracted from statistical innovations
in the VAR. The narrative approach to the identification of tax shocks employed in R&R is immune
from the fiscal foresight problem that aﬀects strctural VARs.


                                                    3
explicitly recognizing a role for debt and for the stock-flow identity linking debt and
deficits.     3   We do this estimating the multiplier associated with the R&R tax shocks
keeping track of the eﬀect that such shocks have on the path of the debt ratio, and
allowing for a response of taxes, spending, output, inflation and interest rates to the
level of the debt. This introduces into the model a source of non-linearity (among the
five macro variables included) which arises from the government intertemporal budget
constraint. We find no major diﬀerence in the eﬀects of tax shocks estimated omit-
ting debt and the debt dynamics equation (and thus using a linear model), and those
estimated including debt and the non-linear equation which describes debt dynamics.
We surmise that the reason why overlooking this non-linearity does not appear to
be important–or at least as important as overlooking the simultaneity highlighted
in the previous paragraph–could be that the five variables entering the government
budget constraint already enter (albeit linearly) the equations of a fiscal VAR that
excludes debt. Non-linearity, however, appears to make a diﬀerence whenever–as in
happens in the United States after 1980–the response of fiscal variables to the level
of the debt becomes stronger.


2        Estimating the eﬀects of tax changes
Having constructed a time series of exogenous shifts in taxes, uτt−i –where each uτt−i
measures the impact of a tax change at the time it was implemented (t − i) on
tax liabilities at time t–R&R measure their eﬀect on output, Yt , estimating, using
quarterly data and ordinary least squares, a single equation of the form

                                                    M
                                                    X
                                       ∆Yt = a +      bi uτt−i + et                                  (1)
                                                     i=0

        Careful analysis of the motivation behind each uτt allows R&R to assume that this
variable is uncorrelated with the error term et , i.e. that the shifts in taxes described
by uτt 0 s are unrelated to other factors likely aﬀect output growth (and to any other
tax responses policymakers may have been making to those factors at around the
same time). The eﬀects of a tax shift on output growth can then be described by the
impulse response constructed using the estimates of the bi coeﬃcients and allowing
fora lag of three years (M = 12).
        In Figure 1 we have replicated the original results by R&R. The figure reports
    3
        Corsetti et al. (2009) show that the impact of a shift in public spending depends on expectations
about oﬀsetting fiscal measures in the future.



                                                     4
the eﬀect on output between period t and period t + i of a shift in taxes occurring in
period t and equivalent to one per cent of U.S. GDP in period t. We use quarterly data
(described in the Data Appendix) and we report three impulse response functions:
one based on estimates from a sample running from 1950:1 to 2006:2, and two based
on estimates restricted to two sub-samples: 1950:1-1980:4 and 1981:1-2006:2. Our
sample starts in 1950, rather than in 1947, the starting date of the R&R sample. The
reason (as explained in the Data Appendix) is that we want to compare the results
in R&R with those obtained using the uτt 0 s in a VAR which also contains an equation
for government spending–and consistent data on government spending are available
only from 1950:1. We end in 2006:2, the last date for which the R&R shocks are
available. The slightly shorter sample does not change the R&R result: the eﬀect on
output peaks, as in R&R, after ten quarters and implies a fall in output of about 3
per cent. The shape of the impulse response function also matches the original one.
The motivation for splitting the sample is the finding by Perotti (2008) of significant
diﬀerences in the eﬀects of fiscal shocks before and after 1980, in the U.S. as well as
in other countries. The results show a remarkable degree of stability of the eﬀect of
the R&R shocks based on the impulse responses from equation (1) .
    To analyze the robustness of these results we interpret equation (1) as a truncated
version of the MA representation of output in a closed-economy fiscal VAR which
includes output growth, inflation (π), the nominal rate of interest (i), government
revenues (τ ) and government spending (g). As we shall explain in the next Section,
the reason we select these five variables is because they appear in the intertemporal
government budget constraint. Defining these variables with the vector Z, the Vector
autoregression is
                                    AZt = CZt−1 + Bεt                                      (2)
        ¡                           ¢
    εt ≡ εyt , επt , εit , ετt , εgt are structural shocks and their variance-covariance matrix
is I.
    The MA representation of (2) is

                                        Zt = Γ(L)εt                                        (3)

                      A−1 B
    where Γ(L) ≡    1−A−1 CL .   The MA representation is not directly estimated in the
VAR approach, but can be derived by inversion after having estimated (2) . To do
this one needs to identify the structural shocks εt : these can be obtained from the
reduced form innovations, et using the relation Aet = Bεt , after having imposed a
suﬃcient number of identifying restrictions on the matrices A and B. R&R don’t
need to do this because their narrative approach provides a direct measure of the

                                              5
tax shocks ετt which are the only structural shocks they use. They then derive the
impulse response by directly estimating the projection of output growth on the tax
shocks. In practice they estimate one equation of the truncated MA representation
(3) that can be re-written as follows:

                                      M
                                      X
                               Zt =     Γ0 Γi1 εt−i + ΓM+1
                                                       1   Zt−M+1                                (4)
                                      i=0

where Γ0 ≡ A−1 B, Γ1 ≡ A−1 C. A comparison between (4) and (1) reveals that the
OLS estimates of the coeﬃcients bi obtained from (1) are consistent provided three
conditions are satisfied:

      • the tax shocks uτt−i are independently distributed, otherwise the sum could not
        be truncated at M,

      • the tax shocks uτt−i are orthogonal to any other shock in εt that might influence
        output growth,

      • the tax shocks uτt−i are orthogonal to the variables in Zt−M+1 .

      The hypothesis that the uτt are not serially correlated can be tested empirically and
is satisfied in the time series constructed by R&R. Orthogonality of the tax shocks
to any other shock is the R&R’s identifying assumption: from an analysis of the
extensive discussion in the narrative record of why each utt−i action was taken, R&R
conclude that ”most actions had a single predominant motivation, and that some of
those motivations are unrelated to other factors likely to have important eﬀects on
output growth (and to any other tax responses policymakers may have been making to
those factors at around the same time)”.
      There is an immediate way of validating the assumption that the uτt−i are orthog-
onal to any information in the VAR dated t − M + 1: include uτt in (2) and check
if the impulse response of output growth to the uτt shock obtained from the VAR is
the same as that delivered by the single equation approach adopted by R&R. (Note
that since we are only interested in the impulse response to a tax shock, to perform
this experiment we don’t need to identify any other structural shock). In fact impulse
responses to the R&R tax shocks can be easily obtained by introducing them as an
additional variable in (2).4
  4
      Bagliano and Favero (1999) do this in the context of a monetary VAR to derive impulse responses
to measures of monetary policy shocks costructed outside the VAR framework.




                                                  6
   We have thus constructed impulse responses of output growth to the R&R tax
shocks by estimating the following VAR
                                   M
                                   X
                              Zt =   Ci Zt−i + δ i uτt + et                           (5)
                                    i=1

   where Zt includes the five variable mentioned above: the nominal rate of interest
(the average cost of the Federal debt), output growth (the first diﬀerence of the log
of real GDP), inflation (the first diﬀerence of the log of the price level), (the logs of)
government receipts and government expenditure net of interest. (The data we use
are described in the Data Appendix.). et are reduced form innovations.
   Figure 2 compares the eﬀect on output of an uτt tax shock equivalent to one per
cent of U.S. GDP estimated using, alternatively, (1) (displayed as a dotted line) and
(5) (displayed as a continuos line). Estimating the eﬀect of tax shocks using the VAR
one obtains a response of output that is much smaller than that delivered by the sin-
gle equation approach adopted in R&R. The impact of a tax shock on output growth
estimated in a VAR never exceeds one per cent. The VAR also highlights the insta-
bility of the eﬀects of tax shocks between the periods preceding and following 1980:
the impact of tax shocks in the first sub-sample is larger and significantly diﬀerent
from the impact in the second sub-sample, where it is not significantly diﬀerent from
zero.
   The results in Figure 2 show that the diﬀerences between the two impulse responses–
that estimated using (1) and (5)–only appear after a few quarters, and not impact.
This is a clear symptom that the single-equation framework fails to capture some
significant simultaneity. This simultaneity must arise from the correlation between
the tax shocks and the information included in the VAR in the periods preceding the
truncation of the MA representation directly estimated by R&R.
   To see this point consider the simple case in which our VAR is of order one Then
the truncated MA representation for output growth can be re-written as
                       M
                       X                             M
                                                     X
                          M      τ      M+1
                  Zt =   Ci δ i ut−i + Ci   Zt−M+1 +   CM
                                                        i et−i                        (6)
                        i=0                                   i=0

   Since by construction the uτt−i are orthogonal to the et−i , the diﬀerence in the
multipliers obtained estimating (1) and (6) must depend on the correlation between
uτt−i and Zt−M+1 . This point can be easily seen re-running the R&R regression
augmenting it with Zt−M+1 , i.e. running the following regression
                                M
                                X
                      ∆Yt = a +   bi uτt−i + CM+1
                                              i   Zt−M+1 + et                         (7)
                                  i=0


                                            7
This is a robustness check R&R do not perform since the robustness checks they
report only use information dated up to time M . Figure 3 reports the eﬀect of
tax shocks as computed originally by R&R alongwith those based on the augmented
regression (7) over the full sample 1950:1-2006:2. The figure shows that the truncation
has an eﬀect on the size of the multiplier approximately after the 8th quarter. The
multiplier estimated using the augmented regression then gets very close 5 to the one
delivered by the inclusion of the R&R shocks in a fiscal VAR i.e. by the estimation
of (5). Interestingly, the R2 increases from 0.09 in the original R&R specification to
0.17 in the augmented specification. Unfortunately, it is impossible to identify which
variable in Z is responsible for these results: the F − test for the joint significance of
the regressors included in the augmented model rejects the null, but the t − tests on
the individual coeﬃcients do not point out any coeﬃcient, on a specific variable, at a
specific lag as strikingly significant.


3        Debt and the eﬀects of tax changes
Henning Bohn (1998), using a century of U.S data, documents a positive correlation
between the government surplus and the Federal debt–a result which suggests that
U.S. fiscal policy reacts to the level of the debt ratio. If fiscal variables respond to the
level of the debt, then the analysis of the impact of tax shocks should be conducted
by explicitly recognizing the eﬀect that such shock determine on the path of debt. For
instance, whether, or not, following a shift in taxes, the debt ratio will be stabilized,
will determine the response of the economy to the tax shock–which is likely to diﬀer
depending on whether the shock produces a path of debt that is stable or tends to
become explosive.6
        When debt is introduced into the VAR this variable needs to be made endogenous,
otherwise impulse response functions would be computed assuming a constant debt
ratio, thus ruling out the very reason why debt is included in the first place–namely
to allow macro variables to respond to the eﬀect of the tax shock on the level of the
debt. The way to make the debt ratio endogenous is to add to the model the equation
that describes how it evolves over time as a function of the path of all other variables,
    5
        The small remaining diﬀerence between the impulse responses can be rationalized on the ground
that, following Blanchard-Perotti (2002), we specify our fiscal VAR in the (log) levels of the macroe-
conimic variables.
   6
     A response of macroeconomic variables is of course necessary for stability of the debt ratio–
except in the special case in which the rate of growth of the economy is exactly equal to the average
cost of debt financing.


                                                   8
i.e. the government’s intertemporal budget constraint.              7   This is why, as mentioned
in the previous Section, we included these five particular variables (output growth,
government revenues, government spending, inflation and nominal interest rates) in
our VAR: because they appear in the government intertemporal budget constraint.
       Doing this, however, makes the model non-linear because the government in-
tertemporal budget constraint implies a non-linear relation among the five macro
variables.
                                      1 + it          exp (gt ) − exp (τ t )
                            dt =               dt−1 +                                             (8)
                                     (1 + xt )             exp (yt )
                                     xt ≡ π t + ∆yt + π t ∆yt

The presence of this non-linearity is compatible with a range of alternative theoretical
models, since it simply arises from the possibility that the macroeconomic variables
included in the VAR respond to the level of the debt ratio.
       In this Section we study whether the multiplier associated with the R&R tax
shocks changes when one keeps track of the eﬀect that such shocks have on the path
of the debt ratio through a non-linear budget constraint and allows for a response of
macroeconomic variables to the level of the debt.
       Before doing this, however, it is worth asking why debt has been systematically
excluded from empirical investigations of the eﬀects of fiscal policy–not only from
the estimates by R&R, but essentially from the entire empirical literature (Edelberg
et al, 1999, Blanchard and Perotti, 2002, Mountford Uhlig, 2002, Fatàs and Mihov,
2001 among other). The omission of a debt feedback from estimated fiscal VARs is
surprising also because the equilibrium structural models used to analyse the eﬀects
of fiscal policy are typically solved by imposing the government intertemporal budget
constraint and are simulated under the assumption that the real value of the debt in
the hands of the public must equal the expected present value of government surpluses.
It is thus natural to ask why debt has been systematically excluded. One justification
is that the eﬀects of this variable are captured by all other variables included in a
fiscal VAR. For instance Z, in (2), contains all the variables that enter the government
intertemporal budget constraint and thus determine the dynamics of the debt ratio.
The diﬀerence is that the debt dynamics equation is non-linear, while the VAR is
linear
       Whether or not including the debt ratio directly in the VAR makes a diﬀerence
thus depends on how good an approximation the linear version of (8) is. This requires
   7
       Note that the budget constraint is an identity: it does not add new parameters to be estimated,
nor new shocks to be identified.


                                                   9
that the debt-to-GDP ratio is stationary and that all other conditions for the validity
of the linearization are met: in this case impulse responses to fiscal shocks are to be
interpreted as the response of the economy computed at the mean of the stationary
government debt-to-GDP ratio.


3.1        Estimating the eﬀects of tax changes keeping track of debt dy-
           namics
To check the empirical importance of taking non-linearity seriously–thus including in
the VAR both the debt level and the budget constraint–we have computed impulse
responses to the R&R shocks using a VAR that includes a debt feedback. The model
estimated thus becomes

                               k
                               X
                          Zt =   Ci Zt−i + δ i utt + γ i (dt−1 − d∗ ) + et                        (9)
                                 i=1

with dt defined as (8). In (9) macroeconomic variables are assumed to respond not to
the level of the debt-to-GDP ratio, but to its distance from a target level d∗ . Although
this assumption is irrelevant for the results, we make it to estimate an equation that
mirrors that estimated in Bohn (1998). As in Bohn we take 0.35, as the target value
for d∗ –a value which, as shown in Figure A1, is also the average debt level in our
sample.
       Note that because (9) is non linear, constructing an MA representation of Zt is
no longer possible. This might induce an additional source of mis-specification of the
single equation estimated by R&R.8
   8
       Also notice that the estimation of (9) diﬀers from the procedure followed by Chung and Leeper
(2007). These authors recognize the importance of including the government budget constraint
because the present value condition implied by the linearized budget constraint–that the real value
of the debt must equal the expected present-value of surpluses–generates a set of cross-equation
restrictions on traditional fiscal VARs. Their results show that imposing such restrictions makes some
diﬀerence for impulse response analysis. Our procedure doesn’t need to assume that the conditions
for linearization are satisfied: by augmenting the traditional fiscal VAR with the equation describing
the debt-deficit dynamics, our impulse responses satisfy by construction (period-by-period) the debt-
deficit stock-flow relationship. We can therefore directly evaluate the validity of the tranversality
condition by considering the long-run response of dt to fiscal shocks and by checking if it converges
to zero.




                                                  10
3.2       Computing impulse responses with stocks and flows
After all the parameters in (9) have been estimated, we are left with the problem of
constructing impulse responses. Given the special nature of (9), the computation of
impulse responses requires going through the following steps:

       • generate a baseline simulation for all variables by solving (9) dynamically for-
         ward (this requires setting to zero all shocks for a number of periods equal to
         the horizon up to which impulse responses are needed),

       • generate an alternative simulation for all variables by setting to one—just for the
         first period of the simulation—the structural shock of interest, and then solve
         dynamically forward the model up to the same horizon used in the baseline
         simulation,

       • compute impulse responses to the structural shocks as the diﬀerence between
         the simulated values in the two steps above. (Note that these steps, if applied
         to a standard VAR, would produce standard impulse responses. In our case
         they produce impulse responses that allow for both the feedback from dt−i to
         Zt and for the endogeneity of dt modelled via (8)),

       • compute confidence intervals by bootstrap methods.9


3.3       Is non-linearity empirically important?
We illustrate the empirical relevance of estimating tax multpliers by including debt
and the government intertemporal budget constraint comparing the impulse responses
obtained using (9) with those shown in Section 2. The results are in Figure 4, both
for the entire sample and for the two sub-samples considered separately.
       The two sets of impulse responses illustrate that the model augmented with debt
and the non-linear debt dynamics equation produces results which are very similar
to those obtained by including the R&R shocks in a traditional fiscal VAR .Figure 4
confirms that when the R&R measure of tax shocks is considered within a multiple
equation model, rather than in a single equation framework, the estimated multpliers
   9
       Bootstrapping requires saving the residuals from the estimated VAR and then iterating the
following steps: a) re-sample from the saved residuals and generate a set of observation for Zt and
dt , b) estimate the VAR, c) compute impulse responses going thorough the steps described in the
text, d) go back to step a). By going thorugh 1,000 iterations we produce bootstrapped distributions
for impulse responses and compute confidence intervals.



                                                11
are much smaller. However, while simultaneity is important, we find no major empir-
ical diﬀerence between a non-linear model with an explicit debt dynamics equation
and a linearized model where the eﬀect of debt is captured by its components.
         Interestingly, the impulse responses based on the linearized model and on the
non-linear model with debt diﬀer in the second subsample where the eﬀect of an
exogenous increase in taxes aﬀects negatively and significantly output growth (with a
peak eﬀect of about 0.5 per cent), while the same eﬀect is never significantly diﬀerent
from zero in the model without debt. This is because the feedback from the debt
ratio to government revenues and spending is stronger in the second sub-sample                      10 –

but the linearized model computes impulse responses at the mean of the stationary
government debt ratio and thus fails to capture this feedback..


4         Conclusions
We have estimated the multiplier associated with the narrative shifts in taxes con-
structed by R&R (forthcoming) without imposing that tax shocks are orthogonal to
any information dated (t − 11), i.e. that they are uncorrelated with past macroeco-
nomic outcomes. We find a much smaller multiplier: 1, rather than 3 at a three-year
horizon. We also find that the multplier changes significantly before and after 1980,
when the impact of tax shocks becomes not significantly diﬀerent from zero
         We have also estimated the multiplier keeping track of the eﬀect of tax shocks
on the level of the debt-GDP ratio. We have done this allowing for the non-linearity
which arises from the government budget constraint. We find that, while in general
not very important, this non-linearity makes a diﬀerence after 1980, when the response
of fiscal variables to the level of the debt becomes stronger.
         The methodology we have developed to analyze the impact of tax shocks by keep-
ing track of the non-linear budget constraint, could be used in other settings. For
instance, the discussions on the importance of including capital as a slow-moving vari-
able to capture the relation between productivity shocks and hours worked (see e.g.
Christiano et al, 2005 and Chari et al. 2005) could benefit from an estimation tech-
nique that tracks the dynamics of the capital stock generated by the relevant shocks.
The same applies to open economy models that study, for instance, the eﬀects of a
productivity shock on the current account and that typically omit a feedback from
the stock of external debt to macroeconomic variables.
    10
         In Favero and Giavazzi (2007) we document how the response of U.S. fiscal variables to the level
of the debt ratio changes around 1980.


                                                     12
    This approach could also be used in the analysis of the eﬀects of tax shocks on
debt sustainability, an issue which cannot be addressed in the context of a VAR that
fails to keep track of debt dynamics.


5    References
 Bagliano, Fabio and C. Favero [1999]: ”Information from financial markets and VAR
      measures of monetary policy”, European Economic Review, 43, 825-837.

 Blanchard, Olivier and R. Perotti [2002]: ”An Empirical Characterization of the
      Dynamic Eﬀects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output”,
      Quarterly Journal of Economics

 Bohn, Henning [1998]: ”The Behaviour of U.S. public debt and deficits”, Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, 113, 949-963.

 Burnside, Craig, M. Eichenbaum and J.D.M. Fisher [2003]: “Fiscal Shocks and Their
      Consequences”, NBER Working Paper No 9772

 Cashell, Brian W. [2006]: ”The Federal Government Debt: its size and economic
      significance” CRS Report for Congress.

 Chari V.V., P.J. Kehoe and E.R. McGrattan [2005]: ”A Critique of Structural VARs
      Using Business Cycle Theory”, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research
      Department Staﬀ Report 364

 Christiano, Lawrence J., M.Eichenbaum and R.Vigfusson [2005]: ”Assessing Struc-
      tural VARs”, mimeo

 Chung Hess and E. M. Leeper [2007] ”What has financed government debt?” NBER
      WP 13425

 Corsetti G., A. Meier, and G. Muller [2009] ”Fiscal Stimulus with Spending Rever-
      sals”, mimeo

 Edelberg, Wendy, M. Eichenbaum and J. D.M. Fisher [1999]: ”Understanding the
      Eﬀects of a Shock to Government Purchases”, Review of Economics Dynamics,
      pp.166-206, 41

 Fatás, Antonio and I. Mihov [2001]: ”The Eﬀects of Fiscal Policy on Consumption
      and Employment: Theory and Evidence”, mimeo, INSEAD


                                        13
Favero, Carlo and F. Giavazzi [2007]: ”Debt and the Eﬀects of Fiscal Policy”, NBER
    Working Paper 12833

Hansen, L. P., and T. J. Sargent (1991): “Two Diﬃculties in Interpreting Vector
    Autoregressions,” in Rational Expectations Econometrics, ed. by L. P. Hansen,
    and T. J. Sargent, pp. 77—119. Westview Press, Boulder, Co.

Leeper Eric, M., T. Walker and Sun Chun Yang [2008]: ”Fiscal Foresight:Analytics
    and Econometrics”, mimeo

Lippi, Marco, and L. Reichlin (1994): “VAR Analysis, Nonfundamental Represen-
    tations, Blaschke Matrices,” Journal of Econometrics, 63(1), 307—325.

Mertens, Karl and Morten O. Ravn [2008]: ”The Aggregate Eﬀects of Anticipated
    and Unanticipated U.S. Tax Policy Shocks: Theory and Empirical Evidence”,
    mimeo.

Mountford, Andrew and H. Uhlig [2002]: ”What Are the Eﬀcets of Fiscal Policy
    Shocks?” CEPR Discussion Paper 3338

Perotti, Roberto [2008]: “In Search of the Transmission Mechanism of Fiscal policy”;
    NBER Macroeconomic Annual, forthcoming

Romer, Christina and David H. Romer [forthcoming]: The Macroeconomic Eﬀects of
    Tax Changes: Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks”, American
    Economic Review.




                                        14
6         Data Appendix
yt is (the log of) real GDP per capita, π t is the log diﬀerence of the GDP defla-
tor. Data for the stock of U.S. public debt and for population are from the FRED
database (available on the Federal Reserve of St.Louis website,also downloaded on
December 7th 2006). Our measure for gt is (the log of) real per capita primary gov-
ernment expenditure: nominal expenditure is obtained subtracting from total Federal
Government Current Expenditure (line 39, NIPA Table 3.2 ) net interest payments
at annual rates (obtained as the diﬀerence between line 28 and line 13 on the same
table). Real per capita expenditure is then obtained by dividing the nominal variable
by population times the GDP chain deflator. Our measure for τ t is (the log of) real
per capita government receipts at annual rates (the nominal variable is reported on
line 36 of the same NIPA Table).
         The R&R tax shocks start in 1947, while our data only start in 1950:1 because
data for total governemnt spending are available on a consistent basis only from
1950:1. We thus exclude the exogenous shocks that occurred between January 1947
and December 1949.
         Our approach requires that the debt-dynamics equation (8) tracks the path of dt
accurately: we thus need to define the variables in this equation with some care. The
source for the diﬀerent components of the budget deficit and for all macroeconomic
variables are the NIPA accounts (available on the Bureau of Economic Analysis web-
site, downloaded on December 7th 2006). The average cost servicing the debt, it , is
obtained by dividing net interest payments by the federal government debt held by
the public (FYGFDPUN in the Fred database) at time t − 1. The federal government
debt held by the public is smaller than the gross federal debt, which is the broadest
definition of the U.S. public debt. However, not all gross debt represents past bor-
rowing in the credit markets since a portion of the gross federal debt is held by trust
funds—primarily the Social Security Trust Fund, but also other funds: the Trust Fund
for Unemployment Insurance, the Highway Trust Fund, the pension fund of federal
employees, etc.. The assets held by these funds consist of non-marketable debt.11 We
thus exclude it from our definition of federal public debt. We are unable to build the
debt series back to 1947:1, the start of the Romer and Romer sample, because, as
mentioned above, data for total governemnt spending, needed to buld the debt series,
are available on a consistent basis only from 1950:1
    11
         Cashell (2006) notes that ”this debt exists only as a book-keeping entry, and does not reflect
past borrowing in credit markets.”



                                                    15
   Figure A-1 reports, starting in 1970:1 (the first quarter for which the debt data
are available in FRED), this measure of the debt held by the public as a fraction of
GDP (this is the dotted line). We have checked the accuracy of the debt dynamics
equation in (8) simulating it forward from 1970:1 (this is the continuous line in Figure
A-1). The simulated series is virtually super-imposed to the actual one: the small
diﬀerences are due to approximation errors in computing inflation and growth rates as
logarithmic diﬀerences, and to the fact that the simulated series are obtained by using
seasonally adjusted measures of expenditures and revenues. Based on this evidence
we have used the debt dynamics equation to extend dt back to 1950:1.



   1 .0


   0 .8


   0 .6


   0 .4


   0 .2


   0 .0
              55     60     65      70     75     80     85     90      95     00     05

                                           DY             D Y_ I

Figure A1: Actual (DY) and simulated (DY I) (dynamically backward and forward
starting in 1970:1) debt-GDP ratio. Actual data are observed at quarterly frequency
 from 1970 onwards and at annual frequency from 1970 backward. The simulated
data are constructed using the government intertemporal budget constraint (8) with
   observed data and initial conditions given by the debt-to-GDP ratio in 1970:1.




                                          16
                                 .01


                                 .00


                                 -.01


                                 -.02


                                 -.03


                                 -.04


                                 -.05


                                 -.06
                                         2    4    6    8     10      12       14       16       18       20

                                                            R&R1950:12006:2

   .01                                                             .01

   .00
                                                                   .00

   -.01                                                            -.01

   -.02                                                            -.02

   -.03
                                                                   -.03

   -.04                                                            -.04

   -.05                                                            -.05

   -.06                                                            -.06
          2   4   6   8     10    12     14   16   18   20                 2        4        6        8        10   12   14   16   18   20

                          R&R1950:11980:4                                                                 R&R1981:12006:2




Figure 1: Estimated Impact of an Exogenous Tax Increase of 1% of GDP on GDP:
                                        R&R single equation approach




                                                             17
                                                                  1950:1-2006:2
                                    .01


                                    .00


                                   -.01


                                   -.02


                                   -.03


                                   -.04


                                   -.05


                                   -.06
                                          2     4   6         8       10    12      14      16   18   20

                         1950:1-1980:4                                                                         1981:1-2006:2
  .01                                                                             . 01


  .00                                                                             . 00


  -.01                                                                            -.01


  -.02                                                                            -.02


  -.03                                                                            -.03


  -.04                                                                            -.04


  -.05                                                                            -.05


  -.06                                                                            -.06
         2   4   6   8       10    12     14   16   18    20                             2       4    6    8      10     12    14   16   18   20



                                                                   R&R in single equation
                                                                   R&R in Fiscal VAR




Figure 2: Estimated Impact of an Exogenous Tax Increase of 1% of GDP on GDP:
 R&R single equation approach (dots) vs. Fiscal VAR approach (continuous line)




                                                         18
                    .01


                    .00


                   -.01


                   -.02


                   -.03


                   -.04


                   -.05
                          1   2    3   4    5    6     7    8     9    10   11   12

                                        R&R in single equation
                                        R&R in Fiscal VAR
                                        R&R in single equation augmented



Figure 3: Estimated Impact of an Exogenous Tax Increase of 1% of GDP on GDP,
 single equation approach. R&R specification (dots) and specification augmented
with lags beyond the 12-th quarter of fiscal variables, output, inflation and interest
                                  rates.Sample 1950:1-2006:2.




                                                 19
                                                               1950:1-2006:2
                                     . 01


                                     . 00


                                     -.01


                                     -.02


                                     -.03


                                     -.04


                                     -.05
                                            2    4    6        8    10     12    14     16       18   20


                     1950:1-1980:4                                                                             1981:1-2006:2
  .01                                                                                 .01

  .00                                                                                 .00

  -.01                                                                                -.01

  -.02                                                                                -.02

  -.03                                                                                -.03

  -.04                                                                                -.04

  -.05                                                                                -.05

  -.06                                                                                -.06
         2   4   6   8    10   12      14   16   18   20                                     2        4    6   8    10   12    14   16   18   20


                                                               R&R in fiscal VAR with IGBC
                                                               R&R in f iscal VAR without IGBC
                                                               R&R in single equation




Figure 4: Estimated Impact of an Exogenous Tax Increase of 1% of GDP on GDP:
 R&R single equation approach (dots), Fiscal VAR with (interrupted lines) and
     without (continuous line) the government intertemporal budget constraint




                                                          20
