NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTRACOMPANY GOVERNANCE AND INNOVATION
Sharon Belenzon
Tomer Berkovitz
Patrick Bolton
Working Paper 15304
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15304

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2009

We thank Liat Oren for invaluable assistance with the programming of the ownership algorithm and
Hadar Gafni for excellent research assistance. We also thank Luca Enriques, Daniel Ferreira, Ronald
Gilson, Joshua Lerner, Randall Morck, Daniel Paravisini, Katharina Pistor, David Robinson, John
Van Reenen and Daniel Wolfenzon for helpful comments. All remaining errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Sharon Belenzon, Tomer Berkovitz, and Patrick Bolton. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Intracompany Governance and Innovation
Sharon Belenzon, Tomer Berkovitz, and Patrick Bolton
NBER Working Paper No. 15304
August 2009
JEL No. O16,O31,O32
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the relation between ownership, corporate form, and innovation for a cross-section
of private and publicly traded innovating firms in the US and 15 European countries. A striking novel
observation emerges from our analysis: while most innovating firms in the US are publicly traded
conglomerates, a substantial fraction of innovation is concentrated in private firms and in business
groups in continental European countries. We find virtually no variation across US industries in the
corporate form of innovating firms, but a substantial variation across industries in continental European
countries, where business groups tend to be concentrated in industries with a slower and more fundamental
innovation cycle and where intellectual protection of innovators seems to be of paramount importance.
Our findings suggest that innovative companies choose the corporate form most conducive to R&D,
as predicted by the Coasian view of how firms form. This is especially true in Europe, where there
are fewer regulatory hurdles to the formation of business groups and hybrid corporate forms. It is less
the case in the US, where conglomerates are generally favored.

Sharon Belenzon
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
1 Towerview Drive, Durham, NC
United States
sharon.belenzon@duke.edu
Tomer Berkovitz
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
New York, NY 10027
tb2122@columbia.edu

Patrick Bolton
Columbia Business School
804 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pb2208@columbia.edu

1. Introduction
Which corporate forms are most propitious to innovation? Is it standalone …rms …nanced by
Venture Capital (VC)? Is it conglomerate incubators, or looser business-group and corporate
alliance structures? While GE, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, DuPont or 3M are often mentioned
as examples of highly innovative conglomerate …rms in the U.S., there have also been many
prominent examples of VC-backed standalones in recent years, such as Amazon, Netscape, or
Google. Although VC-backed innovation has been less important in Europe, innovative activity
in conglomerates such as Philips or Nokia is highly visible, and business-groups in the vein of
Ericsson, Zeiss, Alstom and Novartis are also renowned innovators.
Economists and business scholars have pointed to the advantages of conglomerates in funding R&D projects with cheaper internally generated funds (Gertner, Scharfstein and Stein,
1994 and Stein, 1997) while at the same time emphasizing the dark side of internal capital
markets, in terms of reduced …nancial discipline for poorly performing investments (Scharfstein and Stein, 2000). Seru (2007) …nds evidence consistent with this dark side of internal
capital markets: publicly traded U.S. conglomerates with above-average reallocation of funds
across divisions are less productive innovators than comparable stand-alone …rms. Similarly,
Guedj and Scharfstein (2004) compare clinical trials in the biopharmaceutical industry and …nd
that big pharmaceuticals …rms engaged in cancer research tend to initiate too many studies
but are quicker to terminate unpromising research than smaller (stand-alone) biotech …rms.
In contrast, Belenzon and Berkovitz (2008a) …nd European evidence that innovation tends to
be concentrated in business-groups and that business-group a¢ liates tend to engage in more
innovation than comparable stand-alone …rms.
While these studies do not necessarily o¤er contradictory evidence - as business-groups have
a di¤erent governance structure than fully integrated conglomerates - they do suggest that the
link between governance and innovation is likely to be complex and that more systematic
evidence is required to have a better understanding on how governance a¤ects innovation.

2

In this paper we o¤er a more complete picture of the link between governance and innovation
by looking at a cross-section of innovating …rms in the U.S. and in 15 European countries. In
addition, we provide a broad conceptual framework that allows us to compare the relative
strengths of standalone …rms, conglomerates and business-groups in fostering innovation.
Building on existing theories of conglomerate internal capital markets, we emphasize the
relative strengths of conglomerates in terms of cheaper internal R&D funding, better winnerpicking, and lower stigma of failure, versus the stronger intellectual property rights for innovators in stand-alone …rms.1 Business-groups occupy a middle ground compared with conglomerates and standalones. These are fuzzier and more diverse organizational forms with potentially
complex controlling stakes holding together a set of independently incorporated companies.
Business groups may be entirely composed of privately held entities or may combine both
privately held and publicly traded companies. Business groups may take the form of pyramidal structures, where a single controlling company has direct or indirect controlling stakes in
multiple subsidiary companies, or business alliances, where the companies in the alliance are
connected through interlocking stakes.
Business groups are rare in the U.S. and somewhat rare in the U.K., but they are omnipresent elsewhere in the world. Business groups have been associated with poor minority
investor protection and ine¢ cient rent extraction by controlling shareholders (see Johnson, La
Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 2000, and Bertrand, Mehta, and Mullainathan, 2002).
They are often seen as a consequence of poor legal investor protections in emerging market
countries, and also to some extent in developed ‘civil law’ countries. Accordingly, we model
business groups as in Almeida and Wolfenzon (2006) and allow for ine¢ cient diversion of funds
by controlling shareholders from …rms a¢ liated with a business group. Due to this ine¢ cient
diversion business groups involve greater ine¢ ciencies than conglomerates or standalones, other
things equal. However, business groups also have strengths in terms of cheaper internal R&D
funding and a lower stigma of failure relative to stand-alone …rms, as well as strengths in terms
1

We mainly build on Gertner, Scharfstein and Stein (1994), Stein (1997) and Scharfstein and Stein (2000).

3

of stronger intellectual property rights for innovators relative to conglomerates.
An important basic premise of our analysis is that innovating …rms tend to set up their
corporate governance to implement an e¢ cient environment to foster innovation. Thus, when
the observed choice of corporate form is a conglomerate or a business group we assume that
this is the revealed preferred choice of organization. In other words, a basic premise of our
analysis is a Coasian perspective on …rm organization. Thus, to the extent that a particular
corporate form is especially well suited for innovative activities, we expect this corporate form
to be more prevalent among innovative …rms in a given industry than among non-innovating
…rms.
We base our analysis on a comprehensive data-set of both private and publicly traded
American and European …rms, and match all corporate patents granted by the United States
Patent and Trademark O¢ ce (USPTO) and the European Patent O¢ ce (EPO) to these …rms.
We also single out …rms that publish their research in academic journals. We have thus identi…ed
about 64.000 …rms that hold at least one patent from the EPO or USPTO, or have published at
least one scienti…c article in a science journal. Of these 64.000 …rms, about 60% are American,
11% German, 8% British, 4% French, and 5% are Italian. We matched 880.000 USPTO, 615.000
EPO patents, and 205.000 scienti…c publications. 75% of USPTO patents and close to 40% of
EPO patents are held by American corporation. Germany appears to be the most innovative
European country while holding 12% and 20% of USPTO and EPO patents, respectively.
For scienti…c publications, about 70% of the articles are published by U.S. corporations, 10%
German, and 3% French and British.
Several surprising …ndings emerge from our analysis. First and foremost, while the overall
distribution of USPTO patents by ownership structure in the whole sample is 18% standalones,
74% conglomerates, and 8% business-group a¢ liates, in the U.S. this distribution is skewed
towards standalones and conglomerates, with 20% and 76% respectively of patents falling in
these categories, and only 4% of patents being held by business group a¢ liates. In Europe,
on the other hand, 20% of the patents are held by business-group a¢ liates, and 11% and 68%
4

respectively are held by standalones and conglomerates. A similar pattern emerges for EPO
patents and scienti…c publications. There is also a wide variation in organizational form across
European countries. While Germany appears to resemble the U.S. in terms of concentration
of innovation in conglomerates (80%), French and Italian …rms are clearly skewed towards
business-group a¢ liates, with only 35% and 22% respectively of their patents being held by
conglomerates.
Second, we distinguish between business-group a¢ liates that are wholly-owned by their
parent company, which are more likely to be fully integrated, and a¢ liates that have minority
shareholders. The presence of minority shareholders in an a¢ liate company establishes a separation between the a¢ liate and its parent company in terms of retained pro…ts, patent holdings,
and resource reallocation. Business groups with partially owned a¢ liates are therefore more
decentralized corporate structures. Remarkably, in France 20% of innovation takes place in
a¢ liates with minority shareholders, while only 1% of innovation takes place in such a¢ liates
in the U.S. and Great Britain.
Third, the U.S. distribution of innovating …rms is also heavily skewed towards publicly
traded …rms. Indeed, the fraction of patents held by publicly traded American corporations is
above 60%, while this fraction is only about 40% in Europe. In some large European countries
this picture is even more extreme. In France, only 9% and 18% of USPTO and EPO patents,
respectively, are held by publicly traded …rms, while in Italy these …gures drop to as low as 3%
and 7% respectively. Also, publicly traded innovating …rms in Europe are more likely to belong
to a business group, with more than 40% of innovating listed …rms belonging to a businessgroup in France and Germany, compared with only 2% and 1% respectively in the U.S. and
Great Britain.
Fourth, we …nd a substantial variation in organization structure across industries. Business
groups tend to be concentrated in industries where innovation takes a longer time, is more uncertain, but has a higher payo¤ when it succeeds (such as pharmaceuticals and biotechnology).
These innovative activities may be more vulnerable to hold-up problems and require greater
5

protection of the intellectual property rights of the innovator. In contrast, conglomerates are
more prevalent in industries with rapid, incremental, innovations (such as computer hardware
and telecommunications) where the ability of conglomerates to identify the relevant innovation and to quickly redeploy assets may give this organizational form an edge over business
groups. We …nd that European …rms are strongly skewed towards business groups in the latter
industries, while U.S. innovating …rms take the conglomerate form in more or less the same
proportion across all industries.
Our …ndings are broadly consistent with a Coasian view on …rm organization form, which
is to say that …rms choose the corporate form that is best suited for fostering innovative activities. The alternative view in the literature is that organization form is chosen by entrenched
managers, or controlling shareholders, to suit their best interests at the expense of minority
shareholders and overall …rm e¢ ciency. By this latter view it is not obvious that one should
see any systematic di¤erence in organization form in a given industry and country across innovative and non-innovative …rms. We examine whether innovative …rms are disproportionately
represented in a given organization category, using sales of about 3.5 million …rms as our
benchmark. We …nd that innovation is disproportionately concentrated in business-groups
in the pharmaceuticals industry, and disproportionately concentrated in conglomerates in the
telecommunications industry. This pattern is especially true in Europe, where there are fewer
regulatory hurdles to the formation of business groups and hybrid corporate forms. It is not
the case in the U.S., where conglomerates are generally preferred.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the theoretical
framework, section 3 overviews the data, section 4 reports the main empirical …ndings and
section 5 concludes.

2. A Simple Model
We set up a model with at least two business units, which can be stand-alone entities, divisions
in a conglomerate …rm, or units linked in a business group, with one parent company owning
6

a controlling block in a separately incorporated …rm.
1.Technological Assumptions
There are N

2 business units with liquid assets Wi

0 and a new R&D project. The

R&D project has …xed costs f > 0 at date 1 and a probability of success (a) at date 2.
The probability of success depends on how well the project is managed, or more formally, on
which action a 2 f0; 1g the project’s manager chooses. The project’s value to the business
unit conditional on success is given by v(a) > 0. A successful R&D project may also generate
spillovers to other business units worth s(a)
probability (1

0. When the research is unsuccessful (with

(a))) it yields no …nancial return.

The project brings expected private bene…ts or costs to the managerial team undertaking
it. The bene…ts may come in the form of improved human capital and knowledge, better future
career prospects, enhanced reputation in the event of success. The costs may be the stigma
of failure when the research is not successful. Without loss of generality we normalize the net
bene…ts arising from simply undertaking the project to zero. We denote by b > 0 the private
bene…ts that come with success and by

> 0 the private costs associated with the stigma of

failure.
We shall assume that:
b

1

(1

1)

<b

0

(1

0 );

so that the expected net private bene…ts to the manager are highest when the manager chooses
a = 0. Note that the latter inequality reduces to
(b + )(
and therefore holds if and only if
(v1 + b)

1

(1

These inequalities together with

1

1)

1)

0

0

> 0;

< 0: We also assume that

f > 0 > (v0 + b)

0

(1

0)

f

< 0 mean that the innovative activity is equivalent to

taking a higher risk, higher expected payo¤ actions. In other words, R&D activities are high
7

risk, but also high reward activities. The above inequalities also mean that the R&D activity
is worth undertaking if and only if the manager can be induced to choose the high risk, high
reward, action a = 1.
To simplify the analysis we also restrict attention to parameter values such that b
(1

1 ).

1

The manager’s expected private costs from the stigma of failure when he chooses a = 1

are then greater than the private bene…ts from a successful innovation. Under this assumption
the manager has to receive some form of …nancial incentive to be willing to undertake the risky
innovative activity.
2.Governance Assumptions and Firm boundaries
We distinguish between three main types of …rms: standalones, conglomerates (with whollyowned a¢ liates) and business-groups with a¢ liates owned in part by minority shareholders.
A standalone …rm is essentially a …rm with a single business unit. Such a …rm is run
by a manager with an equity stake su¢ cient to align incentives and is monitored by a large
blockholder, venture capitalist (VC), or creditor, who plays the role of an active monitor as in
Holmstrom and Tirole (1994). A standalone …rm is viable only if it is able to raise su¢ cient
funds to …nance the research, while preserving the manager’s incentives to conduct the research
and the monitor’s incentive to monitor.
We assume that only a fraction
funds. The parameter

of the …rm’s value v(a) can be pledged to raise external

2 (0; 1) represents the fraction of R&D cash-‡ow that is capitalizable

by the …rm. It provides a simple measure of the …nancial development of a country. The
higher is

the more …nancially developed a country is. We assume that capital markets are

perfectly competitive for the pledgeable part of …rm value and for simplicity we normalize the
equilibrium required risk-adjusted return to zero.
Following Holmstrom and Tirole (1994) we also assume that the timing of the contractual
relation between investors in the …rm, the VC monitor, and the entrepreneur is as follows:
1. following an injection of funds in the …rm by investors, the monitor moves …rst by choosing
8

whether to engage in costly monitoring or not;
2. the R&D project manager moves second by choosing whether to take action a = 0 or
a = 1, having observed whether the active monitor is monitoring or not;
3. the R&D project either succeeds or fails;
4. if it succeeds the proceeds from the project are distributed to all investors and the manager.
Suppose that the active monitor decides to monitor the manager and incurs the monitoring
cost m > 0. Then as in Holmstrom and Tirole (1994), we assume that the manager’s net
private bene…ts are lowered by a fraction (1

), where

< 1.

The manager must be incentivized to choose a = 1. If his …nancial stake in the project, , is
large enough he will choose a = 1 even though his private bene…ts are higher for a = 0. Formally,
the manager’s stake

must be such that the following incentive compatibility constraint holds:

( v1 + b)

(1

1

1)

( v0 + b)

0

(1

0)

or
V +
where

V

(v1

1

v0 0 ) and

=

1

(b + )
0.

0:

2

If there is no monitoring, on the other hand, the incentive compatibility constraint is:
V +

(b + )

3

0:

Monitoring is bene…cial if two conditions are satis…ed.
First, it must be the case that the …rm cannot get su¢ cient …nancing in the absence of
monitoring. That is, the …rm should not be able to invest in R&D, by using all its internal
funds Wi and raising (f
2
3

Wi ) from outside investors, while at the same time granting su¢ cient

Note that under our assumptions V is strictly positive and
is strictly negative.
Since
< 0 the incentive constraint is clearly harder to satisfy with no monitoring than under monitoring.

9

…nancial incentives to the entrepreneur to choose a = 1 even though there is no monitoring.
Therefore, a …rst condition is that:
(1
for any

) v1

1

<f

Wi

such that
V +

(b + )

0;

or
(b + )
] v1
V

[1 +

1

<f

Wi :

Second, the …rm must be able to get …nancing when there is monitoring. The active monitor
has an incentive to monitor and incur the monitoring cost m as long as his stake
pro…t is large enough that

m. In exchange for the stake

V

=

m
V

in the …rm’s

, which just ensures

that he will monitor, the active monitor is willing to invest an amount equal to his expected
equilibrium net return:

v1

1

m. Therefore, the standalone …rm is viable under monitoring

if
(1
or, substituting for

and

(1 +

) v1

1

f

Wi

v1

1

+ m;

if:
m
) v1
V

(b + )
V

1

f

Wi

m(

v1

1

V

1):

Rearranging, this condition reduces to:
[1 +
Clearly, for

(b + )
] v1
V

large enough, and m and

1

f

Wi + m:

small enough this condition will be satis…ed given

our assumption that
v1
A conglomerate …rm operates n

1

> f:

2 business units that are wholly-owned subsidiaries. It

has corporate headquarters that make investment and R&D decisions for all divisions. A key
10

feature of conglomerate …rms is that pro…ts of subsidiaries are channeled to headquarters, who
report consolidated earnings to the …rm’s shareholders. Divisional managers typically cannot
be rewarded based on their division’s pro…t, and their incentive pay-component is generally
based only on conglomerate pro…ts and stock price. Moreover, divisional managers don’t own
the intellectual property they create, unless they negotiate a contract which explicitly gives
them the right to any innovation they create.

4

On the other hand, divisional managers may be closely monitored by headquarters. Another
advantage of undertaking research in a conglomerate is that failure can be hidden to some extent
inside the …rm, so that there is a lower stigma of failure. Conglomerates also develop winner
picking skills, and bene…t from R&D spillovers on other divisions.
For our formal analysis we assume that conglomerate …rms are composed of only two divisions, A and B. We also simplify the governance of conglomerate …rms to the CEO’s role in
picking winner R&D projects and to the CEO’s active monitoring of division managers. We
model winner picking by assuming that a project selected by headquarters has a probability of
success

(a), where

1. We model CEO monitoring by letting the CEO monitor division

managers j = A; B at cost
fraction (1

and thereby lowering division managers’ private bene…ts by a

). If the divisional manager’s research is successful, however, it is owned by the

…rm. Thus, division managers have lower powered incentives to pursue R&D in conglomerates.
5

In our model, a divisional manager can only extract a small share

of the direct value of the

innovation by, for example, threatening to leave and pursue his research at another …rm. Thus,
the divisional manager’s incentive constraint for choosing action a = 1 in a conglomerate is:
( v1 + b)

1

+ (1

1)

( v0 + b)

0

+ (1

0)

;

or
V +

(b + )

4

0:

Such contracts are not common and even when a contract grants intellectual property rights to the innovator
it is di¢ cult to enforce.
5
Divisional managers may get a share of conglomerate pro…ts, but due to moral hazard in teams problems,
they will have lower powered incentives than if they received a share of their own division’s pro…ts. For simplicity,
we ignore the …nancial incentives from shares in conglomerate pro…ts.

11

Finally, conglomerates have the …nancing advantage of drawing on the sum of liquid assets
of both divisions, (WA + WB ), to fund a division’s R&D project. To summarize, in our model
a conglomerate picks the most promising R&D project from the divisions, thus ensuring a
probability of success of

1

in equilibrium. It …nances the project entirely with its own funds

(WA + WB ) and it incurs monitoring costs . Thus, the conglomerate’s expected return is given
by:
(1

)v1

1

f

+ WA + WB

provided that it can induce the divisional manager whose R&D project is picked to choose
action a = 1. Should

be so low that
<

(b + )
V

then the division manager will choose a = 0, in which case we assume that the conglomerate
will not pick any R&D projects.
A business-group of n

2 …rms is similar to a conglomerate …rm. It has a controlling hub

akin to corporate headquarters and multiple divisions. The key di¤erences with a conglomerate
are that: i) the business units are not wholly owned subsidiaries, but rather are independently
incorporated companies controlled by the group’s majority shareholders through a controlling
stake; ii) earnings of business units are not consolidated, and ownership of intellectual property
remains with the innovating business unit; iii) R&D project selection is more decentralized, so
that the group’s hub plays less of a winner picking role. The group mainly plays the role of an
internal capital market to fund R&D investments.
We denote by ' the ownership share of the group and (1

') the share owned by minority

shareholders. An important potential source of ine¢ ciency in business groups is the separation
of ownership and control of business units. This separation can give rise to ine¢ cient diversion
of business unit earnings by the controlling shareholders. We model this diversion as in Almeida
and Wolfenzon (2006) by allowing the controlling shareholders to “divert” d of earnings from

12

a unit in which they have a stake ' at a deadweight cost of
k(d) =

1 2
d.
2

Group owners then choose d to maximize:
'(v
where

d) + d

1 2
d;
2

denotes the business unit’s earnings. As is easily established, the optimal amount of

diversion and the deadweight cost of diversion are then respectively:
d('; ) =

1

'

The earnings retained in the …rm–(v

and k(d('; )) =

1 '

') 2

(1
2

:

)–can be shared between the division manager and

all the owners. Thus division managers can be incentivized as in standalones based on the
non-diverted earnings. Moreover, the business unit manager’s private bene…ts can be reduced
through monitoring by the group’s controlling owners.
As the literature on business groups has emphasized, the diversion of earnings by controlling
shareholders reduces the e¢ ciency of business groups relative to stand-alone …rms or conglomerates.

6

The pervasiveness of business groups around the world (with the important exceptions

of the U.S. and Great Britain) suggests, however, that there is also a countervailing e¢ ciency
improving role of business groups.

7

We argue that the e¢ ciency gain of business groups is due

to the stronger intellectual protection given to innovators in business units a¢ liated to business
groups, who can retain (partial) ownership of their patents.
To summarize, business groups combine the R&D incentive bene…ts of stand-alone …rms with
the internal capital market bene…ts of conglomerates. Given equal R&D incentives, however,
6

There can also be diversion of funds from conglomerates with separation of ownership and control. For
simplicity we ignore this form of diversion in our model.
7
While, some commentators simply explain the existence of business groups as an ine¢ cient outcome caused
by managerial entrenchment, others point to the value adding role of business groups as providers of a substitute
source of funding for investment in environments where external capital markets are ine¢ cient due to inadequate
investor protection. Thus, the prevalence of business groups in emerging market countries is seen as a necessary
but transitory consequence of the underdevelopment of securities markets in these countries. However, as our
evidence highlights, business groups are also prevalent in advanced countries, with developed securities markets
and strong investor protections. Moreover, as we show, these groups tend to be both very competitive and
innovative.

13

business groups are less e¢ cient than conglomerates, as they involve both ine¢ cient diversion
of funds and less e¤ective winner-picking.
3.Assumptions on external legal environment
Besides

(the fraction of the value of innovations that is capitalizable) we introduce three

other key parameters to capture the external legal environment:
tax,

the R&D project manager’s bargaining power, and

an intercompany dividend

the stigma cost of failure. As we

argue in the next section, the main comparative advantages of the U.S. relative to the EU are
that U.S. securities markets free up a higher

and . Moreover, U.S. entrepreneurial culture

and bankruptcy laws also result in a lower . Against these comparative advantages the EU’s
main advantage is a lower .

3. Model Analysis
We divide the model analysis into two parts. We begin by considering the main tradeo¤s in
organizational form keeping the external legal environment …xed. In a second step we do a
EU-US comparative analysis by analyzing how changes in the parameters ( ; ; ) a¤ect the
equilibrium distribution of R&D across organizational forms.
3.1. Main tradeo¤s within a given legal environment
We consider in turn the choice between undertaking R&D in a stand-alone unit or inside a
conglomerate …rm, the pros and cons of a business-group and a conglomerate structure, and
…nally the choice between stand-alone and a¢ liation to a business-group.
3.1.1. Stand-alone …rm vs. Conglomerate: the costs and bene…ts of internal capital
markets
Consider the funding of R&D projects in a conglomerate with two business units, A and B.
To facilitate comparisons with a stand-alone …rm we assume that only one of the two units
has a potential research project, say division A. We also assume that the conglomerate has

14

su¢ cient internal funds or capital to be able to fund the project without raising external
funds, (WA + WB )

f . A conglomerate has lower costs of monitoring and greater winner-

picking skills, so that it will be more e¢ cient at R&D as long as it can provide adequate
incentives to choose action a = 1 to its divisional managers. Therefore, R&D is organized in a
conglomerate whenever divisional managers have su¢ cient incentives to choose action a = 1.
That is, whenever

is large enough that:
(b + )
V

+
If

0:

is too small then R&D may be organized in a standalone …rm provided that enough external

funding can be obtained, or:
[1 +

(b + )
] v1
V

1

f

Wi + m:

In Figure 1 below we describe the parameter regions for which R&D takes place in respectively a standalone …rm (SA) and a conglomerate (CL) in ( V; f

Wi +m) space. The function

h( V ) is given by
h( V )
and the vertical line

(b + )
] v1
V

[1 +

V# is
(b + )

V# =

For all values of

1

V

:

V# the incentive constraint for a = 1 in conglomerates is satis…ed

and R&D is organized in a conglomerate. For

V <

V# , R&D is not e¢ cient in a conglom-

erate, but it may be sustainable in a standalone …rm provided that the parameter values for
( V; f

Wi + m) lie in the area (SA); that is, provided that (f

Wi + m)

m lies below

h( V ). In situations where the hold-up problem is so severe that R&D projects cannot be
undertaken e¢ ciently in a conglomerate, innovators may still be able to undertake their R&D
project in a standalone …rm provided that the external …nancing needs of the R&D project

15

Wi ) are su¢ ciently low, and/or the costs of monitoring the innovator (m) are su¢ ciently

(f
low.

Simple comparative statics results can be inferred from Figure 1. In particular, any upward
shift in the function h( V ) and any rightward shift in

V# will increase the region of R&D in

standalones relative to conglomerates. In other words, an increase in v1
to sustain in standalones and an increase in j

1

makes R&D easier

j makes it harder to sustain in conglomerates.

This suggests that high-risk-high-payo¤ R&D (with high j

j and high v1

1

is more likely to

be found in standalones than conglomerates.
Insert Figure 1 here

The role of Venture Capital (VC) in the US is mainly to target these types of innovations.
As we explain in the next section, we believe that in the EU in contrast to the US the role of
VCs is partly …lled by business-groups. The reason is that in the EU the capitalization of R&D
(as measured by ) is lower than in the US. Moreover the stigma of failure

is also higher.

3.1.2. Conglomerate vs. Business Group: internal capital markets, the cost of
diversion and the intercompany dividend tax and intellectual property rights
protection
Business groups can provide better protection of intellectual property rights of its business units
than conglomerates but they are exposed to ine¢ cient diversion of funds by their controlling
owners. Suppose that unit A is combined in a group with unit B, and as before suppose that
(WA + WB )

f . Let 'A denote the group’s ownership share in a¢ liate A and suppose that

'A is large enough that the group has adequate incentives to actively monitor the manager of
a¢ liate A. Recall that for every $1 generated by a¢ liate A a fraction
group and a fraction 1

1 'A

1 'A

is diverted to the

is retained by the a¢ liate. Therefore, if the manager of A is

to e¤ectively undertake an R&D project (i.e. to choose a = 1) his stake must be at least equal
to
=

(b + )
:
V 1 1 'A
16

Setting

= 1, its maximum possible value, it is then straighforward to see that a business

group with equilibrium diversion of funds
as

V

V given by:

1 'A

is able to foster e¢ cient R&D in unit A as long

8

(b + )

V =

1 'A

1

:

Since business-groups involve costs which are not incurred by conglomerates they will only
be the chosen organization form for R&D activities when adequate R&D incentives cannot be
provided in conglomerates, or when

<

1 'A

and

V 2 ( V ; V# ).

But, even for these parameter values business groups may not be the chosen organizational
form if the tax burden in terms of intercompany dividend taxation exceeds the bene…t from
greater R&D incentives. Intercompany dividend taxes amount to
'A

1

1

'A

v1

f

in our model. Indeed, the reported (and undiverted) revenues by a¢ liate A in the event of a successful innovation are given by 1

1 'A

v1 . Therefore the realized pro…ts are 1

1 'A

v1

f . The business-group obtains a share 'A of realized pro…ts on which it pays a marginal intercompany dividend tax of . If the tax rate
group to fund the R&D project in a¢ liate A.

is too high it may not be worthwhile for the
9

3.1.3. Business Group vs. Stand-alone: diversion costs and the bene…ts of internal
capital markets
The main advantage of Business groups over standalones is that they are able to tap the internal
capital of the entire group to fund new R&D projects. Given that business groups also involve
8

Note that the manager’s …nancial stake generally has to be higher than for a stand-alone, as a fraction
of the …nancial value of the innovation is siphoned o¤ by the group. But note also that the higher is
the marginal cost of diversion , the less funds are diverted and therefore the lower is the manager’s …nancial
stake necessary to incentivize him to do research. Similarly and somewhat paradoxically, the higher is 'A –the
group’s stake in a¢ liate A–the lower is the manager’s …nancial stake necessary to incentivize him.
9
Intercompany dividend taxes are not the only cost of setting up a partially integrated business group. Other
tax rules, company registration rules, accounting rules concerning the consolidation of accounts and regulations
limiting the ‡exibility of holding company structures may result in other costs. Thus, for example in the US
the Public Utility Holdings Company Act of 1935 has substantially limited the scope for business groups in the
energy sector.
1 'A

17

diversion costs, R&D will only be undertaken in a business group if it is not possible to fund
R&D in a standalone using costly external …nancing. This is illustrated in Figure 2 below.
Insert Figure 2 here

Again, simple comparative statics results can be seen from this …gure: an upward shift in
h( V ) increases the region of R&D in standalones and reduces the region in business groups
(BG). There is R&D in business groups for
alones. When there is a rightward shift in
rightward shift may occur if

V , only when it is not feasible in stand-

V

V , R&D in business groups is less likely. Such a

is lower, so that there is more potential for diversion of funds. We

therefore expect the share of R&D taking place in business-groups across European countries
to be inversely related to the ease of diversion allowed by the corporate legal environment in
each country.
3.1.4. Business Group vs. Stand-alone and Conglomerates: the bene…ts of internal
capital markets diversion costs and intellectual property rights protection
We can combine the comparison of the three organizational forms into a single …gure (Figure
3) and obtain the following broad comparative statics insights for …xed country parameters
( ; ; ).
Conglomerates will be a higher fraction of innovating …rms when there is a leftward shift in
V# . This shift may be due to either a higher

or a lower

many, incremental, innovations to have both higher
lower

. One may expect industries with

(through greater implicit incentives) and

. These industries are therefore more likely to be dominated by conglomerates. Their

ability to quickly identify the relevant innovation and to quickly redeploy assets gives these
organizational forms an edge over business groups and standalones. Moreover, in these industries conglomerates can credibly o¤er adequate incentives for in house R&D without granting
formal ownership rights to the innovators.
Business groups are likely to be more prevalent in industries with a slower and more fundamental innovation cycle, where

is higher (and
18

lower). These organizational forms may

not be the most e¢ cient in picking winners but they are able to provide better intellectual
ownership protection. To the extent that it is harder to divert funds ( is higher) we should
also see more innovating business groups, as

V is then lower. But a more e¢ cient VC sector

with lower monitoring costs (m) and/or lower costs of external funds will tend to reduce the
dominance of business groups in these industries.
In general, we expect industry variation in the share of business groups among innovating
…rms across industries. However, we also expect this variation to be smaller in countries where
the absolute advantage of one organizational form due to the country’s regulations and laws is
stronger.
Insert Figure 3 here

3.2. Main EU-US comparative predictions
Business groups have one major comparative advantage in continental European countries
relative to the US: the general absence of an intercompany dividend tax. In addition, there is
more of a stigma of failure in these European countries and …nancial markets are also somewhat
less developed. For all these reasons, we expect R&D to be concentrated in higher proportion
in business-groups relative to conglomerates and standalones in continental Europe than in the
US. For the same reasons, we expect to …nd more R&D activity in publicly traded …rms in
the US than in the EU. These simple predictions are indeed borne out in the data as we show
below.

4. Data
Our paper combines data from several sources: (1) ownership data from Amadeus for European …rms and from Icarus for American …rms (both are provided by BvDEP), (2) information
on patents from the United States Patent and Trademark O¢ ce (USPTO) and the European
Patent O¢ ce (EPO), and (3) scienti…c publications from Thomson Web of Knowledge.

19

4.1. Ownership
The Amadeus and Icarus data sets contain detailed information on direct ownership links
between …rms. We sort …rms into four di¤erent categories based on their ownership structure:
(i) standalones, (ii) conglomerates, (iii) wholly-owned business group a¢ liates, and (iv) partlyowned business-group a¢ liates.
A …rm is categorized as a standalone if it has a single line of business and no parent
company, and as a conglomerate if it has more than one line of business. Many innovating
…rms in our sample are wholly-owned a¢ liates –they have a parent company that owns 100%
of their shares –and it is not entirely obvious how one should categorize these …rms. In some
cases a wholly-owned a¢ liate is an independent economic unit, but in other cases, it acts
more like a division in terms of its retained pro…ts and IP protection. We distinguish between
the two cases in the following way. We compute the share of assets that are held by the
company at the apex of the organization out of the total assets the organization holds. In case
this share exceeds a high-enough threshold (80%), we assume the organization is centralized
and categorize all of its wholly-owned a¢ liates as divisions.10 If the organization’s assets
are decentralized and spread across many a¢ liates, we assume the wholly-owned a¢ liates are
independent, and classify them under the business group category (a separate category named
wholly-owned business group a¢ liates). In the context of our model there is not much of
a di¤erence between a division of a conglomerate and a wholly-owned subsidiary. There is a
signi…cant di¤erence, however, between a division of a conglomerate and a partly-owned business
group a¢ liate (our fourth category), as the latter has both a parent-company controllingshareholder and other minority shareholders. As our model highlights minority shareholders
in business-group a¢ liates play a central legal and governance role in protecting intellectual
property owned by the a¢ liate …rm. Business groups establish an intra-company separation of
ownership and control. This separation puts minority shareholders at risk of expropriation by
10
If the apex company reports only consolidated accounts, we infer the unconsolidated assets held by the apex
company by subtracting the aggregated assets of all a¢ liates from the consolidated assets.

20

majority shareholders, as the literature on business groups has emphasized. However, European
Corporate Group Law imposes strict provisions on the reallocation of resources between group
a¢ liates, which provide an intellectual property protection to researchers in a¢ liate …rms.
These provisions practically make the group a¢ liate independent in terms of its assets, patents,
and retained pro…ts. Unlike for group a¢ liates, researchers in conglomerate divisions do not
have the same legal protection of intellectual property. Conglomerate headquarters can freely
reallocate assets, funds and IP rights across di¤erent units with no legal restriction or threat
of litigation by division stakeholders. Our comparative analysis focuses mostly on the relative
prevalence of partly-owned business group a¢ liates, conglomerates, and standalones.
To fully characterize the ownership structure of …rms in our sample, we use ownership links
information for private and public American and European …rms from the ownership section
of the 2008 version of Icarus and Amadeus. To ensure that all ownership links truly represent
control, we make the following assumptions:
1. for private subsidiaries, we keep only links where the shareholder has at least 50% of the
voting rights, and
2. for public …rms we keep only links where the shareholder has at least 20% of the voting
rights. These two assumptions leave us with close to one million ownership links.11
3. to infer group structure from these links we use the algorithm developed and described in
Belenzon and Berkovitz (2008a). This algorithm constructs corporate ownership-chains
and groups together …rms controlled by the same ultimate owner. Appendix A.1 provides
more information about the ownership algorithm and group construction.
11

Erring on the side of caution, we de…ne control of a private …rm as owning at least 50% of the …rm’s voting
rights (excluding non-voting shares). Following previous literature on public …rms (La Porta et al. 1999; Faccio
and Lang, 2002; and others), which have a more dispersed ownership, we set the threshold for control of a public
…rm at 20%. All our results are robust to di¤erent numbers for these thresholds.

21

4.2. Patents and Scienti…c Publications
To create a …rm-level measure of innovation, we examine patent based indicators of technological
advances by …rms.12 We construct a novel database of European and American …rm patents
by matching all granted patent applications from the USPTO and EPO to the complete set of
…rms in Amadeus and Icarus. Our main source of information for patents granted between 1969
and 2002 is USPTO data as assembled in the NBER patent …le.13 Because our ownership data
is cross-sectional for 2008, we also include recently issued patents so as to address potential
concerns that the ownership structure we observe is not contemporaneous with the generation
of patents in our sample. We update the NBER patent …le for 2007 by extracting directly
from the USPTO website all patents granted between 2003 and 2007, adding about 750.000
patents to the original NBER patent data.14 For the EPO, our main information source is the
2007 publication of the PATSTAT database, which is the standard source for European patent
data and is published by the EPO. This database contains all European patent applications
and granted patents from the beginning of the EPO system in 1978 to 2007. For each USPTO
and EPO patent document we have information on the name of the …rm to which the patent
is assigned as well as the …rm’s address. We match the name and the address …elds from
the patent document to the name and address …elds in Amadeus and Icarus. Appendix A.2.
provides details about the matching procedure.
Another innovation indicator is scienti…c publications in academic journals (Cockburn and
Henderson, 1998). We also look at scienti…c publications for two main reasons. First, not all
inventions are patentable, and even if they are, patents can vary substantially in quality. Scienti…c publications, on the other hand, are not subject to the patentability selection problem,
12

We use patents data to measure innovative activity, because we do not have direct information on R&D
expenditures for private …rms. For a discussion on the use of patents data as a measure of inventive activity,
see Griliches (1990).
13
This database is described by Hall, Ja¤e and Trajtenberg (2001) and Ja¤e and Trajtenberg (2002).
14
The general pattern of results holds when focusing on recently granted patents. Table A3 reports the
distribution of patents by country and organization form for USPTO patents that were granted between 1996
and 2006. Only 1 percent of the American patents are held by partly-owned a¢ liates, as compared to 12% and
11% of French and Italian patents, respectively.

22

and they are generally regarded as indicators of high-quality research. Second, while patents
typically represent more directed and incremental research, scienti…c publications tend to be
the result of more basic and risky research (Belenzon and Patacconi, 2009). To measure the
publication activity of our sample …rms, we develop a data set of …rm scienti…c articles. The
world’s largest source of information on scienti…c publications is Thomson’s ISI Web of Knowledge, which includes publication records on hundreds of international journals in the ‘hard’
sciences. Each publication has an address …eld which contains the authors’ a¢ liation. We
match all …rms (patenting and non-patenting) by name to the complete ISI database using the
author a¢ liation name and address …elds.1516

5. Empirical evidence
Several striking …ndings emerge from our analysis, as summarized in tables 1-3. First, while the
overall distribution of patents by ownership structure in the whole sample is 18% standalones,
74% conglomerates, and 8% business-group a¢ liates, in the U.S. this distribution is skewed
towards standalones and conglomerates, 20% and 76% of patents fall in these categories, and
only 4% of innovating …rms are a¢ liated with a business-group. In Europe, on the other hand,
20% of patents are held by business-group a¢ liates. A similar pattern emerges for EPO patents
and scienti…c publications. There is also a substantial variation in organizational form among
European countries. Germany resembles the U.S. in some ways, as 80% of its patents are held
15

It is important to note that we make no restrictions on the availability of accounting information for our
sample …rms. That is, every …rm that was matched to the patent or publications data sets is included in our
analysis. While the coverage of accounting information is likely to vary across countries, especially for very
small …rms, the coverage of names and addresses is rather constant across countries regardless of …rm size. The
general pattern of results continues to hold when we exclude …rms for which we have no accounting information,
or …rms with less than 20 employees (this threshold tends to reduce di¤erences in coverage across countries).
16
Although we do not exclude …rms from our sample if they do not report …nancial information, some interesting observations emerge from examining only …rms for which …nancial information is available. Standalone
…rms tend to be substantially smaller than conglomerates and partly-owned a¢ liates, while conglomerates and
partly-owned a¢ liates do not di¤er much on size. The average standalone …rm has 177 employees (a median
of 20), and about $100 million in annual sales (a median of $8.3 million). The average conglomerate has
3.650 employees (a median of 136), and $918 million in annual sales (a median of $14.3 million). The average
partly-owned a¢ liate has 2.400 employees (a median of 214), and about $1 billion (a median of $65 million).
Comparing conglomerates to partly owned-a¢ liates, the di¤erent in mean size (annual sales) is not signi…cant
(a t-stat of -0.482).

23

by conglomerates and only 9% by business-group a¢ liates17 . In contrast, France is heavily
skewed towards business-groups, where only 35% of patents are held by conglomerates.
Second, the presence of minority shareholders in innovating a¢ liates varies enormously
across countries. While in the U.S. and Great Britain only 1% of innovation takes place
in a¢ liates with minority shareholders, about 20% and 15% of French and Italian patents,
respectively, are concentrated in a¢ liates with minority shareholders.
Third, the U.S. patents distribution is heavily skewed towards publicly traded …rms (table
2). Indeed, the fraction of patents held by publicly traded U.S. corporations is above 60%, while
this fraction is only about 40% for European …rms. This percentage also varies substantially
across European countries: in Germany, 57% of USPTO patents are assigned to publicly traded
…rms; in contrast, in France and Italy only 9% and 3% respectively of patents are assigned to
public …rms. Moreover, a large share of publicly traded …rms in continental Europe belong to
business groups: in France and Germany this percentage is above 40, while in the U.S. and
Great Britain only 2% of publicly traded …rms belong to a business group. Yet, in the U.S.
there is also a higher percentage of standalone publicly traded …rms compared with continental
Europe and Great Britain.
Table 3 further highlights the di¤erences in the distribution of patents by ownership type
across countries. Panel A describes the top 20 American innovating …rms. Leading the list
is IBM with more than 43.000 USPTO patents. All American …rms in this table have the
same ownership structure: they are all conglomerates and are publicly traded. Panel B focuses
on British …rms, which resemble the American conglomerate structure.18 Panel C examines
17

The German data on conglomerate dominance in R&D, however, is driven mostly by four large …rms:
Siemens, Robert Bosch, Bayer and BASF. These conglomerates hold about 60% of all German patents. Excluding these organizations, business groups account for 21% of German patents, and conglomerates account
for 52%.
18
Ownership structure in Great Britain di¤ers somewhat from that in the U.S. While the parent company of
a British organization is usually publicly traded, all innovative a¢ liates in our sample are private companies. A
good example that illustrates this rather unique structure is GlaxoSmithKline. This pharmaceutical giant has
three of its a¢ liates appearing in the top 20 most innovative …rms (Beecham, Glaxo Group, and SmithKline
Beecham). Each …rm is wholly owned by GlaxoSmithKline holding-company. While the holding company
is publicly traded, none of the innovative a¢ liates are. Glaxo has two headquarters - GlaxoWellcome, and
SmithKline Beecham, and a holding company that wholly-owns the whole organization. We classify Glaxo as a

24

the leading innovating …rms in France. More than half of these companies are business group
a¢ liates, where seven of these have minority shareholders. Only 40% of the …rms are publicly
traded. For Germany (panel D), 20% of the German …rms are partly-owned business-group
a¢ liates. Lastly, 40% of the Italian …rms are partly-owned business group a¢ liates (panel E),
and only one Italian …rm is publicly-traded.19
Another interesting observation relates to di¤erences in patent assignment in conglomerates
and business-groups. U.S. conglomerates usually assign patents to headquarters or to special
central intellectual property management divisions, and not to the division where patent was
generated. For example, IBM assigns almost all patents its divisions generate to its New-York
headquarters (as indicated by the assignee name on the patent records)20 . Other examples of
large conglomerates that adopt a central patent management structure include General Electric
(where 21,830 out of 22,348 of GE’s patents are assigned to its Global Research Center division
in New-York), and 3M (where 10,640 out of the 10,806 of 3M’s patents are assigned to its
headquarters, and the remaining patents are assigned to the wholly-owned IP management
subsidiary 3M Innovative Property).
In contrast, business-groups have a decentralized patent assignment. We hypothesize that
the presence of minority shareholders makes it di¢ cult to simply transfer IP assets from the
inventing to the controlling …rm. In France, for example, L’Oreal holds 3,135 USPTO patents,
out of a total number of 4,882 patents assigned to the whole Nestle group. Assigning L’Oreal’s
patents to Nestle would be considered an expropriation of the rights of minority shareholders of
L’Oreal. The transfer of patents to the controlling entity requires some form of valuation and
compensation of shareholders of the originating …rm. This is likely to be a di¢ cult transaction,
conglomerate although it has two headquarters, and a holding company at the apex.
19
In table 3 we do not control for …rm age, which means that older …rms are more likely to appear on
the list of innovative …rms than younger ones. We examine the robustness of our …ndings by looking only at
recent patenting activity. Our list of most innovating …rms does not appear to be very sensitive to …rm age.
For example, the largest patentees in the USPTO between 2002 and 2006 are IBM (16.270 patents), Micron
Technology (8.383 patents), Intel (7.729 patents), Siemens (7.023 patents), and Robert Bosch (5.870 patents).
20
Interestingly, the pattern of scienti…c publications assignments is di¤erent than that of patent assignments.
Where all IBM’s patents are assigned to headquarters, academic publications are always assigned to IBM’s
research centers, mostly in Yorktown Heights New-York, Austin Texas and LA.

25

which is why patents mostly remain with the originating …rm.
Insert Tables 1-3 here

Why do we observe a high concentration of business-groups in Europe, but not in the U.S.?
Based on the history of business-groups in the U.S., a leading explanation in our view is the
tax treatment of intercompany dividends. These have been taxable in the U.S. since the great
depression, but are generally not taxable in continental European countries. Under the U.S.
tax system, dividend income transferred from a subsidiary to the parent company is subject to
a 7.5% tax. A similar tax does not exist in Europe. As described by Morck (2005), the U.S.
tax reform of the 1930’s was a response to the corporate scandals of the late 1920s, and the
Roosevelt administration’s belief that the proliferation of a¢ liate …rms in business-groups have
made these groups very opaque to outsiders, thus creating major governance, tax avoidance,
market power, and political in‡uence problems.
In addition to introducing the inter-company dividend tax, the U.S. congress also abolished consolidated tax …lings for business-groups, eliminated capital gains taxes on liquidated
controlled subsidiaries, and banned large pyramidal groups for controlling public utility companies (the Public Utilites Holdings Company Act or PUHCA of 1935). These policies impose
a high penalty on organizing innovation in business-groups in the U.S. Thus, one would expect
to observe more business-groups, on average, in Europe, especially in industries where group
governance bene…ts are substantial.
5.1. Comparative analysis
Our theoretical analysis points to several predictions concerning the choice of organizational
form, in terms of both the country’s legal environment and …nancial development, and also the
nature of the innovation cycle in each industry. Hereafter the analysis is mostly based on the
number of EPO patents, where all …ndings are robust to using USPTO patents and scienti…c
publications.
26

5.1.1. Comparison across countries
Three key country variables are likely to a¤ect the choice of organizational form: (i) the capitalization value of R&D projects, (ii) the deadweight cost of diverting funds from business-group
a¢ liates, and (iii) the presence or not of intercompany dividend taxes and other regulatory
constraints on the formation of business group. We take as a simple measure of capitalization
of future cash ‡ows the ratio of the country’s stock market capitalization and GDP. Our main
prediction is that innovators are more likely to undertake their R&D project in a standalone
…rm when they are able to raise more funds by capitalizing a bigger fraction of the innovation’s
expected value. Similarly, in countries where the diversion of funds from a¢ liates is harder
we expect to see more R&D activity organized in business group a¢ liates. Finally, countries
with higher intercompany dividend taxes and more regulatory constraints on business group
will have less R&D activity organized in business group a¢ liates.
Table 4 summarizes general …ndings from the cross-country comparison. We rank countries
according to the three-year average ratio of stock-market traded value to GDP (Beck et al., 2000,
2007). As expected, the share of patents held by public …rms is much higher in the top …nancial
development quartile than in the lowest one (63.1% versus 18.0%). We also expect a higher
prevalence of standalones in countries with higher capitalization ratios. Interestingly however,
our …ndings are only partially consistent with the theory. While, as expected, standalones
are more prevalent than business-groups in the high-capitalization countries, they are also
more prevalent than conglomerates in low-capitalization countries. Business groups are much
more prevalent in low-capitalization countries (20.6% versus 1.6% of the patents are held by
partly-owned a¢ liates in low and high capitalization countries, respectively). This …nding
is consistent with the view that business-groups substitute for missing …nancial markets in
fostering innovation.

21

21

Note that the reverse causality may also explain this outcome, if the existence of business-groups impedes
the natural development of …nancial markets. Belenzon and Berkovitz (2008b) address this causality issue in
the following way. They analyze a key channel through which …nancial development a¤ects group a¢ liation
- internal capital markets. If …rms form business groups to create a substitute for underdeveloped …nancial
markets, we would observe a higher probability of group a¢ liation among …rms that operate in industries where

27

We proxy the cost of diversion of funds from a¢ liates with the anti-directive index developed
by La Porta et al. (1997). This index measures the overall strength of a country’s minority
shareholders protection laws. In countries where these laws are stricter, it is more costly
to divert funds from one a¢ liate to another. Innovation in business groups should be more
prevalent in countries with stronger minority shareholders protection laws. Surprisingly, we do
not …nd support for this prediction. There is in fact a higher share of innovation in businessgroups in countries with relatively weak minority protection laws (9.3% in the lowest minority
protection quartile versus 1.5% in the highest quartile). There appears to be no substantial
variation in the distribution of patents across public and private …rms between countries with
weak and strong minority shareholders protection laws. This is again surprising in light of the
strong correlation between …nancial development and minority shareholders protection laws.
To understand better what may be driving these results, we turn to a more detailed comparison of organizational forms across countries.
Insert Table 4 here

Business groups vs.

Conglomerates In comparing business groups to conglomerates

we consider two factors: anti-group laws, and the strength of minority shareholder protection.
Anti-group laws and weak minority shareholder protection make business groups less attractive.
Anti-group laws are strong in the U.S., but hardly exist in Europe. Thus, other things equal, we
expect more innovation to be concentrated in business groups in Europe than in the U.S. Only
1.5% of U.S. and U.K. patents are held by partly-owned a¢ liates, while in continental Europe
11.2% of the patents are held by partly-owned a¢ liates. This percentage varies signi…cantly
across countries, reaching a high of 25% in France. This pattern is consistent with the theory.
Computing the ratio between patents held by partly-owned a¢ liates and conglomerates, leads to
the demand for external capital is higher, especially in countries with less developed …nancial institutions. Thus,
their econometric approach is to examine whether the di¤erence in the percentage of group a¢ liates between
industries with high and low external dependence becomes more pronounces as the country …nancial development
deteriorates. The evidence suggests that business-groups indeed substitute missing …nancial institutions.

28

a similar conclusion. In France 11.550 patents are held by a¢ liates with minority shareholders,
and 20.676 patents are held by conglomerates22 . The ratio between the number of partlyowned a¢ liate and conglomerate patents for France is 0.56 (11.550/20.676), for Italy 0.62
(2.320/3.763), for Germany 0.0823 (10.949/135.220), for Great Britain 0.02 (631/30.809), and
for the U.S. 0.02 (3.417/198.006). These …gures imply that relative to conglomerates, partlyowned a¢ liates are more prevalent in France and Italy than in the U.S., Great Britain, and
Germany.
There is substantial variation in the anti-directive index across countries. For France, the
anti-directive index is 3, as compared to 1 for Germany. Our theoretical analysis predicts a
higher share of innovation in business groups in France than in Germany. The …ndings support
this prediction (a ratio of 0.56 for France versus a ratio of 0.08 for Germany). Yet, when we
compare Great Britain to Germany, the opposite ranking emerges: in Britain only 631 patents
are held by partly-owned a¢ liates, as compared to about 30.809 patents by conglomerates.
Indeed, minority shareholders in a¢ liates are very rare in Britain, which is a puzzle given that
Britain has unusually strong minority shareholder protections.
Standalones vs. conglomerates Standalones should be more prevalent than conglomerates
in countries with more developed …nancial markets (R&D capitalization value is higher). To
examine the prevalence of standalones relative to conglomerates we compute the ratio of the
number of patents held by standalones and the number of patents held by conglomerates. Our
…ndings are mixed. In the U.S., 23.970 patents are held by standalones, and 198.006 patents are
held by conglomerates. The standalones-conglomerates ratio, thus, is 0.12. For Great Britain,
France and Germany, the ratio is 0.17, 0.11, and 0.20, respectively. Compared to the U.S.,
standalones are relatively more prevalent than conglomerates in Great Britain and Germany,
22

For business-groups, we focus only on a¢ liates with minority shareholders, because anti-group and minorityshareholder protection laws typically do not apply to wholly-owned a¢ liates. When including also wholly-owned
a¢ liates, 50% of the French patents are held by business-groups.
23
The top four German conglomerates hold 94.180 patents in the EPO. Excluding these companies raises the
ratio between business group and conglomerate patents to 0.27.

29

and have a similar prevalence in France. For smaller countries in our sample, the ranking
is also unclear: Switzerland has a very high market capitalization, especially as compared
to the Netherlands. The standalones-conglomerates ratio in Switzerland, is 0.16, and in the
Netherlands it is 0.03. This ranking is consistent with our theoretical analysis, but when we
compare the Netherlands to France or Germany, which by our measure have lower stock-market
capitalizations, the …ndings become inconsistent with our theory.
Business groups vs.

Standalones Standalones are likely to represent a bigger share

of R&D than business-groups in countries where anti-group laws are strong and minorityshareholder protection is weak. As the U.S. has both more restrictive anti-group laws and
stronger minority-shareholder protections than European countries, it is not entirely clear how
the U.S. would compare with Europe in terms of the relative shares of R&D in standalones
and business groups. However, as the tax costs of running a business-group are so high in the
U.S. relative to Europe, we expect innovating standalones to be more prevalent in the U.S.
than in Europe. Our evidence supports this prediction. The ratio between the number of
patents held by partly-owned business group a¢ liates and standalones in the U.S. is 0.14, and
is 0.19 in Europe. This ratio varies considerably across European countries: in Great Britain
the a¢ liates-standalones ratio is 0.12, in Germany is 0.41, and in France is 5.07.
As for the e¤ects of minority-shareholder protections, our evidence is again mixed. While the
Germany-France comparison is consistent with our analysis, as minority-shareholder protections
are higher in France (at least as re‡ected by the anti-directive index), the comparison with Great
Britain is not. The ratio between business group and standalone patents in Great Britain is
much lower than in Germany and France, again despite the fact that minority-shareholder
protections in Great Britain are substantially higher.
What could explain these mixed results on organizational form and country conditions?
There are three possibilities: (i) country conditions may be endogenously a¤ected by ownership structure; (ii) unobserved and observed country heterogeneity make it hard to obtain a

30

clean identi…cation, and; (iii) di¤erent industry specialization across countries may a¤ect the
aggregate distribution of organizational forms. To examine in greater depth the choice of organizational form across industries, we turn next to an analysis of organizational variation across
industries.
5.1.2. Comparing across industries
In industries with rapid, incremental, innovations the ability of conglomerate …rms to quickly
identify the relevant innovations and to quickly redeploy assets may give it an edge over business
groups. In contrast, in industries with a slower and more fundamental innovation cycle, the
intellectual protection of the innovator may be of greater importance, giving business groups
an edge over conglomerates. To explore these predictions, we look at four di¤erent industries:
pharmaceuticals and biotechnology as examples of industries with a long innovation cycle,
and computer hardware and telecommunications as examples of industries with rapid and
incremental innovations. Table 5 summarizes the main …ndings for EPO patents.
Business groups vs. Conglomerates By our theoretical analysis, innovation ought to
be more prevalent in a partly-owned business group a¢ liates than in a conglomerate division
in the pharmaceuticals and biotechnology industries, but not in the computer hardware and
telecommunications sectors. Our …ndings con…rm this prediction. In pharmaceuticals and
biotechnology the ratio between the number of business group patents and conglomerate patents
is 0.07, and 0.21, respectively24 , where in computer hardware and telecommunications the
respective ratios are substantially lower at 0.02 and 0.03.25
Another interesting ranking emerges when comparing the U.S. to Europe. In the U.S., the
patent ratio of business-group-to-conglomerate patents for both pharmaceuticals and biotech24

When including patents by wholly-owned business group a¢ liates, the pharmaceuticals and biotechnology
ratios are 0.13 and 0.28.
25
When including patents by wholly-owned business group a¢ liates, the computer hardware and telecommunications ratios are 0.06 (354/5.876) and 0.11 (3.667/34.286). It is interesting to note that the majority
of business group patents are held by wholly-owned a¢ liates, especially in telecommunications, and not in
partly-owned a¢ liates, as in pharmaceuticals and biotechnology.

31

nology is 0.01. In Europe, on the other hand, these …gures are much higher at 0.11 and 0.35,
respectively. The prevalence of business groups in pharmaceuticals and biotechnology is, thus,
strongly driven by European …rms. For computer hardware and telecommunications the respective ratios are very small in both the U.S. and Europe, indicating that innovation activity
in partly-owned a¢ liates is very small.
Standalones vs. Conglomerates Standalones resemble partly-owned a¢ liates in terms of
their governance structure, and thus should have the same relative advantages over conglomerates in pharmaceuticals and biotechnology, but less so in computer hardware and telecommunications. Thus, the relative prevalence of standalones should be similar to that of partly-owned
a¢ liates. Our …ndings support this prediction. In pharmaceuticals and biotechnology the ratios
between standalone and conglomerate patents are 0.20 and 0.32, respectively, where in computer hardware and telecommunications these ratios are substantially lower at 0.11 and 0.07.
Again, in industries where high-powered incentives are of greater importance, partly-owned af…liates are more prevalent. Standalones seem to be more prevalent in the U.S. than in Europe,
especially in biotechnology. This …nding is consistent with our theory, which predicts a higher
prevalence of standalones in countries where R&D capitalization value is higher, especially in
industries where the governance bene…ts of standalones are more pronounced.
Business groups vs. Standalones Partly-owned a¢ liates and standalones have a similar
governance structure. However, partly-owned a¢ liates can bene…t from the business-group
internal capital market. On the other hand, standalones face smaller diversion costs than
a business-group a¢ liate. These considerations imply that we would expect partly-owned
a¢ liates to be more prevalent than standalones in industries where winner-picking is more
important, especially in countries that do not have anti-group laws, and where minority protection is strong. Our …ndings, however, do not support this prediction: business-groups are
more prevalent as compared to standalones in pharmaceuticals and biotechnology, than in com-

32

puter hardware and telecommunications26 . A potential explanation is related to fund raising.
Standalones, especially those that operate in countries with less developed …nancial markets,
may …nd it easier to …nance projects that have a shorter development cycle. In this respect,
business-groups may be able to provide more stable …nancing for longer term and riskier research projects.
Insert Table 5 here

5.2. Patent quality
So far our analysis focused on the number of patents. However, it is well recognized that the
distribution of patent quality is highly skewed, where a small portion of patents receive many
citations, and the majority of patents receive only few or no citations at all. Using the number
of citations a patent receives as our main quality indicator, table 6 compares the quality of
conglomerate and partly-owned a¢ liate patents (for brevity, we do not discuss the respective
comparison for patents by standalones). We control for cohort and technology area e¤ects using
the weighting scheme proposed by Trajtenberg (1990). For each patent, we divide the number
of citations it receives by the average number of citations received by all patents granted at the
same year and classi…ed under the same three-digit technology code.
Panel A reports the comparison analysis for U.S. and Great Britain patents. Conglomerate
patents seem to be of higher quality than business group patents: the average conglomerate
patent receives 1.23 (weighted) citations, as compared to a business group patent that receives
on average 1.12 citations (the di¤erence in means is signi…cant at the 1% level). We also examine
the case of self-citations; where an inventor cites one of its predecessor patents. Self-citations
are commonly regarded as measures of cumulative innovation, and are typically associated
with greater private value (Hall et al., 2005). Conglomerate patents receive signi…cantly more
self-citations than business group patents (1.57 versus 0.98). Additional indicators of patent
26

The ratios between partly-owned a¢ liate and standalone patents are 0.37 and 0.66 in pharmaceuticals and
biotechnology, and 0.24 and 0.42 in computer hardware and telecommunications, respectively.

33

importance are generality and originality. These indicators measure the extent the knowledge
embodied in a patent ‘spills-over’to more technology areas (generality), or builds on knowledge
from many di¤erent technology …elds (originality).27 With respect to patent generality and
originality, conglomerates also seem to dominate. The average generality (originality) value
for a conglomerate patent is 0.278 (0.274), as compared to 0.266 (0.264) for a business group
patent (the di¤erence in means is signi…cant at the 1% level).
We conduct the same comparison for continental European countries (panel B). Interestingly, the opposite pattern of results emerges. Business group patents tend to be of higher
quality and concern more basic research than conglomerate patents. The average conglomerate
patent receives 0.71 citations, as compared to a business group patent that receives on average
0.88 citations (the di¤erence in means is signi…cant at the 1% level). Business group patents
are also more general and original: the average generality (originality) value for a conglomerate
patent is 0.231 (0.226), as compared to 0.264 (0.239) for a business group patent (the di¤erence
is signi…cant at the 1% level).
Insert Table 6 here

5.3. Coasian or Entrenched organizational forms?
A basic premise of our analysis is a Coasian perspective on …rm organization, which is to say
that R&D intensive …rms tend to choose the corporate form that is best suited for fostering
innovative activities. Thus, we expect a corporate form that is particularly well suited for
27

We follow Trajtenberg et. al. (1997), and compute patent generality as the Her…ndahl-Hirschman Index
of the concentration of the citations a patent receives across three-digit technology …elds. The generality index
for patent i, dented by Gi , is:
Gi = 1

X
j

CRij
CRi

2

Where, j denotes three-digit technology …elds, CRij is the number of citations received by patent i from
patents in technology …eld j; and CRi is the total number of citations received by patent i. For patent
originality, we use the same formulation, but for the distribution of the number of citations the patent makes
across technology …elds.

34

innovative …rms to be more prevalent among these …rms in a given industry than among noninnovating …rms. The alternative view in the literature is that organization form is chosen by
entrenched managers, or controlling shareholders, to suit their best interests at the expense of
minority shareholders and overall …rm e¢ ciency. By this latter view it is not obvious that one
should see any systematic di¤erence in organization form in a given industry across innovative
and non-innovative …rms. In this section we explore the extent to which organization form di¤ers
between innovative and non-innovative …rms. Essentially, we examine whether innovative …rms
are disproportionately represented in a given organization category, using aggregated sales in
the same category as a benchmark. We say that patents are disproportionately represented in
one category over another, if the patent ratio of the two categories is higher than the sale ratio
of the same categories. For this comparison our sample includes close to 3.5 million …rms with
sales information.
Table 7 summarizes the main …ndings. First, patents are disproportionately concentrated
in partly-owned a¢ liates relative to standalones, with patent and sales ratios of 0.57 and
0.33, respectively. This pattern is driven mostly by …rms in continental Europe, where the
patent and sale ratios are 0.84 and 0.56. In the U.S. and Great Britain, on the other hand,
these ratios are virtually identical at 0.14 and 0.12. Second, patents are disproportionately
concentrated in conglomerates relative to partly-owned a¢ liates (patent and sale ratios of
0.09 and 0.17). This pattern is much stronger in continental Europe, where the patent and
sale ratios are 0.17 and 0.42, respectively. In the U.S., these ratios are identical at 0.02.
Third, organization form varies substantially across industries. As in the previous section,
we focus on pharmaceuticals and biotechnology (panel B)28 , and telecommunications (panel
C). Consistent with the Coasian perspective, in pharmaceuticals and biotechnology, innovation
is disproportionately concentrated in partly-owned a¢ liates relative to conglomerates (patent
28

We combine pharmaceuticals and biotechnology because many companies that operate in pharmaceuticals
also operate biotechnology. Unlike patents, where we can classify each patent to a technology …eld according to
its IPC code, it is much more di¢ cult to breakdown sales by industries, especially in conglomerates that usually
report consolidated accounts.

35

and sale ratios of 0.11 and 0.06). Yet again, this pattern is driven by European …rms. In the
U.S. alone, the patent and sale ratios are identical (0.01), while in Europe the patents ratio is
substantially higher than the sales ratio (0.18 versus 0.13). In telecommunications (panel C), on
the other hand, business-group patents are under-represented relative to sales in Europe (patent
and sale ratios of 0.04 and 0.08, respectively), and in the U.S., the patent and sale ratios are
e¤ectively zero. Finding disproportionately more conglomerate patents in telecommunications
is also consistent with the Coasian perspective, as we expect that in this industry conglomerates
are more conductive to R&D than business-groups.
Insert Table 7 here

5.4. Robustness
We conduct several robustness tests to check the sensitivity of our …ndings, focusing mostly
on the ownership algorithm, and organization form de…nitions. To ensure ownership shares
represent control, we keep only links where the shareholder has at least 50% of the voting rights
for private …rms, and 20% of the voting rights for public …rms. We check the sensitivity of our
results by experimenting with di¤erent control thresholds. The same pattern of results continue
to hold for thresholds of 40% and 25% for private …rms, and 10% for public …rms. Furthermore,
we construct business group structures using the algorithm developed by Almeida, Yong Park,
Subrahmanyam, and Wolfenzon, 2007 (AYPSW). Due to computational power constraints we
are not able to run their algorithm on our full set of …rms. While restricting the ownership
sample is problematic, the general pattern that emerges highly resembles the one generated
by our own algorithm. The advantage of AYPSW over our algorithm is that it better deals
with cases of cross-holdings (for example, …rm A control 50% of the voting rights of …rm B,
and …rm B controls 50% of the voting rights of …rm A).29 However, while cross-holdings are
prevalent in East-Asian countries, where the AYPSW algorithm was …rst implemented, we …nd
29

The main advantage of our algorithm over AYPSW is that it is better designed to e¢ ciently handle large
datasets on ownership ties.

36

that cross-holdings are very rare in Europe. Actually, only 0.01% of the ownership chains our
algorithm generates are associated with some form of cross-holdings.
We distinguish between standalones and conglomerates by determining whether a …rm is
specialized or diversi…ed. We assume a …rm is diversi…ed if it operates in at least two di¤erent
two-digit industry SIC. The same pattern of results continue to hold when we de…ne diversi…cation at the one-digit SIC level. Moreover, we supplement the industry information with
data on the …rm patenting distribution across technology …elds. We check whether diversi…ed
…rms also tend to patent in more than one technology areas. We …nd that about 80% of the
conglomerates in our sample patent in more than one two-digit IPC …elds. The general pattern
of results continue to hold when we use the IPC …elds in de…ning conglomerates.
We also distinguish between patents that were acquired by a business group and patents
that were generated internally. We use Zephyr to track changes in ownership structure through
M&As (table A1). We …nd that, on average, 9% of the …rms joined a business group between
1997 and 2007, where the remaining 91% are associated with an organic business group expansion. Our main …ndings continue to hold also when excluding patents that were acquired
through M&A.

6. Conclusion
This paper examines the relation between organization form and innovation for a cross-section
of private and publicly traded innovating …rms in the U.S. and 15 European countries. Several
new …ndings emerge from our analysis. First, while most innovating …rms in the U.S. are
publicly traded conglomerates, a substantial fraction of innovation is concentrated in private
…rms and in business groups in continental European countries. Second, there is a substantial
variation in organization form across industries. Business groups tend to be concentrated in
industries where innovation takes time, is highly uncertain, and where the intellectual protection
of the innovator may be of paramount importance. On the other hand, conglomerates are more
prevalent in industries with rapid, incremental, innovation where the ability of conglomerates
37

to promptly identify the relevant innovation and to quickly redeploy assets may give it an edge
over business groups. Third, our …ndings are consistent with a Coasian view of how …rms
organize themselves: namely that R&D intensive …rms tend to choose the corporate form most
conducive to innovation. This is especially true in Europe, where there are fewer regulatory
hurdles to the formation of business groups and hybrid corporate forms. It is not the case in the
U.S., where tax and regulatory hurdles essentially eliminate any gains from forming business
groups, and where a highly visible VC and private equity sector provides an alternative to
business-group …nancing of R&D.

38

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, Claire Lelarge, John Van Reenen, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2007. “Technology, Information and the Decentralization of the Firm.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 122(4), 1759-1800.
[2] Almeida, Heitor, and Daniel Wolfenzon. 2006. “A Theory of Pyramidal Ownership and
Family Business Groups.”Journal of Finance 61, 2637-2680.
[3] Almeida, Heitor, Sang Yong Park, Marti Subrahmanyam and Daniel Wolfenzon. 2007.
“Valuation and performance of …rms in complex ownership structures: An application to
Korean chaebols.”Working paper.
[4] Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. 2000. A New Database on Financial
Development and Structure. World Bank Economic Review 14, 597-605 (updated in 2007).
[5] Belenzon, Sharon and Tomer Berkovitz. 2008a. “Innovation in Business Groups.”Working
paper.
[6] Belenzon, Sharon and Tomer Berkovitz. 2008b. “Business Groups, Financial Development
and Market Structure: Evidence from Europe.”Working paper.
[7] Belenzon, Sharon and Andrea Patacconi. 2009. “Firm Size and Innovation: Evidence from
European Panel Data.”Working paper.
[8] Black, Bernard and Ronald J. Gilson. 1998 “Venture capital and the structure of capital
markets: banks versus stock markets.”Journal of Financial Economics
[9] Coase, Ronald H. 1937. “The Nature of the Firm.”Economica 4, 386-405.
[10] Cockburn, Iain and Rebecca M. Henderson. 1998 “Absorptive Capacity, Coauthoring Behavior, and the Organization of Research in Drug Discovery.” Journal of Industrial Economics 46(2), 157-182
39

[11] Gompers, Paul A. 1995. “Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Staging of Venture
Capital.”Journal of Finance 50(5), 1461-1489.
[12] Gompers, Paul A. and Josh Lerner. 2001 “The Venture Capital Revolution.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives
[13] Faccio, Mara, and Larry Lang. 2002. “The Ultimate Ownership of Western European
Corporations”. Journal of Financial Economics 65, 365-395.
[14] Forum Eurpaeum Corporate Group Law. 2000. “Corporate Group Low For Europe.”European Business Organization Law Review (1), 165-265
[15] Gilson, Ronald J. 1999. “The legal infrastructure of high technology industrial districts:
Silicon Valley, Route 128, and covenants not to compete.”NYU Law Review
[16] Greenwald, Bruce, Joseph E. Stiglitz, and Andrew Weiss. 1984. “Informational Imperfections in the Capital markets and Macro-Economic Fluctuations.” American Economic
Review 74(1), 194-199.
[17] Griliches, Zvi. 1979. “Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Development
to Productivity Growth.”Bell Journal of Economics, 10(1), 92-116.
[18] Griliches, Zvi. 1990. “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey.” Journal of
Economic Literature 28, 1661-1707.
[19] Griliches, Zvi. 1998. “R&D and Productivity: The Econometric Evidence.”The University
of Chicago Press.
[20] Gompers, Paul A. 1995. “Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Staging of Venture
Capital.”Journal of Finance 50(5), 1461-1489.
[21] Guedj, Ilan and David S. Scharfstein. 2004. “Organizational Scope and Investment: Evidence from the Drug Development Strategies and Performance of Biopharmaceutical
Firms.”Working paper.
40

[22] Guedj, Ilan. 2006. “Ownership vs. Contract: How Vertical Integration A¤ects Investment
Decisions in Pharmaceutical R&D.”Working paper.
[23] Ja¤e, Adam and, Manuel Trajtenberg. 2002. “Patents, Citations and Innovations: A Window on the Knowledge Economy.” Cambridge, Mass, MIT Press
[24] Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam Ja¤e, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 2001. “The NBER Patent Citations Data File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools.”Working Paper.
[25] Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam Ja¤e, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 2005. “Market Value and Patent
Citations.”The Rand Journal of Economics 36, 16-38.
[26] Henderson Rebecca, Ja¤e Adam, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 1997. “University versus Corporate Patents: A Window on the Basicness of Invention.” Economics of Innovation and
New Technology 5, 19-50.
[27] Himmelberg, Charles and Bruce Petersen. 1994. “R&D and Internal Finance: A Panel
Study of Small Firms in High-Tech Industries.”Review of Economics and Statistics 76(1),
38-51.
[28] Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap and David Scharfstein. 1991. “Corporate Structure, Liquidity,
and Investment: Evidence from Japanese Industrial Groups.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 106(1), 33-60.
[29] La Porta, Rafael, Shleifer, Andrei, Lopez de Silanes, Florencio and Vishny, Robert W.
1999. “Law and Finance.”Journal of Political Economy 106(6).
[30] Morck, Randall, Daniel Wolfenzon and Bernard Yeung, 2005. “Corporate Governance,
Economic Entrenchment, and Growth.”Journal of Economic Literature 43(3), 655-720.
[31] Morck, Randall. 2005. “How to Eliminate Pyramidal Business Groups: The DoubleTaxation of Intercorporate Dividends and Other Incisive Uses of Tax Policy.” Tax Policy
and the Economy 19, 135-179.
41

[32] Mullainathan,Sendhil and David Scharfstein. 2001. “Do Firm Boundaries Matter?.” The
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 91, 195–199.
[33] Meyer, Margaret, Paul Milgrom and Donald Roberts. 1992. “Organizational Prospects,
In‡uence Costs, and Ownership Changes.”Journal of Economics & Management Strategy
1, 9-35.
[34] Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales. 1998. “Financial Dependence and Growth.”American Economic Review 88, 559-586.
[35] Robinson, David. 2007. “Strategic Alliances and the Boundaries of the Firm.” Review of
Financial Studies Forthcoming.
[36] Robinson, David and Toby Stuart. 2007. “Financial Contracting in Biotech Strategic Alliances.”Journal of Law and Economics 50(3).
[37] Scharfstein, David and Jeremy Stein. 2000. “The Dark Side of Internal Capital Markets:
Divisional Rent-Seeking and Ine¢ cient, Investment.”Journal of Finance 55(6), 2537-2564.
[38] Seru, Amit. 2007. “Do Conglomerates Sti‡e Innovation?.” Working paper, University of
Chicago.
[39] Trajtenberg, Manuel. 1990. “A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value of
Innovations.”The Rand Journal of Economics 21(1), 172-187

42

A. Appendix
A.1. Constructing ownership structure
This section details the construction and output of our newly developed algorithm. The purpose of the algorithm is to determine the structure of European business-groups based on the
Amadeus ownership database. The algorithm consists of two parts: a control-chain generator that constructs the ownership and control links between di¤erent European …rms, and a
name matching procedure that groups together …rms controlled by the same ultimate owner.
Our source of information is the ownership sections of the 2008 versions of Amadeus (for the
European subsidiaries) and Icarus (for the American subsidiaries).
A.1.1. The Control chain generator
The Amadeus ownership database includes detailed information on the percentage of ownership between European corporate shareholders and their European subsidiaries. The data span
virtually all European countries (including Eastern Europe). Icarus provides similar information for the United States. We develop an ownership algorithm that constructs the internal
structure of business-groups based on these inter-company ownership links. The main bene…ts
of the algorithm are: (i) it constructs the ownership chains without relying on the (often missing) information on whether an ownership link is direct or indirect,30 (ii) it completes missing
ownership links by transitivity, (iii) it identi…es cross-holdings, and (iv) it handles complex
ownership structures. These features allow us to develop robust measures of business-group
characteristics (such as group size).
We include all ownership links from the Amadeus ownership database that represent a
control relation. For this, we make the following assumptions: for private subsidiaries, a shareholder exerts control if its direct percentage of ownership is larger than 50. For public …rms,
the percentage of direct ownership has to be larger than 20 to represent a control relation (since
ownership is typically less concentrated in public …rms than in private …rms).31
There are about 1 million direct ownership links that satisfy our control assumptions, where
291.974 shareholders control 789.557 subsidiaries. The average percentage of direct ownership is
91 with a median of 100 (59 percent of the ownership links represent a wholly-owned relation).
There are 1.369 public subsidiaries. For these public subsidiaries, the average percentage of
direct ownership is 53 with a median of 48. The input …le of direct ownership links generates
718.092 ownership chains. 69 percent of the chains include only two …rms (13 percent of the
chains include more than 3 …rms and 3 percent of the chains include more than 5 …rms). 63
percent of the chains are wholly-owned (for all levels in the chain). For chains where the apex in
an American or British …rms, 83 percent are wholly-owned, for German apex …rms, 60 percent
of the chains are wholly-owned, where for French apex …rms, only 25 percent are wholly-owned.
30

Indirect ownership links are very common in our data. Suppose, for example, that …rm A owns 60% of the
shares of B and that B owns 60% of the shares of C. In this case, …rm A has a direct ownership of 60% in B
and an indirect ownership of 36% in C.
31
Similar assumption was made by La Porta et al. (1999) and Faccio and Lang (2002).

43

A.1.2. Description of the algorithm
The algorithm follows three steps: (i) completes missing ownership links, (ii) generates lists
of all subsidiaries and parents for each company, and (iii) constructs the ownership chains
bottom-up.32 To illustrate our methodology, it would be useful to consider the following example. Suppose Figure A.1 correctly describes the ownership structure of a business-group. The
ultimate owner (for example, a family) at the apex of the group controls 7 public and private
…rms. Amadeus provides detailed data on direct ownership links. Thus, our raw data include
the links A ! D, B ! F , C ! G, and D ! E. Note that the percentage of ownership for
the link C ! G has to be larger than 20 (because …rm G is public), where for the percentage
of ownership for all other links has to be larger than 50 (because the other subsidiaries are
private). Because there is no information about indirect ownership links, the link A ! E is
missing from the raw data. The …rst step of the algorithm is to complete missing links. As
we observe the ownership relations A ! D and D ! E, our algorithm infers the ownership
relation A ! E. Note that at this stage of the algorithm we still do not know whether the
ownership relation is direct or indirect (and if it is indirect, how many layers separate …rm E
from …rm A). The second step of the algorithm is to construct two lists for each …rm: shareholders and subsidiaries. This step saves valuable running time, which is especially important
when dealing with large scale ownership data. The following table is generated:
Firm Shareholder Subsidiary
A
D, E
F
B
C
G
D
A
E
A, D
E
F
B
G
C
Note that from step 1, we already know that …rm A is a shareholder of …rm E. Also, because
we assume the ultimate owner is a family, …rms A, B, and C have no corporate (European)
shareholder. The third and …nal step of the algorithm is to construct the structure of the group
based on the above ownership relations. Because of the missing links problem, our algorithm
does not assume that an ownership relation is direct; the only input the algorithm receives is
the existence of the ownership relation. We start with a …rm that has no subsidiaries from the
list generated in step 2. We illustrate the procedure for …rm E, which is the most interesting
in this example. Firm E is placed at the bottom of the ownership chain. Next, we move to
the shareholder list of …rm E. It includes …rms A and D. Starting arbitrary with A, place A
above E. Proceeding to …rm D, there are three possibilities for its location: (i) D is above
E and above A; (ii) D is above E, but below A; (iii) D is above E, but not below neither
above A (di¤erent ownership chain). For (i) to be the right structure, D has to appear in the
shareholder list of …rm A. From step 2, we rule this out. For (ii) to be the right structure,
D has to appear on the subsidiary list of …rm A. From step 2, this holds. Finally, for (iii) to
32

Unlike business groups in East Asia (such as the Japanese keiretsu), most European business groups are
organized in pyramids (Figure A.1). This means that interlocking shareholdings are not common and, therefore,
ownership chains can be constructed bottom-up.

44

be the right structure, A cannot appear on either the shareholder or subsidiary lists of …rm
D. From step 2, this is ruled out. At the end of this procedure, we have determined for each
ownership chain the highest shareholder …rm - we call this …rm the leading shareholder.
Our algorithm fails in the case of cross-holdings. A cross-holding is an ownership structure
where a shareholder is also a subsidiary of its own subsidiary. For example, suppose we also
observe the ownership link E ! A. Our ordering procedure will not work because there is no
starting point: no …rm is placed at the bottom of the business-group and, therefore, the leading
shareholder cannot be determined.33 Yet, we observe only few cases of cross-holdings in the
data (0.5 percent of the ownership links are associated with at least one cross-holding).

Ultimate Owner

Private
A

Private
B

Public
C

Private
D

Private
F

Public
G

Private
E

Figure A.1: Example of a business-group
A.1.3. Ultimate owner name matching
The next part of our algorithm groups …rms across ownership chains based on the name of
the ultimate owners. The name matching process deals with two main issues. First, ultimate
owner names are not standardized, i.e., the same name can be spelled di¤erently across subsidiaries. Second, common names, especially for family members, may lead to ‘over-grouping’.
We deal with theses issues as following. First, we develop a name standardization procedure
that harmonizes the di¤erent string patterns in our data. Second, to ensure families are indeed
wealthy, we search for publicly available information, such as Forbes and The Economist, on
the largest 500 wealthiest families in our sample (for example, De Rotchild family, Nasi-Agnelli
family). For the other individual ultimate owners in our sample, we compute the frequency of
the appearance of the name in the ultimate owner population. In case this frequency is higher
33

A less ‘severe’case of cross-holding is where we observe E ! D. In this case, our algorithm constructs two
ownership chains: A ! D ! E and A ! D ! E, where both correctly characterize the ownership structure.
The leading shareholder is …rm A in both cases, which allows us to correctly group …rms into business groups.

45

than the median frequency, we assume the common name problem and do not include that ultimate owner in our sample. Our control assumptions may lead to cases where we miss-classify
…rms to groups. For example, suppose an ultimate owner controls 33 percent of …rm C, and
…rms A and B control each 33 percent of …rm C. Assuming …rm C is private, our algorithm will
not assign …rm C to a group. The ultimate owner fully controls …rm C (via its control of …rms
A and B), thus …rm C should be part of the group. To deal with this situation we take the
following step. For …rms that were not assigned to groups we extract a list of their immediate
shareholders (corporate and individuals). For each shareholder we already know whether it
belongs to a group and its ultimate owner (as indicated by the ownership algorithm). Then,
we examine whether an ultimate owner controls more than 50 percent of the stocks for private
…rms and more than 20 percent of the stocks for public …rms. In case the aggregated holding
of the ultimate owner meets these threshold, we assign the a¢ liate to the group.
A.2. Matching patent data
A.2.1. European Patent O¢ ce (EPO)
The matching between EPO patent applicants and Amadeus …rms has been a collaborative
project with the Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS) and the Centre for Economic Performance
(CEP). This section is a brief summary of the matching procedure.
Our main information source on patents is the 2007 publication of the PATSTAT database,
which is the standard source for European patent data. This database contains all bibliographic
data (including citations) on all European patent applications and granted patents, from the
beginning of the EPO system in 1979 to the end of 2007.
We match the name of each EPO applicant listed on the patent document to the full name
of a …rm listed in Amadeus (about 8 million names). Since we are interested only in matching
patent applicants to …rms, we exclude applicant names that fall into the following categories:
government agencies, universities, and individuals. We identify government agencies and universities by searching for a set of identifying strings in their name. We identify individuals as
patents where the assignee and the inventor name strings are identical.
The matching procedure follows two main steps. (i) Standardizing names of patent applicants. This involves replacing commonly used strings which symbolize the same thing, for
example “Ltd.”and “Limited”in the UK. We remove spaces between characters and transform
all letters to capital letters. As an example, the name “British Nuclear Fuels Public Limited
Company”becomes “BRITISHNUCLEARFUELSPLC”. (ii) Name matching: match the standard names of the patent applicants with Amadeus …rms. If there is no match, then try to
match to the old …rm name available in Amadeus. We need to confront a number of issues.
First, in any given year, the Amadeus database excludes the names of …rms that have not
…led …nancial reports for four consecutive years (e.g. M&A, default). We deal with this issue
in several ways. First, we use information from historical versions of the Amadeus database
(1995-2006) on names and name changes. Second, even though Amadeus contains a unique
…rm identi…er (BVD ID number), there are cases in which …rms with identical names have
di¤erent BVD numbers. In these cases, we use other variables for identi…cation, for example: address (ZIP code), Date of incorporation (whether consistent with the patent application
date), and more. Finally, we manually match most of the remaining corporate patents to the
list of Amadeus …rms.
46

Some groups assign many of their patents to a single subsidiary. This subsidiary typically
does not innovate and its main purpose is to manage the intellectual property assets of the
group. We identify such …rms using their SIC classi…cation. We use information on the location
of the patent inventors to match the centrally-assigned patents to innovative a¢ liates. The
secondary assignment of these patents is based on a match between the address of the patent
inventor and the group a¢ liates. In case the address of the inventor matches multiple group
a¢ liates we make the following assumption: if only one of the a¢ liates innovates (as indicated
by the number of patents this a¢ liate already has), assign the patent to this innovative a¢ liate.
If more than one of the matched a¢ liates innovates, keep the original central assignment of
the patent. The secondary matching procedure increases the number of innovative a¢ liates by
about 250 …rms.
A.2.2. United States Patents and Trademarks O¢ ce (USPTO)
The procedure described above matches European …rms to patents registered with the EPO.
Yet, some European …rms register patents only with the USPTO, without applying to the
EPO. In order to identify the European …rms that only apply to the USPTO, we match the
complete set of Amadeus …rms to the name of the patent applicants from the USPTO. The
most updated patent database for the USPTO is the 2002 version of the NBER patents and
citations data archive. Because this database covers patent information only up to 2002 and our
accounting data go up to 2007, we updated the patent data …le by extracting all information
about patents granted between 2002 and 2007 directly from the USPTO website.34 Having
updated the USPTO patent database, we follow the matching procedure described above to
create the matched USPTO patent data for the Amadeus …rms.
A.3. Matching scienti…c publications
The largest database on scienti…c publications is the ISI Web of Knowledge (WoK) by Thomson.
This includes millions of records on publications in academic journals. The data is divided to
three main categories based on the publication type: hard sciences, social sciences, and arts
and humanities. Because we are interested in capturing investment in scienti…c research, we
focus only on the hard sciences section of WoK. This section includes publication records over
the period 1970-2007. The address …eld on each record indicates the a¢ liation of the authors
of the publication. This a¢ liation is typically either a research institution or a …rm. We use
the name appearing in this …eld and match it to the complete list of Amadeus …rms. We follow
the same matching procedure as described above for the EPO and USPTO patent matching.
Articles may have more than one author (the median number of authors per article is 2). In
this case, the address …eld would include multiple a¢ liations. We assign a scienti…c publication
to a speci…c …rm if the name of this …rm appears at least once in the address …eld of the
article. This procedure means that a single article can be assigned to more than one …rm, but
a …rm cannot be assigned more than once to the same article. For each article, we also extract
information on the number of times it was cited, the journal in which it was published, and the
year of publication. Information about the importance of journals is taken from the Journal
Citations Report index (JCR). Finally, European research institutions can be incorporated,
thus, they appear in Amadeus as potential …rms to be matched. To screen out such …rms,
34

http://patft.uspto.gov/netahtml/PTO/srchnum.htm

47

we follow two steps. First, as for patent matching, we drop Amadeus names that include
strings that are associated with research institutions (such as, UNIVERSITY, RESEARCH,
INSTITUTION, etc.). Second, we manually examine the websites of …rms that have a large
number of publications but appear as small …rms in terms of their sales and number of patents.
For these …rms, we check whether their primary activity is research. In case the primary activity
is research, we exclude them from our matched sample.
A.4. Industry patent classi…cation
Table 7 summarizes the distribution of patents across selected industries. The classi…cation
of patents to these industries is based on the patent International Patent Classi…cation, as
following. Pharmaceuticals includes IPCs A61 (excluding A61B, A61K 38, A61K 39, and
A61K 48). Biotechnology includes IPCs A01H 1/00, A01H 4/00, A61K 38/00, A61K 39/00,
A61K 48/00, C02F 3/34, C07G 11/00, C07G 13/00, C07G 15/00, C07K 4/00, C07K 14/00,
C07K 16/00, C07K 17/00, C07K 19/00, C12M, C12N, C12P, C12Q, C12S, G01N 27/327, G01N
33/53, G01N 33/54, G01N 33/55, G01N 33/57, G01N 33/68, G01N 33/74, G01N 33/76, G01N
33/78, G01N 33/88, and G01N 33/92. Computer Hardware includes G06F 13/12, G11C, G065
15, and H01L. Telecommunications includes H04B, H04L, H04N, H04M, H04K, H04J, and
H04H.

48

∆V#

f-Wi+m

CL
h(∆V)
CL
SA
m

∆V

Figure 1

f-Wi+m

∆V*
BG
h(∆V)

SA

SA

m

∆V

Figure 2

f-Wi+m

∆V*

∆V#

BG

CL
h(∆V)

SA

SA

CL

m

∆V

Figure 3

TABLE 1:
INNOVATION AND OWNERSHIP STRUCTURE ACROSS COUNTRIES
PANEL A. NUMBER OF FIRMS
Ultimate Owner
Country

Stand Alone

Conglomerate
Total affiliates

Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Great Britain
Greece
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Republic of Ireland
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Total Europe
United States
Total

Total

Business-Group
Wholly-owned

Minority
Shareholders

382

234

174

120

54

(48%)

(30%)

(22%)

(15%)

(7%)

363

141

240

156

84

(49%)

(19%)

(32%)

(21%)

(11%)

177

151

138

81

57

(38%)

(32%)

(30%)

(17%)

(12%)

575

238

103

67

36

(63%)

(26%)

(11%)

(7%)

(4%)

884

518

962

480

482

(37%)

(22%)

(41%)

(20%)

(20%)

3,942

2,044

842

468

374

(58%)

(30%)

(12%)

(7%)

(5%)

2,466

1,842

672

569

103

(50%)

(37%)

(13%)

(11%)

(2%)

24

4

4

1

3

(75%)

(13%)

(13%)

(3%)

(9%)

2,073

699

347

139

208

(66%)

(22%)

(11%)

(4%)

(7%)

161

230

252

189

63

(25%)

(36%)

(39%)

(29%)

(10%)

349

90

88

51

37

(66%)

(17%)

(17%)

(10%)

(7%)

40

20

29

25

4

(45%)

(22%)

(33%)

(28%)

(4%)

396

197

113

40

73

(56%)

(28%)

(16%)

(6%)

(10%)

380

328

376

246

130

(35%)

(30%)

(35%)

(23%)

(12%)

634

582

236

165

71

(44%)

(40%)

(16%)

(11%)

(5%)

12,846

7,318

4,576

2,797

1,779

(52%)

(30%)

(18%)

(11%)

(7%)

30,187

7,810

1,295

1,127

168

(77%)

(20%)

(3%)

(3%)

(0%)

43,033

15,128

5,871

3,924

1,947

(67%)

(24%)

(9%)

(6%)

(3%)

790
744
466
916
2,364
6,828
4,980
32
3,119
643
527
89
706
1,084
1,452
24,740
39,292
64,032

TABLE 1: (Cont'd)
INNOVATION AND OWNERSHIP STRUCTURE ACROSS COUNTRIES
PANEL B. NUMBER OF USPTO PATENTS
Ultimate Owner
Country

Stand Alone

Conglomerate
Total affiliates

Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Great Britain
Greece
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Republic of Ireland
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Total Europe
United States
Total

Total

Business-Group
Wholly-owned

Minority
Shareholders

684

994

763

381

382

(28%)

(41%)

(31%)

(16%)

(16%)

309

1,736

2,600

740

1,860

(7%)

(37%)

(56%)

(16%)

(40%)

289

2,338

1,106

477

629

(8%)

(63%)

(30%)

(13%)

(17%)

651

4,595

327

279

48

(12%)

(82%)

(6%)

(5%)

(1%)

801

9,487

17,077

11,832

5,245

(3%)

(35%)

(62%)

(43%)

(19%)

12,052

86,564

9,407

3,388

6,019

(11%)

(80%)

(9%)

(3%)

(6%)

4,775

22,581

3,752

3,596

156

(15%)

(73%)

(12%)

(12%)

(1%)

17

0

4

1

3

(81%)

(0%)

(19%)

(5%)

(14%)

3,246

1,295

1,222

369

853

(56%)

(22%)

(21%)

(6%)

(15%)

242

8,219

738

516

222

(3%)

(89%)

(8%)

(6%)

(2%)

393

131

148

121

27

(58%)

(19%)

(22%)

(18%)

(4%)

61

50

138

131

7

(24%)

(20%)

(55%)

(53%)

(3%)

369

127

209

126

83

(52%)

(18%)

(30%)

(18%)

(12%)

558

2,961

2,179

1,378

801

(10%)

(52%)

(38%)

(24%)

(14%)

1,272

13,237

6,102

1,582

4,520

(6%)

(64%)

(30%)

(8%)

(22%)

25,719

154,315

45,772

24,917

20,855

(11%)

(68%)

(20%)

(11%)

(9%)

132,031

500,670

24,465

20,162

4,303

(20%)

(76%)

(4%)

(3%)

(1%)

157,750

654,985

70,237

45,079

25,158

(18%)

(74%)

(8%)

(5%)

(3%)

2,441
4,645
3,733
5,573
27,365
108,023
31,108
21
5,763
9,199
672
249
705
5,698
20,611
225,806
657,166
882,972

TABLE 1: (Cont'd)
INNOVATION AND OWNERSHIP STRUCTURE ACROSS COUNTRIES
PANEL C. NUMBER OF EPO PATENTS
Ultimate Owner
Country

Stand Alone

Conglomerate
Total affiliates

Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Great Britain
Greece
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Republic of Ireland
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Total Europe
United States
Total

Total

Business-Group
Wholly-owned

Minority
Shareholders

1,646

4,006

1,570

876

694

(23%)

(55%)

(22%)

(12%)

(10%)

1,503

1,946

3,943

1,356

2,587

(20%)

(26%)

(53%)

(18%)

(35%)

435

4,144

2,473

992

1,481

(6%)

(59%)

(35%)

(14%)

(21%)

1,411

7,732

466

311

155

(15%)

(80%)

(5%)

(3%)

(2%)

2,278

20,676

23,011

11,461

11,550

(5%)

(45%)

(50%)

(25%)

(25%)

26,448

135,220

16,137

5,188

10,949

(15%)

(76%)

(9%)

(3%)

(6%)

5,229

30,809

3,493

2,862

631

(13%)

(78%)

(9%)

(7%)

(2%)

30

2

0

0

0

(94%)

(6%)

(0%)

(0%)

(0%)

5,312

3,763

3,412

1,092

2,320

(43%)

(30%)

(27%)

(9%)

(19%)

669

26,693

2,775

2,147

628

(2%)

(89%)

(9%)

(7%)

(2%)

1,063

263

213

107

106

(69%)

(17%)

(14%)

(7%)

(7%)

147

51

164

155

9

(41%)

(14%)

(45%)

(43%)

(2%)

873

407

364

148

216

(53%)

(25%)

(22%)

(9%)

(13%)

1,527

10,907

4,024

2,522

1,502

(9%)

(66%)

(24%)

(15%)

(9%)

3,160

19,587

8,292

1,595

6,697

(10%)

(63%)

(27%)

(5%)

(22%)

51,731

266,206

70,337

30,812

39,525

(13%)

(69%)

(18%)

(8%)

(10%)

23,970

198,006

8,013

4,596

3,417

(10%)

(86%)

(3%)

(2%)

(1%)

75,701

464,212

78,350

35,408

42,942

(12%)

(75%)

(13%)

(6%)

(7%)

7,222
7,392
7,052
9,609
45,965
177,805
39,531
32
12,487
30,137
1,539
362
1,644
16,458
31,039
388,274
229,989
618,263

TABLE 1: (Cont'd)
INNOVATION AND OWNERSHIP STRUCTURE ACROSS COUNTRIES
PANEL D. NUMBER OF PUBLICATIONS
Ultimate Owner
Country

Stand Alone

Conglomerate
Total affiliates

Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Great Britain
Greece
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Republic of Ireland
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Total Europe
United States
Total

Total

Business-Group
Wholly-owned

Minority
Shareholders

262

493

208

121

87

(27%)

(51%)

(22%)

(13%)

(9%)

379

316

553

252

301

(30%)

(25%)

(44%)

(20%)

(24%)

170

1,308

465

58

407

(9%)

(67%)

(24%)

(3%)

(21%)

326

225

166

143

23

(45%)

(31%)

(23%)

(20%)

(3%)

998

3,500

4,660

4,100

560

(11%)

(38%)

(51%)

(45%)

(6%)

4,100

12,551

4,425

741

3,684

(19%)

(60%)

(21%)

(4%)

(17%)

2,672

4,609

1,136

1,059

77

(32%)

(55%)

(13%)

(13%)

(1%)

19

4

2

0

2

(76%)

(16%)

(8%)

(0%)

(8%)

614

398

206

74

132

(50%)

(33%)

(17%)

(6%)

(11%)

257

1,445

634

472

162

(11%)

(62%)

(27%)

(20%)

(7%)

237

87

73

47

26

(60%)

(22%)

(18%)

(12%)

(7%)

17

55

16

15

1

(19%)

(63%)

(18%)

(17%)

(1%)

220

90

187

66

121

(44%)

(18%)

(38%)

(13%)

(24%)

278

517

504

319

185

(21%)

(40%)

(39%)

(25%)

(14%)

1,066

11,648

1,859

298

1,561

(7%)

(80%)

(13%)

(2%)

(11%)

11,615

37,246

15,094

7,765

7,329

(18%)

(58%)

(24%)

(12%)

(11%)

40,362

94,142

7,206

6,075

1,131

(28%)

(66%)

(5%)

(4%)

(1%)

51,977

131,388

22,300

13,840

8,460

(25%)

(64%)

(11%)

(7%)

(4%)

963
1,248
1,943
717
9,158
21,076
8,417
25
1,218
2,336
397
88
497
1,299
14,573
63,955
141,710
205,665

TABLE 2:
PRIVATE AND PUBLIC INNOVATING FIRMS
Number of Firms
Ultimate Owner
Country
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Great Britain
Greece
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Republic of Ireland
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Total Europe
United States
Total

Private

USPTO Patents

Public

Total

Private

764

26

790

(97%)

(3%)

711

33

(96%)

(4%)

443

23

(95%)

(5%)

868

48

(95%)

(5%)

2,229

135

(94%)

(6%)

6,678

150

(98%)

(2%)

4,836

144

(97%)

(3%)

25

7

(78%)

(22%)

3,075

44

(99%)

(1%)

615

28

(96%)

(4%)

504

23

(96%)

(4%)

87

2

(98%)

(2%)

677

29

(96%)

(4%)

1,024

60

(94%)

(6%)

1,407

45

(97%)

(3%)

23,943

797

(97%)

(3%)

37,801

1,491

(96%)

(4%)

61,744

2,288

(96%)

(4%)

744
466
916
2,364
6,828
4,980
32
3,119
643
527
89
706
1,084
1,452
24,740
39,292
64,032

EPO Patents

Public

Total

Private

Public

Total

1,719

722

2,441

6,096

1,126

7,222

(70%)

(30%)

(84%)

(16%)

2,482

2,163

4,466

2,926

(53%)

(47%)

(60%)

(40%)

2,067

1,666

2,859

4,193

(55%)

(45%)

(41%)

(59%)

1,329

4,244

2,319

7,290

(24%)

(76%)

(24%)

(76%)

24,988

2,377

37,746

8,219

(91%)

(9%)

(82%)

(18%)

46,172

61,851

79,498

98,307

(43%)

(57%)

(45%)

(55%)

23,108

8,000

26,594

12,937

(74%)

(26%)

(67%)

(33%)

18

3

(86%)

(14%)

5,580

183

(97%)

(3%)

3,000

6,199

(33%)

(67%)

482

190

(72%)

(28%)

216

33

(87%)

(13%)

687

18

(97%)

(3%)

4,120

1,578

(72%)

(28%)

13,710

6,901

(67%)

(33%)

129,678

96,128

(57%)

(43%)

248,715

408,451

(38%)

(62%)

378,393

504,579

(43%)

(57%)

4,645
3,733
5,573
27,365
108,023
31,108
21
5,763
9,199
672
249
705
5,698
20,611
225,806
657,166
882,972

29

3

(91%)

(9%)

11,652

835

(93%)

(7%)

4,729

25,408

(16%)

(84%)

876

663

(57%)

(43%)

336

26

(93%)

(7%)

1,522

122

(93%)

(7%)

14,010

2,448

(85%)

(15%)

22,251

8,788

(72%)

(28%)

214,983

173,291

(55%)

(45%)

71,879

158,110

(31%)

(69%)

286,862

331,401

(46%)

(54%)

7,392
7,052
9,609
45,965
177,805
39,531
32
12,487
30,137
1,539
362
1,644
16,458
31,039
388,274
229,989
618,263

TABLE 3:
PANEL A. TOP 20 INNOVATING AMERICAN FIRMS
Company name

Firm
public

Group
public

Total Group
Patents USPTO
Patents USPTO

Patents EPO

Publications

Ultimate Owner

Organizational form

Apex

(1)

IBM

Yes

Yes

43,241

43,125

14,319

0

IBM

Conglomerate

Yes

(2)

General Electric

Yes

Yes

22,348

21,830

9,641

93

General Electric

Conglomerate

Yes

(3)

Eastman Kodak

Yes

Yes

17,441

17,157

9,676

3,361

Legg Mason

Conglomerate

Yes

(4)

Motorola

Yes

Yes

17,639

16,380

4,839

2,409

Motorola

Conglomerate

Yes

(5)

Micron Technology

Yes

Yes

13,986

13,986

561

119

Micron Technology

Conglomerate

Yes

(6)

Intel

Yes

Yes

12,936

12,934

2,103

2,285

Intel

Conglomerate

Yes

(7)

Texas Instruments

Yes

Yes

12,695

12,668

3,180

2,989

Texas Instruments

Conglomerate

Yes

(8)

Xerox

Yes

Yes

12,636

12,635

4,402

3,761

Xerox

Conglomerate

Yes

(9)

E.I. du Pont de Nemours

Yes

Yes

11,198

10,700

6,967

9,343

E.I. du Pont de Nemours

Conglomerate

Yes

(10)

3M

Yes

Yes

10,806

10,640

8,796

501

3M

Conglomerate

Yes

(11)

General Motors

Yes

Yes

9,392

9,275

1,643

162

General Motors

Conglomerate

Yes

(12)

Hewlett Packard

Yes

Yes

9,150

9,028

5,181

2,042

Hewlett Packard

Conglomerate

Yes

(13)

Advanced Micro Systems

Yes

Yes

8,466

8,466

685

518

Advanced Micro Systems

Conglomerate

Yes

(14)

Ford Motor

Yes

Yes

7,349

7,321

1,586

2,653

Ford

Conglomerate

Yes

(15)

Procter & Gamble

Yes

Yes

7,522

6,417

8,463

2,534

Procter & Gamble

Conglomerate

Yes

(16)

Microsoft

Yes

Yes

5,888

6,864

2,460

660

Microsoft

Conglomerate

Yes

(17)

Sun Microsystems

Yes

Yes

6,452

5,641

2,193

472

Sun Microsystems

Conglomerate

Yes

(18)

Boeing

Yes

Yes

6,072

4,981

1,384

1,307

Boeing

Conglomerate

Yes

(19)

United Technologies

Yes

Yes

7,151

4,297

2,002

6

United Technologies

Conglomerate

Yes

(20)

Applied Materials

Yes

Yes

3,842

3,842

1,109

0

Applied Materials

Conglomerate

Yes

TABLE 3: (Cont'd)
PANEL B. TOP 20 INNOVATING BRITISH FIRMS
Company name

Firm
public

Group
public

Total Group
Patents USPTO Patents EPO
Patents USPTO

Publications

Ultimate Owner

Organizational form

Apex

Imperial Chemical Industries

Conglomerate

Yes

Rolls Royce

Conglomerate

Yes

(1)

Imperial Chemical Industries

Yes

Yes

4,147

3,178

2,410

0

(2)

Rolls Royce

Yes

Yes

1,288

1,242

805

379

(3)

British Telecommunications

Yes

Yes

1,074

1,073

1,848

0

British Telecommunications

Conglomerate

Yes

(4)

Beecham Group

No

Yes

3,326

743

801

0

GlaxoSmithKline

Conglomerate

No

(5)

BOC

Yes

Yes

692

686

504

4

BOC

Conglomerate

Yes

(6)

British Technology Group

Yes

Yes

590

590

1,201

2

BTG

Conglomerate

Yes

(7)

BP Chemicals

No

Yes

4,917

583

728

0

BP

Conglomerate

No

(8)

Glaxo Group

No

Yes

3,326

506

1,377

0

GlaxoSmithKline

Conglomerate

No

(9)

The British Petroleum

Yes

Yes

4,917

499

531

0

BP

Conglomerate

Yes

(10)

SmithKline Beecham

No

Yes

3,326

440

1,101

5

GlaxoSmithKline

Conglomerate

No

(11)

Johnson Matthey

Yes

Yes

314

300

384

24

Johnson Metthey

Conglomerate

Yes

(12)

Merck Sharp & Dohme

No

Yes

4,408

300

323

107

Merck

Conglomerate

No

(13)

Smiths Industries

No

Yes

530

293

141

0

Smiths Group

Conglomerate

No

(14)

Molins

Yes

Yes

293

287

78

0

Molins

Stand Alone

Yes

(15)

British Gas

No

Yes

274

274

211

0

Centrica

Business-Group, Wholly-Owned

No

(16)

John Wyeth & Brother

No

Yes

1,957

253

77

7

Wyeth

Conglomerate

No

(17)

Renishaw

Yes

Yes

215

214

308

9

Renishaw

Conglomerate

Yes

(18)

ARM

Yes

Yes

272

184

64

12

ARM

Conglomerate

Yes

(19)

BAE Systems

Yes

Yes

490

128

282

0

BAE Systems

Conglomerate

Yes

(20)

Qinetiq

Yes

Yes

245

122

489

0

Qinetiq

Conglomerate

Yes

TABLE 3: (Cont'd)
PANEL C. TOP 20 INNOVATING FRENCH FIRMS
Company name

Firm
public

Group
public

Total Group
Patents USPTO

Patents
USPTO

Patents EPO

Publications

Ultimate Owner

Organizational form

Apex

(1)

L'Oreal

Yes

Yes

4,882

3,135

4,066

0

Nestlé

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

(2)

Thales

Yes

No

2,652

2,604

3,438

0

TSA

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

(3)

Valeo

Yes

Yes

890

586

291

1

Valeo

Conglomerate

Yes

(4)

France Telecom

Yes

Yes

543

525

1,839

1

France Telecom

Conglomerate

Yes

(5)

Thomson Licensing

No

Yes

536

498

2,671

0

Thomson

Conglomerate

No

(6)

Hutchinson

No

Yes

383

259

509

1

Total

Business-Group, Wholly-Owned

No

(7)

Rhone Poulnec Biochimie

No

Yes

6,465

187

6

0

Sanofi Aventis

Conglomerate

No

(8)

Automobiles Peugeot

No

No

219

150

1,177

0

ETS Peugeot-Frères

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

(9)

Valois

No

Yes

203

128

248

0

Aptargroup

Conglomerate

No

(10)

ELA Medical

No

No

245

123

96

0

Fingruppo

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

(11)

Airbus France

No

Yes

565

112

353

9

Lagardere

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

(12)

Nexans

Yes

Yes

131

105

344

0

Nexans

Conglomerate

Yes

(13)

Saint Gobain Glass France

No

Yes

469

102

475

0

Saint Gobain

Business-Group, Wholly-Owned

No

(14)

Kuhn

No

Yes

121

95

279

0

Bucher Industries

Conglomerate

No

(15)

Gaz De France

Yes

Yes

88

88

211

2

Gaz De France

Conglomerate

Yes

(16)

Valeo Vision

No

Yes

890

84

598

0

Valeo

Business-Group, Wholly-Owned

No

(17)

Somfy

No

No

91

82

219

0

J.P.J Holding company

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

(18)

Valeo Equipment Electriques Moteur

No

Yes

890

81

296

0

Valeo

Business-Group, Wholly-Owned

No

(19)

Transgene

Yes

No

67

67

137

331

TSGH

Stand Alone

No

(20)

Gemplus

No

Yes

68

64

325

9

Gemalto

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

TABLE 3: (Cont'd)
PANEL D. TOP 20 INNOVATING GERMAN FIRMS
Firm
public

Group
public

(1) Siemens

Yes

Yes

31,999

29,156

52,566

4,263

(2) Robert Bosch Stiftung

No

No

10,437

10,437

13,832

(3) Bayer

Yes

Yes

11,501

9,969

(4) BASF

Yes

Yes

9,659

(5) Hoechst

No

Yes

(6) Infineon Technologies

Yes

(7) DaimlerChrysler

Company name

Total Group
Patents USPTO Patents EPO
Patents USPTO

Publications

Ultimate Owner

Organizational form

Apex

Siemens

Conglomerate

Yes

10

Robert Bosch Stiftung

Conglomerate

Yes

10,913

0

Bayer

Conglomerate

Yes

9,009

11,331

2,654

BASF

Conglomerate

Yes

6,465

5,364

5,868

2,600

Sanofi Aventis

Conglomerate

No

Yes

4,107

3,914

4,044

0

Infineon Technologies

Conglomerate

Yes

Yes

Yes

1,903

1,894

2,241

7

Daimler

Conglomerate

Yes

(8) Heidelberger Druckmaschinen

Yes

Yes

1,755

1,748

1,138

4

Heidelberger Druckmaschinen

Conglomerate

Yes

(9) Henkel

Yes

Yes

1,565

1,438

4,008

14

Henkel

Stand Alone

Yes

(10) Atecs Mannesmann

No

Yes

1,408

1,408

1,186

0

Vodafone

Stand Alone

No

(11) AGFA Gevaert

Yes

Yes

2,850

1,049

742

51

KBC Group

Conglomerate

No

(12) Porsche

Yes

Yes

1,492

903

26

4

Porsche

Conglomerate

Yes

(13) ZF Friedrichshafen

No

No

881

865

1,031

6

Zeppelin Stiftung

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

(14) Man Roland Druckmaschinen

No

Yes

928

822

1,263

1

Allianz SE

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

(15) Wacker Chemie

Yes

No

922

728

1,019

0

Dr Alexander Wacker

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

(16) BMW

Yes

Yes

708

708

2,866

0

BMW

Conglomerate

Yes

(17) Schering

No

Yes

11,501

552

1,116

2,217

Bayer

Conglomerate

No

(18) Degussa

No

Yes

630

548

894

6

RWE

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

(19) Alfred Teves

No

Yes

698

485

80

0

Continental

Conglomerate

No

(20) Volkswagen

Yes

Yes

1,492

440

0

140

Porsche

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

TABLE 3: (Cont'd)
PANEL E. TOP 20 INNOVATING ITALIAN FIRMS
Firm
public

Group
public

(1) Montedison

No

Yes

396

396

251

88

State of France

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

(2) Biofarmitalia

No

No

336

336

148

0

Biofarmitalia

Stand Alone

Yes

(3) Fiat Auto

No

No

306

237

784

7

Giovanni Agnelli & C.

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

(4) Gruppo Lepetit

No

Yes

6,465

133

67

46

Sanofi Aventis

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

(5) Zambon Group

No

No

108

108

121

1

Zambon

Business-Group, Wholly-Owned

No

(6) GD

No

No

96

96

123

0

GD

Conglomerate

Yes

(7) Indena

No

No

94

93

134

62

IdB Holding

Business-Group, Wholly-Owned

No

(8) SKF Industrie

No

Yes

345

57

115

0

SKF

Conglomerate

No

(9) Arturo Salice

No

No

47

47

125

0

Giorgio E Luicano Salice

Stand Alone

No

(10) Solvay Solexis

No

Yes

253

45

273

2

Solvac

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

(11) Chiesi Farmaceutici

No

No

46

45

116

3

Chiesi Farmaceutici

Conglomerate

Yes

(12) Snamprogetti

No

Yes

163

37

47

91

Eni

Business-Group, Wholly-Owned

No

(13) Claber

No

No

37

37

1

0

Claber

Stand Alone

Yes

(14) Dideco

No

No

245

33

26

11

Fingruppo

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

(15) Magneti Marelli PowerTrain

No

No

306

32

126

0

Giovanni Agnelli & C.

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

(16) Lonati

No

No

66

32

42

0

Lonati

Conglomerate

Yes

(17) Italfarmaco

No

No

34

31

31

41

Italfarmaco Holding

Business-Group, Wholly-Owned

No

(18) Eni

Yes

Yes

163

30

123

5

Eni

Conglomerate

Yes

(19) ACRAF

No

No

30

29

49

0

APO Conerpo

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

(20) Esaote

No

Yes

40

27

9

0

Intesa Sanpaolo

Business-Group, Partly-Owned

No

Company name

Total Group
Patents USPTO Patents EPO
Patents USPTO

Publications

Ultimate Owner

Type of Ownership

Apex

TABLE 4:
COMPARING ORGANIZATIONAL FORM BY COUNTRY FINANCIAL AND LEGAL CONDITIONS
PANEL A. EPO PATENTS
Market Capitalization

Minority Shareholders Protection

U.S. & U.K. vs. Con. Europe

Lower 25%

Top 25%

Lower 25%

Top 25%

United States &
Great Britain

Continental
Europe

20.6%

1.6%

9.3%

1.5%

1.5%

11.2%

Partly-owned / Conglomerates

0.58

0.02

0.13

0.02

0.02

0.17

Standalones / Conglomerates

0.87

0.13

0.20

0.13

0.13

0.20

Partly-owned / Standalones

0.66

0.14

0.65

0.14

0.14

0.84

18.0%

63.1%

51.8%

63.5%

63.5%

46.0%

% Partly-owned Affiliates

% Public

PANEL B. USPTO PATENTS
Market Capitalization

Minority Shareholders Protection

U.S. & U.K. vs. Con. Europe

Lower 25%

Top 25%

Lower 25%

Top 25%

United States &
Great Britain

Continental
Europe

24.1%

0.7%

9.4%

0.6%

0.6%

10.6%

Partly-owned / Conglomerates

0.77

0.01

0.13

0.01

0.01

0.16

Standalones / Conglomerates

1.06

0.26

0.16

0.26

0.26

0.16

Partly-owned / Stand Alones

0.73

0.03

0.80

0.03

0.03

0.99

23.9%

60.4%

51.6%

60.5%

60.5%

45.3%

% Partly-owned Affiliates

% Public

PANEL C. SCIENTIFIC PUBLICATIONS
Market Capitalization

Minority Shareholders Protection

U.S. & U.K. vs. Con. Europe

Lower 25%

Top 25%

Lower 25%

Top 25%

United States &
Great Britain

Continental
Europe

15.1%

0.9%

14.6%

0.8%

0.8%

13.1%

Partly-owned / Conglomerates

0.43

0.01

0.22

0.01

0.01

0.22

Standalones / Conglomerates

1.05

0.44

0.24

0.44

0.44

0.27

Partly-owned / Stand Alones

0.41

0.03

0.92

0.03

0.03

0.81

14.9%

63.5%

58.8%

63.6%

63.6%

61.9%

% Partly-owned Affiliates

% Public

Notes: This table examines the distribution of organizational form by country financial and legal conditions. For Market Capitalization, We rank
countries according to the three-year average ratio of stock-market traded value to GDP, based on Beck et al. (2000, 2007). We use the antidirective index developed by La Porta et al. (1997) to rank countries according to the strength of minority shareholders protection. The businessgroup category includes only partly-owned affiliates.

TABLE 5:
INNOVATION AND OWNERSHIP STRUCTURE ACROSS COUNTRIES AND SELECTED INDUSTRIES: NUMBER OF EPO PATENTS
Pharmaceuticals
Ultimate owner
Country:

Stand Alone

Conglomerate

Biotechnology

Business-Group
Total affiliates Wholly-owned

Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Great Britain
Greece
Italy
Netherlands
Norway

Republic of Ireland
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Total Europe
United States
Total

Total

Stand Alone

Conglomerate

Minority
Shareholders

41

624

2

0

2

(6%)

(94%)

(0%)

(0%)

(0%)

46

11

191

135

56

(19%)

(4%)

(77%)

(54%)

(23%)

31

404

97

4

93

(6%)

(76%)

(18%)

(1%)

(17%)

63

64

0

0

0

(50%)

(50%)

(0%)

(0%)

(0%)

132

1,296

284

115

169

(8%)

(76%)

(17%)

(7%)

(10%)

919

2,053

348

74

274

(28%)

(62%)

(10%)

(2%)

(8%)

190

4,732

229

156

73

(4%)

(92%)

(4%)

(3%)

(1%)

7

0

0

0

0

(100%)

(0%)

(0%)

(0%)

(0%)

420

212

79

5

74

(59%)

(30%)

(11%)

(1%)

(10%)

85

205

24

17

7

(27%)

(65%)

(8%)

(5%)

(2%)

26

5

17

8

9

(54%)

(10%)

(35%)

(17%)

(19%)

11

19

52

52

0

(13%)

(23%)

(63%)

(63%)

(0%)

175

13

44

14

30

(75%)

(6%)

(19%)

(6%)

(13%)

40

57

139

77

62

(17%)

(24%)

(59%)

(33%)

(26%)

134

1,980

538

75

463

(5%)

(75%)

(20%)

(3%)

(17%)

2,320

11,675

2,044

732

1,312

(14%)

(73%)

(13%)

(5%)

(8%)

1,487

7,361

327

222

105

(16%)

(80%)

(4%)

(2%)

(1%)

3,807

19,036

2,371

954

1,417

(15%)

(75%)

(9%)

(4%)

(6%)

Business-Group
Total affiliates Wholly-owned

667
248
532
127
1,712
3,320
5,151
7
711
314
48

82
232
236
2,652
16,039
9,175
25,214

Total
Minority
Shareholders

19

147

3

2

1

(11%)

(87%)

(2%)

(1%)

(1%)

39

11

30

15

15

(49%)

(14%)

(38%)

(19%)

(19%)

27

315

508

22

486

(3%)

(37%)

(60%)

(3%)

(57%)

51

10

6

6

0

(76%)

(15%)

(9%)

(9%)

(0%)

134

522

124

46

78

(17%)

(67%)

(16%)

(6%)

(10%)

446

868

194

12

182

(30%)

(58%)

(13%)

(1%)

(12%)

179

1,457

160

122

38

(10%)

(81%)

(9%)

(7%)

(2%)

-

-

169
80
850
67
780
1,508
1,796
-

101

20

24

1

23

(70%)

(14%)

(17%)

(1%)

(16%)

50

104

10

7

3

(30%)

(63%)

(6%)

(4%)

(2%)

26

1

8

6

2

(74%)

(3%)

(23%)

(17%)

(6%)

0

0

15

15

0

(0%)

(0%)

(100%)

(100%)

(0%)

11

7

6

3

3

(46%)

(29%)

(25%)

(13%)

(13%)

2

31

36

5

31

(3%)

(48%)

(56%)

(8%)

(48%)

28

973

714

22

692

(2%)

(57%)

(42%)

(1%)

(40%)

1,113

4,466

1,838

284

1,554

(15%)

(60%)

(25%)

(4%)

(21%)

1,271

2,971

204

184

20

(29%)

(67%)

(5%)

(4%)

(0%)

2,384

7,437

2,042

468

1,574

(20%)

(63%)

(17%)

(4%)

(13%)

145
164
35

15
24
64
1,715
7,417
4,446
11,863

TABLE 5: (Cont'd)
INNOVATION AND OWNERSHIP STRUCTURE ACROSS COUNTRIES AND SELECTED INDUSTRIES: NUMBER OF EPO PATENTS
Computer Hardware
Ultimate owner
Country:

Stand Alone

Conglomerate

Business-Group
Total affiliates Wholly-owned

Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Great Britain
Italy
Netherlands
Norway

Republic of Ireland
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Total Europe
United States
Total

Telecommunications
Total

Stand Alone

Conglomerate

Minority
Shareholders

9

7

2

2

0

(50%)

(39%)

(11%)

(11%)

(0%)

5

1

3

2

1

(56%)

(11%)

(33%)

(22%)

(11%)

3

3

2

1

1

(38%)

(38%)

(25%)

(13%)

(13%)

19

156

11

2

9

(10%)

(84%)

(6%)

(1%)

(5%)

27

214

176

100

76

(6%)

(51%)

(42%)

(24%)

(18%)

64

1,060

38

11

27

(6%)

(91%)

(3%)

(1%)

(2%)

79

69

18

13

5

(48%)

(42%)

(11%)

(8%)

(3%)

5

11

5

1

4

(24%)

(52%)

(24%)

(5%)

(19%)

1

424

33

21

12

(0%)

(93%)

(7%)

(5%)

(3%)

11

3

0

0

0

(79%)

(21%)

(0%)

(0%)

(0%)

2

0

0

0

0

(100%)

(0%)

(0%)

(0%)

(0%)

1

0

3

0

3

(25%)

(0%)

(75%)

(0%)

(75%)

7

117

9

6

3

(5%)

(88%)

(7%)

(5%)

(2%)

8

15

11

1

10

(24%)

(44%)

(32%)

(3%)

(29%)

241

2,080

311

160

151

(9%)

(79%)

(12%)

(6%)

(6%)

393

3,796

43

40

3

(9%)

(90%)

(1%)

(1%)

(0%)

634

5,876

354

200

154

(9%)

(86%)

(5%)

(3%)

(2%)

Business-Group
Total affiliates Wholly-owned

18
9
8
186
417
1,162
166
21
458
14

2
4
133
34
2,632
4,232
6,864

Total
Minority
Shareholders

34

10

1

1

0

(76%)

(22%)

(2%)

(2%)

(0%)

65

95

93

3

90

(26%)

(38%)

(37%)

(1%)

(1000%)

0

20

3

2

1

(0%)

(87%)

(13%)

(9%)

(13%)

60

3,104

19

3

16

(2%)

(98%)

(1%)

(0%)

(9%)

121

3,852

2,767

2,145

622

(2%)

(57%)

(41%)

(32%)

(149%)

373

6,059

217

129

88

(6%)

(91%)

(3%)

(2%)

(8%)

163

318

89

68

21

(29%)

(56%)

(16%)

(12%)

(13%)

55

193

54

42

12

(18%)

(64%)

(18%)

(14%)

(57%)

0

4,759

180

98

82

(0%)

(96%)

(4%)

(2%)

(18%)

55

45

2

2

0

(54%)

(44%)

(2%)

(2%)

(0%)

5

1

0

0

0

(83%)

(17%)

(0%)

(0%)

(0%)

10

22

16

12

4

(21%)

(46%)

(33%)

(25%)

(100%)

20

2,845

77

70

7

(1%)

(97%)

(3%)

(2%)

(5%)

124

150

14

9

5

(43%)

(52%)

(5%)

(3%)

(15%)

1,085

21,473

3,532

2,584

948

(4%)

(82%)

(14%)

(10%)

(4%)

1,259

12,813

135

102

33

(9%)

(90%)

(1%)

(1%)

(0%)

2,344

34,286

3,667

2,686

981

(6%)

(85%)

(9%)

(7%)

(2%)

45
253
23
3,183
6,740
6,649
570
302
4,939
102

6
48
2,942
288
26,090
14,207
40,297

TABLE 6:
COMPARISON OF MEANS: CONGLOMERATES VS. BUSINESS-GROUPS
Panel A. United States & Great Britain
Conglomerates
Variable

Cong - BG

Business-Groups

Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Weighted Citations per patent

0.111 ***

522,437

1.231

2.654

31,645

1.120

2.292

Weighted Citations per patent - 3 year window

0.065 ***

515,961

1.208

2.689

31,254

1.143

2.464

Weighted Citations per patent - 5 year window

0.084 ***

515,961

1.224

2.635

31,254

1.140

2.342

Weighted Self citations per patent - 5 year window

0.592 ***

515,961

1.567

5.173

31,254

0.975

3.539

Generality

0.012 ***

254,863

0.278

0.282

16,015

0.266

0.278

Originality

0.010 ***

385,689

0.274

0.284

22,985

0.264

0.282

Panel B. Continental Europe
Conglomerates
Variable

Cong - BG

Business-Groups

Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Weighted Citations per patent

-0.169 ***

117,884

0.713

2.015

40,370

0.883

2.050

Weighted Citations per patent - 3 year window

-0.161 ***

116,414

0.772

2.155

39,806

0.932

2.172

Weighted Citations per patent - 5 year window

-0.162 ***

116,414

0.759

2.074

39,806

0.920

2.091

Weighted Self citations per patent - 5 year window

-0.019

116,414

0.598

2.570

39,806

0.617

2.778

Generality

-0.033 ***

47,125

0.231

0.273

18,757

0.264

0.281

Originality

-0.013 ***

75,341

0.226

0.273

27,468

0.239

0.277

Notes: This table reports mean comparison tests for measures of patent quality between conglomerates and partly-owned business group affiliates. The
unit of observation is patents from the USPTO over the period 1969-2007. Self citations are citations where the citing firm cites one of its predecessor
patents. Generality is defined as one minus the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index of the concentration of the citations a patent receives across three-digit
technology fields. Originality is defined as one minus the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index of the concentration of the citations a patent receives across threedigit technology fields. *** indicates that the difference in means in significant at the one percent level.

TABLE 7:
PANEL A: INCLUDING NON-INNOVATING FIRMS
EPO Patents
Ultimate owner
Country:

Stand Alone

Sales ($M)

Business-Group

Conglomerate

Total affiliates Wholly-owned
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Great Britain
Greece
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Republic of Ireland
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Total Europe
United States
Total

Total

Stand Alone

Minority
Shareholders

1,646

4,006

1,570

876

694

(23%)

(55%)

(22%)

(12%)

(10%)

1,503

1,946

3,943

1,356

2,587

(20%)

(26%)

(53%)

(18%)

(35%)

435

4,144

2,473

992

1,481

(6%)

(59%)

(35%)

(14%)

(21%)

1,411

7,732

466

311

155

(15%)

(80%)

(5%)

(3%)

(2%)

2,278

20,676

23,011

11,461

11,550

(5%)

(45%)

(50%)

(25%)

(25%)

26,448

135,220

16,137

5,188

10,949

(15%)

(76%)

(9%)

(3%)

(6%)

5,229

30,809

3,493

2,862

631

(13%)

(78%)

(9%)

(7%)

(2%)

30

2

0

0

0

(94%)

(6%)

(0%)

(0%)

(0%)

5,312

3,763

3,412

1,092

2,320

(43%)

(30%)

(27%)

(9%)

(19%)

669

26,693

2,775

2,147

628

(2%)

(89%)

(9%)

(7%)

(2%)

1,063

263

213

107

106

(69%)

(17%)

(14%)

(7%)

(7%)

147

51

164

155

9

(41%)

(14%)

(45%)

(43%)

(2%)

873

407

364

148

216

(53%)

(25%)

(22%)

(9%)

(13%)

1,527

10,907

4,024

2,522

1,502

(9%)

(66%)

(24%)

(15%)

(9%)

3,160

19,587

8,292

1,595

6,697

(10%)

(63%)

(27%)

(5%)

(22%)

51,731

266,206

70,337

30,812

39,525

(13%)

(69%)

(18%)

(8%)

(10%)

23,970

198,006

8,013

4,596

3,417

(10%)

(86%)

(3%)

(2%)

(1%)

75,701

464,212

78,350

35,408

42,942

(12%)

(75%)

(13%)

(6%)

(7%)

Business-Group

Conglomerate

Total affiliates Wholly-owned
7,222
7,392
7,052
9,609
45,965
177,805
39,531
32
12,487
30,137
1,539
362
1,644
16,458
31,039
388,274
229,989
618,263

Total
Minority
Shareholders

112,331

282,728

184,851

149,687

35,165

(19%)

(49%)

(32%)

(26%)

(6%)

318,930

270,565

281,023

149,940

131,083

(37%)

(31%)

(32%)

(17%)

(15%)

65,155

57,801

110,935

68,324

42,611

(28%)

(25%)

(47%)

(29%)

(18%)

157,591

341,274

94,689

46,669

48,020

(27%)

(57%)

(16%)

(8%)

(8%)

983,506

2,426,349

3,142,541

1,096,336

2,046,205

(15%)

(37%)

(48%)

(17%)

(31%)

3,184,594

4,179,662

1,979,268

745,130

1,234,138

(34%)

(45%)

(21%)

(8%)

(13%)

1,004,820

4,006,807

1,910,309

1,383,107

527,202

(15%)

(58%)

(28%)

(20%)

(8%)

92,488

45,221

31,725

8,216

23,509

(55%)

(27%)

(19%)

(5%)

(14%)

1,251,114

515,623

463,700

262,265

201,436

(56%)

(23%)

(21%)

(12%)

(9%)

692,932

891,044

742,451

512,979

229,472

(30%)

(38%)

(32%)

(22%)

(10%)

273,878

247,768

161,400

89,753

71,647

(40%)

(36%)

(24%)

(13%)

(10%)

326,369

146,663

58,731

50,586

8,145

(61%)

(28%)

(11%)

(10%)

(2%)

934,822

887,995

688,147

201,559

486,588

(37%)

(35%)

(27%)

(8%)

(19%)

211,686

488,545

498,265

274,883

223,381

(18%)

(41%)

(42%)

(23%)

(19%)

204,994

976,556

319,395

131,275

188,120

(14%)

(65%)

(21%)

(9%)

(13%)

9,815,208

15,764,599

10,667,428

5,170,707

5,496,721

(27%)

(43%)

(29%)

(14%)

(15%)

8,811,427

21,377,492

2,763,126

2,147,748

615,378

(27%)

(65%)

(8%)

(7%)

(2%)

18,626,635

37,142,091

13,430,554

7,318,455

6,112,099

(27%)

(54%)

(19%)

(11%)

(9%)

579,910
870,518
233,890
593,554
6,552,396
9,343,524
6,921,935
169,434
2,230,437
2,326,426
683,045
531,762
2,510,965
1,198,495
1,500,944
36,247,235
32,952,045
69,199,280

TABLE 7:
PANEL B: INCLUDING NON-INNOVATING FIRMS - PHARMACEUTICALS AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
EPO Patents
Ultimate owner
Country:

Stand Alone

Sales ($M)

Business-Group

Conglomerate

Total affiliates Wholly-owned
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Great Britain
Greece
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Republic of Ireland
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Total Europe
United States
Total

Total

Stand Alone

Minority
Shareholders

60

771

5

2

3

(7%)

(92%)

(1%)

(0%)

(0%)

85

22

221

150

71

(26%)

(7%)

(67%)

(46%)

(22%)

58

719

605

26

579

(4%)

(52%)

(44%)

(2%)

(42%)

114

74

6

6

0

(59%)

(38%)

(3%)

(3%)

(0%)

266

1,818

408

161

247

(11%)

(73%)

(16%)

(6%)

(10%)

1,365

2,921

542

86

456

(28%)

(61%)

(11%)

(2%)

(9%)

369

6,189

389

278

111

(5%)

(89%)

(6%)

(4%)

(2%)

7

0

0

0

0

(100%)

(0%)

(0%)

(0%)

(0%)

521

232

103

6

97

(61%)

(27%)

(12%)

(1%)

(11%)

135

309

34

24

10

(28%)

(65%)

(7%)

(5%)

(2%)

52

6

25

14

11

(63%)

(7%)

(30%)

(17%)

(13%)

11

19

67

67

0

(11%)

(20%)

(69%)

(69%)

(0%)

186

20

50

17

33

(73%)

(8%)

(20%)

(7%)

(13%)

42

88

175

82

93

(14%)

(29%)

(57%)

(27%)

(30%)

162

2,953

1,252

97

1,155

(4%)

(68%)

(29%)

(2%)

(26%)

3,433

16,141

3,882

1,016

2,866

(15%)

(69%)

(17%)

(4%)

(12%)

2,758

10,332

531

406

125

(20%)

(76%)

(4%)

(3%)

(1%)

6,191

26,473

4,413

1,422

2,991

(17%)

(71%)

(11.9%)

(4%)

(8%)

Business-Group

Conglomerate

Total affiliates Wholly-owned
836
328
1,382
194
2,492
4,828
6,947
7
856
478
83
97
256
305
4,367
23,456
13,621
37,077

Total
Minority
Shareholders

4,048

3,448

104

104

0

(53%)

(45%)

(1%)

(1%)

(0%)

15,034

1,504

16,627

13,342

3,285

(45%)

(5%)

(50%)

(40%)

(10%)

800

2,507

2,510

933

1,576

(14%)

(43%)

(43%)

(16%)

(27%)

3,588

1,289

54

4

50

(73%)

(26%)

(1%)

(0%)

(1%)

17,941

102,218

13,406

3,462

9,944

(13%)

(77%)

(10%)

(3%)

(7%)

56,465

150,206

36,877

2,577

34,300

(23%)

(62%)

(15%)

(1%)

(14%)

8,832

162,238

4,868

4,049

819

(5%)

(92%)

(3%)

(2%)

(0%)

6,172

93

227

0

227

(95%)

(1%)

(3%)

(0%)

(3%)

28,844

3,279

7,471

650

6,822

(73%)

(8%)

(19%)

(2%)

(17%)

10,472

24,164

4,629

3,449

1,180

(27%)

(62%)

(12%)

(9%)

(3%)

1,786

523

1,035

964

71

(53%)

(16%)

(31%)

(29%)

(2%)

7,021

3,349

1,937

431

1,507

(57%)

(27%)

(16%)

(3%)

(12%)

22,921

20,705

5,385

1,124

4,261

(47%)

(42%)

(11%)

(2%)

(9%)

5,524

1,799

5,652

3,338

2,315

(43%)

(14%)

(44%)

(26%)

(18%)

8,161

95,671

8,323

1,298

7,025

(7%)

(85%)

(7%)

(1%)

(6%)

197,609

572,993

109,105

35,725

73,380

(22%)

(65%)

(12%)

(4%)

(8%)

62,035

841,708

33,146

21,696

11,450

(7%)

(90%)

(4%)

(2%)

(1%)

259,643

1,414,701

142,251

57,421

84,830

(14%)

(78%)

(7.8%)

(3%)

(5%)

7,600
33,164
5,817
4,931
133,564
243,548
175,939
6,493
39,594
39,265
3,343
12,308
49,011
12,975
112,155
879,706
936,889
1,816,595

TABLE 7:
PANEL C: INCLUDING NON-INNOVATING FIRMS - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
EPO Patents
Ultimate owner
Country:

Stand Alone

Sales ($M)

Business-Group

Conglomerate

Total affiliates Wholly-owned
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Great Britain
Greece
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Republic of Ireland
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Total Europe
United States
Total

Total

Stand Alone

Minority
Shareholders

34

10

1

1

0

(76%)

(22%)

(2%)

(2%)

(0%)

65

95

93

3

90

(26%)

(38%)

(37%)

(1%)

(36%)

0

20

3

2

1

(0%)

(87%)

(13%)

(9%)

(4%)

60

3,104

19

3

16

(2%)

(98%)

(1%)

(0%)

(1%)

121

3,852

2,767

2,145

622

(2%)

(57%)

(41%)

(32%)

(9%)

373

6,059

217

129

88

(6%)

(91%)

(3%)

(2%)

(1%)

163

318

89

68

21

(29%)

(56%)

(16%)

(12%)

(4%)

-

-

-

-

-

55

193

54

42

12

(18%)

(64%)

(18%)

(14%)

(4%)

0

4,759

180

98

82

(0%)

(96%)

(4%)

(2%)

(2%)

55

45

2

2

0

(54%)

(44%)

(2%)

(2%)

(0%)

5

1

0

0

0

(83%)

(17%)

(0%)

(0%)

(0%)

10

22

16

12

4

(21%)

(46%)

(33%)

(25%)

(8%)

20

2,845

77

70

7

(1%)

(97%)

(3%)

(2%)

(0%)

124

150

14

9

5

(43%)

(52%)

(5%)

(3%)

(2%)

1,085

21,473

3,532

2,584

948

(4%)

(82%)

(14%)

(10%)

(4%)

1,259

12,813

135

102

33

(9%)

(90%)

(1%)

(1%)

(0%)

2,344

34,286

3,667

2,686

981

(6%)

(85%)

(9%)

(7%)

(2%)

Business-Group

Conglomerate

Total affiliates Wholly-owned
45
253
23
3,183
6,740
6,649
570
302
4,939
102
6
48
2,942
288
26,090
14,207
40,297

Total
Minority
Shareholders

243

213

152

152

0

(40%)

(35%)

(25%)

(25%)

(0%)

130

1,687

28

28

0

(7%)

(91%)

(2%)

(2%)

(0%)

63

81

567

567

0

(9%)

(11%)

(80%)

(80%)

(0%)

936

58,720

895

0

895

(2%)

(97%)

(1%)

(0%)

(1%)

1,315

1,599

28,200

21,665

6,535

(4%)

(5%)

(91%)

(70%)

(21%)

5,293

2,710

16,408

15,953

455

(22%)

(11%)

(67%)

(65%)

(2%)

663

66,360

5,328

2,528

2,800

(1%)

(92%)

(7%)

(3%)

(4%)

143

0

138

0

138

(51%)

(0%)

(49%)

(0%)

(49%)

4,567

271

1,067

814

254

(77%)

(5%)

(18%)

(14%)

(4%)

0

360

515

512

3

(0%)

(41%)

(59%)

(59%)

(0%)

572

227

114

95

19

(63%)

(25%)

(12%)

(10%)

(2%)

39

0

0

0

0

(100%)

(0%)

(0%)

(0%)

(0%)

3,813

305

803

110

693

(77%)

(6%)

(16%)

(2%)

(14%)

90

13,899

181

148

33

(1%)

(98%)

(1%)

(1%)

(0%)

193

359

38

38

0

(33%)

(61%)

(6%)

(6%)

(0%)

18,060

146,790

54,432

42,609

11,824

(8%)

(67%)

(25%)

(19%)

(5%)

126,781

773,582

11,632

6,809

4,822

(14%)

(85%)

(1%)

(1%)

(1%)

144,841

920,372

66,064

49,418

16,646

(13%)

(81%)

(6%)

(4%)

(1%)

607
1,845
711
60,551
31,114
24,410
72,350
282
5,905
875
914
39
4,921
14,169
589
219,283
911,994
1,131,277

TABLE A1:
PANEL A: TOP 20 INNOVATING CORPORATIONS - ALL INDUSTRIES
Group name

Country of
ultimate owner

Sales (M, $)

# of
employees

Public

Patents
USPTO

Patents EPO

Publications

# of
subsidiaries

# of patenting
subsidiaries

(1)

IBM

USA

91,400

355,766

Public

43,241

14,576

925

198

31

(2)

Siemens

Germany

110,820

427,000

Public

31,999

55,190

4,357

578

101

(3)

General Electric

USA

163,000

319,000

Public

22,348

10,116

237

1,271

72

(4)

Motorola

USA

15,800

24,568

Public

17,639

5,359

2,462

76

23

(5)

Eastman Kodak

USA

10,301

26,900

Public

17,441

9,954

3,371

30

5

(6)

Micron Technology

USA

5,688

23,500

Public

13,986

561

128

11

3

(7)

Intel

USA

37,600

83,900

Public

12,936

2,104

2,291

31

4

(8)

Texas Instruments

USA

14,300

30,986

Public

12,695

3,212

2,992

24

5

(9)

Xerox

USA

12,200

20,355

Public

12,636

4,403

3,761

156

3

(10)

Bayer

Germany

32,918

180,600

Public

11,501

13,322

2,592

146

44

(11)

E.I. Du Pont De Nemours

USA

29,000

59,000

Public

11,198

7,044

9,398

122

17

(12)

3M

USA

22,900

75,333

Public

10,806

8,971

532

97

13

(13)

Robert Bosch Stiftung

Germany

46,320

271,000

Private

10,437

13,832

10

5

1

(14)

BASF

Germany

69,600

87,413

Public

9,659

11,993

2,691

187

26

(15)

General Motors

USA

207,000

280,000

Public

9,392

2,319

189

260

9

(16)

Hewlett Packard

USA

10,400

172,000

Public

9,150

6,798

3,606

151

46

(17)

Alcatel-Lucent

France

19,400

46,096

Public

8,567

7,272

3,659

138

43

(18)

Advanced Micro Devices

USA

5,649

10,626

Public

8,466

685

518

17

1

(19)

Procter & Gamble

USA

76,500

138,000

Public

7,522

9,138

2,645

221

17

(20)

Ford Motor

USA

160,000

283,000

Public

7,349

3,195

2,807

67

18

TABLE A1:
PANEL B: TOP 20 INNOVATING CORPORATIONS - PHARMACEUTICALS
Sales (M, $)

# of
employees

Public

Patents
USPTO

Patents EPO

Publications

# of
subsidiaries

# of patenting
subsidiaries

Germany

32,918

180,600

Public

11,501

13,322

2,592

146

44

3M

USA

22,900

75,333

Public

10,806

8,971

532

97

13

(3)

BASF

Germany

69,600

87,413

Public

9,659

11,993

2,691

187

26

(4)

Procter & Gamble

USA

76,500

138,000

Public

7,522

9,138

2,645

221

17

(5)

Sanofi Aventis

France

22,300

52,096

Public

6,465

7,369

2,954

137

27

(6)

Pfizer

USA

48,400

98,000

Public

5,314

4,475

5,145

147

28

(7)

Roche

Switzerland

10,900

40,689

Public

3,832

4,940

8,755

72

29

(8)

Johnson & Johnson

USA

53,300

122,200

Public

3,570

2,583

664

186

99

(9)

Abbott Laboratories

USA

22,500

66,663

Public

3,476

2,020

4,619

81

14

(10)

Glaxosmithkline

Great Britain

36,400

76,573

Public

3,326

5,432

515

142

25

(11)

Eli Lilly

USA

15,700

41,500

Public

3,246

2,437

5,526

40

8

(12)

Wyeth

USA

20,400

50,060

Public

1,957

795

55

48

8

(13)

Novartis

Switzerland

12,800

65,257

Public

1,703

3,638

3,330

143

30

(14)

Henkel

Germany

16,900

21,716

Public

1,565

4,155

23

39

10

(15)

Novo Nordisk

Denmark

904

22,590

Public

1,456

3,132

1,137

35

10

(16)

Astrazeneca

Great Britain

28,300

30,986

Public

1,366

2,430

682

76

22

(17)

Schering Plough

USA

18,502

50,000

Public

1,275

1,004

1,243

50

5

(18)

Allergan

USA

3,900

5,389

Public

945

548

132

22

6

(19)

CH Boehringer Sohn Germany

14,300

37,723

Private

744

1,437

1,281

47

18

(20)

BTG

139

95

Public

590

1,201

2

10

1

Group name

Country of
ultimate owner

(1)

Bayer

(2)

Great Britain

TABLE A1:
PANEL C: TOP 10 INNOVATING CORPORATIONS - BIOTECHNOLOGY
Sales (M, $)

# of employees

Public

Patents USPTO

Patents EPO

Publications

# of
subsidiaries

# of patenting
subsidiaries

Germany

32,918

180,600

Public

11,501

13,322

2,592

146

44

E.I. Du Pont De Nemours

USA

29,000

59,000

Public

11,198

7,044

9,398

122

17

(3)

BASF

Germany

69,600

87,413

Public

9,659

11,993

2,691

187

26

(4)

Sanofi Aventis

France

22,300

52,096

Public

6,465

7,369

2,954

137

27

(5)

Pfizer

USA

48,400

98,000

Public

5,314

4,475

5,145

147

28

(6)

Roche

Switzerland

10,900

40,689

Public

3,832

4,940

8,755

72

29

(7)

Abbott Laboratories

USA

22,500

66,663

Public

3,476

2,020

4,619

81

14

(8)

Glaxosmithkline

Great Britain

36,400

76,573

Public

3,326

5,432

515

142

25

(9)

Eli Lilly

USA

15,700

41,500

Public

3,246

2,437

5,526

40

8

(10)

Monsanto

USA

8,563

18,800

Public

2,961

872

2,095

24

9

(11)

Novartis

Switzerland

12,800

65,257

Public

1,703

3,638

3,330

143

30

(12)

Becton Dickinson

USA

6,359

28,018

Public

1,594

1,247

37

27

8

(13)

Novo Nordisk

Denmark

904

22,590

Public

1,456

3,132

1,137

35

10

(14)

Astrazeneca

Great Britain

28,300

30,986

Public

1,366

2,430

682

76

22

(15)

Schering Plough

USA

18,502

50,000

Public

1,275

1,004

1,243

50

5

(16)

Amgen

USA

14,771

17,500

Public

847

333

3,139

17

13

(17)

CH Boehringer Sohn

Germany

14,300

37,723

Private

744

1,437

1,281

47

18

(18)

Human Genome Sciences USA

28

770

Public

499

546

0

2

1

(19)

Applera

USA

2,644

8,210

Private

407

534

72

19

17

(20)

Syngeta

Switzerland

4,659

13,398

Public

341

591

37

53

15

Group name

Country of
ultimate owner

(1)

Bayer

(2)

TABLE A1:
PANEL D: TOP 10 INNOVATING CORPORATIONS - COMPUTER HARDWATE
Sales (M, $)

# of
employees

Public

Patents
USPTO

Patents EPO

Publications

# of
subsidiaries

# of patenting
subsidiaries

USA

91,400

355,766

Public

43,241

14,576

925

198

31

Micron Technology

USA

5,688

23,500

Public

13,986

561

128

11

3

(3)

Intel

USA

37,600

83,900

Public

12,936

2,104

2,291

31

4

(4)

Texas Instruments

USA

14,300

30,986

Public

12,695

3,212

2,992

24

5

(5)

Xerox

USA

12,200

20,355

Public

12,636

4,403

3,761

156

3

(6)

Hewlett Packard

USA

10,400

172,000

Public

9,150

6,798

3,606

151

46

(7)

Advanced Micro Devices

USA

5,649

10,626

Public

8,466

685

518

17

1

(8)

Sun Microsystems

USA

13,900

34,200

Public

6,452

2,252

568

46

7

(9)

LSI

USA

1,982

4,010

Public

3,472

239

6

15

3

(10)

Seagate Technology

USA

12,700

54,000

Public

3,074

200

56

14

4

(11)

Cisco Systems

USA

34,900

61,535

Public

2,785

172

6

50

13

(12)

Broadcom

USA

3,668

5,233

Public

1,781

1,254

115

7

6

(13)

Unisys

USA

5,230

30,000

Public

1,737

194

67

26

13

(14)

Apple Computers

USA

24,000

21,600

Public

1,737

288

159

19

2

(15)

EMC

USA

11,200

31,100

Public

1,274

146

53

64

10

(16)

Lexmark

USA

5,108

14,900

Public

1,022

100

0

10

1

(17)

Dell

USA

57,400

82,200

Public

985

10

4

32

8

(18)

Imation

USA

1,584

2,070

Public

373

95

3

14

2

(19)

National Instruments

USA

661

4,199

Public

353

3

153

8

1

(20)

Diebold

USA

2,906

15,451

Public

215

67

1

25

2

Group name

Country of
ultimate owner

(1)

IBM

(2)

TABLE A1:
PANEL E: TOP 10 INNOVATING CORPORATIONS - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Sales (M, $)

# of
employees

Public

Patents
USPTO

Patents EPO

Publications

# of
subsidiaries

# of patenting
subsidiaries

Germany

110,820

427,000

Public

31,999

55,190

4,357

578

101

Motorola

USA

15,800

24,568

Public

17,639

5,359

2,462

76

23

(3)

Alcatel-Lucent

France

19,400

46,096

Public

8,567

7,272

3,659

138

43

(4)

AT&T

USA

63,100

302,770

Public

5,845

4,999

10

401

12

(5)

Nokia

Finland

44,800

56,896

Public

3,817

3,597

35

38

11

(6)

Ericsson

Sweden

2,385

56,055

Public

3,293

6,393

28

63

17

(7)

Harris Corp

USA

3,500

16,000

Public

1,948

591

3

63

8

(8)

Qualcomm

USA

11,142

15,400

Public

1,887

2,381

352

16

7

(9)

Vodafone

Great Britain

55,810

72,375

Public

1,408

1,186

0

5

1

(10)

BT Group

Great Britain

31,200

108,500

Public

1,074

1,849

213

242

4

(11)

France Telecom

France

33,900

67,784

Public

543

1,880

2

210

5

(12)

ADC Telecommunicatios

USA

1,322

9,050

Public

419

95

0

10

2

(13)

Verizon Communications

USA

88,100

24,200

Public

252

7

15

249

14

(14)

Teleflex

USA

2,647

19,800

Public

229

32

4

75

16

(15)

Qwest Communications

USA

13,900

38,000

Public

215

0

0

17

18

(16)

Deutsche Telekom

Germany

81,300

238,134

Public

171

798

2

231

6

(17)

Time Warner

USA

44,200

92,700

Public

155

47

15

314

20

(18)

3COM

USA

1,300

6,000

Public

155

7

2

15

2

(19)

Telefonica

Spain

50,700

19,508

Public

22

59

8

160

4

(20)

Telecom Italia

Italy

41,900

90,129

Public

17

318

2

73

2

Group name

Country of
ultimate owner

(1)

Siemens

(2)

TABLE A2:
ORGANIC VS. M&A BUSINESS-GROUP GROWTH
Number of Subsidiaries
Ultimate Owner
Country
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Great Britain
Greece
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Republic of Ireland
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Total Europe
United States
Total

Subs Joing by
Organic Growth

USPTO Patents

Subs Joined by M&A

Total Group
Affiliates

218

21

239

(91%)

(9%)

298

24

(93%)

(7%)

209

18

(92%)

(8%)

170

24

(88%)

(12%)

1,093

122

(90%)

(10%)

1,385

118

(92%)

(8%)

1,518

142

(91%)

(9%)

1

3

(25%)

(75%)

416

38

(92%)

(8%)

397

39

(91%)

(9%)

118

10

(92%)

(8%)

34

9

(79%)

(21%)

115

19

(86%)

(14%)

527

53

(91%)

(9%)

517

45

(92%)

(8%)

7,016

685

(91%)

(9%)

4,807

522

(90%)

(10%)

11,823

1,207

(91%)

(9%)

322
227
194
1,215
1,503
1,660
4
454
436
128
43
134
580
562
7,701
5,329
13,030

Subs Joing by
Organic Growth

EPO Patents

Subs Joined by
M&A

Total Group
Affiliates

Subs Joing by
Organic Growth

803

247

1,050

(76%)

(24%)

3,886

225

(95%)

(5%)

1,663

143

(92%)

(8%)

644

43

(94%)

(6%)

18,376

6,132

(75%)

(25%)

16,068

1,990

(89%)

(11%)

16,564

722

(96%)

(4%)

1

3

(25%)

(75%)

1,374

200

(87%)

(13%)

2,518

117

(96%)

(4%)

115

76

(60%)

(40%)

144

9

(94%)

(6%)

254

11

(96%)

(4%)

3,174

347

(90%)

(10%)

13,059

2,592

(83%)

(17%)

78,643

12,857

(86%)

(14%)

93,728

4,978

(95%)

(5%)

172,371

17,835

(91%)

(9%)

4,111
1,806
687

Subs Joined by
M&A

Total Group
Affiliates

3,615

337

3,952

(91%)

(9%)

4,874

230

(95%)

(5%)

3,181

51

(98%)

(2%)

5,104
3,232

728

79

(90%)

(10%)

28,176

7,799

(78%)

(22%)

27,659

2,226

(93%)

(7%)

19,288

5,025

(79%)

(21%)

4

-

-

-

1,574

4,009

720

4,729

(85%)

(15%)

24,508
18,058
17,286

2,635
191
153
265
3,521
15,651
91,500
98,706
190,206

3,575

298

(92%)

(8%)

210

59

(78%)

(22%)

174

12

(94%)

(6%)

462

38

(92%)

(8%)

12,211

403

(97%)

(3%)

17,620

170

(99%)

(1%)

125,782

17,447

(88%)

(12%)

47,117

4,083

(92%)

(8%)

172,899

21,530

(89%)

(11%)

807
35,975
29,885
24,313

3,873
269
186
500
12,614
17,790
143,229
51,200
194,429

TABLE A3:
INNOVATION AND OWNERSHIP STRUCTURE ACROSS COUNTRIES: USPTO PATENTS GRANTED
BETWEEN 1996 AND 2006
Ultimate Owner
Country

Stand Alone

Conglomerate
Total affiliates

Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Great Britain
Greece
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Republic of Ireland
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Total Europe
United States
Total

Total

Business Group
Wholly-owned

Minority
Shareholders

324

373

295

178

117

(33%)

(38%)

(30%)

(18%)

(12%)

161

3,333

1,524

481

1,043

(3%)

(66%)

(30%)

(10%)

(21%)

240

1,439

763

285

478

(10%)

(59%)

(31%)

(12%)

(20%)

536

4,166

157

123

34

(11%)

(86%)

(3%)

(3%)

(1%)

511

3,039

10,992

9,193

1,799

(4%)

(21%)

(76%)

(63%)

(12%)

7,087

35,379

5,625

1,998

3,627

(15%)

(74%)

(12%)

(4%)

(8%)

1,708

8,614

1,893

1,793

100

(14%)

(71%)

(15%)

(15%)

(1%)

15

0

0

0

0

(100%)

(0%)

(0%)

(0%)

(0%)

2,280

812

586

168

418

(62%)

(22%)

(16%)

(5%)

(11%)

166

7,136

455

297

158

(2%)

(92%)

(6%)

(4%)

(2%)

291

117

62

44

18

(62%)

(25%)

(13%)

(9%)

(4%)

52

44

124

117

7

(24%)

(20%)

(56%)

(53%)

(3%)

222

80

129

72

57

(52%)

(19%)

(30%)

(17%)

(13%)

420

1,839

1,272

633

639

(12%)

(52%)

(36%)

(18%)

(18%)

824

6,956

3,412

774

2,638

(7%)

(62%)

(30%)

(7%)

(24%)

14,837

73,327

27,289

16,156

11,133

(13%)

(64%)

(24%)

(14%)

(10%)

75,437

280,464

12,508

10,468

2,040

(20%)

(76%)

(3%)

(3%)

(1%)

90,274

353,791

39,797

26,624

13,173

(19%)

(73%)

(8%)

(6%)

(3%)

992
5,018
2,442
4,859
14,542
48,091
12,215
15
3,678
7,757
470
220
431
3,531
11,192
115,453
368,409
483,862

United States
IBM
43,125 USPTO /
13,523 EPO

100%

100%

100%

Micromuse

Tivoli

FileNet

4 USPTO / 2 EPO

14 USPTO

5 USPTO / 1 EPO

100%

IBM Global Holding
(Netherlands)
100%

IBM Deutschland
(Germany)
246 EPO

United States

General Motors
9,300 USPTO /
1,643 EPO

100%

100%

GM Global
Technology
Operations

SAAB Automobile
(Sweden)

48 USPTO

61 USPTO

100%

Adam Opel
(Germany)
2 USPTO

50%

Metal Casting
Technology
8 USPTO

France

Bouygues Family
19%

Bouygues Group
14 USPTO / 54 EPO

25%

96.5%

83%

Alstom

Bouygues Telecom

COLAS

230 USPTO / 391 EPO

3 USPTO / 45 EPO

18 USPTO / 80 EPO

50%

ABB Alstom Power
40 USPTO

100%

Alstom Power Service

100%

Power Systems MFG (USA)
53 USPTO / 2 EPO

100%

Alstom Power
19 USPTO

100%

Alstom Power Hydro
2 USPTO / 4 EPO

100%

Alstom Power
Energy Recovery
2 USPTO

France
Valeo
610 USPTO / 279 EPO

90%

73%

100%

100%

100%

100%

Valeo Vision
214 USPTO / 609 EPO

Valeo Raytheon (USA)
1 USPTO

Valeo Systemes D'Essuyage
141 USPTO / 222 EPO

Valeo Thermique Moteur
157 USPTO / 233 epo

Valeo Electronique & Systemes De Liaison
1 USPTO / 32 EPO

Valeo Finance
100%

Valeo Sécurité Habitacle
54 USPTO / 245

Germany
Porsche
1,109 USPTO / 740 EPO
51%

25%

Volkswagen

Bertrandt AG

706 USPTO / EPO
99%

50%

30%

Audi

100%

Automobili Lamborghini (Italy)

100%

2 USPTO / 2 EPO

50%

IAV

MAN AG

206 USPTO / 893 EPO

4 USPTO / 23 EPO

MAN Nutzfahrzeuge
95 USPTO / 505 EPO

PMD Technologies

100%

1 USPTO / 1 EPO

MAN Steyr (Austria)
1 USPTO / 10 EPO

100%

MAN Turbo
16 USPTO / 23 EPO

76%

Renk
70 USPTO / 35 EPO

Germany
SAP AG
112 USPTO / 940 EPO

100%

OutlookSoft (USA)
5 USPTO

100%

Khimetrics (USA)
5 USPTO

100%

SAP (USA)
1 USPTO

100%

SAP UK
1 EPO

50%

MDB (France)

96.5%

SAP Systems Integration (Germany)

Switzerland
Novartis
714 USPTO / 1860 EPO

Hoffmann and Oeri families
50%

33%

Roche Holding

100%

F. Hoffmann-La Roche (Switzerland)
21 USPTO / 2374 EPO

100%

Roche Diagnostics (Germany)
241 USPTO / 1762 EPO

58%

Genentech (USA)
1,048 USPTO / 612 EPO

51%

Chugai Pharmaceutical (Japan)
365 USPTO / 591 EPO

12%

Basilea Pharmaceutica (Switzerland)
23 USPTO / 32 EPO

100%

F. Hoffmann-La Roche (USA)
2,590 USPTO / 2 EPO
100%

BioVeris (USA)
6 USPTO / 22 EPO

Switzerland
Nestlé
1,188 USPTO / 314 EPO

30%

100%

76.5%

L’Oreal (France)

Nestec

3,135 USPTO / 115 EPO

1,188 USPTO / 314 EPO

100%

La Roche-Posay Laboratoire
Pharmaceutique (France)
3 USPTO / 6 EPO

Alcon
(Switzerland, USA)
137 USPTO / 18 EPO

100%

100%

Alcon Surgical
(USA)

Alcon Laboratories
(USA)

30 USPTO

374 USPTO / 13 EPO

Italy
Giovanni Agnelli e C.
100%
IFI
70%
IFIL Investments

30%

Fiat Group SpA

100%

Magneti Marelli Holding

100%

90%

CNH Global (Netherlands)

100%

100%

Magneti Marelli Powertrain
51 USPTO / 126 EPO

CNH Belgium
194 EPO

Fiat Auto Holding (Netherlands)

100%

Fiat Auto SpA
243 USPTO / 784 EPO

46%

Iveco-Magrius
2 USPTO / 119 EPO

Sweden
Telefonaktiebolaget
L. M. Ericsson

100%

100%

100%

Ericsson (Sweden)

Ericsson (USA)

Entrisphere (USA)

1,920 USTPO / 5,708 EPO

1,671 USPTO / 640 EPO

1 USPTO / 11 EPO

50%

Sony Ericsson
(Sweden)
57 USPTO / 534 EPO

100%

UIQ Technology
(Sweden)
7 EPO

Netherlands

Koninklijke Philips
Electronics
4,881 USPTO / 23,743 EPO

100%

Avent (UK)
2 EPO

100%

Advanced Technology
Laboratories (USA)
74 USPTO

100%

Philips Electronics
North America

50%

EMGO (Belgium)

732 USPTO

100%

100%

ADAC Laboratories (USA)

Color Kinetics (USA)

53 USPTO / 2 EPO

46 USPTO / 31 EPO

Finland
Nokia
3,727 USPTO /
6,388 EPO

100%

Vertu (UK)
4 USPTO / 13 EPO

100%

Navteq North
America
51 USPTO

63%

100%

100%

Symbian (UK)

Nokia (USA)

Intellisync (USA)

2 USPTO / 21 EPO

51 USPTO / 95 EPO

7 USPTO

100%

Symbian
Software (UK)
31 EPO

