                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                   PORTFOLIO CHOICE IN RETIREMENT:
 HEALTH RISK AND THE DEMAND FOR ANNUITIES, HOUSING, AND RISKY ASSETS

                                        Motohiro Yogo

                                      Working Paper 15307
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w15307

                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge MA 02138
                                  September 2009


This research was supported by the Steven H. Sandell Grant in Retirement Research, funded by
the Center for Retirement Research at Boston College and the U.S. Social Security
Administration, and a pilot grant from the University of Pennsylvania, funded by the National
Institutes of Health-National Institute on Aging (grant P30-AG12836), the Boettner Center for
Pensions and Retirement Research, the National Institutes of Health-National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development Population Research Infrastructure Program (grant R24-
HD044964), and the Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research. The Health and Retirement
Study is sponsored by the National Institute on Aging (grant U01-AG009740) and is conducted
by the University of Michigan. For comments and discussions, I thank Andrew Abel, John
Ameriks, Jeffrey Brown, David Chapman, Jo˜ao Cocco, Du Du, Eric French, Matthew
Greenblatt, Hanno Lustig, Olivia Mitchell, Radek Paluszynski, Ricardo Reis, Pascal St-Amour,
Stephen Zeldes, and Michael Ziegelmeyer. I also thank seminar participants at Boston University;
Duke University; Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and New York; Imperial College
London; INSEAD; London Business School; London School of Economics; New York
University; Nomura Securities; Northwestern University; Princeton University; University of
California Berkeley, Hawaii at M¯anoa, Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Michigan, Pennsylvania,
and Tokyo; UCLA; Yale University; 2008 Michigan Retirement Research Center Research
Workshop; 2008 Texas Finance Festival; 2008 Summer Real Estate Symposium; 2008 SED
Annual Meeting; 2008 NBER Summer Institute Capital Markets and Economy Workshop; 2008
Joint Statistical Meetings; 2008 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology Finance
Symposium; 2009 AFA Annual Meeting; 2009 SIFR-Netspar Conference on Pension Plans and
Product Design; 2009 Annual Joint Conference of Retirement Research Consortium; 2009 NBER
Household Finance Working Group Meeting; 2009 Q-Group Fall Seminar; 2010 Conference on
Household Heterogeneity and Household Finance; and 2010 NTA Annual Conference on
Taxation. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2009 by Motohiro Yogo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Portfolio Choice in Retirement: Health Risk and the Demand for Annuities, Housing, and
Risky Assets
Motohiro Yogo
NBER Working Paper No. 15307
September 2009, Revised May 2016
JEL No. D91,G11,I10,J26

                                          ABSTRACT

In a life-cycle model, a retiree faces stochastic health depreciation and chooses consumption,
health expenditure, and the allocation of wealth between bonds, stocks, and housing. The model
explains key facts about asset allocation and health expenditure across health status and age. The
portfolio share in stocks is low overall and is positively related to health, especially for younger
retirees. The portfolio share in housing is negatively related to health for younger retirees and
falls significantly in age. Finally, out-of-pocket health expenditure as a share of income is
negatively related to health and rises in age.


Motohiro Yogo
Department of Economics
Princeton University
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
myogo@princeton.edu
1.   Introduction

   As a large cohort of baby boomers enters retirement, there is growing ﬁscal pressure to
reduce the beneﬁts promised by Social Security and Medicare, and the impact of such re-
forms on private saving and the demand for health care remains unclear. At the same time,
there is growing availability of ﬁnancial products like annuities, reverse mortgages, Medi-
gap insurance, and long-term care insurance that supplement or replace public insurance.
Despite enormous practical interest, there is relatively little academic work on consumption
and portfolio decisions in retirement when households face health risk, compared with a
large literature that studies consumption and portfolio decisions in the working phase when
households face labor-income risk. This paper is an attempt to ﬁll this gap in the life-cycle
literature.
   I develop a life-cycle model in which a retiree faces stochastic health depreciation, which
aﬀects her marginal utility of consumption and her life expectancy. The retiree receives
income and chooses consumption, health expenditure, and the allocation of wealth between
bonds, stocks, and housing to maximize expected lifetime utility. The life-cycle model takes
three important inputs, which are estimated for single retirees, aged 65 or older, in the
Health and Retirement Study. The ﬁrst input is health transition probabilities, which are
estimated from self-reported health status, mortality, and various measures of health care
utilization. The second input is health insurance coverage (including Medicare), which are
estimated from the ratio of out-of-pocket to total health expenditure. The third input is
retirement income from Social Security and deﬁned-beneﬁt pension plans.
    Given these inputs, the preference and health parameters are calibrated to explain the
observed variation in asset allocation and health expenditure across health status and age.
The portfolio share in stocks is low overall and is positively related to health, especially for
younger retirees. The portfolio share in housing is negatively related to health for younger
retirees and falls signiﬁcantly in age. Since stocks account for a small share of ﬁnancial and
housing wealth, the portfolio share in bonds (net of mortgages and home equity loans) is
essentially the mirror image of the portfolio share in housing. That is, the portfolio share
in bonds is positively related to health for younger retirees and rises signiﬁcantly in age.
Finally, out-of-pocket health expenditure as a share of income is negatively related to health
and rises in age.
   These results are primarily driven by three economic mechanisms. The ﬁrst mechanism
is the horizon eﬀect in portfolio choice, which is that younger investors should invest a
higher share of their liquid wealth in risky assets (Bodie et al., 1992). The horizon eﬀect
explains why healthier retirees, who have a longer life expectancy, invest a higher share


                                               2
of their ﬁnancial wealth in stocks instead of bonds. The horizon eﬀect also explains why
retirees substitute from risky housing to safe bonds as they age. The second mechanism
is preferences that imply that non-health consumption and health are substitutes. This
explains why younger retirees in worse health have a higher portfolio share in housing,
which implies higher consumption of housing services. The third mechanism is decreasing
returns to health investment. This explains why out-of-pocket health expenditure is higher
for retirees in worse health, for whom the marginal product of health investment is higher.
    Although this paper is primarily about portfolio choice, the facts about health expen-
diture are also important for two reasons. First, out-of-pocket health expenditure is the
only measure of consumption expenditure that is available in the Health and Retirement
Study. Therefore, the facts about health expenditure impose additional discipline on models
of portfolio choice in retirement, just as the hump-shaped consumption proﬁle imposes dis-
cipline on models of portfolio choice during the working phase (Cocco et al., 2005). Second,
health expenditure can be thought of as an investment in “health capital”, just as bonds
and stocks are investments in ﬁnancial wealth, and housing expenditure is an investment
in housing wealth. Therefore, it is natural to think about health expenditure as part of a
bigger portfolio decision between ﬁnancial and housing wealth versus health capital.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the life-cycle model
of consumption and portfolio choice in retirement. Section 3 estimates the key inputs and
outputs of the life-cycle model using the Health and Retirement Study. Section 4 calibrates
and solves the life-cycle model to explain key facts about asset allocation and health expen-
diture across health status and age. Section 5 uses the calibrated model to examine how
asset allocation would respond to a one-time reduction in Social Security beneﬁts. Section 6
concludes with a discussion of open issues and extensions for future work.


2.    Life-cycle model of consumption and portfolio choice in retirement

     This section presents a life-cycle model of consumption and portfolio choice in retire-
ment. The basic structure of the model can be summarized as follows. An individual enters
retirement with an initial endowment of ﬁnancial wealth, housing wealth, and health. In
each period while alive, the retiree receives income and faces stochastic health depreciation,
which aﬀects her marginal utility of consumption and her life expectancy. In response to
the health shock, the retiree chooses consumption, housing expenditure, health expenditure,
and the allocation of ﬁnancial wealth between bonds and stocks.
   The life-cycle model in this paper allows health expenditure and the allocation of wealth
between bonds, stocks, and housing to all respond endogenously to health shocks. Indi-


                                              3
vidual features of the model have appeared in the literature. For example, several papers
allow health expenditure to respond endogenously to health shocks, but they do not model
housing or portfolio choice (Picone et al., 1998; Hugonnier et al., 2013). Several papers
study housing and portfolio choice during the working phase when households face labor-
income risk, instead of retirement when they face health risk (Cocco, 2005; Hu, 2005; Yao
and Zhang, 2005). Finally, several papers study portfolio choice between bonds, stocks, and
annuities (but not housing) in the context of a life-cycle model in which health expenditure
and mortality are exogenous (Edwards, 2008; Horneﬀ et al., 2009; Pang and Warshawsky,
2010; Inkmann et al., 2011; Koijen et al., 2016).

2.1. Housing expenditure

   The retiree enters each period t with an initial housing stock Dt−1 . The level of the
housing stock incorporates both the size and the quality of the home. Housing depreciates
at a constant rate δ ∈ [0, 1) in each period. After depreciation, the retiree chooses housing
expenditure Et , which can be negative in the case of downsizing. Whenever housing expen-
diture deviates from zero, the retiree pays a transaction cost of τ Pt Dt in period t + 1, where
τ ∈ [0, 1) and Pt is the home price. The presence of a ﬁxed cost, which is proportional to the
value of the existing housing stock, makes housing expenditure lumpy. The accumulation
equation for housing is

                                   Dt = (1 − δ)Dt−1 + Et .                                  (1)

   Housing is a unique asset that serves a dual purpose. On the one hand, the retiree enjoys
a utility ﬂow from living in a home. On the other hand, housing is a form of savings, which
the retiree can use for consumption or health expenditure while alive and bequeath upon
death. For example, an individual that develops a physical disability can sell her home and
use the proceeds to pay for nursing home care (Davidoﬀ, 2010).

2.2. Health expenditure

   Analogous to housing, health is modeled as an accumulation process (Grossman, 1972).
The retiree enters each period t with initial health capital Ht−1 . Health depreciates at a
stochastic rate ωt ≤ 1 in each period t. As discussed in Section 3.2, the distribution of ωt
depends on the state variables in period t, including previous health. For example, whether
you get a heart attack today is purely chance, but the likelihood of getting a heart attack
depends on whether you have a history of heart disease. The retiree dies if ωt = 1, that is, if



                                               4
her health depreciates entirely. The maximum possible lifetime is T , so that ωT +1 = 1 with
certainty.
    After health depreciation is realized in period t, the retiree chooses health expenditure
It ≥ 0 if still alive. Health expenditure is an investment in the sense that its impact on health
can persist for more than one period. Health investment is irreversible in the sense that the
retiree cannot reduce her health through negative expenditure. Irreversibility of investment
is a key economic feature that makes health fundamentally diﬀerent from ﬁnancial assets or
housing.
   The accumulation equation for health is

                         Ht = (1 − ωt )Ht−1 + ψ[(1 − ωt )Ht−1 ]1−ψ Itψ .                      (2)

This speciﬁcation for health production has two key features that are suitable for empirical
analysis. First, health production is homogeneous in health capital. Second, health invest-
ment is subject to decreasing returns, captured by the parameter ψ ∈ (0, 1] (Ehrlich and
Chuma, 1990). Decreasing returns is a simple way to model the fact that treatment in poor
health has a much larger impact on health than preventive care in good health.

2.3. Budget and portfolio constraints

   The retiree receives income Yt from Social Security and deﬁned-beneﬁt pension plans in
period t if still alive. Let Wt denote cash-on-hand, which is the sum of beginning-of-period
ﬁnancial wealth and income in period t. The retiree uses cash-on-hand for consumption Ct ,
housing expenditure Et at the relative price Pt , and health expenditure It at the relative price
Qt . As discussed in Section 3.2, the relative price of health care includes health insurance
coverage.
    Wealth remaining after consumption as well as housing and health expenditures can be
saved in bonds and stocks. Let Ab,t and As,t denote savings in bonds and stocks in period t,
respectively. Total savings is
                               
                                       Ai,t = Wt − Ct − Pt Et − Qt It .                       (3)
                             i={b,s}


Let Ri,t+1 denote the gross rate of return on asset i from period t to t + 1. Let ½{Et =0} denote
an indicator function that is equal to one if housing expenditure deviates from zero in period




                                                   5
t. The intertemporal budget constraint is
                                       
                          Wt+1 =             Ri,t+1 Ai,t − τ ½{Et =0} Pt Dt + Yt+1 .                 (4)
                                   i={b,s}


       Deﬁne total wealth as the sum of cash-on-hand and housing wealth:

                                         wt = Wt + (1 − δ)Pt Dt−1 .                                   (5)

Deﬁne savings in housing wealth as Ah,t = Pt Dt . Combined with the accumulation equation
for housing (1), total savings is
                                         
                                                   Ai,t = wt − Ct − Qt It .                           (6)
                                       i={b,s,h}


Deﬁne the gross rate of return on housing from period t to t + 1 as

                                                         (1 − δ)Pt+1
                                            Rh,t+1 =                 .                                (7)
                                                             Pt

The intertemporal budget constraint is
                              
                    wt+1 =             Ri,t+1 Ai,t + (Rh,t+1 − τ ½{Et =0} )Ah,t + Yt+1 .             (8)
                             i={b,s}



2.3.1. Bonds

    Bonds have a constant gross rate of return Rb,t+1 = Rb . The average real return on the
one-year Treasury bond, deﬂated by the consumer price index for all items less medical care,
is 2.5% from 1958 to 2008. Therefore, the bond return is calibrated to Rb = 1.025 annually.
   For tractability, a mortgage or a home equity loan is modeled as a short position in bonds.
Therefore, only the net bond position (i.e., bonds minus mortgage and home equity loans)
is determinate in the life-cycle model. In Section 4, the simulated model is matched to the
net bond position in the data. The retiree can borrow up to Ab,t ≥ −λAh,t in each period
t.1 The borrowing limit is calibrated to λ = 0.5 based on the evidence for older households’s
ability to borrow from home equity (Sinai and Souleles, 2008).
   1
     This speciﬁcation has a potential drawback that a retiree at the borrowing constraint must inject ad-
ditional cash when the home price falls. However, the results in this paper are robust to an alternative
speciﬁcation Ab,t ≥ −λP1 Dh,t , in which the borrowing limit does not depend on the current home price.




                                                          6
2.3.2. Stocks

   Stocks have a stochastic gross rate of return

                                       Rs,t+1 = Rs s,t+1 ,                                 (9)

where log(s,t+1 ) ∼ N(−σs2 /2, σs2 ) is independently and identically distributed. The real
return on the Center for Research in Securities Prices value-weighted stock index, deﬂated
by the consumer price index for all items less medical care, has a mean of 7% and a standard
deviation of 18% from 1958 to 2008. Based on these estimates, stock returns are calibrated
with Rs = 1.065 and σs = 0.18 annually. An equity premium of 4%, which is slightly lower
than its historical estimate of 4.5%, is a common assumption in the life-cycle literature (e.g.,
Cocco et al., 2005). The retiree cannot short stocks, so that she faces the portfolio constraint
As,t ≥ 0 in each period t.

2.3.3. Housing

   Housing has a stochastic gross rate of return

                                       Rh,t+1 = Rh h,t+1 ,                                (10)

where log(h,t+1 ) ∼ N(−σh2 /2, σh2 ) is independently and identically distributed. Equation
(7) then determines the dynamics of the home price, where the initial level is normalized
to P1 = 1. Based on equation (7), the housing return is estimated using the Oﬃce of
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight price index and a depreciation rate of 1.14% for private
residential ﬁxed assets. The real housing return, deﬂated by the consumer price index for all
items less medical care, has a mean of 0.4% and a standard deviation of 3.5% from 1976 to
2008. Therefore, housing returns are calibrated with Rh = 1.004 and σh = 0.035 annually.
The transaction cost is calibrated to τ = 0.08, following Cocco (2005).

2.4. Objective function

   If the retiree is alive in period t, she has utility ﬂow from consumption, housing, and
health. Her utility ﬂow over consumption and housing is given by the Cobb-Douglas function.
Her utility ﬂow over non-health consumption and health is given by the constant elasticity
of substitution function:

                                                                  1−1/ρ 1/(1−1/ρ)
                 U(Ct , Dt , Ht ) = [(1 − α)(Ct1−φ Dtφ )1−1/ρ + αHt    ]            .      (11)



                                                7
The parameter φ ∈ (0, 1) is the utility weight on housing, and α ∈ (0, 1) is the utility weight
on health. The parameter ρ ∈ (0, 1] is the elasticity of substitution between non-health
consumption and health.
   If the retiree dies in period t, she bequeathes ﬁnancial and housing wealth. Her utility
ﬂow over the bequest is
                                                                    φ
                                                             φ
                                  G(wt , Pt ) = wt                        .                         (12)
                                                         (1 − φ)Pt

This speciﬁcation is the indirect utility function that corresponds to a Cobb-Douglas function
over ﬁnancial wealth and housing (i.e., Wt1−φ Dtφ ). It captures the notion that ﬁnancial wealth
and housing are not perfectly substitutable forms of bequest (see Yao and Zhang (2005) for
a similar approach).
    Let ½{ωt+1 =1} denote an indicator function that is equal to one if the retiree dies in period
t + 1, and let ½{ωt+1 =1} = 1 − ½{ωt+1 =1} denote its complement. The objective function is
deﬁned recursively as

     Jt ={(1 − β)U(Ct , Dt , Ht )1−1/σ
          + βEt [½{ωt+1 =1} Jt+1
                              1−γ
                                  + ½{ωt+1 =1} ν γ G(wt+1 , Pt+1 )1−γ ](1−1/σ)/(1−γ) }1/(1−1/σ) ,   (13)


                               +1 = 0. The parameter β ∈ (0, 1) is the subjective discount
where the terminal value is JT1−γ
factor. The parameter σ > 0 is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, and γ > 1 is
relative risk aversion (Epstein and Zin, 1991). The parameter ν ≥ 0 determines the strength
of the bequest motive.
  If ρ < σ, non-health consumption and health are complements in the sense that the
marginal utility of non-health consumption rises in health. For example, the marginal utility
of a ﬁne meal could be low if you have diabetes. If ρ > σ, non-health consumption and
health are substitutes. For example, the marginal utility of a massage could be high if you
have a physical disability. The degree of complementarity between non-health consumption
and health could also capture changes in the composition of consumption with respect to
health.

2.5. Homogeneity in total wealth

   In addition to age, the state variables of the life-cycle model are health, the housing
stock, the home price, and total wealth. However, homogeneity of the objective function
allows me to eliminate total wealth as a state variable. The state variables of the life-cycle



                                                     8
model are redeﬁned as their values relative to total wealth:

                                              (1 − ωt )Qt Ht−1
                                         ht =                  ,                                   (14)
                                                    wt
                                              (1 − δ)Pt Dt−1
                                         dt =                .                                     (15)
                                                    wt

   Homogeneity is a common assumption in the life-cycle literature, which signiﬁcantly
simpliﬁes solution of the model. Three additional parametric assumptions are necessary to
preserve homogeneity. First, the distribution of health depreciation ωt+1 depends on present
health only through ht . Second, health insurance coverage, which enters the relative price of
health care, depends on present health only through ht . Finally, the distribution of income
relative to total wealth, yt+1 = Yt+1 /wt+1 , depends on present health only through ht . In
Section 3.2, health transition probabilities, health insurance coverage, and retirement income
are estimated using the Health and Retirement Study.
   Homogeneity implies the following transformed consumption and portfolio-choice prob-
lem. Let Δwt+1 = wt+1 /wt . In each period t, the retiree chooses ct = Ct /wt , it = Qt It /wt ,
and ai,t = Ai,t /wt for i = {b, s, h} to maximize her objective function:

           Jt           1−1/σ
    jt =      ={(1 − β)ut
           wt
                         1−γ
                + βEt [Δwt+1 (½{ωt+1 =1} jt+1
                                           1−γ
                                               + ½{ωt+1 =1} ν γ gt+1              }
                                                                 1−γ (1−1/σ)/(1−γ) 1/(1−1/σ)
                                                                     )]                      ,     (16)

where

                 U(Ct , Dt , Ht )
            ut =                    = ct V t ,                                                     (17)
                       wt
                                    φ(1−1/ρ)                             1−1/ρ 1/(1−1/ρ)
                               ah,t                    ht [1 + ψ(it /ht )ψ ]
            Vt = (1 − α)                        +α                                             ,   (18)
                               P t ct                         Qt ct
                                               φ
                 G(wt , Pt )             φ
            gt =             =                     .                                               (19)
                   wt               (1 − φ)Pt

Equations (6) and (8) imply that the intertemporal budget constraint is

                Δwt+1 =(1 − yt+1 )−1 [Rb,t+1 (1 − ct − it ) + (Rs,t+1 − Rb,t+1 )as,t
                            + (Rh,t+1 − Rb,t+1 − τ ½{ah,t =dt } )ah,t ].                          (20)




                                                     9
The portfolio constraints are

                                 ct + it + as,t + (1 − λ)ah,t ≤ 1,                      (21)
                                           ai,t ≥ 0 for i = {s, h}.                     (22)

The law of motion for the state variables is
                                                           ψ 
                                   (1 − ωt+1 )Qt+1 ht       it
                          ht+1   =                     1+ψ        ,                     (23)
                                       Qt Δwt+1             ht
                                   Rh,t+1 ah,t
                          dt+1 =               ,                                        (24)
                                    Δwt+1

and equation (7) for the home price.


3.   Calibrating the life-cycle model with the Health and Retirement Study

   The Health and Retirement Study is a panel survey designed to study the health and
wealth dynamics of the elderly in the United States. The data consist of eight waves,
covering every two years between 1992 and 2006. This section explains how the data are
used to measure the key inputs and outputs of the life-cycle model. Appendix A contains
details on the construction of the relevant variables for my analysis.

3.1. Description of the sample

    My sample consists of primary respondents who were born 1891–1940, aged 65 or older,
single (including widowed or divorced), and retired (including disabled or out of the labor
force) at the time of interview. The sample includes the Study of Assets and Health Dynamics
Among the Oldest Old (born before 1924), the Children of Depression (born 1924–1930),
and the initial cohort of the Health and Retirement Study (born 1931–1941). Respondents
must have both positive income and net worth to be included in the sample, which eliminates
about 15% of the otherwise eligible.
   The life-cycle model in this paper applies not only to single respondents, but also to
previously married respondents once they are widowed or divorced. Therefore, previously
excluded respondents may enter my sample as they are widowed or divorced. My sample
consists of both females and males. The life-cycle model is calibrated separately for females
and males because they have diﬀerent life expectancies. To economize on the presentation,
the main text focuses on the results for females, and Appendix B presents additional results
for males.


                                                   10
   The Health and Retirement Study continues to interview respondents that enter nursing
homes. However, any respondent that enters a nursing home receives a zero sampling weight
because these weights are based on the non-institutionalized population of the Current Pop-
ulation Survey. Therefore, the use of sampling weights would lead me to underestimate the
cost of nursing home care, which accounts for a signiﬁcant share of out-of-pocket health
expenditure in old age. Therefore, I do not use sampling weights in my analysis.
   The primary measure of health for my study is self-reported general health status. At
each interview, the respondent’s health can be either poor, fair, good, very good, or excel-
lent. Insofar as health enters the utility function, self-reported health status is a relevant
measure of health for calibrating the life-cycle model. Self-reported health status is also
highly correlated with doctor-diagnosed health problems, diﬃculty with activities of daily
living, health care utilization, and future mortality (Wallace and Herzog, 1995).

3.2. Measuring the inputs of the life-cycle model

   The key inputs of the life-cycle model are health transition probabilities, the relative
price of health care, and retirement income.

3.2.1. Health transition probabilities

   Let h∗t denote self-reported health status at each interview. Health status is modeled as
a function of unobserved health ht through the following response function (see Wagstaﬀ
(1986) for a similar approach):
                                 ⎧
                                 ⎪
                                 ⎪ 0 Dead           if ht < h1
                                 ⎪
                                 ⎪
                                 ⎪
                                 ⎪                  if h1 ≤ ht < h2
                                 ⎪
                                 ⎪ 1 Poor
                                 ⎪
                                 ⎨ 2 Fair           if h2 ≤ ht < h3
                           h∗t =                                    .                        (25)
                                 ⎪
                                 ⎪ 3 Good           if h3 ≤ ht < h4
                                 ⎪
                                 ⎪
                                 ⎪
                                 ⎪                  if h4 ≤ ht < h5
                                 ⎪
                                 ⎪ 4 Very good
                                 ⎪
                                 ⎩ 5 Excellent      if h5 ≤ ht

An ordered probit model is used to estimate how future health status at two years from
the present interview depends on present health status, age, ﬁnancial and housing wealth,
measures of health care utilization, vigorous physical activity, smoking, and birth cohort. The
measures of health care utilization are interacted with health status to allow for the possibility
that the marginal product of health care varies with health. I control for ﬁnancial and housing
wealth since the relevant measure of health for the life-cycle model is the variation in health
that is independent of total wealth (i.e., ht ). Finally, all of these variables are interacted


                                               11
with a male dummy.
   Column (1) of Table 1 reports the estimated coeﬃcients and t-statistics for the ordered
probit model. The sign of the coeﬃcients can be interpreted as the direction of the marginal
eﬀects for the likelihood of the extreme health outcomes, namely death and excellent health.
Present health status is a statistically signiﬁcant predictor of future health status. The
negative coeﬃcients for poor and fair health imply that these respondents are more likely to
die prior to the next interview, compared with those in good health. Conversely, the positive
coeﬃcients for very good and excellent health imply that these respondents are less likely
to die. The negative coeﬃcient on age implies that older respondents are more likely to die.
The positive coeﬃcient on ﬁnancial and housing wealth implies that wealthier respondents
are less likely to die, holding everything else constant.
   Measures of health care utilization that are positive predictors of future health status for
respondents in good health are dentist visits and cholesterol tests. Doctor visits, home health
care, nursing home stays, outpatient surgery, and prescription drugs predict future health
status with negative coeﬃcients, potentially due to unobserved heterogeneity in health. For
doctor visits, dentist visits, nursing home stays, outpatient surgery, and prescription drugs,
the coeﬃcients on their interaction with poor health are positive, which implies that health
care has a larger impact on the future health of respondents that are already in poor health.
In addition to health care utilization, I examine vigorous physical activity and smoking as
non-monetary measures of health investment. Vigorous physical activity is a positive and
statistically signiﬁcant predictor of future health status, while smoking is a negative and
statistically signiﬁcant predictor. A joint Wald test for measures of health care utilization,
vigorous physical activity, smoking, and their interaction with health status rejects strongly.
Taken together, this evidence suggests that the choices over health investment have an
important impact on future health.
   Respondents in poor health are more likely to use health care. Therefore, the coeﬃcients
for health care utilization are potentially downward biased, insofar as health care utilization
is negatively correlated with unobserved heterogeneity in health. To investigate this possi-
bility, column (2) of Table 1 introduces doctor-diagnosed health problems and diﬃculty with
activities of daily living as additional measures of present health. These additional measures
are statistically signiﬁcant predictors of future health status, implying that present health
status does not fully capture heterogeneity in health. The coeﬃcients for health care utiliza-
tion in column (2) are generally higher than those in column (1). For example, prescription
drugs have a statistically insigniﬁcant coeﬃcient of 3.83 in column (2), which is higher than
the statistically signiﬁcant coeﬃcient of −12.93 in column (1).
   The estimates from column (1) of Table 1 are used to predict the health transition prob-


                                              12
abilities for single females, who were born 1931–1940, have the average ﬁnancial and housing
wealth for her cohort and age, have not used health care in the two years prior to the inter-
view, and does not regularly participate in vigorous physical activity and smokes at the time
of interview. In other words, I estimate the counterfactual of how health status transitions
from the present interview to the next in the absence of health investment. Figure 1 reports
the predicted transition probabilities for females by present health status and age. The ﬁgure
shows that health status is persistent and that present health is an important predictor of
future mortality. Death is the most likely outcome for females in poor health at any given
age, while it is the least likely outcome for those in excellent health.
   Let Pr(h∗t+1 = j|h∗t = i) denote the predicted transition probability from health status i
in period t to health status j in period t + 1 in the absence of health investment. Health
depreciation in period t + 1 is calibrated as
                                  ⎧
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎪ 0          with Pr(h∗t+1 = 0|h∗t = i)
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎪            with Pr(h∗t+1 = 1|h∗t = i)
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎪ h1 /hi
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎨ h /h
                                      2  i     with Pr(h∗t+1 = 2|h∗t = i)
                     1 − ωt+1   =                                         ,              (26)
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎪ h3 /hi     with Pr(h∗t+1 = 3|h∗t = i)
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎪            with Pr(h∗t+1 = 4|h∗t = i)
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎪ h4 /hi
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎩ h /h
                                       5   i   with Pr(h∗t+1 = 5|h∗t = i)

conditional on health hi ≤ ht < hi+1 in period t.

3.2.2. Relative price of health care

   Virtually all respondents report health insurance coverage through Medicare, Medicaid,
or an employer-provided health plan. Nevertheless, some report signiﬁcant out-of-pocket
health expenditure, especially in old age, which can arise for a number of reasons. Medicare
does not cover nursing home care, and Medicaid only covers a limited and capped amount
of nursing home care for those that qualify. In addition, some may choose out-of-network or
higher quality care that is not covered by their health insurance.
    For each respondent at each interview, the out-of-pocket expenditure share is computed
as the ratio of out-of-pocket to total health expenditure. A censored regression model is used
to estimate how the out-of-pocket expenditure share depends on health status, age and its
interaction with health status, ﬁnancial and housing wealth and its interaction with health
status, birth cohort, and the interaction of these variables with a male dummy. The out-
of-pocket expenditure share is then predicted for single females, who were born 1931–1940
and have the average ﬁnancial and housing wealth for her cohort and age. Let qt (h∗t ) denote


                                                13
the predicted out-of-pocket expenditure share for health status h∗t in period t. The relative
price of health care is modeled as

                                      Qt = eq(t−1) qt (h∗t ).                              (27)

The ﬁrst term accounts for secular growth in the relative price of health care, and the second
term accounts for health insurance coverage. The average log growth rate of the consumer
price index for medical care, relative to that for all items less medical care, is 1.9% from
1958 to 2008. Therefore, the growth rate is calibrated q = 0.019 annually.
    Figure 2 reports the relative price of health care for females by health status and age. The
relative price of health care is positively related to health, especially for younger females.
For example, the relative price of health care is 0.36 for females in poor health at age
65, which is lower than 0.43 for those in excellent health. The fact that health insurance
coverage is slightly better in poor health is consistent with copays and deductibles that diﬀer
between treatment and preventive care. The relative price of health care rises in age. Part
of this growth is explained by an out-of-pocket expenditure share that rises in age, while
the remainder is explained by the secular growth in the relative price of health care. For
example, the out-of-pocket expenditure share is 0.46 for females in good health at age 65,
which rises to 0.55 at age 89.

3.2.3. Retirement income

   The ratio of income to total wealth is computed for each respondent at each interview.
A censored regression model is used to estimate how the income-wealth ratio depends on
health status, age and its interaction with health status, ﬁnancial and housing wealth and
its interaction with health status, birth cohort, and the interaction of these variables with a
male dummy. Then the income-wealth ratio is predicted for single females, who were born
1931–1940 and have the average ﬁnancial and housing wealth for her cohort and age.

3.3. Measuring the outputs of the life-cycle model

   The key outputs of the life-cycle model are the allocation of ﬁnancial and housing wealth
and out-of-pocket health expenditure.

3.3.1. Allocation of financial and housing wealth

   In Table 2, a censored regression model is used to estimate how the portfolio share in
stocks depends on health status, age and its interaction with health status, ﬁnancial and


                                                14
housing wealth and its interaction with health status, birth cohort, and the interaction of
these variables with a male dummy. The portfolio share in stocks is positively related to
health, even after controlling for ﬁnancial and housing wealth (Rosen and Wu, 2004). The
portfolio share in stocks is 2 percentage points lower for respondents in poor health at age
65, compared with those in good health. Conversely, the portfolio share in stocks is 1
percentage point higher for respondents in excellent health at age 65, compared with those
in good health.
    To facilitate comparison of the data with the simulated model, Panel B of Table 3 reports
the predicted portfolio share in stocks for females by health status and age. The table does
not extend beyond age 89 because sample attrition through death makes such extrapolation
potentially unreliable. The portfolio share in stocks is low overall and is positively related
to health, especially for younger females. The portfolio share in stocks is 1% for females in
poor health at age 65, which is lower than 4% for those in excellent health.
     Table 2 also shows how the portfolio share in housing depends on health status, age and
its interaction with health status, ﬁnancial and housing wealth and its interaction with health
status, birth cohort, and the interaction of these variables with a male dummy. The portfolio
share in housing is negatively related to health, even after controlling for ﬁnancial and
housing wealth. The portfolio share in housing is 16 percentage points higher for respondents
in poor health at age 65, compared with those in good health. Conversely, the portfolio
share in housing is 9 percentage points lower for respondents in excellent health at age 65,
compared with those in good health. For respondents in good health, the portfolio share in
housing falls by 14 percentage points for every ten years in age. The negative coeﬃcient on
the interaction of age with poor health implies that the portfolio share in housing falls more
in age for respondents in poor health. Conversely, the positive coeﬃcient on the interaction
of age with excellent health implies that the portfolio share in housing falls less in age for
respondents in excellent health.
    Panel C of Table 3 reports the predicted portfolio share in housing for females by health
status and age. The portfolio share in housing is high overall and is negatively related to
health for younger females. The portfolio share in housing is 85% for females in poor health
at age 65, which is higher than 61% for those in excellent health. The portfolio share in
housing falls signiﬁcantly in age. The portfolio share in housing is 70% for females in good
health at age 65, which falls to 36% at age 89.
   Since stocks account for a small share of ﬁnancial and housing wealth, Panel A of Table 3
shows that the portfolio share in bonds is essentially the mirror image of the portfolio share
in housing. That is, the portfolio share in bonds is positively related to health for younger
females and rises signiﬁcantly in age.


                                              15
3.3.2. Out-of-pocket health expenditure

     In Table 4, a linear regression model is used to estimate how the logarithm of out-
of-pocket health expenditure as a share of income depends on health status, age and its
interaction with health status, ﬁnancial and housing wealth and its interaction with health
status, birth cohort, and the interaction of these variables with a male dummy. Out-of-pocket
health expenditure as a share of income is negatively related to health. Out-of-pocket health
expenditure is 57% higher for respondents in poor health at age 65, compared with those
in good health. Conversely, out-of-pocket health expenditure is 32% lower for respondents
in excellent health at age 65, compared with those in good health. For respondents in good
health, out-of-pocket health expenditure rises by 56% for every ten years in age.
    Panel E of Table 3 reports the predicted out-of-pocket expenditure as a share of income
for females by health status and age. Out-of-pocket health expenditure as a share of income
is negatively related to health. Females in poor health at age 65 spend 12% of their income
on health care, which is higher than 5% for those in excellent health. Similarly, females in
poor health at age 89 spend 48% of their income on health care, which is higher than 17%
for those in excellent health. Out-of-pocket health expenditure as a share of income rises in
age. Females in good health spend 7% of their income on health care at age 65, which rises
to 27% at age 89.

4.    Asset allocation and health expenditure in the life-cycle model

     Table 5 reports the preference and health parameters used to calibrate the life-cycle model
for females. The subjective discount factor is calibrated to β = 0.96 annually, following a
common practice in the life-cycle literature (e.g., Cocco et al., 2005). Relative risk aversion
is calibrated to γ = 5 to explain the low portfolio share in stocks. The bequest motive is
not well identiﬁed, separately from the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, based on the
average life-cycle wealth proﬁle (as discussed in De Nardi et al. (2010) and Ameriks et al.
(2011)). Therefore, the benchmark case assumes no intentional bequest motive (i.e., ν = 0).
The remaining parameters are calibrated to explain key facts about asset allocation and
health expenditure in Table 3.

4.1. Optimal consumption and portfolio policies

   The life-cycle model is solved by numerical dynamic programming, as described in Ap-
pendix C. Figure 3 reports the optimal consumption and portfolio policies for a female aged
65 as functions of health status. My discussion will focus on the baseline policy evaluated
at dt = 0.6, which is the relevant region of the state space for the model simulation.

                                               16
    Optimal consumption decreases in health. The retiree consumes a lower share of her total
wealth in better health because non-health consumption and health are substitutes at the
calibrated parameters (i.e., σ < ρ). Optimal out-of-pocket health expenditure also decreases
in health. The retiree spends a lower share of her total wealth on health care in better health
because of decreasing returns to health investment (i.e., ψ < 1).
   The optimal portfolio share in stocks increases in health. To understand this result, it is
useful to recall the horizon eﬀect in portfolio choice, which is that a younger investor should
invest a higher share of her liquid wealth in risky assets (Bodie et al., 1992). The horizon
eﬀect comes from the fact that a young investor has a large implicit position in an illiquid
bond through her claim to future income. As the value of the illiquid bond declines in age,
the investor must shift her liquid wealth from stocks to bonds to keep the overall portfolio
share in risky assets constant. The positive relation between the optimal portfolio share
in stocks and health is analogous to the horizon eﬀect because the retiree has a longer life
expectancy in better health.
   The optimal portfolio share in housing decreases in health, while the optimal portfolio
share in bonds increases in health. The retiree consumes less housing in better health because
non-health consumption and health are substitutes at the calibrated parameters. The dashed
lines represent the policy functions for a higher housing stock (i.e., dt = 0.7), and the dotted
lines represent the policy functions for a lower housing stock (i.e., dt = 0.5). Any diﬀerences
between these policies and the baseline policy can be attributed to transaction costs because
the housing stock would drop out as a state variable in the absence of such costs. Consistent
with the importance of transaction costs, a higher initial housing stock leads to a higher
optimal portfolio share in housing, which is oﬀset nearly one-to-one with a lower optimal
portfolio share in bonds.
   The policy functions are used to simulate a population of 100,000 retirees, who make
optimal consumption and portfolio decisions every two years from age 65 until death. Initial
health is drawn from a lognormal distribution (i.e., log h1 ∼ N(μh , σh )) to match the observed
health distribution at age 65. The initial housing stock is calibrated conditional on health
to match the observed portfolio share in housing by health status at age 65. As discussed in
Section 3.2, The path of income by health status and age is estimated under the assumption
of homogeneity in wealth. By construction, the simulated model matches the observed ratio
of total wealth to income by health status and age.

4.2. Allocation of financial and housing wealth

   Panel B of Table 6 reports the portfolio share in stocks by health status and age for the
simulated model. Consistent with the evidence in Panel B of Table 3, the portfolio share

                                              17
in stocks is low overall and is positively related to health, especially for younger retirees.
The portfolio share in stocks is 6% for retirees in poor health at age 65, which is lower
than 10% for those in excellent health. As discussed above, the horizon eﬀect in portfolio
choice explains the positive relation between the portfolio share in stocks and health because
retirees in better health have a longer life expectancy.
   Panel C of Table 6 reports the portfolio share in housing by health status and age for the
simulated model. Consistent with the evidence in Panel C of Table 3, the portfolio share in
housing is high overall and is negatively related to health for younger retirees. The portfolio
share in housing is 83% for retirees in poor health at age 65, which is higher than 61% for
those in excellent health. Housing consumption and health are substitutes at the calibrated
parameters, which explains the negative relation between the portfolio share in housing (i.e.,
consumption of housing services) and health.
   Also consistent with the evidence, Panel C of Table 6 shows that the portfolio share in
housing falls signiﬁcantly in age. The portfolio share in housing is 68% for retirees in good
health at age 65, which falls to 36% at age 89. Since stocks account for a small share of
ﬁnancial and housing wealth, Panel A shows that the portfolio share in bonds is essentially
the mirror image of the portfolio share in housing. Because housing is risky and bonds are
safe, the horizon eﬀect in portfolio choice explains the negative relation between the portfolio
share in housing and age.

4.3. Out-of-pocket health expenditure

   Panel E of Table 6 reports out-of-pocket health expenditure as a share of income by
health status and age for the simulated model. Consistent with the evidence in Panel E of
Table 3, out-of-pocket health expenditure as a share of income is negatively related to health.
Retirees in poor health at age 65 spend 37% of their income on health care, which is higher
than 2% for those in excellent health. Similarly, retirees in poor health at age 89 spend
31% of their income on health care, which is higher than 3% for those in excellent health.
Retirees in better health spend a lower share of their total wealth on health care because of
decreasing returns to health investment. Also consistent the evidence, out-of-pocket health
expenditure as a share of income rises in age. Retirees in good health spend 9% of their
income on health care at age 65, which rises to 12% at age 89.
   Panel F of Table 6 reports the health distribution by age as an additional check of the
simulated model. If health expenditure were not suﬃciently productive, the simulated model
would produce bunching of retirees in poor health. Conversely, if health expenditure were
too productive, the simulated model would produce bunching of retirees in excellent health.
The health distribution in the simulated model is non-degenerate throughout the life cycle,

                                              18
consistent with the evidence in Panel F of Table 3. At age 89, 10% of retirees are in poor
health, 27% are in fair health, 37% are in good health, 23% are in very good health, and 3%
are in excellent health.

4.4. Summary of the results for males

   Appendix B reports asset allocation and health expenditure for males in the Health
and Retirement Study and in the simulated model. The results are similar to those for
females, so the main diﬀerences are brieﬂy summarized. The life-cycle model explains asset
allocation and health expenditure for males with small diﬀerences in the preference and
health parameters. First, males have lower life expectancy and higher average depreciation
of health. Therefore, health expenditure must be more productive for males to match the
observed out-of-pocket health expenditure and the health distribution. Accordingly, the
returns to health investment is calibrated to ψ = 0.20, compared with ψ = 0.19 for females.
Second, older males have a higher portfolio share in housing. For example, the portfolio
share in housing for males in good health at age 89 is 47%, compared with 36% for females.
Therefore, the utility weight on housing is calibrated to φ = 0.9, compared with φ = 0.6 for
females.


5.   Predicted response to a reduction in Social Security benefits

   In contrast to a reduced-form approach, the structural approach in this paper allows
us to understand the economic mechanisms (i.e., preferences, technology, and constraints)
that explain the key facts about asset allocation and health expenditure across health status
and age. Another advantage is that the calibrated model could be used to understand how
asset allocation and health expenditure would respond to policy changes. In this section,
I consider a one-time reduction in Social Security beneﬁts as an example of such a policy
experiment. In Table 7, the life-cycle model is simulated with retirees receiving only 50% of
the estimated income.
    Under the maintained assumption of homogeneity in wealth, the reduction in the level
of wealth from the policy experiment has no eﬀect. However, the change in the composition
of wealth matters through the horizon eﬀect in portfolio choice, as discussed in Section 4.1.
The reduction in income implies that retirees now have a smaller implicit position in an
illiquid bond. Therefore, retirees must shift their liquid wealth from stocks and housing to
bonds to keep the overall portfolio share in risky assets constant. For example, Panel A of
Table 7 shows that the portfolio share in bonds is 58% for retirees in good health at age 71,
compared with 50% for the corresponding number in Panel A of Table 6.


                                             19
   I have assumed homogeneity in wealth for tractability in this paper. However, this
assumption limits the potential responses to policy experiments that have wealth eﬀects,
such as a reduction in Social Security or Medicare beneﬁts. In future work, it would be
interesting to reconsider the impact of these policy experiments in a life-cycle model that
relaxes the assumption of homogeneity in wealth.


6.   Conclusion

    This paper has shown that a life-cycle model, in which consumption and portfolio deci-
sions respond endogenously to health shocks, explains key facts about asset allocation and
health expenditure across health status and age. An open issue is whether the life-cycle
model (with appropriate modiﬁcations) could explain a larger set of moments related to
heterogeneity across retirees and dynamics in response to health shocks. For example, an
earlier version of this paper (Yogo, 2009) attempted to explain how ﬁnancial and housing
wealth responds to health shocks at a higher frequency (from one interview to the next in
the Health and Retirement Study). In future work, it would be interesting to explore what
assumptions about preferences and constraints are necessary to explain how asset allocation
and health expenditure respond to health shocks at diﬀerent horizons.
   In addition, there are various extensions of the life-cycle model that are promising for
future work. First, an extension to married households makes consumption and portfolio
decisions depend on the health and survival of both partners (Lillard and Weiss, 1997; Ja-
cobson, 2000; Love, 2010). Second, an extension to the working phase prior to retirement
introduces an endogenous response of labor supply to health shocks as well as public and
employer-provided health insurance (Blau and Gilleskie, 2008; French and Jones, 2011). Fi-
nally, the portfolio-choice problem could be extended to insurance products such as annuities,
life insurance, Medigap insurance, and long-term care insurance (Koijen et al., 2016).




                                             20
References

Ameriks, J., Caplin, A., Laufer, S., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2011. The joy of giving or assisted
 living? Using strategic surveys to separate bequest and precautionary motives. Journal of
 Finance 66 (2), 519–561.

Blau, D. M., Gilleskie, D. B., 2008. The role of retiree health insurance in the employment
  behavior of older men. International Economic Review 49 (2), 475–514.

Bodie, Z., Merton, R. C., Samuelson, W. F., 1992. Labor supply ﬂexibility and portfolio
  choice in a life cycle model. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 16 (3–4), 427–
  449.

Cocco, J. F., 2005. Portfolio choice in the presence of housing. Review of Financial Studies
  18 (2), 535–567.

Cocco, J. F., Gomes, F. J., Maenhout, P. J., 2005. Consumption and portfolio choice over
  the life cycle. Review of Financial Studies 18 (2), 491–533.

Davidoﬀ, T., 2010. Home equity commitment and long-term care insurance demand. Journal
  of Public Economics 94 (1–2), 44–49.

De Nardi, M., French, E., Jones, J. B., 2010. Why do the elderly save? The role of medical
  expenses. Journal of Political Economy 118 (1), 39–75.

Edwards, R. D., 2008. Health risk and portfolio choice. Journal of Business and Economic
  Statistics 26 (4), 472–485.

Ehrlich, I., Chuma, H., 1990. A model of the demand for longevity and the value of life
  extension. Journal of Political Economy 98 (4), 761–782.

Epstein, L. G., Zin, S. E., 1991. Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior
  of consumption and asset returns: An empirical analysis. Journal of Political Economy
  99 (2), 263–286.

French, E., Jones, J. B., 2011. The eﬀects of health insurance and self-insurance on retirement
  behavior. Econometrica 79 (3), 693–732.

Grossman, M., 1972. On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. Journal
  of Political Economy 80 (2), 223–255.




                                              21
Horneﬀ, W. J., Maurer, R. H., Mitchell, O. S., Stamos, M. Z., 2009. Asset allocation and
  location over the life cycle with investment-linked survival-contingent payouts. Journal of
  Banking and Finance 33 (9), 1688–1699.

Hu, X., 2005. Portfolio choices for homeowners. Journal of Urban Economics 58 (1), 114–136.

Hugonnier, J., Pelgrin, F., St-Amour, P., 2013. Health and (other) asset holdings. Review of
  Economic Studies 80 (2), 663–710.

Inkmann, J., Lopes, P., Michaelides, A., 2011. How deep is the annuity market participation
  puzzle? Review of Financial Studies 24 (1), 279–319.

Jacobson, L., 2000. The family as producer of health—An extended Grossman model. Journal
  of Health Economics 19 (5), 611–637.

Koijen, R. S. J., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., Yogo, M., 2016. Health and mortality delta: Assess-
 ing the welfare cost of household insurance choice. Journal of Finance 71 (2), 957–1010.

Lillard, L. A., Weiss, Y., 1997. Uncertain health and survival: Eﬀects on end-of-life con-
  sumption. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 15 (2), 254–268.

Love, D. A., 2010. The eﬀects of marital status and children on savings and portfolio choice.
  Review of Financial Studies 23 (1), 385–432.

Pang, G., Warshawsky, M., 2010. Optimizing the equity-bond-annuity portfolio in retire-
  ment: The impact of uncertain health expenses. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics
  46 (1), 198–209.

Picone, G., Uribe, M., Wilson, R. M., 1998. The eﬀect of uncertainty on the demand for
  medical care, health capital and wealth. Journal of Health Economics 17 (2), 171–185.

Rosen, H. S., Wu, S., 2004. Portfolio choice and health status. Journal of Financial Economics
  72 (3), 457–484.

Sinai, T., Souleles, N. S., 2008. Net worth and housing equity in retirement. In: Ameriks, J.,
  Mitchell, O. S. (Eds.), Recalibrating Retirement Spending and Saving. Oxford University
  Press, New York, Ch. 4, pp. 46–77.

Wagstaﬀ, A., 1986. The demand for health: Some new empirical evidence. Journal of Health
  Economics 5 (3), 195–233.

Wallace, R. B., Herzog, A. R., 1995. Overview of the health measures in the Health and
 Retirement Study. Journal of Human Resources 30, 84–107.

                                             22
Yao, R., Zhang, H. H., 2005. Optimal consumption and portfolio choices with risky housing
  and borrowing constraints. Review of Financial Studies 18 (1), 197–239.

Yogo, M., 2009. Portfolio choice in retirement: Health risk and the demand for annuities,
  housing, and risky assets, NBER Working Paper 15307.




                                           23
                                       Table 1
          Future health in relation to present health and health investment.


                                                   (1)                                           (2)
                                 Coeﬃcient               Interaction eﬀect      Coeﬃcient              Interaction eﬀect
Explanatory variable             for females                 for males          for females                for males
Health status:
   Poor                        -141.42   (-5.87)          24.48     (0.65)   -101.42   (-3.99)           7.69     (0.20)
   Fair                         -81.01   (-5.72)          23.65     (0.96)    -68.82   (-4.61)          14.30     (0.56)
   Very good                     56.10    (4.42)          18.40     (0.67)     57.22    (4.43)          14.95     (0.54)
   Excellent                    114.38    (5.76)          23.86     (0.61)    111.61    (5.59)          18.78     (0.48)
(Age − 65)/10                   -17.40   (-5.96)           6.10     (0.92)    -11.23   (-3.77)           3.95     (0.59)
   × Poor                        11.59    (3.13)         -13.78    (-1.63)      7.57    (2.00)         -10.46    (-1.22)
   × Fair                        13.06    (4.23)         -14.23    (-2.07)     11.19    (3.60)         -13.71    (-1.98)
   × Very good                   -5.17   (-1.50)          -8.33    (-1.06)     -4.99   (-1.43)          -9.40    (-1.19)
   × Excellent                   -7.23   (-1.12)          -2.64    (-0.20)     -5.78   (-0.89)          -2.59    (-0.19)
Financial and housing wealth      2.64    (3.69)           0.77     (0.46)      1.76    (2.44)           1.18     (0.68)
   × Poor                        -2.65   (-2.38)           1.03     (0.41)     -2.61   (-2.30)          -0.90    (-0.35)
   × Fair                        -2.03   (-2.11)          -1.04    (-0.46)     -2.06   (-2.13)          -1.76    (-0.76)
   × Very good                    1.67    (1.33)           2.16     (0.78)      1.77    (1.41)           1.74     (0.63)
   × Excellent                    4.07    (1.66)         -10.05    (-2.02)      4.50    (1.86)         -10.99    (-2.22)
Doctor visits                    -2.18   (-0.24)           8.78     (0.49)      0.71    (0.08)           9.32     (0.52)
   × Poor                        10.44    (0.49)          -6.79    (-0.20)     -1.68   (-0.08)          -5.43    (-0.15)
   × Fair                        12.37    (0.87)         -21.53    (-0.84)     12.07    (0.82)         -20.21    (-0.77)
   × Very good                   -5.83   (-0.46)         -20.51    (-0.77)     -7.55   (-0.59)         -18.68    (-0.69)
   × Excellent                    8.38    (0.44)         -26.47    (-0.71)      8.99    (0.47)         -29.99    (-0.80)
Dentist visits                    7.24    (2.34)          11.12     (1.55)      6.18    (1.98)          12.36     (1.71)
   × Poor                         3.59    (0.64)         -13.82    (-1.11)      1.60    (0.28)         -14.25    (-1.13)
   × Fair                         1.94    (0.43)         -19.05    (-1.89)      1.71    (0.38)         -19.80    (-1.94)
   × Very good                   15.74    (3.12)          -5.45    (-0.47)     15.41    (3.04)          -6.38    (-0.55)
   × Excellent                   19.77    (1.94)         -14.72    (-0.70)     17.34    (1.70)         -11.78    (-0.56)
Home health care                -21.54   (-3.93)         -21.14    (-1.63)    -12.64   (-2.27)         -20.63    (-1.60)
   × Poor                        -4.87   (-0.67)          22.62     (1.35)      1.36    (0.18)          24.85     (1.45)
   × Fair                        -4.17   (-0.60)          18.13     (1.09)     -0.59   (-0.08)          16.14     (0.98)
   × Very good                  -14.79   (-1.39)          12.72     (0.48)    -14.69   (-1.37)          18.29     (0.69)
   × Excellent                  -60.66   (-2.20)          10.06     (0.20)    -60.07   (-2.18)          32.77     (0.62)
Nursing home stays              -19.41   (-2.32)         -21.09    (-0.98)    -16.14   (-1.92)          -7.31    (-0.34)
   × Poor                         0.88    (0.08)         -13.57    (-0.51)      9.04    (0.79)         -19.24    (-0.72)
   × Fair                        -9.84   (-0.87)          15.38     (0.59)      2.00    (0.18)           3.12     (0.12)
   × Very good                  -13.68   (-0.87)         -26.61    (-0.68)    -11.28   (-0.72)         -33.90    (-0.89)
   × Excellent                  -87.60   (-2.17)         119.79     (1.86)    -83.99   (-2.04)         117.17     (1.76)
Outpatient surgery               -0.44   (-0.12)           9.30     (1.19)      1.60    (0.44)           8.41     (1.07)
   × Poor                         3.22    (0.51)         -21.30    (-1.49)     -0.12   (-0.02)         -19.27    (-1.31)
   × Fair                         0.93    (0.18)          -6.60    (-0.59)      0.18    (0.04)          -5.34    (-0.47)
   × Very good                    2.58    (0.43)         -10.58    (-0.84)      2.90    (0.49)         -10.22    (-0.81)
   × Excellent                    0.36    (0.03)          20.18     (0.84)      1.15    (0.09)          23.32     (0.96)
Prescription drugs              -12.93   (-2.74)          -4.44    (-0.42)      3.83    (0.79)          -7.93    (-0.73)
   × Poor                         7.09    (0.52)          18.06     (0.71)      6.44    (0.47)          21.25     (0.81)
   × Fair                       -11.87   (-1.39)           9.97     (0.60)    -12.23   (-1.44)          13.74     (0.83)
   × Very good                   -3.92   (-0.57)          -5.58    (-0.37)     -8.45   (-1.22)          -4.69    (-0.31)
   × Excellent                  -16.48   (-1.45)           1.07     (0.04)    -25.03   (-2.20)           5.76     (0.24)
Cholesterol tests                 3.55    (0.92)         -18.55    (-1.96)      7.30    (1.88)         -22.00    (-2.29)
   × Poor                        -3.59   (-0.52)          -5.43    (-0.36)     -4.39   (-0.62)           1.28     (0.08)
   × Fair                         3.55    (0.62)          28.44     (2.19)      2.08    (0.36)          34.33     (2.62)
   × Very good                   11.95    (1.86)           8.62     (0.57)      9.70    (1.50)          13.37     (0.87)
   × Excellent                    2.51    (0.21)           9.77     (0.41)      1.40    (0.12)          11.88     (0.49)
Vigorous physical activity       17.66    (5.55)           5.71     (0.80)     14.12    (4.41)           3.74     (0.52)
   × Poor                        -0.50   (-0.06)           4.48     (0.28)     -4.64   (-0.57)          -4.39    (-0.27)
   × Fair                         5.30    (1.01)         -20.79    (-1.96)      4.67    (0.89)         -20.54    (-1.91)
   × Very good                   -2.25   (-0.46)           0.93     (0.08)     -0.08   (-0.02)           2.99     (0.27)
   × Excellent                   19.65    (2.10)          -6.96    (-0.34)     21.48    (2.29)          -3.10    (-0.15)
Smoking                         -15.13   (-3.23)         -12.15    (-1.12)    -15.76   (-3.34)         -14.92    (-1.37)
   × Poor                         4.23    (0.54)          -1.18    (-0.07)     -0.15   (-0.02)          18.06     (1.04)
   × Fair                         9.49    (1.39)          -6.79    (-0.47)      7.47    (1.10)          -4.24    (-0.29)
   × Very good                    2.17    (0.28)           3.83     (0.21)      2.27    (0.29)           5.82     (0.32)
   × Excellent                  -26.53   (-1.55)          27.88     (0.89)    -29.06   (-1.71)          35.48     (1.13)

                                                           24
                                                  Table 1 (continued)


                                                                       (1)                                         (2)
                                                      Coeﬃcient          Interaction eﬀect        Coeﬃcient          Interaction eﬀect
 Explanatory variable                                 for females            for males            for females            for males
 Doctor-diagnosed health problems:
    High blood pressure                                                                         -10.60   (-5.50)           7.17    (1.69)
    Diabetes                                                                                    -18.26   (-7.93)          -4.63   (-0.94)
    Cancer                                                                                      -14.88   (-6.09)          -0.10   (-0.02)
    Lung disease                                                                                -22.55   (-7.90)         -12.99   (-2.24)
    Heart problems                                                                              -17.35   (-8.68)           3.21    (0.75)
    Stroke                                                                                       -9.26   (-3.26)           1.19    (0.20)
    Psychiatric problems                                                                         -8.44   (-3.50)          -2.32   (-0.38)
    Arthritis                                                                                   -12.40   (-6.12)           7.04    (1.70)
 Some diﬃculty with activities of daily living:
    Bathing                                                                                     -17.73   (-5.68)         -19.87   (-2.48)
    Dressing                                                                                     -9.42   (-3.27)           0.54    (0.08)
    Eating                                                                                      -29.47   (-6.47)          14.22    (1.38)
 Birth cohort:
    1891–1900                                      -67.14    (-3.33)          80.21    (1.44)   -67.14   (-3.33)     115.47        (2.02)
    1901–1910                                      -22.98    (-3.39)          -5.01   (-0.33)   -22.98   (-3.39)      -5.16       (-0.33)
    1911–1920                                       -4.00    (-1.01)          -4.44   (-0.49)    -4.00   (-1.01)      -0.52       (-0.06)
    1921–1930                                        1.44     (0.54)          -2.28   (-0.39)     1.44    (0.54)       0.20        (0.03)
 Constant                                                                    -14.20   (-0.83)                        -14.31       (-0.82)
 Wald test for health investment                   439.57    (0.00)                             259.46   (0.00)
 Wald test for male interaction eﬀects                                   131.86       (0.00)                         140.98       (0.00)
 Observations                                      19,404                                       19,223


Note: An ordered probit model is used to explain future health status at two years from the present interview. The table
reports the estimated coeﬃcients in percentage points and heteroskedasticity-robust t-statistics in parentheses. The Wald test
for the dependence of future health status on health investment includes measures of health care utilization (i.e., doctor visits,
dentist visits, home health care, nursing home stays, outpatient surgery, prescription drugs, and cholesterol tests), vigorous
physical activity, smoking, and the interaction of these variables with present health status. The p-value for the Wald test is
reported in parentheses. The sample consists of single retirees in the Health and Retirement Study, who were born 1891–1940,
aged 65 or older, and interviewed between 1992 and 2006.




                                                               25
                                                                        Table 2
                                             Portfolio shares in stocks and housing in relation to health.


                                                                            Stocks                                          Housing
                                                               Elasticity        Interaction eﬀect             Elasticity        Interaction eﬀect
            Explanatory variable                              for females            for males                for females            for males
            Health status:
              Poor                                           -2.11 (-4.24)         3.02       (1.41)        16.19   (5.74)         -3.06     (-0.54)
              Fair                                           -1.66 (-3.54)         0.91       (0.72)         9.68   (4.61)         -6.27     (-1.67)
              Very good                                       0.95 (1.64)          0.61       (0.58)        -5.55 (-2.81)          -1.14     (-0.29)
              Excellent                                       0.99 (1.11)         -1.28      (-1.28)        -8.80 (-3.55)           4.69      (0.90)
            (Age − 65)/10                                     0.89 (3.84)          0.45       (1.00)       -14.17 (-14.32)          6.74      (3.40)
              × Poor                                          1.01 (2.53)         -1.41      (-1.75)        -5.77 (-3.45)           6.16      (1.71)
              × Fair                                          0.90 (2.99)         -0.97      (-1.69)        -3.37 (-2.65)           2.83      (1.18)
              × Very good                                    -0.33 (-1.22)         0.19       (0.36)         1.81   (1.49)          0.90      (0.38)
              × Excellent                                    -0.23 (-0.58)         0.90       (1.25)         5.37   (3.37)         -4.85     (-1.55)




26
            Financial and housing wealth                      3.84 (25.98)        -0.59      (-2.14)         8.68 (28.89)          -1.55     (-2.24)
              × Poor                                          0.02 (0.06)         -0.47      (-0.79)         3.23   (5.65)         -1.12     (-0.87)
              × Fair                                         -0.13 (-0.54)         0.56       (1.18)         1.93   (4.38)         -0.51     (-0.55)
              × Very good                                     0.06 (0.28)         -0.13      (-0.34)        -1.06 (-2.14)           0.09      (0.08)
              × Excellent                                    -0.19 (-0.60)        -0.12      (-0.23)        -2.44 (-2.92)           0.99      (0.69)
            Birth cohort:
              1891–1900                                      -1.70    (-1.96)     -2.10      (-1.51)        -8.73     (-1.69)      2.96       (0.30)
              1901–1910                                      -0.78    (-1.88)     -0.43      (-0.49)        -0.82     (-0.43)     -9.40      (-2.51)
              1911–1920                                       0.50     (1.54)     -0.48      (-0.82)        -0.30     (-0.24)     -6.57      (-2.51)
              1921–1930                                       1.28     (4.85)      0.59       (1.11)         1.90      (1.79)     -6.39      (-3.05)
            Constant                                                               1.66       (2.06)                              -5.02      (-1.82)
            Wald test for male interaction eﬀects                                147.15       (0.00)                             143.28       (0.00)
            Observations                                   28,522                                          28,522

     Note: A censored regression model is used to explain the portfolio shares in stocks and housing. The table reports the estimated elasticities at the
     mean of the explanatory variables in percentage points and heteroskedasticity-robust t-statistics in parentheses. The sample consists of single retirees
     in the Health and Retirement Study, who were born 1891–1940, aged 65 or older, and interviewed between 1992 and 2006.
                                        Table 3
 Asset allocation and health expenditure for females in the Health and Retirement Study.


                                                               Age
               Health status            65          71           77          83          89
               Panel A: Bonds (% of ﬁnancial and housing wealth)
               Poor                   13         24         36       47                  57
               Fair                   19         29         39       49                  57
               Good                   27         36         44       52                  59
               Very good              32         40         47       54                  60
               Excellent              36         41         46       51                  55
               Panel B: Stocks (% of ﬁnancial and housing wealth)
               Poor                    1          2          3        3                    5
               Fair                    2          2          3        4                    5
               Good                    3          3          4        4                    5
               Very good               4          4          4        4                    5
               Excellent               4          4          4        5                    5
               Panel C: Housing (% of ﬁnancial and housing wealth)
               Poor                   85         74         62       49                  38
               Fair                   80         69         58       47                  37
               Good                   70         61         52       44                  36
               Very good              64         57         49       42                  35
               Excellent              61         55         50       45                  40
               Panel D: Ratio of total wealth to income
               Poor                  2.9        2.8        2.7      2.6                  2.5
               Fair                  2.8        2.7        2.7      2.6                  2.6
               Good                  2.6        2.6        2.6      2.6                  2.5
               Very good             2.5        2.5        2.5      2.5                  2.6
               Excellent             2.5        2.5        2.5      2.5                  2.6
               Panel E: Out-of-pocket health expenditure (% of income)
               Poor                   12         17         24       34                  48
               Fair                    9         13         17       24                  33
               Good                    7         10         14       19                  27
               Very good               6          8         11       16                  22
               Excellent               5          7          9       13                  17
               Panel F: Health distribution (% at given age)
               Poor                   10         11         13       14                  16
               Fair                   23         25         26       27                  28
               Good                   33         33         33       32                  32
               Very good              25         24         22       21                  19
               Excellent               8          7          6        5                   5

Note: Panels B and C report the predicted values from the censored regression model in Table 2. Panel D
reports the predicted values from the censored regression model for the income-wealth ratio in Section 3.2.
Panel E reports the predicted values from the regression model in Table 4. Panel F reports the predicted
values from an ordered probit model that explains health status as a function of age, ﬁnancial and housing
wealth, birth cohort, and the interaction of these variables with a male dummy. All predicted values are for
single females, who were born 1931–1940 and have the average ﬁnancial and housing wealth for her cohort
and age.
                                                    27
                                           Table 4
                     Out-of-pocket health expenditure in relation to health.


                                                             Coeﬃcient          Interaction eﬀect
         Explanatory variable                                for females            for males
         Health status:
           Poor                                             57.25    (7.09)   1.22           (0.07)
           Fair                                             29.49    (4.93)   3.24           (0.28)
           Very good                                       -17.88   (-3.13) -12.07          (-1.04)
           Excellent                                       -31.82   (-3.52)   5.62           (0.32)
         (Age − 65)/10                                      56.44   (17.58) -5.68           (-0.83)
           × Poor                                            0.47    (0.09)   0.64           (0.06)
           × Fair                                           -3.92   (-0.99)   0.14           (0.02)
           × Very good                                      -1.24   (-0.32) 12.79            (1.56)
           × Excellent                                      -4.83   (-0.78) -5.60           (-0.45)
         Financial and housing wealth                        4.57    (5.03)   0.01           (0.01)
           × Poor                                            5.34    (3.31)   1.34           (0.36)
           × Fair                                            4.43    (3.31) -4.63           (-1.60)
           × Very good                                       3.10    (2.11) -3.60           (-1.17)
           × Excellent                                      -1.79   (-0.71)   4.52           (0.93)
         Birth cohort:
           1891–1900                                       -64.51 (-3.89) 12.96              (0.27)
           1901–1910                                       -40.31 (-6.18) -1.10             (-0.08)
           1911–1920                                       -39.22 (-8.94)    1.78            (0.20)
           1921–1930                                       -22.10 (-6.60) -12.23            (-1.80)
         Constant                                         -267.90 (-67.47) -15.15           (-1.88)
         Wald test for male interaction eﬀects                               7.53            (0.00)
         Observations                                      25,891

Note: A linear regression model is used to explain the logarithm of out-of-pocket health expenditure as a
share of income. The table reports the estimated coeﬃcients in percentage points and heteroskedasticity-
robust t-statistics in parentheses. The sample consists of single retirees in the Health and Retirement Study,
who were born 1891–1940, aged 65 or older, and interviewed between 1992 and 2006.




                                                     28
                                             Table 5
                                Calibration parameters for females.


 Parameter                                                                            Symbol      Value
 Preferences:
 Subjective discount factor                                                           β             0.96
 Elasticity of intertemporal substitution                                             σ              0.5
 Relative risk aversion                                                               γ                5
 Utility weight on housing                                                            φ              0.6
 Utility weight on health                                                             α              0.1
 Elasticity of substitution between non-health consumption and health                 ρ              0.7
 Strength of the bequest motive                                                       ν                0
 Financial assets:
 Bond return                                                                          Rb − 1       2.5%
 Average stock return                                                                 Rs − 1       6.5%
 Standard deviation of stock returns                                                  σs            18%
 Housing:
 Depreciation rate                                                                    δ          1.14%
 Average housing return                                                               Rh − 1      0.4%
 Standard deviation of housing returns                                                σh          3.5%
 Borrowing limit                                                                      λ            50%
 Transaction cost                                                                     τ             8%
 Health:
 Average of log health                                                                μH            −11
 Standard deviation of log health                                                     σH             1.2
 Returns to health investment                                                         ψ             0.19

Note: The life-cycle model is solved and simulated at a two-year frequency to match the frequency of
interviews in the Health and Retirement Study. The subjective discount factor, the average and the standard
deviation of asset returns, and the depreciation rate are annualized.




                                                    29
                                          Table 6
         Asset allocation and health expenditure for females in the simulated model.


                                                                 Age
              Health status              65          71           77           83           89
              Panel A: Bonds (% of ﬁnancial and housing wealth)
              Poor                  11         42        46        47                       48
              Fair                  18         50        52        52                       51
              Good                  26         50        59        60                       60
              Very good             28         56        64        66                       67
              Excellent             29         66        65        64                       65
              Panel B: Stocks (% of ﬁnancial and housing wealth)
              Poor                   6          8         7         6                        5
              Fair                   5          5         4         4                        4
              Good                   6          7         5         4                        4
              Very good              9         11         7         6                        5
              Excellent             10          8         8         8                        8
              Panel C: Housing (% of ﬁnancial and housing wealth)
              Poor                  83         49        48        47                       47
              Fair                  77         45        44        45                       45
              Good                  68         43        36        36                       36
              Very good             63         33        29        28                       28
              Excellent             61         26        27        27                       26
              Panel D: Ratio of total wealth to income
              Poor                 2.9        2.8       2.7       2.6                      2.5
              Fair                 2.8        2.7       2.7       2.6                      2.6
              Good                 2.6        2.6       2.6       2.6                      2.5
              Very good            2.5        2.5       2.5       2.5                      2.6
              Excellent            2.5        2.5       2.5       2.5                      2.6
              Panel E: Out-of-pocket health expenditure (% of income)
              Poor                  37         26        29        30                       31
              Fair                  18         15        17        18                       19
              Good                   9          7         9        10                       12
              Very good              4          3         4         5                        6
              Excellent              2          2         3         3                        3
              Panel F: Health distribution (% at given age)
              Poor                  10          8         9        10                       11
              Fair                  23         21        23        25                       27
              Good                  33         34        36        37                       37
              Very good             25         31        27        25                       23
              Excellent              8          6         5         4                        3

Note: The solution to the life-cycle model is used to simulate a population of 100,000 females starting at
age 65. The table reports the mean of the given variable in the cross section of retirees that remain alive at
the given age. Table 5 reports the parameters of the life-cycle model.

                                                     30
                                         Table 7
     Asset allocation and health expenditure for females with lower retirement income.


                                                                  Age
              Health status              65           71           77           83           89
              Panel A: Bonds (% of ﬁnancial and housing wealth)
              Poor                   9         48        46        47                        48
              Fair                  21         57        56        58                        60
              Good                  27         58        62        64                        65
              Very good             28         57        68        68                        70
              Excellent             29         56        68        69                        73
              Panel B: Stocks (% of ﬁnancial and housing wealth)
              Poor                  14          9         8         8                         8
              Fair                   5          5         4         4                         4
              Good                   7          6         5         5                         4
              Very good              9          8         7         6                         5
              Excellent             11         10        10         9                         5
              Panel C: Housing (% of ﬁnancial and housing wealth)
              Poor                  77         42        46        45                        45
              Fair                  74         38        39        37                        36
              Good                  67         36        33        32                        30
              Very good             62         35        25        25                        25
              Excellent             60         35        23        22                        22
              Panel D: Ratio of total wealth to income
              Poor                 5.8        5.6       5.4       5.2                       5.0
              Fair                 5.5        5.4       5.3       5.2                       5.1
              Good                 5.2        5.2       5.2       5.1                       5.1
              Very good            5.0        5.1       5.1       5.1                       5.1
              Excellent            5.0        5.0       5.0       5.1                       5.1
              Panel E: Out-of-pocket health expenditure (% of income)
              Poor                  42         32        32        33                        33
              Fair                  19         18        18        19                        20
              Good                   9          9        10        11                        11
              Very good              3          4         4         5                         6
              Excellent              2          2         2         2                         3
              Panel F: Health distribution (% at given age)
              Poor                  10          5         6         7                         7
              Fair                  23         16        18        20                        23
              Good                  33         32        34        35                        36
              Very good             25         35        33        30                        28
              Excellent              8         12        10         8                         6

Note: The solution to the life-cycle model, in which the retiree receives only 50% of the estimated income, is
used to simulate a population of 100,000 females starting at age 65. The table reports the mean of the given
variable in the cross section of retirees that remain alive at the given age. Table 5 reports the parameters of
the life-cycle model.
                                                      31
                                     Present health = 1 (Poor)                                           Present health = 2 (Fair)

                                     0.5                                                                0.5


                       Probability




                                                                                          Probability
                           0                                                                   0
      Fu           Excellent                                                 Fu        Excellent
           tur                             4                                   tur                            4
              eh                               3                    90            eh                              3                    90
                  ea                               2           80                    ea                               2           80
                      lth                            1    70                            lth                             1    70
                                                   Dead               e                                               Dead               e
                                                                    Ag                                                                 Ag

                                     Present health = 3 (Good)                               Present health = 4 (Very good)

                                     0.5                                                                0.5
                       Probability




                                                                                          Probability
                           0                                                                   0
      Fu           Excellent                                                 Fu        Excellent
           tur                             4                                   tur                            4
              eh                               3                    90            eh                              3                    90
                  ea                               2           80                    ea                               2           80
                      lth                            1    70                            lth                             1    70
                                                   Dead               e                                               Dead               e
                                                                    Ag                                                                 Ag

                              Present health = 5 (Excellent)

                                     0.5
                       Probability




                           0
      Fu           Excellent
        tur                                4
             eh                                3                    90
                 ea                                2           80
                    lth                              1    70
                                                   Dead                  e
                                                                    Ag

Figure 1. Health transition probabilities in the absence of health investment. Note: The
predicted probabilities from the ordered probit model in column (1) of Table 1 are reported.
The predicted probabilities are for single females, who were born 1931–1940, have the average
ﬁnancial and housing wealth for her cohort and age, have not used health care in the two
years prior to the interview, and does not regularly participate in vigorous physical activity
and smokes at the time of interview.



                                                                             32
                                            1.2
          Units of non-health consumption




                                             1


                                            0.8


                                            0.6


                                            0.4


        Excellent

                                                  4
                                                                                                                95
                                                             3                                             90
                                                                                                      85
                                                  He                                             80
                                                      alt        2                         75
                                                         h                            70          e
                                                                     Poor        65             Ag


Figure 2. Relative price of health care. Note: The relative price of health care including
health insurance coverage is reported, based on equation (27) with q = 0.019. A censored
regression model is used to estimate how the out-of-pocket expenditure share depends on
health status, age and its interaction with health status, ﬁnancial and housing wealth and
its interaction with health status, birth cohort, and the interaction of these variables with a
male dummy. The predicted values for single females, who were born 1931–1940 and have
the average ﬁnancial and housing wealth for her cohort and age, are used to construct qt (h∗t ).




                                                                            33
                                                     Consumption                                        Out-of-pocket health expenditure
                                             15                                                                           15
                                                         Baseline policy
         % of total wealth




                                                                                      % of total wealth
                                                         Higher housing stock
                                             10          Lower housing stock                                              10



                                              5                                                                           5



                                             0                                                                            0
                                             Poor    2       3       4   Excellent                                        Poor   2     3      4   Excellent
                                                           Health                                                                    Health
                                                          Bonds                                                                      Stocks
         % of financial and housing wealth




                                                                                      % of financial and housing wealth
                                             45                                                                           40


                                             35                                                                           30


                                             25                                                                           20


                                             15                                                                           10


                                             5                                                                            0
                                             Poor    2       3       4   Excellent                                        Poor   2     3      4   Excellent
                                                           Health                                                                    Health
                                                         Housing
         % of financial and housing wealth




                                             90


                                             80


                                             70


                                             60


                                             50
                                              Poor   2       3       4   Excellent
                                                           Health


Figure 3. Optimal consumption and portfolio policies in the life-cycle model. Note: The
optimal consumption and portfolio policies for females at age 65 are reported as functions of
health status. The baseline policy corresponds to dt = 0.6, and higher (lower) housing stock
corresponds to d1 = 0.7 (d1 = 0.5). The home price is ﬁxed at P1 = 1.




                                                                                 34
Appendix A.       Definition of variables based on the Health and Retirement Study

   Most of the variables are based on the RAND HRS (Version I), which is produced by the
RAND Center for the Study of Aging with funding from the National Institute on Aging
and the Social Security Administration.
   Out-of-pocket health expenditure is the sum of out-of-pocket health expenditure from
the RAND HRS, payments of health insurance premiums, and end-of-life health expenditure
from the exit interviews (since wave 3 when the data are available). Out-of-pocket health
expenditure from the RAND HRS is the total amount paid for hospitals, nursing homes,
doctor visits, dentist visits, outpatient surgery, prescription drugs, home health care, and
special facilities. Payments of health insurance premiums are the sum of premiums paid for
Medicare/Medicaid HMO, private health insurance, long-term care insurance, and prescrip-
tion drug coverage (i.e., Medicare Part D). The premium reported at monthly, quarterly,
semi-annual, or annual frequency is converted to the total implied payment over two years.
End-of-life health expenditure from the exit interviews is the total amount paid for hospi-
tals, nursing homes, doctor visits, prescription drugs, home health care, other health services,
other medical expenses, and other non-medical expenses.
   Income is the sum of labor income, employer pension and annuity income, Social Se-
curity disability and supplemental security income, Social Security retirement income, and
unemployment or workers compensation. The after-tax income is calculated by subtracting
federal income tax liabilities, estimated through the NBER TAXSIM program (Version 9).
   Bonds consist of checking, savings, and money market accounts; CD, government savings
bonds, and T-bills; bonds and bond funds; and the imputed value of bonds in IRA and
Keogh accounts. Because the asset allocation in IRA and Keogh accounts is not available,
the portfolio share in bonds for each respondent is imputed to be the same as that in non-
retirement accounts. The value of liabilities is subtracted from the value of bonds. Liabilities
consist of all mortgages for primary and secondary residence, other home loans for primary
residence, and other debt. Stocks consist of businesses; stocks, mutual funds, and investment
trusts; and the imputed value of stocks in IRA and Keogh accounts. Housing consists of
primary and secondary residence.


Appendix B.       Asset allocation and health expenditure for males

   This appendix reports asset allocation and health expenditure for males in the Health and
Retirement Study and in the simulated model. That is, it reports the analogs of Tables 3,
5, and 6 for males.



                                              35
                                        Table B1
  Asset allocation and health expenditure for males in the Health and Retirement Study.


                                                               Age
               Health status            65          71           77          83          89
               Panel A: Bonds (% of ﬁnancial and housing wealth)
               Poor                   18         22         26       29                  33
               Fair                   29         33         37       41                  45
               Good                   31         35         39       42                  45
               Very good              36         38         40       42                  43
               Excellent              36         39         42       44                  46
               Panel B: Stocks (% of ﬁnancial and housing wealth)
               Poor                    4          5          5        6                   7
               Fair                    3          4          5        6                   7
               Good                    4          5          6        7                   8
               Very good               6          7          8        9                  11
               Excellent               4          5          6        8                  10
               Panel C: Housing (% of ﬁnancial and housing wealth)
               Poor                   78         73         69       65                  60
               Fair                   68         63         58       53                  48
               Good                   65         60         56       51                  47
               Very good              58         55         52       49                  46
               Excellent              60         56         52       48                  44
               Panel D: Ratio of total wealth to income
               Poor                  2.4        2.5        2.7      2.9                  3.1
               Fair                  2.5        2.7        2.8      3.0                  3.1
               Good                  2.4        2.5        2.7      2.9                  3.2
               Very good             2.3        2.5        2.7      2.9                  3.2
               Excellent             2.3        2.5        2.6      2.8                  3.0
               Panel E: Out-of-pocket health expenditure (% of income)
               Poor                   11         14         20       27                  37
               Fair                    8         11         14       19                  25
               Good                    6          8         11       15                  20
               Very good               4          6          9       13                  19
               Excellent               5          6          7        9                  12
               Panel F: Health distribution (% at given age)
               Poor                   10         12         13       15                  18
               Fair                   24         25         27       28                  29
               Good                   33         33         33       32                  31
               Very good              25         23         21       20                  18
               Excellent               8          7          6        5                   4

Note: Panels B and C report the predicted values from the censored regression model in Table 2. Panel D
reports the predicted values from the censored regression model for the income-wealth ratio in Section 3.2.
Panel E reports the predicted values from the regression model in Table 4. Panel F reports the predicted
values from an ordered probit model that explains health status as a function of age, ﬁnancial and housing
wealth, birth cohort, and the interaction of these variables with a male dummy. All predicted values are for
single males, who were born 1931–1940 and have the average ﬁnancial and housing wealth for his cohort and
age.
                                                    36
                                            Table B2
                                 Calibration parameters for males.


 Parameter                                                                            Symbol      Value
 Preferences:
 Subjective discount factor                                                           β             0.96
 Elasticity of intertemporal substitution                                             σ              0.5
 Relative risk aversion                                                               γ                5
 Utility weight on housing                                                            φ              0.9
 Utility weight on health                                                             α              0.1
 Elasticity of substitution between non-health consumption and health                 ρ              0.7
 Strength of the bequest motive                                                       ν                0
 Financial assets:
 Bond return                                                                          Rb − 1       2.5%
 Average stock return                                                                 Rs − 1       6.5%
 Standard deviation of stock returns                                                  σs            18%
 Housing:
 Depreciation rate                                                                    δ          1.14%
 Average housing return                                                               Rh − 1      0.4%
 Standard deviation of housing returns                                                σh          3.5%
 Borrowing limit                                                                      λ            50%
 Transaction cost                                                                     τ             8%
 Health:
 Average of log health                                                                μH            −11
 Standard deviation of log health                                                     σH             1.2
 Returns to health investment                                                         ψ             0.20

Note: The life-cycle model is solved and simulated at a two-year frequency to match the frequency of
interviews in the Health and Retirement Study. The subjective discount factor, the average and the standard
deviation of asset returns, and the depreciation rate are annualized.




                                                    37
                                         Table B3
          Asset allocation and health expenditure for males in the simulated model.


                                                                 Age
              Health status              65          71           77           83           89
              Panel A: Bonds (% of ﬁnancial and housing wealth)
              Poor                  19         27        30        37                       38
              Fair                  29         41        48        47                       47
              Good                  31         42        50        51                       55
              Very good             34         48        53        57                       61
              Excellent             29         49        57        62                       62
              Panel B: Stocks (% of ﬁnancial and housing wealth)
              Poor                   6          9         8         5                        5
              Fair                   5          6         3         3                        3
              Good                   5         11         5         5                        4
              Very good              9         13         9         8                        6
              Excellent             11         14        12        10                       10
              Panel C: Housing (% of ﬁnancial and housing wealth)
              Poor                  75         64        62        58                       57
              Fair                  66         53        49        49                       49
              Good                  64         47        45        44                       42
              Very good             57         39        38        35                       33
              Excellent             60         36        31        28                       28
              Panel D: Ratio of total wealth to income
              Poor                 2.4        2.5       2.7       2.9                      3.1
              Fair                 2.5        2.7       2.8       3.0                      3.1
              Good                 2.4        2.5       2.7       2.9                      3.2
              Very good            2.3        2.5       2.7       2.9                      3.2
              Excellent            2.3        2.5       2.6       2.8                      3.0
              Panel E: Out-of-pocket health expenditure (% of income)
              Poor                  33         26        27        30                       33
              Fair                  17         13        16        18                       19
              Good                   8          7         9        10                       12
              Very good              4          3         4         5                        6
              Excellent              3          2         3         3                        4
              Panel F: Health distribution (% at given age)
              Poor                  10         10        11        11                       10
              Fair                  24         21        23        25                       26
              Good                  33         37        37        37                       36
              Very good             25         26        25        23                       23
              Excellent              8          6         5         4                        4

Note: The solution to the life-cycle model is used to simulate a population of 100,000 males starting at age
65. The table reports the mean of the given variable in the cross section of retirees that remain alive at the
given age. Table B2 reports the parameters of the life-cycle model.

                                                     38
Appendix C.      Numerical solution of the life-cycle model

    Health ht is discretized into 5 grid points, spaced to match the lognormal distribution
for health at age 65. The housing stock dt is discretized into 9 grid points, equally spaced
between 0.1 and 0.9. The home price Pt is discretized into 5 grid points, equally spaced on a
logarithmic scale between 1 and 1.5. The transition probabilities between these 5 grid points
are calculated to match the moments for housing returns. Finally, the lognormal shock
for stock returns s,t is discretized into 5 grid points by Gauss-Hermite quadrature. The
ﬁneness of the state space is chosen after some experimentation to minimize computation
time without sacriﬁcing accuracy.
   Because the retiree dies with certainty in period 28 (i.e., age 119), her value function in
that period is given by equation (19). For each period t < 28 and at each grid point in the
state space, the problem is solved recursively through the following algorithm.

  1. Suppose that paying the transaction cost to change the housing stock is optimal (i.e.,
     ah,t = dt ). Find the policies ct , it , and ai,t for i = {s, h} that maximizes the objective
     function, using numerical interpolation to evaluate the value function in period t + 1.

  2. If (1 − λ)dt ≥ 1, the policies from step 1 must be optimal because the retiree must
     reduce the housing stock to satisfy the budget constraint. Otherwise, proceed to step
     3.

  3. Suppose that avoiding the transaction cost by keeping the present housing stock is
     optimal (i.e., ah,t = dt ). Find the policies ct , it , and as,t that maximizes the objective
     function, using numerical interpolation to evaluate the value function in period t + 1.

  4. Compare the value of the objective function achieved in steps 1 and 3. The policy that
     achieves the higher value is the optimal policy.

   The use of analytical partial derivatives of the objective function makes the numerical
optimization routine faster and more accurate than it would otherwise be. The partial
derivative of the objective function with respect to consumption is

             ∂jt   1/σ         −1/σ ∂ut
                 =jt   (1 − β)ut
             ∂ct                    ∂ct
                    − βEt [Δwt+1
                              1−γ
                                  (½{ωt+1 =1} jt+1
                                                1−γ
                                                    + ½{ωt+1 =1} ν γ gt+1
                                                                      1−γ (γ−1/σ)/(1−γ)
                                                                          )]
                                                                                     
                               Rb,t+1
                    ×Et                      (½{ωt+1 =1} jt+1 + ½{ωt+1 =1} ν gt+1 ) ,
                                                           1−γ               γ 1−γ
                                                                                              (C1)
                             γ
                          Δwt+1 (1 − yt+1 )



                                                39
where
                                                                         φ(1−1/ρ)
                          ∂ut                   1/ρ              ah,t
                              = (1 − α)(1 − φ)Vt                                         .               (C2)
                          ∂ct                                    P t ct

The partial derivative of the objective function with respect to health expenditure is

             ∂jt   1/σ         −1/σ ∂ut
                 =jt   (1 − β)ut
             ∂it                    ∂it
                    − βEt [Δwt+1
                              1−γ
                                  (½{ωt+1 =1} jt+1
                                                1−γ
                                                    + ½{ωt+1 =1} ν γ gt+1
                                                                      1−γ (γ−1/σ)/(1−γ)
                                                                          )]
                                                                                     
                               Rb,t+1
                    ×Et                      (½{ωt+1 =1} jt+1 + ½{ωt+1 =1} ν gt+1 ) ,
                                                           1−γ               γ 1−γ
                                                                                                         (C3)
                             γ
                          Δwt+1 (1 − yt+1 )

where
                                          1/ρ                                1−1/ρ
                        ∂ut   αψ 2 ct V             ht [1 + ψ(it /ht )ψ ]
                            = ψ 1−ψ t                                                        .           (C4)
                        ∂it  ht it + ψit                   Qt ct

The partial derivative of the objective function with respect to savings in stocks is

             ∂jt
                                   (½{ωt+1 =1} jt+1 + ½{ωt+1 =1} ν γ gt+1
                    1/σ        1−γ               1−γ                   1−γ (γ−1/σ)/(1−γ)
                  =jt βEt [Δwt+1                                           )]
            ∂as,t
                         (Rs,t+1 − Rb,t+1 )
                    × Et                      (½{ωt+1 =1} jt+1
                                                            1−γ
                                                                + ½{ωt+1 =1} ν γ gt+1
                                                                                  1−γ
                                                                                      ) .                (C5)
                             γ
                         Δwt+1   (1 − yt+1 )

Finally, the partial derivative of the objective function with respect to savings in housing
wealth is

           ∂jt    1/σ         −1/σ ∂ut
                =jt   (1 − β)ut
          ∂ah,t                   ∂ah,t
                           1−γ
                  + βEt [Δwt+1 (½{ωt+1 =1} jt+1
                                             1−γ
                                                 + ½{ωt+1 =1} ν γ gt+1
                                                                   1−γ (γ−1/σ)/(1−γ)
                                                                       )]
                                                                                                 
                         (Rh,t+1 − Rb,t+1 − τ )
                  ×Et                           (½{ωt+1 =1} jt+1
                                                              1−γ
                                                                  + ½{ωt+1 =1} ν γ gt+1
                                                                                    1−γ
                                                                                        )            ,   (C6)
                           Δwt+1 (1 − yt+1 )
                               γ



where
                                                      1/ρ               φ(1−1/ρ)
                           ∂ut     (1 − α)φct Vt                ah,t
                                 =                                                   .                   (C7)
                           ∂ah,t         ah,t                   P t ct




                                                    40
