                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE FINANCIAL CRISIS AND SIZABLE INTERNATIONAL RESERVES DEPLETION:
FROM 'FEAR OF FLOATING' TO THE 'FEAR OF LOSING INTERNATIONAL RESERVES'?

                                          Joshua Aizenman
                                               Yi Sun

                                        Working Paper 15308
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15308


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2009




We gratefully acknowledge research assistance from Rajeswari Sengupta. We thank the comments
of Peter Garber, Paolo Pesenti, and the participants at the Global Dimensions of the Financial Crisis,
hosted by the NY FED, June 3-4, 2010. Joshua Aizenman gratefully acknowledges the hospitality,
support and comments at the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research (HKIMR), and the support
of the UCSC Presidential Chair of Economics. Any mistakes are those of the authors. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Joshua Aizenman and Yi Sun. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The financial crisis and sizable international reserves depletion: From 'fear of floating' to the
'fear of losing international reserves'?
Joshua Aizenman and Yi Sun
NBER Working Paper No. 15308
October 2009, Revised January 2011
JEL No. F15,F31,F32,F42

                                               ABSTRACT

In this paper we study the degree to which Emerging Markets (EMs) adjusted to the global liquidity
crisis by drawing down their international reserves (IR). Overall, we find a mixed and complex picture.
Intriguingly, only about half of the EMs depleted their IR as part of the adjustment mechanism. To
gain further insight, we compare pre-crisis demand for IR of countries that experienced sizable IR
depletion, to that of countries that did not, and find different patterns between the two groups. Trade
related factors (such as trade openness, primary goods export ratio, especially large oil export) seem
to play a significant role in accounting for the pre-crisis IR/GDP level of countries that experienced
a sizable IR depletion during the first phase of crisis. Our findings suggest that countries that internalized
their large exposure to trade shocks before the crisis, used their IR as a buffer stock in the first phase
of the crisis. Their reserves losses followed an inverted logistical curve. After a rapid initial depletion
of reverses, within seven months they reached a markedly declining rate of IR depletion, losing not
more than one-third of their pre crisis IR. On the contrary, in case of countries that refrained from
a sizable IR depletion during the first phase of crisis, financial factors seem more important than trade
factors in explaining the initial IR/GDP level. Our results indicate that the adjustment of EMs was
constrained more by their fear of losing IR than by their fear of floating.


Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics; E2
1156 High St.
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@ucsc.edu

Yi Sun
Economics E2
UCSC
Santa Cruz, CA, 95064
ysun@ucsc.edu
       The 2008-9 global financial crisis imposes daunting challenges to emerging markets
(EMs). Earlier hopes of ‘decoupling,’ that would have allowed EMs to be spared the brunt of
adverse adjustments have not materialized. The “flight to quality,” deleveraging and the rapid
reduction of international trade began affecting EMs from mid 2008, putting to test their
adjustment capabilities. During earlier crises episodes, EMs were forced to adjust mostly via
rapid depreciation. However, the sizable hoarding of international reserves (IR) during the late
1990s and early 2000s, provided these countries with a relatively richer menu of choices. In this
paper we study the degree to which earlier hoarding of IR “paid off,” by allowing EMs to buffer
their adjustment by drawing down IR stocks.
       To recall, investigating the patterns of exchange rates, interest rates and IR during
1970-1999, Calvo and Reinhart (2002) inferred the prevalence of the “fear of floating”. Countries
claiming that they allow their exchange rates to float, mostly do not. Instead, the authorities
frequently attempt to stabilize the exchange rate through direct intervention in foreign exchange
market and open market operations. The fear of floating may also provide an interpretation for the
massive hoarding of IR during the last ten years by EMs and other developing countries.
Alternative explanations of IR hoarding however include the precautionary and/or mercantilist
motives [Aizenman and Lee (2007, 2008)], and the Bretton Woods II interpretation [Dooley,
Garber and (2003)]. This study looks at the factors accounting for the depletion of IR during the
2008-9 crisis, investigate the dynamics of drawing down of IR by EMs, and verify the degree to
which the fear of floating dominated the use of IR during the crisis. We explore the adjustment of
21 EMs during the window of the crisis and reveal a mixed and complex picture. Regression
analysis shows that EMs with large primary commodity exports, especially oil exports,
experienced large IR losses during the 2008-9 global crisis. Countries with a medium level of
financial openness and a large short term external debt to GDP ratio also on average lost more of
their initial IR holdings. Most of the countries that suffered large IR losses, started depleting their
IR during the second half of 2008. Quite intriguingly, only about half of the EMs relied on
significant depletion of their IR as part of their adjustment mechanism.

                                                  1
        We proceed by dividing the sample of EMs into two groups: countries that experienced
sizable IR losses and countries that had either not lost IR or quickly recovered from their IR losses.
The first group is defined as countries that lost at least 10 per cent of their IR during the period of
July 2008 - February 2009 relative to their highest IR level. Among 21 EMs, 9 countries belong
to the first group. To gain further insight, we compare the pre-crisis demand for IR/GDP of
countries that experienced sizable depletion of their IR, to that of countries that did not, and find
differential patterns across the two groups. Trade related factors (such as trade openness, and the
primary goods export, especially large oil export) seem to be more significant in accounting for the
pre-crisis IR/GDP levels of countries that experienced a sizable depletion of IR in the first phase of
the crisis. These findings suggest that countries that internalized their large exposure to trade
shocks before the crisis used their IR as a buffer stock in the first phase of crisis. The IR losses of
these countries followed an inverted logistical curve. After a rapid initial depletion of IR, these
countries reached within 7 months a markedly declining rate of IR depletion, and lost not more
than one-third of their pre crisis IR.
        In contrast, in case of countries that refrained from a sizable depletion of IR during the first
crisis phase, financial factors seem more important than trade factors in explaining the initial level
of IR/GDP. These countries refrained from using IR altogether and achieved external adjustment
through large depreciations of their currencies. The patterns of using IR by the first group of
countries, and refraining from using IR by the second group, are consistent with the ‘fear of losing
reserves.’ Such a fear may reflect a country’s concern that dwindling IR may signal greater
vulnerability to run on its currency, thereby triggering such a run on its remaining reserves. This
fear may be related to a country’s apprehension that, as the duration of the crisis in unknown,
depleting IR quickly may be suboptimal.
        Our results suggest that the adjustment of EMs during the on-going global liquidity crisis
has been constrained more by their fear of losing IR than by their fear of floating. Countries’
choice of currency depreciation instead of reserve depletion also suggests that some may opt to
revisit the gains from financial globalization. Earlier research suggests that EMs that increased

                                                   2
their financial integration during the 1990s and mid 2000s, accumulated IRs due to precautionary
motives, to obtain self insurance against sudden stops, capital flights, and deleveraging crises [See
Calvo (1998) and Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor (2010)]. Yet, the 2008-9 global crisis
suggests that the levels of IR required in order for this self-insurance to work may be comparable
to that of a country’s gross external financial exposure [see Park (2009) analyzing Korea’s
challenges during the crisis]. In these circumstances, prudential supervision that would tighten the
link between short-term external borrowing and hoarding IR would mitigate the excessive
exposure to deleveraging risks induced by short-term external borrowing.
        In Section 1, we analyze the impact of recent financial crisis on IR holdings in EMs.
After documenting that about half of the EMs experienced a large decline of their IR, we look for
factors explaining the depletion of IR. In Section 2, we explain the factors determining the speed
of drawing down IR. Finally we conclude in Section 3.


1.   IR changes in all emerging markets
        Our sample consists of countries listed in the FTSE and MSCI emerging market list.1 We
have not included Singapore and Hong-Kong because of their special economic structure,
specializing in entrepôt services.2 Figure 1 presents IR holdings since January 2008 of the 21
EMs included in our sample. In Figure 1a, IR are normalized by a country’s GDP. In Figure 1b,
IR are measured relative to the highest IR level since January 2008. From Figure 1, we can see


1
   As of April 2009, MSCI Barra classified the following 22 countries as emerging markets: Brazil, Chile,
China, Colombia, Czech Republic, Egypt, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Russia, South Africa, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey [see
http://www.mscibarra.com/products/indices/equity/index.jsp]. The FTSE emerging markets classification
is similar to that of MSCI, adding Argentina, subtracting Israel [see
http://www.ftse.com/Indices/FTSE_Emerging_Markets/index.jsp ].
The list tracked by The Economist is the same as the MSCI, except with Hong Kong, Singapore and
Saudi Arabia included (MSCI classifies the first two as Developed Markets).
2
   Considering the dramatic effect of the IMF’s aid on Hungary’s reserves changes, we excluded it from
our sample. Following the IMF’s announced its loan to Hungary in November 2008, Hungary’s
international reserves have increased nearly by half in the next two months. Due to data availability, we
did not include Morocco and Pakistan.
                                                      3
that more than half of the EMs in our sample reduced their IR holdings during the 2008-9 crisis.
Most countries experiencing large IR losses began depleting their IR during the second half of
2008. We next look into the factors that may have caused a country to deplete its IR holdings
during the global financial crisis.
1.1 Data and explanatory variables
        In our analysis, we use several measures of IR changes. Most EMs began exhibiting large
IR losses during second half of 2008, and regained most of their losses by first quarter of 2009.
Hence, we use July 2008 to February 2009 as the time window for our case study. We measure
IR changes in two ways: IR changes relative to a country’s GDP; and IR changes relative to a
country’s initial IR level in our sample period.3
        We include both trade related factors and financial market related factors as potential
explanatory variables accounting for changes in IR patterns. The first variable we consider is
trade openness (henceforth labeled as topen), defined as the sum of imports and exports over
GDP in the year before the crisis. The second trade variable is a country’s oil export share,
(oilex/gdp). It is measured as a country’s net oil export level in 2005 (by 1000 barrels per day)
divided by its GDP. The third variable is the primary products export ratio (prim2export), defined
as the value of fuel and non-fuel primary products export, divided by total exports.4           We also
consider historic export volatility (xvolatile) as an explanatory variable. It is measured as the
standard deviation of monthly export growth rates (year to year) of the previous year. We expect
countries with greater trade dependence will be impacted more following a negative global shock
that leads to rapid decline in international trade. Thus, relatively higher trade openness, larger
net oil exports, larger primary product export ratio, and higher export volatility to experience a
larger IR loss when faced with a negative global shock. The larger IR losses may reflect
dwindling revenue from export (reflecting lower demand for export, tighter trade credit,
3
  We have tried other measures in our analysis, e.g. IR changes divided by the highest IR level during our
sample period. However the results were very similar to the results of the previous two measures,
therefore we did not report those results here.
4
  The data of primary products is collected from the United Nations Commodity Trade Statistics
Database. Fuel and non-fuel primary products used in our sample are defined as the products in SITC 0, 1,
2, 3, 4 and 68 categories.
                                                     4
deteriorating terms of trade, etc.), and possibly greater deleveraging of foreign positions in the
economy, reflecting anticipation of lower future growth.
        In the category of financial market factors, the first variable we include is financial
openness. We use the Chinn-Ito capital market openness index (Kopen). The second variable is
historic exchange rate volatility (exstdev), which is measured as the standard deviation of
monthly exchange rate growth rate (month to month changes). The last variable in this category
is the short term external debt relative to a country’s GDP (STdebt/gdp)5. In general, the impact
of financial openness on IR losses may be ambiguous. For countries that allow larger exchange
rate volatility, we expect lower IR changes during the crisis. Whereas countries with relatively
large short term external debt may opt to lose more IR during crisis. In our empirical estimations,
we have also included other control variables, such as previous year’s GDP (gdp07), per capita
GDP (gdppc) as well as some interaction terms involving these explanatory variables. Table 1
presents summary statistics for the variables used in our cross section analysis.
1.2 Regression results
        Tables 2 and 3 present the regression results, accounting for the variation of our two IR
change measures and using different explanatory variables. Dependent variable in Table 2 is the
IR change from July 2008 to Feb 2009 measured as a ratio to a country’s GDP. Dependent
variable in Table 3 is the IR change over the same period measured as a ratio to a country’s initial
IR level, i.e. IR level in July 2008. The explanatory variables are measured using 2007 data
except for short term external debt and oil export ratio.6
        In Table 2, we first control for four trade factors in our regressions. Columns 2 and 3
show that the primary product exports, especially oil exports, have significant impact on IR
changes. Since including the primary product export ratio gives similar results as those of the oil
export ratio, we have not reported other regressions including primary export ratios. Trade
openness affects IR changes only when we control for the primary product exports or oil exports.

5
  Short term debt data is based on the IMF debt statistics tables drawn from creditor and market sources.
6
  In table 2 and 3, short term debt are measured by June 2008 level. Due to data constraint, the oil export
level used here is taken from 2005 data.
                                                     5
When we include trade openness, oil exports, and their interaction term (topenXoilex), trade
openness is found to have negative impact on IR changes. The oil export ratio also has negative
impact on IR, but shows up only in the interaction term (Column 4 reports this result, and also
see figure 2.a). However, export volatility does not seem to have any significant relationship with
IR changes, and so we do not report it in Table 2.
           Next, we include financial openness, exchange rate volatility and short term debt ratio in
our regression. Financial openness has some impact on IR changes. However the relationship
between IR changes and financial openness is non-linear. Low and high financial openness (i.e.
openness index value either close to -1 or close to 2 and 3) are related to a small IR loss, or to an
increase in IR holdings. In contrast, countries with medium financial openness (i.e. with
openness index value close to 0) tend to experience larger IR losses (see figure 2b). In column 6,
we add to the selected trade-related factors, the absolute value of Chinn-Ito index, and find it to
have a significant positive association with IR changes. We also find that short term external
debts have a negative impact on IR changes. Column 7 shows that countries with large short
term external debts tend to have relatively large IR losses during the crisis (also see figure 2.c).
Exchange rate volatility turned out to be insignificant, and thus we do not include them in the
reported regressions.7
           In the last column we include initial IR level (labeled Ini.IR, and measured as the IR/GDP
level in July 2008) as an explanatory variable. The significant negative sign of Ini.IR shows that
large IR/GDP levels during the pre-crisis period were associated with large IR/GDP declines
during the crisis period. The higher pre-crisis IR/GDP level may have encouraged countries to
spend more IR during the crisis to absorb the external shock (and countries that faced large IR
losses in process of crisis management, maybe hypothesized to              accumulate more IR after the
crisis).    Table 3 presents similar regressions for the case where the IR change is calculated
relative to its initial IR level, ((IR2009.2 – IR2008.7) / IR2008.7). Overall, the results are similar. Trade

7
  We have also tried other factors such as country size (GDP2007) and country income level (measured
as the 2007 per capita GDP). Both turned out to be insignificant, and hence we do not report them in the
table.
                                                     6
openness is insignificant, but the primary product export/total export ratio, oil export/GDP ratio
and the absolute value of the financial openness index – all remain significant as in Table 2. The
last regression in Table 3 also shows that the initial levels of IR no longer have a large impact on
the relative changes in reserves level. In subsequent analysis we find that trade openness plays an
important role in deciding countries’ initial IR levels. Hence one interpretation of the differences
in results of Table 2 and Table 3 could be that trade openness affects initial IR level, and thus the
magnitude of changes in IR/GDP ratio, but it does not have any direct impact on the relative IR
changes. On the other hand, primary commodity exports, oil exports and financial openness not
only affect the initial IR level, but also affect the patterns of relative IR changes.
        Based on results in Tables 2 and 3, we find that EMs with a large primary commodity
export, especially oil export, tend to experience relatively large IR loss during the 2008-9 global
crisis. EMs with a medium level of financial openness and a large short term debt ratio also lost a
larger share of their IR holdings. Trade openness affects a country’s initial IR level. Trade
openness and the initial IR level together affect the magnitude of IR changes relative to GDP, but
do not have any impact on the IR changes relative to a country’s historic IR level.
        EMs accumulate IR for different reasons such as to protect from trade shocks, to promote
exports, etc. Thus, they may use their IRs differently as well when facing the same external
shock. Comparing pre-crisis level of IR/GDP of EMs that depleted a significant share of their IR
during the crisis with that of EMs that did not, may provide further insights. We next divide our
sample into two groups: countries that have sizable IR losses, and countries that either have not
lost IR or have quickly recovered from their IR losses. We define the first group as countries that
lost at least 10% of their IR during the period of July 2008- Feb 2009, relative to their highest IR
level. Among 21 EMs, 9 countries were selected to be included in the first group.8
        Table 4 compares the motives of IR holdings between these two groups. We first regress
the pre-crisis level of IR/GDP (i.e. the IR level in July 2008) on the same explanatory variables



8
 Large IR loss countries include Brazil (BRA), India (IND), Indonesia (IDN), Malaysia (MYS), South
Korea (KOR), Peru (PER), Poland (POL), Russia (RUS), and Turkey (TUR).
                                                   7
as in Tables 2 and 3.9 The results show that both financial market related factors and trade
related factors are important in accounting for the pre-crisis IR accumulation. However these
factors have different weights between these two groups of countries. For EMs experiencing
large IR depletion, trade related factors show consistent expected signs in our regressions.
Countries with relatively larger trade sectors, countries with large primary goods export ratio,
and countries that have faced large trade shocks accumulated more IR. Thus, compared with the
second group (i.e. small or no IR depletion countries), trade related factors are more important
for the first group. The R-Squared of the regression on trade related factors for the first group
(equation 1 in Table 4), exceeds that of the corresponding regression for the second group by a
factor of 4 [see the first and the fourth columns of Table 4]. Even after controlling for the
financial factors (column 3 in Table 4), trade related factors (trade openness, the primary product
export ratio) are still the only significant variables in the regression for the first group. Financial
factors, on the other hand, are much more significant for the second group of countries who have
not lost much IR. In the second group, countries with relatively strict financial controls tend to
have a higher pre-crisis level of IR/GDP whereas countries with more flexible exchange rates
tend to have a lower per-crisis IR/GDP. Their coefficients have consistent signs in both
regressions with and without the trade factors, and are statistically significant when trade factors
are controlled for. Short term debt/GDP, ratio however, shows different signs in regressions with
and without the trade factors.10 In the last column of Table 4, we run regressions for all 20
countries that have relevant data. Trade openness and exchange rate flexibility are significant in
accounting for the pre-crisis IR/GDP level. Figure 3 provides a detailed picture of these
relationships.
        Table 4b presents results for regressions wherein we use a longer duration panel data to
further test the above mentioned relationships. The time period is 2000 to 2007. Dependent

9
   In order to address the possible role of outliers, we have applied the ROBUST OLS regression in Table
4. “Robust regression” is essentially a compromise between dropping the case(s) that are moderate
outliers and seriously violating the assumptions of OLS regression.
10
    One potential reason could be the high correlation between trade openness and short term debt ratio.
The correlation between these two variables is 0.51 in the cross section dataset.
                                                        8
variable used in Table 4b is the IR level at the end of each year and the explanatory variables in
the panel are measured using the data from 2000 to 2007.11 In Table 4b we found results similar
to those in Table 4a. For both groups of countries, trade openness and exchange rate volatility
have a consistent and significant impact on IR accumulation level. Countries with a larger trade
sector and lower exchange rate flexibility tend to hold more IR. When we include all the control
variables, trade openness is statistically more significant for group 1, whereas exchange rate
volatility is more significant for group 2. Similar to Table 4a, the primary product export ratio
shows significant impact for countries in the first group, but not for the second group. Capital
market openness shows a significant negative sign in regressions for the second group but not for
the first group. The short term debt ratio is significantly positive in both columns 2 and 5 when
we include only the financial factors.12 When we include trade factors, the short term debt ratio
turned out to be significant only for the first group of countries.13
        Overall, trade related factors (especially the primary product export ratio) are more
statistically significant for the first group, whereas financial factors (with the exception of short
term debt ratio) seem to be more important for the second group. Table 4c gives the results of an
F-test for the hypothesis that trade rated factors and financial markets related factors play equally
important roles in determining the pre-crisis IR level of EMs. We include a group dummy,
interact it with each of the explanatory variables, and run regressions over the full sample. Table
4c reports the F-test values for the hypothesis that group dummy and all the associated
interaction terms added to regressions in Tables 4a and 4b are jointly zero. Five out of six results
reject our hypothesis, confirming the hypothesis that trade and financial related factors played


11
   We exclude Taiwan in our regression since we do not have its data on primary product export ratio. We
also exclude Argentina’s 2000-2004’s observations, since its exchange rate and short term debt exhibit
extraordinary changes during the collapse of the currency board during these years.
12
   These findings, and the observation that EMs with a medium level of financial openness and a large
short term debt ratio also lost a larger share of their IR holdings, are supportive of the view that part of the
reserve accumulation can be explained by the EMs’ desire to build their war-chest for defense against
financial crisis.
13
   Our results should be taken with a grain of salt, as we have only 21 countries, and relatively low R^2.
                                                         9
different roles in accounting for the pre-crisis IR accumulation across these two groups of EMs.
        One possible interpretation could be that EMs internalizing their large exposure to trade
shocks before the 2008-9 crisis, opted to deplete a relatively larger share of their initial IR during
the first phase of crisis. In contrast, EMs that did not take into account trade factors while
hoarding IR before the crisis, refrained from using their IR. This could possibly be owing to the
fear that depleting IR may signal greater vulnerability and induce a deeper run on IRs.
Comparing the mean value of the conditioning variables in the two groups failed to reveal
significant differences. Thus, we are unable (so far) to explain the sources of the differences in
the pre-crisis IR/GDP levels between the two groups of EMs. To gain further insight, we next
study the dynamics of IR accumulation for countries that experienced sizable IR depletion during
the 2008-9 crisis.


2. Countries with large IR Losses
        In this section we focus on the first group of EMs, i.e. countries that experienced a
sizable IR depletion during the crisis. We attempt to explain their IR/GDP patterns during the
first phase of crisis.
2.1 Fitted logistic curves
        Figure 1b suggests that an inverted logistic curve may provide a good fit to the data.14
Such a curve implies that in the first part of the crisis the depletion of IR tends to gradually speed
up. Once a threshold is reached, the depletion rate slows down, and ultimately the IR stock
regains stability.   Thus, we fit a logistic curve to the IR/MaxIR path. We apply a nonlinear least
squares regression to the data for the selected period, starting with the month when IR peaked:

                                                  1
        IR(t)/MaxIR = (1 − b0 ) + b0 ×                                                   (1)
                                         1 + exp(b1 + b2 × t )

with the presumption that b0 > 0, b1 < 0, b2 > 0 . For each country, we select the data starting from

14
   The Logistic curve has been used in modeling the depletion of natural resources [applying the Hubbert
model of exhaustible resources]. While it lacks micro foundation in the context of depleting international
reserves, the data suggests that it provides a very good fit.
                                                      10
the month with the highest IR position until the end of sample, i.e. February 2009.               The

estimated parameters are as follows: b0 , determining the long run value of ‘desirable’ IR (i.e.,

IR(t ) ⎯⎯⎯
        t →∞
             →1 − b0 ); b1 , providing information about the inflection point and determining the

point when the rate of IR depletion starts decreasing; and b2 , measuring the rate of IR depletion.

    Figure 4 presents the picture of relative IR changes, and the fitted logistic curves for the 9
countries that experienced sizable IR depletion during the crisis. Overall, the predicted line fits
the data very well. Table 5 reports the coefficients of fitted logistic curves for the 9 EMs with

sizable IR losses. Most Asian and Europe countries have a relatively large value of b0 (15% to

36%), while Latin-American countries (BRA, PER), and Turkey (TUR) have relatively lower
values, (10% to 17%). Table 5 also reports the number of months since IR started to decline,

reported as “length”. Solving b1 + b2 × t * = 0 for t*, we find the time it takes to reach the

inflection point (i.e., the number of months from the beginning of the decline of IR to the point
when the depletion rate itself starts declining). We label t* as the turning point or inflection
point. Adding t* to the starting time of the IR decline, we find the time when the IR depletion
starts losing speed and slows down, and label it “MTP” (Month of IR depletion’s Turning Point).
For most EMs, MTP is found to be around 8 to 10, implying that the turning point in the rate of
IR depletion occurred between August to October. 2008.
2.2 Regression Results
       Table 5 shows that different countries begin to lose IR from different starting points. We
next turn to identify factors that determine the starting time of IR loss for these countries that
have lost sizable amounts of IR. We use ‘length’, i.e. the number of months since the IR start to
decline, as our dependent variable. Table 6 presents statistically significant regression results.
Among all explanatory variables we attempted to include, exchange rate volatility and oil export
ratio are the only two variables that consistently show a significant sign in our regression. The
large oil export countries have a relatively small “length” value, which means their IR loss
started later. This is consistent with the fact that oil price started falling only when the perception
                                                  11
of recession hit the market, i.e. around August 2008. Exchange rate volatility has a significant
negative sign, indicating the tradeoff between tolerating exchange rate movements and IR
adjustment. Financial openness, trade openness and country size come out to be significant
when we include all of them in the regression, but these relationships are not robust when we
include any one of them separately.
        Table 7 reports the regression results using MTP as our dependent variable. The results
validate that EMs that had begun depleting their IR sooner had an earlier turning point (see the
negative sign on the coefficient of length). Financial openness has a positive sign in our
regression indicating that more financial open economy has a later turning point. However this
coefficient is statistically significant only when we include country size in the regression. Other
variables are mostly insignificant when we control for length.15
     Tables 8 and 9 report the regression results on the size of IR loss. Similar to what we find
in Table 2, large trade openness, large primary goods and oil export ratios are associated with
large IR loss during the crisis. Other trade or financial market related factors are insignificant in
the regressions for this small sample. As expected, length -- the duration of IR depletion, is
positively related to magnitude of IR changes. The earlier the countries begin to lose IR, the
larger are the total IR loss during the sample period.16 Table 9 presents the regression results for
the relative IR position changes (d.rir). Similar to Table 3, trade openness no longer comes out
significant in our regression, but oil export ratio is still significant. Overall, trade related factors
are the only significant determinants in our regressions for this small sample.
        Table 10 reports panel data regressions of monthly reserve changes during the crisis. In
addition to the variables used before, we add three new variables: monthly changes of oil price
(d.oilprice), monthly trade surplus as percentage of GDP (tsurplusgdp) and normalized exchange
15
  This regression may be viewed as a test of the degree that MTP is exogenous. If MTP is exogenous,
say August for all countries, then t*=14-length-8, therefor MTP (= 14-length-t*) should not be impacted
by length. Thus, the regression result hinges on the correlation between t* and length.
16
   The positive association of length with the magnitude of the IR change, and the finding that EMs
which had begun depleting their IR sooner had also an earlier turning point is consistent with the fear of
losing reserves – this fear restrained Emerging Markets from more heavily drawing down their reserves,
preserving at least two-thirds of their pre-crisis level of international reserves.
                                                       12
rate changes (norexgrowth)17. We use two measures for the independent variable: monthly
changes in IR relative to a country’s GDP (md.ir_gdp) and monthly changes in IR relative to a
country’s highest IR level in the sample (md.rir).
        The first column of Table 10 presents results from ordinary least squares regressions, and
the second column reports results from random effect regressions. The third column reports
random effect regression results, including time dummies for each month. Trade openness and
oil price changes have significant effects on monthly IR/GDP changes, in line with our cross
section analysis. Historic exchange rate volatility is significant in the first and third column but
not in the second, while monthly trade surplus and exchange rate changes are insignificant. In the
next three columns we apply the same methods to the monthly IR changes relative to the initial
IR level at July 2008 (md.rir). As in Tables 3 and 9, trade openness is insignificant. Exchange
rate depreciation (norexgrowth) however has a negative impact on IR changes. Over all, our
panel data regressions confirm the results obtained before. Trade related factors, especially those
related to oil exports, have a significant impact on the size of IR depletion. Financial market
related factors have some impact on IR losses, but not as significant as trade related
determinants.
2.3 Robustness analysis
     We conducted several robustness tests.           We have run regressions including an Asian
dummy, added to verify if there a regional bias stemming from the fact that many emerging
markets are from. Overall, adding the Asian dummy does not affect the results of regressions
that include both large and small IR loss countries. In the subgroup regressions in table 4,
including Asian dummy does not affect results related to role of trade factors but will result in
unstable results on financial factors. Since many Asian countries have strict capital controls,
especially among the countries that don’t lose IR, we cannot distinguish whether this result is

17
   Normalized exchange rate change is measured as monthly exchange rate growth minus the average
monthly exchange rate growth rate in 2007, divided by the standard deviation of monthly exchange rate
change in 2007, { i.e. (et –eavg)/std.dev(e) }. Since Central Banks may use IR to stabilize unusual changes
in exchange rate, we use this variable to identify these unusual changes, and measure its effect on IR
changes.
                                                       13
driven by Asian dummy or by the financial factors. The choice of the threshold for losing IR in
our base regression is 10% [i.e., we take a 10% threshold of reserve losses to differentiate the
high versus low losses.]. The main results are not impacted by varying the threshold to be 5%
or 15%. Moving the threshold to 20% reduces the group or countries that lost IR to 3, not
allowing us to run a meaningful regression.
2.4 Deleveraging and exchange rate pressure during the crisis.
     Further insight is gained by looking at the association of short term external debt and IR
changes. In the absence of monthly data of these variables, we apply quarterly data for 18 EMs
during 2008 and the first quarter of 2009. Figure 5 traces the average quarterly IR position and
short term external borrowing of the two groups (sizable and non-sizable IR losses, 9 countries in
each group), during 2008 and the first quarter of 2009. 18 Figure 5 shows that EMs that
experienced sizable IR losses during the worst part of the crisis were exposed to a much larger
deleveraging of short term external debt than other EMs. During Q4, 2008, the average IR losses
were 28 Billion US$ for EMs in the sizable IR losses group, half of it funded the deleveraging of
short-term external debt (14 Billion US$). In contrast, IR losses and the deleveraging of short
term debt were close to zero for countries experiencing non-sizable IR losses during Q4 2008 --
IR increased on average by 1 Billion $, short term external debt declined by 2 Billion.
     Figure 6 reports the association between the quarterly changes of IR and short-term external
debt (ST) during Q1 2008 and Q1 2009 for EMs, subject to data availability. The darker
(lighter) lines are the regression lines for the sizable (non sizable) IR losses group, respectively.
During the peak of the crisis, Q4 of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009, there is a clear positive
relationship between these variables for the sizable IR losses group. Figure 7 plots the overall
association of quarterly changes of reserves and the short-term external debt of all the EMs
during the 5 quarters. The regression line confirms the importance of the balance sheet, inducing

18
   Sizable IR loss group includes: BRA IDN IND KOR MYS PER POL RUS TUR, Non-sizable IR loss
group include: ARG CHL COL CZE EGY ISR MEX THA ZAF (quarterly data is not available for CHN
PER and TWN). Due to the unavailability of monthly data we apply quarterly data.


                                                 14
a positive and significant association of the two [see Eichengreen et al. (2003)].
     We close the section with an analysis of the way EMs, experiencing sizable IR losses, dealt
                                    19
with exchange market pressure.           First, we calculate the exchange market pressure, EMP,
defined as the sum of the monthly exchange rate depreciation against the US$ plus the rate of IR
depletion, measured by IR losses as a fraction of M1.20 For country i,
EMPi = ΔEi/usd /Ei/usd - ΔIR/ M1. We focus on EMs that experienced a large exchange market
pressure -- a spell of at least three consecutive months with an exchange market pressure
exceeding 0.05.     These countries are Brazil, Columbia, Indonesia, India, Korea, Malaysia,
Poland, Russia, and South Africa. A common pattern exhibited by most of these countries is
that after experiencing large losses of IR during a few months in the first phase of the crisis,
countries increased the weight of exchange rate depreciation, and reduced the weight of losing
IR as a way of dealing with exchange market pressures. This pattern is consistent with the
growing fear of losing IR.
     Figure 8 illustrates these patterns for Russia, Korea, Poland and Malaysia.21            EMP is
measured by the bars, using the left scales. An EMP exceeding 0.05 is reported by the lighter
bars. Note that these countries faced an EMP exceeding 0.05 after August 2008, the on-set of the
worst phase of the crisis. The top broken line measures the IR/MaxIR ratio (MaxIR is the MaxIR
level during 2008.1-2009), using the right scale. The solid volatile line, IRER, measures the
relative weight of IR in the exchange market pressure, using the right scale. Focusing on the
experience of Russia and Korea, their EMP increased rapidly from about 0.1 in August 2008 to
about 0.4 in Russia within half a year, and 0.2 in Korea within four months. During that period,
Russia and Korea experienced rapid depletion of international reserves. After three months of
intensive IR losses, they started decelerating their IR depletion rate, increasing the weight of
exchange rate depreciation in dealing with exchange market pressure.22 Similar patterns are

19
   See Girton and Roper (1977) and Frankel (2009) for further discussion of exchange market pressure.
20
   Due to data limitation, we don’t have monthly data of the monetary base, thereby we deflate ΔIR by
M1.
21
   These are the countries experiencing spells of four or more consecutive months with EMP > 0.05.
22
   Note that the FED swap line advanced to Korea in November 2008 was associated with the large drop
                                                     15
exhibited by the other EMs experiencing sizable IR losses.
        The hoarding of reserves in boom times, and the use of reserves during the crises
followed frequently a similar narrative, impacted by the political economy circumstances of the
emerging markets. Russia and other oil exporting countries were slow to spend their growing
trade surpluses in years of high price of oil, either because they were unsure of the permanence
of the price rise, or because they their demand for foreign products did not rise fast enough to
catch with the windfall gains of strong terms of trade in boom years. The huge price rise in 2008
led to large reserve hoarding in Russia and other commodity countries. During the collapse of oil
prices, these countries were willing to buffer the adjustment with reserves. Frequently, their
corporations expanded rapidly on foreign debt during the boom associated with strong terms of
trade, and needed to cover their position during the crisis. The large initial reserves outlays were
to cover the corporate sector; after that, there was less need for intervention. In a similar vein,
relatively open countries with large short term foreign debt, or a banking system that had dollar
liabilities funding dollar assets offshore opt to follow similar adjustment.               In these
circumstances, central banks tended to hoard reserves in boom years, used these reserves to
mitigate exchange rate depreciations in the first phase of the crisis, and lend funds to its banks so
that they can pay off their foreign creditors with reserves purchased at cheap prices from the
central bank. This had had been the case in Korea, Russia and others during the 2008-9 crisis,
reflecting the use of reserves to meet balance sheet exposure of systemic or politically powerful
agents in the first phase of the 2008-9 crisis. The resultant reduced balance sheet exposure of
key players, and declining stock of reserves led to the sharp reduction in reserve depletion,
shifting the adjustment from reserves depletion in the first phase of the crisis to exchange rate
deprecations in the second crisis phase [see Figure 8].




in exchange market pressure shortly after.
                                                 16
3.   Concluding remarks
       Our paper suggests that trade related factors seem to be much more significant in
accounting for the pre-crisis IR level of EMs that experienced a sizable depletion of their IR in
the first phase of crisis. This finding is in line with the buffer stock interpretation of demand for
IR.23 Financial factors come across as more important in accounting for pre-crisis IR level of
countries that refrained from spending IR in the first phase of crisis. During the “flight to
quality,” and deleveraging from EMs observed in the first phase of crisis, “fear of losing IR”
seem to have played a key role in shaping the actual use of IR by EMs. Countries that depleted
their IR in the first phase of crisis, refrained from drawing their IR below one-third of the
pre-crisis level. Majority of the EMs used less than one-fourth of their pre crisis IR stock.
Countries whose pre crisis demand for IR was more sensitive to financial factors, refrained from
using IR altogether, preferring to adjust through larger depreciations of exchange rate. Both
patterns may reflect the fear that dwindling IR may induce more destabilizing speculative flows.
A possible interpretation for the fear of losing IR is the “keeping up with the Joneses’ IRs”
motive alluding to the apprehension of a country that a reduction of its IR/GDP level below the
average of its reference group might increase its vulnerability to deleveraging and sudden
stops.24 These factors suggest a greater demand for regional pooling arrangements and swap
lines [Rajan et al. (2005)], as well as possible new roles for International Financial Institutions.
A better understanding of these issues is left for future research.
     Our findings raise new questions. Apart from short-term external debt, it would also be
important to include stock of foreign holdings of portfolios as explanatory variables in the model,
given that these are potentially reversible too, as witnessed in Korea, India and elsewhere during
this crisis. This exercise requires data that is not available for some of the countries in our sample.
More work is needed to understand why countries differ in the weight assigned to financial
versus trade factors, in accounting for their demand for IRs. Intriguingly, the average exchange

23
  See Frenkel (1983), Edwards (1983) for further discussion of this buffer stock view.
24
  See Cheung and Qian (2009) for evidence on the “keeping up with the Joneses’ IRs” hypothesis in
context of East Asia.
                                                  17
rate depreciation rate from August 2008 to October 2009 was about 30% in EMs that depleted
and those that refrained from depleting their IR, alike. A hypothesis that can explain this
observation is that the shocks affecting the EMs that opted to deplete their IR were larger than
the shocks impacting EMs that refrained from using their IR. Testing this possibility requires
more data, not available presently. This hypothesis implies that countries prefer to adjust to bad
shocks first via exchange rate depreciation, supplementing it with partial depletion of their IR
when the shocks are deemed to be too large to be dealt only with exchange rate adjustment.
The case for using reserves tends to be stronger for countries with a significant balance sheet
exposure at times of deleveraging. The case for depreciation tends to be stronger for countries
with a limited balance sheet exposure, at times of global recessionary pressure. Deflationary
shocks (drops in commodity prices, collapsing export demands, etc.) mitigate fears from the
inflationary consequences of depreciation, increasing the perceived gain of depreciation as a
form of demand switching policy, thereby improving the competitiveness of a country.
     Overall, our study confirms the benefits of hoarding reserves as a war chest dealing with
deleveraging and collapsing trade, finding that half of the countries relied heavily on depleting
reserves during the most acute stages of the 2008-9 crisis. Yet, our study also confirms
important limitations of the efficacy of hoarding reserves – in deep crises; reserves may not
suffice to quell market sentiments if they don’t cover the external debt exposure of a country.
Consequently, the 2008-9 crisis suggests that in order for the self insurance provided by
international reserves to work, a country may require levels of IR comparable to its external
financial gross exposure.25 Under such circumstances, countries may benefit by invoking the
proper Pigovian taxes.26


25
   See Park (2009) analyzing Korea’s challenges during the crisis.
26
   These policies may take the form of non linear taxes on external borrowing, where inflows of external
borrowing above a threshold may be taxed at an increasing rate, reflecting the resultant higher exposure
of the central bank to a possible future bailout of the banking system [Aizenman (2009)]; varying reserves
requirements of the Chilean type [see Edwards (2000) and Cowan and De Gregorio (2005)]; and changing
reserve ratios in the banking system. See Rodrik (2006) for further discussion of policy options facing
emerging markets that are concerned with exposure to sudden stops.
                                                       18
                                                 References
Aizenman, J. (2009). “Hoarding International Reserves versus a Pigovian Tax scheme: Reflections on the
         deleveraging crisis of 2008-9, and a cost benefit analysis,” NBER Working Paper # 15484.
_______ and J. Lee. (2007). "International Reserves: Precautionary versus Mercantilist Views, Theory
         and Evidence," with Jaewoo Lee. Open Economies Review, 18: 2, pp. 191-214.
_______ and J. Lee. (2008). “Financial versus monetary mercantilism -- long-run view of large
         international reserves hoarding,” (with J. Lee), The World Economy, 31: 5, pp. 593-611.
Calvo, G. A. (1998). Capital flows and capital-market crises: the simple economics of sudden stops.
         Journal of Applied Economics 1, pp. 35–54.
____________ and C. M. Reinhart. (2002) "Fear Of Floating," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107: 2,
         pp. 379-408.
Cowan K. & J. De Gregorio. (2005). "International Borrowing, Capital Controls and the Exchange Rate:
         Lessons from Chile," NBER Working paper 11382, National Bureau of Economic Research,
         Cambridge, MA.
Cheung Y. W. and X. Qian. (2009) “Hoarding of International Reserves: Mrs Machlup's Wardrobe and the
         Joneses” Review of International Economics, 17: 4, pp. 777-801.
Dooley, P. M., D. Folkerts-Landau and P. Garber, "An Essay on the Revived Bretton Woods System",
         NBER Working Paper 9971, September 2003.
Edwards, S. (1983). The demand for international reserves and exchange rate adjustments: the case of
         LDCs, 1964–1972. Economica 50, 269–80.
_________ (2000) “Capital Flows, Real Exchange Rates and Capital Controls: Some Latin American
         Experiences,” in, S. Edwards (Ed.), Capital Flows and the Emerging Economies, Chicago and
         London: University of Chicago Press, 2000, 197-253.
Frenkel, J. (1983). International liquidity and monetary control. In International Money and Credit: The
         Policy Roles, ed. G. von Furstenberg. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Frankel, J. (2009). New estimation of China’s exchange rate regime. Pacific Economic Review , 14: 3.
Girton, L. and D. Roper (1977) “A Monetary Model of Exchange Market Pressure Applied to the Postwar
         Canadian Experience”, American Economic Review 67, 537–48.
Eichengreen B., R. Hausmann and U. Panizza. (2003) “Currency Mismatches, Debt Intolerance and
         Original Sin: Why They Are Not the Same and Why it Matters” NBER Working Paper 10036.
Obstfeld, M., Shambaugh, J. C. and A. M. Taylor (2010) “Financial Stability, the Trilemma, and
         International Reserves,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2, 57-94.
Park, Y. C. (2009) “Reform of the Global Regulatory System: Perspectives of East Asia’s Emerging
         Economies”, presented that the ABCDE World Bank conference, Seoul, June 2009.
Rajan R. S., R. Siregar and G. Bird. (2005) “The Precautionary Demand for Reserve Holdings in Asia:
         Examining the Case for a Regional Reserve Pool”, Asia‐Pacific Journal of Economics and
         Business, 5 (12), pp.21‐39.
Rodrik, D. (2006) “The Social Cost of Foreign Exchange Reserves.” International Economic Journal 20,
         3 (September 2006).


                                                  19
Figure 1. Emerging Markets International Reserves (IR)
Figure 1.a IR/GDP, scales are different for each country


                                             Emerging Market IR position (IR/GDP)
                                                                               (from Jan.2008 to Feb.2009)
                                 ARG                                  BRA                                   CHL                                   CHN                                 COL



                                                   .15 .2 .25




                                                                                       .1 .15 .2 .25
             .15 .2 .25 .3




                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                                                              .3 .4 .5 .6




                                                                                                                                                                   .15
                                                                                                                                                                   .1
                                 CZE                                  EGY                                   IDN                                   IND                                 ISR
                                                   .2 .25 .3 .35




                                                                                       .1 .15 .2 .25
             .15 .2 .25 .3




                                                                                                                              .15 .2 .25 .3




                                                                                                                                                                   .15 .2 .25 .3
                                 KOR                                  MEX                                   MYS                                   PER                                 PHL
             .2 .25 .3 .35




                                                                                                                                                                   .25 .3 .35
    IR/GDP




                                                   .1 .15 .2




                                                                                       .3 .4 .5 .6 .7




                                                                                                                              .25 .3 .35 .4
                                 POL                                  RUS                                   THA                                   TUR                                 TWN
             .1 .15 .2 .25




                                                   .2 .3 .4 .5




                                                                                       .2 .3 .4 .5




                                                                                                                              .2




                                                                                                                                                                   .5 .6 .7 .8
                                                                                                                              .15
                                                                                                                              .1
                                                            Jan.08   Jul.08   Jan.09             Jan.08    Jul.08    Jan.09             Jan.08   Jul.08   Jan.09            Jan.08   Jul.08   Jan.09

                                  ZAF
             .2
             .15
             .1




                       Jan.08   July.08   Jan.09

                                                                                                          month

The countries abbreviations are
Argentina (ARG), Brazil (BRA), Chile (CHL), China (CHN), Colombia (COL), Czech Republic (CZE),
Egypt (EGY), Indonesia (IDN), India (IND), Israel (ISR), South Korea (KOR), Mexico (MEX), Malaysia
(MYS), Morocco , Peru (PER), Philippines (PHL), Poland (POL), Russia (RUS), Thailand (THA), Turkey
(TUR), Taiwan (TWN), South Africa (ZAF)




                                                                                                                    20
                                                         Relative IR Position
                      .6 .7 .8 .9 1                  .6 .7 .8 .9 1         .6 .7 .8 .9 1         .6 .7 .8 .9 1         .6 .7 .8 .9 1




             Jan.08
             Jul.08
                                      ZAF
                                                                                                                 CZE




                                                                     POL
                                                                                           KOR
                                                                                                                                       ARG




             Jan.09
                                                     .6 .7 .8 .9 1         .6 .7 .8 .9 1         .6 .7 .8 .9 1         .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                            Jan.08
                                            Jul.08
                                                                                                                                       BRA




                                                                                                                 EGY




                                                                     RUS
                                                                                           MEX




                                            Jan.09
                                                     .6 .7 .8 .9 1         .6 .7 .8 .9 1         .6 .7 .8 .9 1         .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                            Jan.08
                                            Jul.08
                                                                                                                 IDN




                                                                     THA
                                                                                                                                       CHL




                                                                                           MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 1.b IR/MaxIR, identical scale for all countries




     Month




21
                                            Jan.09


                                                     .6 .7 .8 .9 1         .6 .7 .8 .9 1         .6 .7 .8 .9 1         .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                                                                                                                             (from Jan.2008 to Feb.2009)




                                            Jan.08
                                            Jul.08
                                                                                                                 IND




                                                                     TUR
                                                                                           PER
                                                                                                                                       CHN




                                            Jan.09




                                                     .6 .7 .8 .9 1         .6 .7 .8 .9 1         .6 .7 .8 .9 1         .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                                                                                                                                                           Emerging Market IR Position (IR/MaxIR)




                                            Jan.08
                                            Jul.08
                                                                                                                 ISR




                                                                                           PHL
                                                                                                                                       COL




                                                                     TWN




                                            Jan.09
Figure 2 Regression on IR/GDP changes since July 2008
2.a

                                      IR/GDP changes vs. topenXoilex
          .05




                                                                  ISR
                         THA
                                                                            CHN
                                TWN                                PHL
                                                                     CHL
          0




                                                                   ZAF                    COL
                                                                                        ARG     MEX
                                                                  CZE            TUREGY
                                                                                     BRA
  IR changes / GDP




                                                                                      IDN
            -.05




                                                    KOR                    IND PER
                                                                            POL
      -.1 -.15




                                                                                                              RUS
                                                                                                                MYS
          -.2




                         -4                      -2                   0                       2
                          topenXoil:interaction term between trade openness and oil export ratio

                                  large IR loss countries               Small or no IR loss countries


2.b

                               IR/GDP changes vs financial market openness
          .05




                                                                                                        ISR
                         THA
                         CHN
                         TWN                        PHL
                                                                                                        CHL
          0




                         ZAF    ARG           COL                           MEX
                         TUR                                             BRA             CZE            EGY
  IR changes / GDP




                                                                            IDN
            -.05




                         IND                         KOR                                                PER
                                                    POL
      -.1 -.15




                                              RUS
                                              MYS
          -.2




                         -1                0                  1                 2                              3
                                        Kopen: Chinn & Ito financial openness index

                                  large IR loss countries               Small or no IR loss countries


2.c

                                 IR/GDP changes vs Short term debt ratio
          .05




                                         ISR
                                         THA
                                            CHN
                                                                  PHL    TWN              CHL
          0




                                       COL
                                       MEX       ZAF            ARG
                                                BRA                  EGYTURCZE
  IR changes / GDP




                                                          IDN
            -.05




                                                          IND              PER                          KOR
                                                                POL
      -.1 -.15




                                                                RUS
                                                                                                              MYS
          -.2




                     0                    5                    10                          15                  20
                                                     Short term debts / GDP

                                  large IR loss countries               Small or no IR loss countries




                                                                                                          22
Figure 3 Regression on IR/GDP level at July 2008
3a.
                                           Initial IR/GDP level vs Trade Openness
             .8




                                                                                              TWN

                                                                                                                                   MYS
                      .6
   Initial IR/GDP level




                                                                      CHN


                                                            RUS                                     THA
              .4




                                                            PER
                                                       IND        EGY         KOR
                                                                            PHL
                                                                                                            CZE
 .2




                                                  ARG                       POL
                                                                             ISR                             HUN
                                            BRA       IDN ZAF
                                                COL TUR                 CHL
                                                        MEX
             0




                           0                           .5                      1                      1.5                      2
                                                                             Topen

                                           large IR loss countries                 small or no IR loss countries


3.b
                                                 Initial IR/GDP level vs EX volatility
             .8




                                           TWN

                                                       MYS
                      .6
   Initial IR/GDP level




                                     CHN


                                                 RUS                                            THA
              .4




                                                 PER
                                       EGY              KOR
                                                          IND
                                                          PHL
                                                                      CZE
 .2




                                       ARG                              HUN
                                                                         POL
                                                                           ISR
                                                                IDN                       BRA
                                                              CHL         TURZAF                                     COL
                                                            MEX
             0




                           0                                  .02                        .04                             .06
                                                            Exchange rate volatility (exstdev)

                                           Large IR loss countries                 Small or no IR loss countries


3c
                                     Initial IR/GDP level vs Capital market openness
             .8




                               TWN

                                                        MYS
                      .6
   Initial IR/GDP level




                               CHN


                               THA                      RUS
              .4




                                                                                                                   PER
                               IND                              KOR
                                                               PHL                                                 EGY
                                                                                                 CZE
 .2




                                       ARG                     POL                               HUN               ISR
                                                                                    BRAIDN
                               ZAF
                               TUR                      COL                                                        CHL
                                                                                       MEX
             0




                               -1                       0                      1                      2                    3
                                                                            Kopen

                                           Large IR loss countries                 Small or no IR loss countries




                                                                                                                     23
Figure 4.

                                               Relative IR level with fitted logistic curves
                                                      for large IR loss countries (Jan.08-Feb.09)
                                            BRA                             IDN                              IND
                        .6 .7 .8 .9 1
    Relative IR Level




                                            KOR                            MYS                               PER
                        .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                            POL                             RUS                              TUR
                        .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                               Jan.2008   Jul.2008   Jan.2009 Jan.2008
                                                               Jan.08    Jul.2008    Jan.2009   Jan.2008   Jul.2008   Jan.2009

                                                                         Month
                                                      relative IR level                     fitted IR curves




                                                                                    24
Figure 5: Average IR and short terms external debt, quarterly data, Q1, 2008-Q1, 2009 [levels (left panel) and
changes (right panel)]
Small (or no) IR loss group: ARG CHL COL CZE EGY ISR MEX THA ZAF (quarterly data not available for CHN PER TWN)
Sizable IR loss group includes: BRA IDN IND KOR MYS PER POL RUS TUR




                                                       25
Figure 6: The association of ST debt and IR during Q1, 2008 and Q1, 2009.
The bold (solid) line is the regression line in the group of large (small) losses, respectively.




Figure 7: The association of ST debt and IR during Q1, 2008 and Q1, 2009 for all 5 quarters.
[the regression line is -0.4 + 0.8X without Russia]
Figure 8: Exchange market pressure, IR/Max IR and the weight of IR in Exchange market pressure during the crisis, Russia, Korea, Poland and Malaysia




Notes: EMP is measured by the bars, using the left scales.    EMP exceeding 0.05 is reported by the lighter bars. Note that these countries faced EMP exceeding
0.05 after August 2008, the on-set of the worst phase of the crisis. The top line (broken line) measures the IR/MaxIR ratio, where MaxIR is the MaxIR level
during 2008.1-2009, using the right scale. The solid volatile line, IRER, measures the relative weight of IR in the exchange market pressure, using the right
scale.                    The definition of IRER is = sign(- ΔIR / M1* ΔEi/usd / Ei/usd) * abs((- ΔIR / M1)/[abs(- ΔIR / M1)+abs(ΔEi/usd / Ei/usd)]
Table 1. Summary for variables in cross section analysis
 Variable            Obs         Mean         Std. Dev.    Min        Max         Data Source

 d.ir_gdp            21          -0.024       0.057        -0.182     0.050       IMF and CB
 d.rir               21          -0.072       0.139        -0.355     0.250       IMF and CB


 topen               21          0.797        0.430        0.262      2.001       WEO
 prim2export         20*         0.324        0.226        0.039      0.675       Comtrade
 oilexgdp            21          -0.546       1.658        -3.039     3.992       EIA
 Xvolatile           21          0.098        0.046        0.041      0.222       IFS


 kopen               21          0.374        1.375        -1.131     2.532       Chinn & Ito
 exstdev             21          0.020        0.013        0.003      0.055       GFD
 STdebt/gdp          21          8.817        4.298        3.623      19.283      JEDH


 GDP07               21          616382       721885       107298     3205507     WEO
 GDPpc               21          8353         6536         940        23579       WEO


Variables definition: (also see descriptions in the paper for details)
IR changes / GDP (d.ir_gdp) = (IR2009.2 – IR2008.7)/GDP
IR changes / Ini.IR (d.rir) = (IR2009.2 – IR2008.7) / IR2008.7
Trade openness (Topen) = (export + import)/GDP
Primary product export ratio (prim2export) = (primary product export value) / (total export value)
Oil export ratio (oilex/gdp) = net oil export volume / GDP (1000 Barrels per day / billion USD)
Export volatility (xvolatile) = standard.deviation (monthly export growth rate during 2006-07)
Capital Market Openness (Kopen) = Chinn-Ito Capital market openness index in 2007 (Chinn-Ito index does
not have data for Taiwan. Hence, we assume that Taiwan has the same financial openness level as China).**
Exchange rate volatility (exstdev) = standard.deviation (monthly exchange rate growth during 2007)
Short term debts ratio (STdebt/gdp) = Short term Loan and debt security / GDP (as %)
GDP in 2007 (GDP07) and per capita GDP (GDPpc)

Data source: IMF and CB: data are based on IMF and central banks of selected countries. WEO: IMF World
economic outlook database; Comtrade: United Nations Commodity Trade Statistics Database; ChinnIto: Chinn
and Ito (2007); GFD: Global financial database; JEDH: Joint BIS-IMF-OECD-WB Statistics on External
Debt.
* Comtrade database do not have data for Taiwan.
** We replicated our regression results for the case where Taiwan has the same financial openness level as
Korea, finding that the main results are not affected by using Korean’s openness instead of China’s openness
for the missing value of Taiwan’s openness. Results are available upon request.
    Table 2. Regressions on IR/GDP changes (all emerging markets)
                   (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)            (8)
                   d.ir_gdp      d.ir_gdp     d.ir_gdp      d.ir_gdp       d.ir_gdp       d.ir_gdp      d.ir_gdp       d.ir_gdp

Topen              -0.0299       -0.0667**    -0.0541**     -0.0548**      -0.0540**      -0.0490**     -0.0204        -0.000332
                   (-1.02)       (-2.13)      (-2.40)       (-2.54)        (-2.58)        (-2.45)       (-0.97)        (-0.01)

Prim2export                      -0.126**
                                 (-2.13)

oilexgdp                                      -0.0238***    -0.00469
                                              (-4.07)       (-0.37)

topenXoilex                                                 -0.0224        -0.0269***     -0.0245***    -0.0216***     -0.0221***
                                                            (-1.66)        (-4.67)        (-4.37)       (-4.28)        (-4.64)

Kopen.abs                                                                                 0.0177*       0.0182*        0.0157*
                                                                                          (1.77)        (2.06)         (1.87)

STdebts/gdp                                                                                             -0.00498**     -0.00487**
                                                                                                        (-2.45)        (-2.55)

Ini.IR                                                                                                                 -0.0810*
                                                                                                                       (-1.78)

_cons              0.00000225    0.0669       0.00635       0.00354        0.00274        -0.0196       0.00278        0.0110
                   (0.00)        (1.72)       (0.32)        (0.19)         (0.15)         (-0.92)       (0.13)         (0.55)

N                  21            20+          21            21             21             21            21             21
R-sq               0.052         0.269        0.506         0.575          0.571          0.638         0.737          0.783
    Notes: t statistics in parentheses. For confidence level, * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
    +
        Because we do not have prim2export data for Taiwan, we do not include Taiwan in the regression of column 2.
    We do not report the regressions include exchange rate volatility and trade volatility to save space, since these variables did not
    show significant sign and did not change our results on other variables.




                                                                      29
    Figure 3. Regressions on Relative IR position changes (all emerging markets)
                   (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)         (7)             (8)
                   d.rir         d.rir       d.rir         d.rir           d.rir          d.rir       d.rir           d.rir

Topen              0.00762       -0.0567     -0.0370       -0.0381         -0.0367        -0.0192     0.0638          0.0899
                   (0.10)        (-0.66)     (-0.54)       (-0.55)         (-0.55)        (-0.31)     (0.95)          (1.14)

Prim2export                      -0.221
                                 (-1.37)

Oilex/gdp                                    -0.0437**     -0.00887
                                             (-2.46)       (-0.22)

topenXoilex                                                -0.0408         -0.0492**      -0.0408**   -0.0327*        -0.0332*
                                                           (-0.95)         (-2.70)        (-2.34)     (-2.02)         (-2.02)

Kopen.abs                                                                                 0.0620*     0.0633**        0.0600*
                                                                                          (1.99)      (2.25)          (2.07)

STdebts/gdp                                                                                           -0.0145**       -0.0143**
                                                                                                      (-2.23)         (-2.17)

Ini.IR                                                                                                                -0.105
                                                                                                                      (-0.67)

_cons              -0.0785       0.0387      -0.0669       -0.0720         -0.0735        -0.152**    -0.0867         -0.0759
                   (-1.17)       (0.36)      (-1.12)       (-1.20)         (-1.26)        (-2.27)     (-1.30)         (-1.09)

N                  21            20+         21            21              21             21          21              21
R-sq               0.001         0.099       0.252         0.290           0.288          0.422       0.559           0.572
    Notes: t statistics in parentheses. For confidence level, * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
    +
        Because we do not have prim2export data for Taiwan, we do not include Taiwan in the regression of column 2.




                                                                     30
Table 4 IR accumulation determination between two groups
Table 4a Robust OLS regression using cross section data
 Dependent Var      IR level (Jun 2008)
                    Large IR loss countries                          Less IR loss countries               All countries
                        (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)

 Topen              0.359**                        0.266**           0.0852                   0.421**     0.283**
                    (12.00)                        (4.89)            (0.45)                   (4.45)      (4.15)

 Prim2export        0.307*                         0.514*            -0.125                   -0.0953     0.182
                    (2.06)                         (3.29)            (-0.38)                  (-0.53)     (1.09)

 xvolatile          1.916                          1.416             -0.349                   2.842**     0.0197
                    (1.60)                         (0.70)            (-0.55)                  (2.82)      (0.03)

 kopen                              -0.00834       -0.0408                      -0.0745       -0.0877*    -0.0418
                                    (-0.29)        (-1.75)                      (-1.73)       (-2.16)     (-1.59)

 exstdev                            -9.197         -0.00143                     -4.432        -6.620*     -5.349*
                                    (-1.49)        (-0.00)                      (-1.43)       (-2.67)     (-1.83)

 STdebt/gdp                         0.0154         0.0128                       0.00972       -0.0376**   -0.00557
                                    (0.89)         (0.99)                       (0.59)        (-3.28)     (-0.77)

 _cons              -0.253*         0.304          -0.336            0.239      0.325*        0.0764      0.154
                    (-2.08)         (1.33)         (-0.84)           (0.92)     (2.10)        (0.49)      (1.04)

 N                  9               9              9                 11         12            11          20
 R-sq               0.883           0.533          0.938             0.204      0.422         0.799       0.603
Notes: t statistics in parentheses. For confidence level, * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                31
Table 4b OLS regression using panel data (2000-2007)
 Dependent Var      IR at the end of each year (2000-2007)
                    Large IR loss countries                                Less IR loss countries                    All countries
                     (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)          (5)           (6)             (7)

 Topen              0.178***                            0.156***           0.142***                   0.172***       0.161***
                    (12.12)                             (9.34)             (5.33)                     (6.17)         (11.22)

 Prim2export        0.110***                            0.0763*            -0.0115                    0.0334         0.0369
                    (2.70)                              (1.83)             (-0.28)                    (0.84)         (1.35)

 xvolatile          -0.429*                             -0.224             -0.0460                    0.0670         -0.0370
                    (-1.85)                             (-0.95)            (-0.42)                    (0.67)         (-0.41)

 kopen                                0.00765           -0.00218                        -0.0150**     -0.0131***     -0.0114***
                                      (0.78)            (-0.33)                         (-2.56)       (-2.84)        (-3.00)

 exstdev                              -2.078***         -0.807**                        -1.863***     -1.692***      -1.144***
                                      (-4.45)           (-2.34)                         (-2.99)       (-3.41)        (-4.02)

 STdebt/gdp                           1.597***          0.481*                          0.458*        -0.286         0.0740
                                      (4.86)            (1.95)                          (1.81)        (-1.20)        (0.45)

 _cons              0.0733**          0.114***          0.0622*            0.0897***    0.206***      0.102***       0.0892***
                    (2.47)            (3.85)            (1.81)             (2.88)       (9.72)        (3.60)         (4.64)

 N                  72                72                72                 82           82            82             154
 R-sq               0.726             0.401             0.756              0.361        0.194         0.529          0.632
Notes: t statistics in parentheses. For confidence level, * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01


Table 4c, F test of the difference between groups
Null hypothesis: coefficients are the same between the regressions on two groups of countries reported in 4a
and 4b
                         Cross section regression (table 4a)               Panel regression (table 4b)
 Equations
                         (1) vs (4)        (2) vs (5)    (3) vs (6)        (1) vs (4)    (2) vs (5)     (3) vs (6)
 compared with
 F value                 3.56**            1.16          5.29**            2.10*         2.28*          1.93*
 Prob>F                  0.0390            0.3714        0.0297            0.0839        0.0630         0.0699
Degree of freedom        (4, 12)           (4, 13)       (7, 6)            (4,146)       (4,146)        (7, 140)

* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                      32
Table 5, Estimated coefficients for fitted logistic curves


                        BRA      IND         IDN           KOR           MYS     PER            POL     RUS     TUR
b0                      0.10     0.21        0.16          0.25          0.27    0.17           0.28    0.36    0.10
b1                      -2.59    -6.59       -8.88         -5.74         -5.88   -6.49          -5.76   -4.29   -8.72
b2                      0.93     1.36        2.83          0.83          1.39    0.93           1.89    1.01    4.91
Length                  6        10          8             12            9       11             8       8       6
t*                      -2.78    -4.84       -3.14         -6.90         -4.24   -6.95          -3.05   -4.25   -1.78
MTP                     10.78    8.84        9.14          8.9           9.24    9.95           9.05    10.25   9.78
Countries include Brazil, India, Indonesia, South Korea, Malaysia, Peru, Poland, Russia, and Turkey.
Note: Length is the number of months from the time with the highest IR level to the last month of our sample (i.e.
Feb.2009); t* is the value of t that satisfied b1+b2*t=0; MTP=14-length-t*, which give the month when the IR
losing speed start to slow down. If MTP value equals 10, it means the turning point is at the 10th month of 2008.




Table 6    Regressions on the starting time of IR falls (for large IR loss countries)
                  (1)            (2)             (3)               (4)                (5)
                  length         length          length            length             length

 Oilex/gdp        -0.663**       -0.664**        -0.664**          -0.698**           -0.790***
                  (-3.70)        (-3.66)         (-3.39)           (-3.75)            (-9.66)

 exstdev          -215.4***      -210.7***       -212.5***         -228.5***          -216.8***
                  (-5.51)        (-5.28)         (-4.72)           (-5.40)            (-11.82)

 kopen                           0.261                                                0.697**
                                 (0.93)                                               (4.66)

 topen                                           0.142                                1.365**
                                                 (0.20)                               (3.72)

 gdp07                                                             6.63e-7            2.09e-6**
                                                                   (0.90)             (4.84)

 _cons            12.73***       12.57***        12.58***          12.50***           10.03***
                  (15.82)        (15.07)         (10.62)           (14.56)            (14.96)

 N                9              9               9                 9                  9
 R-sq             0.856          0.877           0.858             0.877              0.987
Notes: t statistics in parentheses. For confidence level, * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                   33
Table 7 regressions on the time of speed turning point
                  (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)                (5)        (6)
                  mtp            mtp            mtp             mtp                mtp        mtp

 length           -0.178         -0.216*        -0.198*         -0.249             -0.178     -0.195
                  (-1.71)        (-2.25)        (-2.38)         (-1.66)            (-1.70)    (-1.84)

 kopen                           0.285          0.389*          0.288              0.262      0.260
                                 (1.67)         (2.44)          (1.55)             (1.50)     (1.41)

 gdp07                                          6.73e-7
                                                (1.74)

 exstdev                                                        -11.12
                                                                (-0.31)

 Oilex/gdp                                                                         0.106
                                                                                   (0.93)

 topen                                                                                        -0.259
                                                                                              (-0.62)

 _cons            11.09***       11.33***       10.67***        11.84***           11.03***   11.36***
                  (11.99)        (13.51)        (13.00)         (6.34)             (12.13)    (12.82)

 N                9              9              9               9                  9          9
 R-sq             0.294          0.518          0.700           0.527              0.589      0.552
Notes: t statistics in parentheses. For confidence level, * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                34
       Table 8 Regression on IR/GDP changes for large IR loss countries.
                  (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)              (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)        (9)
                  d.ir_gdp       d.ir_gdp      d.ir_gdp     d.ir_gdp         d.ir_gdp    d.ir_gdp    d.ir_gdp     d.ir_gdp d.ir_gdp

topen             -0.0735***     -0.0308       -0.0861**    -0.0717**        -0.0719**   -0.0828**   -0.0638**    -0.0554    -0.0620***
                  (-3.93)        (-1.94)       (-3.98)      (-3.44)          (-3.57)     (-3.67)     (-3.81)      (-1.49)    (-4.21)

Oilex/gdp         -0.0218***     -0.0853**     -0.0206**    -0.0223**        -0.0219**   -0.0193**   -0.0198***   -0.0232** -0.0260***
                  (-4.15)        (-3.08)       (-3.91)      (-3.81)          (-3.93)     (-3.11)     (-4.31)      (-3.81)    (-6.06)

topenXoilex                      0.0139
                                 (0.61)

gdp07                                          -2.61e-08
                                               (-1.11)

gdppc                                                       -6.40e-07
                                                            (-0.36)

kopen                                                                        0.00484
                                                                             (0.54)

xvolatile                                                                                -0.355
                                                                                         (-0.80)

exstdev                                                                                              1.914
                                                                                                     (1.82)

STdebt/gdp                                                                                                        -0.00229
                                                                                                                  (-0.58)

length                                                                                                                       -0.00946*
                                                                                                                             (-2.40)

_cons             -0.0150        -0.00772      0.0133       -0.0113          -0.0176     0.0239      -0.0586*     -0.00432   0.0581
                  (-0.92)        (-0.37)       (0.44)       (-0.55)          (-0.98)     (0.46)      (-2.11)      (-0.17)    (1.77)

N                 9              9             9            9                9           9           9            9          9
R-sq              0.861          0.870         0.888        0.864            0.868       0.876       0.916        0.869      0.935
       Notes: t statistics in parentheses. For confidence level, * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                        35
Table 9 Regressions on relative IR level changes for large IR loss countries.
                  (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)          (6)       (7)        (8)
                  d.RIR        d.RIR         d.RIR          d.RIR          d.RIR        d.RIR     d.RIR      d.RIR

 Oilex/gdp        -0.0273*     -0.0300*      -0.0324*       -0.0298*       -0.0327*     -0.0238   -0.0313*   -0.0380**
                  (-2.04)      (-1.98)       (-2.24)        (-2.04)        (-2.03)      (-1.82)   (-2.19)    (-2.90)
 topen            -0.0646
                  (-1.35)
 gdp07                         1.85e-08
                               (0.31)
 gdppc                                       -4.08e-06
                                             (-0.94)
 kopen                                                      0.0158
                                                            (0.68)
 xvolatile                                                                 0.550
                                                                           (0.52)
 exstdev                                                                                4.679
                                                                                        (1.64)
 STdebt/gdp                                                                                       -0.00514
                                                                                                  (-0.95)
 length                                                                                                      -0.0211
                                                                                                             (-1.81)
 _cons            -0.154**     -0.214***     -0.168***      -0.205***      -0.251**     -0.290*** -0.147*    -0.0185
                  (-3.67)      (-4.24)       (-3.99)        (-7.80)        (-2.54)      (-4.95)   (-2.37)    (-0.18)

 N                9            9             9              9              9            9         9          9
 R-sq             0.529        0.395         0.465          0.429          0.412        0.576     0.465      0.602
     Notes: t statistics in parentheses. For confidence level, * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                  36
Table 10. Panel data regressions on size of IR changes.
                      (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)           (5)             (6)
 Dependent Var.       md.ir_gdp          md.ir_gdp          md.ir_gdp         md.rir        md.rir          md.rir

 Method               Robust OLS         Random Effect Random Effect           Robust OLS   Random Effect   Random Effect
 Month Dummies        No                 No                 Yes                No           No              Yes

 topen                -0.0166**          -0.0166*           -0.0176**         -0.0340       -0.0340         -0.0330*
                      (-2.50)            (-1.96)            (-2.15)           (-1.51)       (-1.49)         (-1.70)
 oilexgdp             -0.00176           -0.00176           -0.00240          0.0000563     0.0000563       -0.00126
                      (-1.02)            (-1.05)            (-1.50)           (0.01)        (0.01)          (-0.33)
 kopen                -0.000589          -0.000589          -0.000803         -0.00131      -0.00131        -0.00120
                      (-0.33)            (-0.28)            (-0.41)           (-0.24)       (-0.23)         (-0.26)
 exstdev              0.347*             0.347              0.371*            0.854         0.854           0.940*
                      (1.89)             (1.44)             (1.69)            (1.39)        (1.32)          (1.81)
 STdebt/gdp           0.000301           0.000301           0.000253          0.00175       0.00175         0.00154
                      (0.56)             (0.41)             (0.37)            (0.88)        (0.88)          (0.96)
 gdp07                -5.25e-09          -5.25e-09          -6.90e-09         -7.77e-09     -7.77e-09       -1.10e-08
                      (-1.26)            (-0.96)            (-1.33)           (-0.54)       (-0.53)         (-0.90)
 D.oilprice           0.000517***        0.000517***        0.000759*         0.00158***    0.00158***      0.00346***
                      (3.16)             (3.38)             (1.81)            (3.73)        (3.86)          (3.48)
 tsurplusgdp          0.0129             0.0129             0.0221            0.0536        0.0536          0.0618
                      (0.31)             (0.35)             (0.63)            (0.54)        (0.54)          (0.74)
 norexgrowth          -0.000512          -0.000512          0.000215          -0.00292***   -0.00292**      -0.000733
                      (-1.49)            (-1.21)            (0.44)            (-3.10)       (-2.57)         (-0.63)
 _cons                0.00438            0.00438            n.a.              -0.00472      -0.00472        n.a.
                      (0.46)             (0.39)             (.)               (-0.16)       (-0.16)         (.)
 N                    66                 66                 66                66            66              66
 R-sq                 0.448                                                   0.395
Notes: t statistics in parentheses. For confidence level, * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Definition of new variables in panel data analysis: (also see descriptions in the paper for details)
     md.ir_gdp: monthly change of IR position (ΔIR/GDP2007)
     D.oilprice: monthly oil price changes.
     Tsurplusgdp: trade surplus relative to GDP, equals (monthly export – monthly import)×12÷GDP2007
Norexgrowth: normalized exchange rate growth rate. See foot note 11.Note: Only D.oilprice (oil price changes),
tsurplusgdp (trade surplus ratio) and norexgrowth (normalized exchange rate changes) are using monthly
data; other variables are using the initial value before the crisis. The 2007 GDP level is used to remove the
country size effect in calculating the trade surplus. Using monthly GDP can be an option, but that data is
not available and may also subject to seasonal patterns.



                                                                   37
