NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF MATERNAL DEPRESSION AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE ON CHILD
HUMAN CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT
Richard G. Frank
Ellen Meara
Working Paper 15314
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15314

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2009

We gratefully acknowledge funding from the National Institute of Drug Abuse grants DA10233 and
DA019485 and the MacArthur Network on Mental Health Policy. We thank Kathleen Reilly for programming
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Richard G. Frank and Ellen Meara. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Effect of Maternal Depression and Substance Abuse on Child Human Capital Development
Richard G. Frank and Ellen Meara
NBER Working Paper No. 15314
September 2009
JEL No. I1
ABSTRACT
Recent models of human capital formation represent a synthesis of the human capital approach and
a life cycle view of human development that is grounded in neuroscience (Heckman 2007). This model
of human development, the stability of the home and parental mental health can have notable impacts
on skill development in children that may affect the stock of human capital in adults (Knudsen, Heckman
et al. 2006; Heckman 2007). We study effects of maternal depression and substance abuse on children
born to mothers in the initial cohort of the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), a
national household survey of high school students aged 14-22 in 1979. We follow 1587 children aged
1-5 in 1987, observing them throughout childhood and into high school. We employ a variety of methods
to identify the effect of maternal depression and substance abuse on child behavioral, cognitive, and
educational related outcomes. We find no evidence that maternal symptoms of depression affect
contemporaneous cognitive scores in children. However, maternal depression symptoms have a
moderately large effect on child behavioral problems. These findings suggest that the social benefits
of effective behavioral health interventions may be understated. Based on evidence linking early life
outcomes to later well-being, efforts to prevent and/or treat mental and addictive disorders in mothers
and other women of childbearing age have the potential to improve outcomes of their children not only
early in life, but throughout the life cycle.

Richard G. Frank
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
frank@hcp.med.harvard.edu
Ellen Meara
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115-5899
and NBER
meara@hcp.med.harvard.edu

1. Introduction
New approaches to modeling the formation of human capital represent a synthesis
of the human capital approach and a life cycle view of human development that is
grounded in neuroscience (Heckman 2007). That literature highlights the importance of
the household environment on the development of children and the compelling evidence
that a child’s relationship with his or her care giver is important in determining the
development of the brain. Based on this model of human development, the stability of the
home and parental mental health can have notable impacts on skill development in
children that may affect the stock of human capital in adults (Knudsen, Heckman et al.
2006; Heckman 2007).
There is a well developed literature that links mental illness in adults to lower
levels of employment, reduced productivity, lower earnings and early exits from the labor
force (Currie and Madrian 1999; Frank and Koss 2005).1 Empirical analysis of the causal
links between mental illness and labor market outcomes reveals evidence of
intergenerational effects of mental disorders on labor market outcomes. That is, working
age adults with parents that suffered from mental disorders had relative odds of working
that were 5 to 10 percent lower than otherwise similar adults that reported no mental
illness in their parents (Ettner, Frank and Kessler 1997). Similarly, parental mental illness
reduces earnings and hours worked in working adults, holding constant other factors
affecting labor supply. That research and other studies (Currie and Stabile 2008) also
suggest that the effect is due in part to an increased likelihood of experiencing a mental
illness if one’s parents had such illnesses (relative odds of 1.12 to 1.24). Understanding
how parental mental disorders can affect skill accumulation and adult human capital is
1

When we refer to mental illnesses we include substance use and abuse disorders.

2

especially important given that there are cost-effective treatments for the most prevalent
mental illnesses that have been tested in women of child bearing ages at various income
levels (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 1999; Miranda, Chung et al.
2003). Thus, ameliorating parental mental health problems offers the potential to
efficiently bolster the development of human capital at an early age.
In this paper we examine the impact of maternal depression and substance abuse
on the cognitive and behavioral development of children during their early school years.
We make use of data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), 1979
cohort, to estimate the impact of maternal mental health on a set of cognitive and
behavioral outcomes in grammar school aged children. Our results show that, after
controlling for the mother’s early life circumstances, symptoms of maternal depression or
alcohol abuse/dependence primarily influence behavioral outcomes in children rather
than cognitive outcomes. As shown in recent work (National Research Council and
Institute of Medicine 2000; Heckman 2006; Cunha and Heckman 2007; Heckman 2007),
non-cognitive skills and attributes are important determinants of economic success that
have been under appreciated in policy circles.
The paper is organized into five remaining sections. Section 2 summarizes
background literature on child development and maternal depression, including a
discussion of conceptual models relevant to our research. In section 3, we describe our
data and the empirical strategy in detail. The fourth section provides the results on how
maternal behavioral health influences maternal investments in children and child
outcomes. Section 5 presents factor analyses and Section 6 presents mother-fixed effect

3

models as robustness checks of our main results. Section 7 offers a discussion of our
conclusions and some policy implications.

2. Background and Theoretical Considerations
Research in neurobiology and child development shows that stress in the home
environment can have important effects for the healthy development of children
(National Research Council and Institute of Medicine 2000; National Scientific Council
on the Developing Child 2005). This research also shows that early influences (positive
or negative) on emotional development in children can have lasting effects into
adulthood. The quality of maternal care early in life is known to be important in animals
and humans (McEwan and Seeman 1999). Stable and supportive care-giving
environments have been linked to an enhanced ability to cope with stress that reduces the
likelihood of mental health problems in children and with lasting effects into adulthood.
Maternal depression and substance abuse is thought to disrupt the care giving
environment (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 1999; Kim-Cohen, Moffit
et al. 2005). Earlier literature on maternal depression established evidence that there are
important and lasting effects of maternal depression on child development (Cogill,
Caplan et al. 1986). Cogill and colleagues (1986) showed that maternal depression early
in a child’s life (1st year) has a negative and significant effect on cognitive skills
measured at age 4. A meta-analysis published in 1999 reviewed 33 studies of the
relationship between maternal depression and child behavior (Beck 1999). That review
showed a consistent relationship between maternal depression and child behavior. The

4

results showed that behavior problems occurred both in the pre-school period and among
school aged children.
Two more recent studies are consistent with those from the 1980s and 1990s. In
one, (Petterson and Albers 2001), the authors analyzed the National Maternal and Infant
Follow Back Survey data to examine the impacts of maternal depression and poverty on
child development. They found that mothers with likely depression as measured by a
CESD score of 16 to 30 and 30 and above had young children that scored lower on
cognitive and motor skills development tests. They also found that higher income levels
appear to attenuate but do not eliminate the effects of maternal depression. A British
study examined the link between maternal depression and antisocial behavior in children
(Kim-Cohen, Moffit et al. 2005). Using data on twins, the authors examined the impact of
maternal depression that occurred during the first 5 years of the children’s life on
antisocial behavior measured at age 7. They also examined the incremental effects of
maternal depression that occurred when the children were aged 5 to 7 years. The results
indicated a significant impact on antisocial behavior at age 7 of both early life maternal
depression and more recent depression.
The presence of mental health problems in school aged children has been linked
to long term reduction in the accumulation of human capital (Currie and Stabile 2008).
Currie and Stabile (2008) use the NLSY to examine the impact of mental disorders on
children and their subsequent academic achievement. They show that Attention Deficiet
and Hyperactivity Disorder and conduct disorders both have negative and significant
impacts on achievement test scores and levels of educational attainment. Together these

5

results suggest that maternal depression and substance abuse, treatable mental disorders,
may affect the accumulation of human capital early in life.
A Comment on Gene-environment interactions
An emerging literature on the role of gene-environment interactions as predictors
of depression and substance abuse offers a final piece of background that is relevant for
framing our study. Both depression and addictive disorders have a large heritable
component, with estimates based on twin studies in the range of .4 to .5 as the share of
depression and alcohol disorders that are heritable (Sullivan et al. 2000; Caspi et al.
2008). Research has long struggled with understanding how and when genes lead to
psychiatric disorders. After a number of unsuccessful attempts to isolate particular genes
that “cause” specific illnesses, researchers have instead identified gene environment
interactions that likely cause depression and substance use (Heath and Nelson 2002;
Kendler, Garnder et al. 2002; Caspi and Moffit 2006).
For example, stressful life events are common predictors of depression, but the
presence of symptoms and diagnoses of depression following stressful life events were
much more common among individuals exhibiting a particular polymorphism in one
region of the serotonin transporter (5-HTT) gene (Caspi and Moffit 2006). Similarly,
alcoholism often runs in families, but it is unclear precisely how much of this relates to
familial environment compared with genetics. Evidence suggests that highly traumatic
events such as sexual abuse as a child, interact with elevated genetic risk of alcoholism to
raise the chance that individuals become alcoholics (Heath and Nelson 2002; Kendler,
Garnder et al. 2002; Caspi and Moffit 2006). Taken together, this evidence suggests that
an attempt to isolate the effect of maternal depression or substance abuse on children

6

requires rich information about the mother’s background. In addition, such evidence
suggests that a model of child development of human capital cannot treat all genetic
influence as fixed, as a model with child fixed effects might.

Theoretical Considerations
Cunha and colleagues (Cunha, Heckman et al. 2006; Cunha and Heckman 2007)
have developed a model that links skills or capability (education, cognitive, emotional
and behavioral attributes that underlie economic success) formation in children to
parental capabilities and parental investments in child development. The model
developed by Cunha et al. (2006) also recognizes that there are multiple stages in child
development. The findings from the neuroscience literature (National Research Council
and Institute of Medicine 2000) indicate that parental capabilities and investments have
different impacts on child development at different stages of development. The model of
Cunha et al. (2006) yields several implications. First, cognitive, behavioral, physical and
other capabilities are interdependent. That is, cognitive skills obtained today depend on
investments in health and emotional development among other factors (possibly made at
an earlier point in time). Second, parental capacities to invest in child capabilities are
important and have varying impacts at different points in a child’s development. Third,
past investments affect the impact of current investments in child development.
The empirical work presented in this paper takes these ideas as a point of
departure. Consider the skills formation function of Cunha et al. (2006)
(1) St+1 = F( PS, St, It; Mt)

7

Where S is the level of skill formation, PS is parental skill attributes (education, cognitive
abilities, etc.), I is the investment in child capabilities at time t, and M is mother’s mental
health status at time t. We focus on mother’s mental health status because of the mother’s
central role as a care giver and the existing clinical evidence of a link between mother’s
mental health and child skills acquisition. We focus on depression and substance abuse
because they are relatively common behavioral health problems in women of child
bearing age and because they can disrupt care giving. We observe the impact of
depression and substance use and abuse on measures of cognitive and behavioral skills
formation early in a child’s academic career (grades 1-5 and again in grades 6-9). In our
conception, maternal depression and substance abuse can affect skill formation in
children by reducing the effective level of parent skills (PS) and by reducing the
productivity of parental investments in child skills development (I). The literature on the
impact of mental disorders on human capital formation shows that mental and substance
abuse problems affect productivity, conditioning on human capital attributes (Frank and
Koss, 2005).
The empirical implications of these ideas are that models aimed at estimating the
impact of depression and substance use and abuse on child development should condition
on parental skill levels. Our empirical analysis tries to account for the mother’s stock of
human capital at the time of the child’s early schooling. We then estimate the impact of
proximate mental health shocks (maternal depression, substance abuse) on the parents’
level and effectiveness of investment in skill acquisition for their children. We adopt an
empirical strategy that directly examines the effect of symptoms of maternal depression
and substance abuse on indicators of maternal investments in child development,

8

essentially comparing maternal investments and child outcomes across groups of mothers
with and without significant symptoms of depression and/or substance abuse. To
strengthen this comparison, we combine the detailed information about the mother’s
family of origin with early measures of the mother’s behavioral health and substance use
to match mothers based on their risk of having significant symptoms of depression using
propensity score methods (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983). We condition out mother’s
measured human capital, family endowments, risk of mental health problems, and other
capabilities (Currie and Thomas 1999). This ensures that we are comparing mothers who
are similar with respect to observed characteristics that are associated with a high
likelihood of depression. Using these methods, we find consistent evidence that
symptoms of maternal depression, and to a lesser extent, symptoms of maternal alcohol
abuse/dependence have a significant and moderate sized adverse effect on child behavior.
These effects are also present in maternal fixed effect models that compare siblings with
and without exposure to maternal behavioral health symptoms in primary school.

3. Data and Empirical Strategy
The 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
We used the 1979 cohort of the NLSY (Bureau of Labor Statistics 2005) to follow
a cohort of women and their children through grade nine of the child’s schooling. The
NLSY conducted in-person interviews with individuals aged 14-22 in 1979, reinterviewing them annually through 1994 and every 2 years since then. Blacks,
Hispanics, and economically disadvantaged non-black/non-Hispanic youths were oversampled. Until 1989, interviews were conducted using pencil and paper before

9

converting to Computer Assisted Personal Interviews in 1990. About 4,000 women were
interviewed over the period from 1979 through 2004. Initial response rates were high, 87
percent, and retention rates were about 90 percent through 1994. In the years since,
retention rates have ranged from 77 to 85 percent. The data set contains information on
demographics, household structure (both in the household of origin, and in new living
arrangements as respondents mature), education, income, cognitive ability, symptoms of
depression, substance use and symptoms use and dependence.
Beginning in 1986, the NLSY collected information on all children of interviewed
females, through maternal reports, but also from direct assessments of children. For a
subset of questions, children age 10 and older were interviewed biennially regarding
family, school, and delinquent behavior. For our analyses, we selected all female
respondents with a preschool aged child (ages 0-4) in 1986. From this sample of 2,421
unique female NLSY respondents and their 3,333 children, we dropped 1327 children
missing one or more cognitive assessments. From the remaining 2006 children, we
dropped 116 children due to missing information on key variables such as maternal
depression and substance use, abuse, and dependence symptoms. We also dropped 303
children due to missing information on other covariates such as education and income.
This left us with a sample of 1587 children of female NLSY respondents. Each mother
was interviewed, 18 times, on average (from 1979 through 2004).
Below we describe the behavioral and cognitive variables of interest. Because the
longitudinal nature of the NLSY implies some complexity regarding the timing of
different measures used, we display the timing of our most important measures, maternal
depression and substance use/abuse and child outcome measures in Figures 1 and 2 and

10

the means of our dependent and independent variables of interest are shown in Tables 1
and 2.
Maternal investments in children – the HOME scales
To understand how maternal depression and problem substance use might
influence children, we first examine measures of investments in children made in the
home. The NLSY asked detailed questions regarding parental involvement with children
using the Home Observation for Measurement of the Environment-Short Form, adapted
from the HOME inventory (Caldwell and Bradley 1984). The NLSY public use data set
includes two separate summary scales: a cognitive stimulation scale and an emotional
stimulation scale. Examples of cognitive stimulation scale questions include, “How
many children’s books does your child have?” and emotional questions like, “If your
child got so angry that he/she hit you, what would you do?” Questions differ based on
relevance for the child’s age. We used the continuous measures of these scales contained
in the NLSY as measures reflecting maternal inputs. Table 1 summarizes the scales we
use in analyses of maternal inputs. The total HOMES scale measure averages 985 with a
standard deviation of about 150. The cognitive stimulation score has a similar mean and
variance. The emotional stimulation score averages about 48, but with a standard
deviation close to 30.
Child outcomes
We examine both the cognitive and behavioral outcomes of children. The
cognitive outcome measures were scores on the Peabody Individual Achievement Test
(PIAT) in Math and Reading Comprehension. We include two PIAT assessments for
each child, the first took place when the child was between the ages of 7 and 10, and the

11

second occurred when the child was between ages 11 and 14. In a separate assessment of
child behavior, mothers were asked multiple items regarding child behavior, the Behavior
Problem Index (BPI), which was adapted from Achenbach’s Child Behavior Check List
(Achenbach and Edlebroch 1978; Achenbach and Edlebroch 1979). As with the
cognitive measures, we include two measurements of the BPI , assessments between ages
7 and 10, and between ages 11 and 14. In addition, children aged 10 and older answered
9 items related to delinquency which were combined by NLSY staff to form a
delinquency scale (see the Appendix for details). For all children, we examine whether
the child has ever been suspended or expelled from school at any point during the
schooling years.
Table 1 summarizes the child outcomes of interest for the 1587 children in our
sample. The cognitive measures are all standardized to have an average near 100 with
standard deviations in the range of 12 to 15. The behavior problems indices are similarly
standardized, although the variance is modestly higher for these (with standard deviations
ranging from 15-17). The delinquency scale is standardized to have a mean of zero with
higher numbers indicating increasing delinquent behavior. In this group of children born
to relatively young mothers, the average score on the scale is slightly positive, .055.
Finally, a sizeable minority of children in our sample, 22.4 percent, have experienced
suspension or expulsion from school.
Maternal mental health and substance abuse
The empirical analysis described below, seeks to estimate the separate effects of
episodic symptoms of depression on investments in children and on cognitive and
behavioral outcomes of children. We chose this focus because there are many successful

12

psychotherapeutic and pharmacological treatments available for individuals with mild
and moderate depression. Similarly, there are many effective treatments available for
individuals with substance abuse or dependence. As a result, the variables of interest
include maternal symptoms of depression, symptoms of alcohol abuse or dependence,
and heavy use of marijuana (which we use as a proxy for substance abuse or
dependence).
The NLSY includes several direct and indirect measures of maternal mental
health based on interviews with the study participant.2 As part of our attempt to focus on
proximate symptoms of depression that occurred during a child’s primary school years,
we want to compare women at similar risk for having significant symptoms of depression
thus we take account of indicators of early depression in mothers before the child was
born. We also did this to account for the most recalcitrant cases of depression that might
be less amenable to treatment. In 1980 and 1987, the ten item Rosenberg scale of selfesteem (Rosenberg 1965) was administered to mothers. Although this scale was not
designed to measure depression directly, in another data set, the Longitudinal Study of
Generations, measures of the Rosenberg and the commonly used 20 item CES-D, or
Center for Epidemiological Studies – Depression Scale (Radloff 1977) are quite highly
correlated, with a correlation coefficient of .56 to .64.3 We created our proxy indicator of
depression in 1980 using the standard cutoffs for low self esteem, a score below 10 on the
30 point Rosenberg scale. We then used these in our procedure for balancing risk of
2

In the case of depression and substance abuse or dependence, diagnosis of these disorders relied heavily
on self-reported symptoms of the patient.
3
We verified the correlation among female respondents in the National Longitudinal Survey of Generations
(Bengston 1997), a survey of California health maintenance organization enrollees age-matched to the
same cohort as the NLSY. In this survey, measures of the CES-D and the Rottenberg scale were
significantly (p<.0001) positively correlated with ρ ranging from .56 to .64 during years in which both
measures were available (1988, 1991, 1994, and 1997).

13

depression in mother with and without depression during children’s primary school years.
Our approach is described more fully later in this section.
In 1992, respondents completed the 20 item CES-D, or Center for
Epidemiological Studies – Depression Scale (Radloff 1977). Respondents answer
questions regarding their mood, energy level, feelings of worth, and related questions.
Generally, a score of 16 or higher on a scale from 0 to 60 indicates a cluster of symptoms
consistent with a high likelihood of a diagnosis of depression. Respondents also
responded to an abbreviated seven item CES-D in 19944, and again in the first interview
after age 40. Respondents answered a nine item CES-D scale when taking the age 40
assessment in 1998 and later. We coded women as having symptoms of depression if
they scored 16 or higher (1992 CES-D) and if they scored more than one standard
deviation above the mean on later CES-D scales.5 For the bulk of our analyses, we
categorize a mother as depressed (during a child’s schooling years) if she had a CES-D
score at or above the cutoff in both 1992 and 1994. We do this to minimize the
measurement error natural in population based measures of depressive symptoms. In
models that examine within-mother outcomes of multiple children, we use a single
measure of depression (1992, 1994, or age 40) closest to the child’s 7-10 year old
assessment.
Substance use, abuse, and dependence measures
The NLSY asked respondents extensive questions regarding use of alcohol and
illicit drugs, and in selected years, respondents were asked to report a wide array of

4

The seven item CES-D is highly correlated with the 20 item scale (r=.90 according to David Dooley and
JoAnn Prause Social costs of underemployment)
5
The cutoff for depression was 8 on a scale from 0 to 21 on seven item scales, and 9 on a scale from 0 to
27 on 9 item scales.

14

symptoms associated with alcohol abuse or dependence. To target alcohol use associated
with functional impairment, we used questions from the 1985, 1989, and 1994 surveys to
code individuals with 2 or more symptoms of alcohol abuse or dependence (See the
appendix for a list of the questions used to identify symptoms.) Very few mothers
reported use of illicit drugs other than marijuana, so we focused on measures of heavy
marijuana use based on the 1984, 1992, and 1998 surveys. Marijuana use was considered
heavy for individuals that had used marijuana more than 5 times in the last 30 days
(1984), or at least 1-2 times per week in the last 30 days (1992 and 1998). Unlike the
NLSY questions on alcohol use, the survey provides no information regarding symptoms
related to marijuana use, and heavy use of marijuana in itself does not necessarily imply
that mothers were impaired by marijuana use.
Table 2 summarizes the maternal characteristics of interest, the rate of mothers
likely to have depression, alcohol abuse/dependence symptoms, and heavy marijuana use;
it also summarizes the set of covariates employed in each analysis. As teenagers and
young adults, based on Rosenberg scores, the mothers had rates of depression of 18.6
percent. This rate is in line with epidemiological evidence from the National Comorbidity Study Replication, or NCS (Kessler, Berglund et al. 2005). The NCS collected
information on US adults aged 18 to 54. In this study, 11.6 percent of women report any
mood disorder in the past year (8.6 percent for depression), and 23.4 percent experienced
an anxiety disorder, and over 30 percent are estimated to have a diagnosis of any mental
or substance disorder in the course of the year (Kessler, Berglund et al. 2005). Just over
3 percent had symptoms of alcohol abuse and/or dependence, similar to national numbers
on the 12 month prevalence of alcohol abuse.

15

Overview of Empirical Approach
Our analysis of the influence of maternal depression and substance use or abuse
on child outcomes faces several common methodological challenges due to potential
reverse causation and omitted variables that may be correlated with both measures of
interest (maternal depression and substance use and abuse) and the child outcomes.
Reverse causation could occur if children who have poor behavior or low cognitive skills
cause stress for mothers that might trigger symptoms of depression, alcohol abuse, or
lead to heavier use of marijuana. The second potential threat to our analysis is that
unobserved variables could influence both maternal behavioral health and child
outcomes. For example, if mothers with lower cognitive skills also are at higher risk of
poor mental health, and if maternal cognitive skills affect the way in which mothers
invest in children, we might erroneously attribute child outcomes to maternal depression
when in fact the mother’s low cognitive endowment causes both poor mental health and
poor child outcomes. We take multiple steps to address these threats to inference.
Addressing the Potential for Reverse Causation
The longitudinal nature of the NLSY helps to ensure that we identify symptoms
of depression and/or substance abuse that precede child assessments of behavior and
cognitive outcomes. We experimented with alternative specifications regarding the
measurement of a mother’s mental health and the measurement of child outcomes. In
each case, the relationship between maternal depression and child outcomes were as
strong in models where depression measures preceded measures of childhood outcomes
as they were in models where depression may have been measured at the same time or
after child outcomes. For example, most of the child outcomes at age 11 to 14 were a

16

function of maternal depression measured in 1992 and 1994, before the outcomes were
measured (see Figure 2), but these results are equally strong compared with outcomes
measured when children were ages 7-10, but using the same depression measure.
One might still worry about reverse causation in the event that the birth of a
difficult child launched a series of depressive episodes in the mother. However, we can
test the robustness of our findings to such a threat by estimating mother-fixed effect
models that examine siblings who were and were not exposed to maternal depression
symptoms at the time of age 7 to 10 assessments. Because these observations will
necessarily be after the birth of both children, women for whom a difficult child launches
repeated or chronic depression would have symptoms throughout the schooling years of
all the children we observe in the NLSY, and thus such mothers would be dropped from
any mother-fixed effect analysis.
Addressing Omitted Variables
The rich data in the NLSY minimize the potential threat of unobserved variables
because we can control for an expansive set of covariates. They will help us address
three of the most serious threats to inference a) that maternal ability is correlated with her
behavioral health and her inputs to children; b) that the permanent income of the mother’s
family of origin or her family as an adult makes it difficult to invest in child human
capital and also contributes to poor behavioral health; or c) that the genetic endowment of
the mother, including her propensity to have poor behavioral health and or her ability to
invest in education might affect child-rearing independently of behavioral health
problems. The measures included in the NLSY make it possible to better address such
threats than does the typical household surveys. For example, for each NLSY

17

respondent, we have a measure of IQ based on her 1980 percentile on the Armed Forces
Qualification Test. We also know details regarding the mother’s household of origin
during her high school years, so we can control for household structure, a measure of
average annual income in the mother’s household of origin (measured over the period
from 1979-84) and educational attainment of the mother’s parents.
A unique feature in the NLSY is that respondents report depression and/or anxiety
of their parents, as well as whether a mother or father had problematic drinking behavior.
Throughout the paper, we refer to the mother’s parents as grandparents, since we are
focused on child outcomes. Also, due to the structure of the NLSY sample frame, many
mothers have siblings in the NLSY; we have measures of depression and substance
use/abuse among siblings too. We use these family measures of parent and sibling
behavioral health to control for family-level factors such as genetic predisposition to have
behavioral health problems. Such variables help us to control for genetic factors passed
on through family members that would not be affected by treatment of behavioral health
symptoms. Third, we combine the detailed information about the mother’s family of
origin with early measures of the mother’s behavioral health and substance use to match
mothers based on their risk of having significant symptoms of depression using
propensity score methods. This ensures that we are comparing mothers who are similar
with respect to observed characteristics that are associated with a high likelihood of
depression. Finally, as described above, we test the robustness of our main findings
among a sample of mothers with more than one child, using fixed effect specifications to
measure within-mother differences in child outcomes related to contemporaneous
symptoms of depression and/or alcohol abuse. This last approach is similar to the

18

approach taken in a study of substance use and children (Chatterji and Markowitz 2001)
in the NLSY.6
Propensity Score Models
We employ propensity score methods to achieve two empirical goals of our
analysis. First, we wish to account for the impact of the characteristics of the mother’s
family of origin, including parental and sibling measures of behavioral health, a measure
of income, and the household structure. Also, as mentioned before, to focus on
symptoms of depression or substance abuse that are episodic, rather than a chronic and
severe mental disorder that is less amenable to treatment, we control for measures of
depression, alcohol abuse, and marijuana use of the mother before the child was born.
Second, we wish to balance observed characteristics that are predictive of maternal
depression to ensure that we are comparing women with similar tendencies to be
depressed. Thus, we balance our data so that the women in our sample share common
attributes during their youth that are associated with depression (whether or not they
actually display symptoms). The advantage of the propensity score weighting approach
we describe below (or any propensity score approach) over simple regression-based
adjustment is that we will compare those women who, on the basis of observed
characteristics, appear very similar. This prevents us from attributing child outcome
effects to depression when the distribution of observed characteristics of depressed
mothers (those with an indicator for depression based on 1992 and 1994 CESD measures)
differs dramatically from that of mothers who are not depressed.

6

We employ multiple measures of maternal depression symptoms, and we examine alcohol abuse whereas
Chatterji and Markowitz (2001) estimate the effect of substance use. Our narrower definition captures
women who are impaired by drinking behavior, and we incorporate the effect of maternal depression on
primary school outcomes for children.

19

Using an adaptation of weighting methods initially proposed by Hirano and
Imbens (2001), but modified as described in Li, Zaslavsky and Landrum (2007), we use
the extensive information available in the NLSY on the mother’s youth to predict her
likelihood of depression (Hirano and Imbens 2001; Li, Zaslavsky et al. 2007). The
propensity score model takes the following form:
(2) log[Pr(DEPRESSED)/(1-Pr(DEPRESSED)] = β 0 + β 1 X ijYOUTH + β 2 Z ijYOUTH
where X is a vector of early life characteristics of the mother and Z captures characteristics
of the mother’s family and household of origin. The X vector of mother’s characteristics
when she was a youth includes: a measure of depression using the 1980 Rosenberg scale,
whether the mother had 2 or more symptoms of alcohol abuse or dependence in 1985,
whether the mother used marijuana 6 times or more in the 30 days prior to the 1984 survey,
whether the mother was an oldest child, the mother’s race and ethnicity, immigrant status,
and her 1980-81 AFQT percentile. The Z vector includes: whether the mother reports that
either of her parents (the maternal grandparents) had alcohol problems, whether either
maternal grandparent had anxiety or depression, whether the maternal grandparents were
married in 1979, the mother’s mean real family income 1979-1984, the mother’s number of
siblings in 1979, two indicators for whether the maternal grandmother completed high
school or some college, indicators for whether the mother had a sibling NLSY participant
who was depressed in 1980, had symptoms of alcohol abuse in 1985, or used marijuana
heavily in 1984. We then used the estimated parameters from (1) to construct a propensity
score, pˆ i = βˆ1 X iYOUTH + βˆ 2 Z iYOUTH . The propensity score formed the basis of person-level
weights that balanced the observed characteristics (from equation 1) of depressed and nondepressed mothers, giving more weight to the overlapping portion of the distribution of

20

propensity scores. Specifically ω i = pˆ i , if the mother was not depressed in 1992 and 1994,
and ω i = 1 − pˆ i , if the mother was depressed in 1992 and 1994. This propensity score
weighting approach, described briefly in Li, Zaslavsky, and Landrum (2007), like more
commonly discussed inverse probability weighting techniques (Hirano & Imbens, 2001),
balances observed characteristics across treatment and control groups. However, in this
case, characteristics are balanced to resemble those among overlapping portions of the
treatment and control distributions of observed characteristics. This adapted technique
obtains average treatment effects, over the distribution of covariates in the population
where the treatment and control groups overlap, as opposed to the entire population. This
approach also minimizes the variance of our estimates, which can be excessively large in
inverse probability weighting techniques when individuals have a very low propensity
score. By construction, this propensity score weighting technique forces the distribution
of observed characteristics in the propensity model to be identical across the two groups.7
All estimates in the paper weight each observation with the propensity-score-based
weight.
Table 2 displays a summary of variables used to predict maternal depression in
the propensity score models. One surprising statistic is the high rate of problem drinking
women report among their parents, 20 percent. This measure is admittedly crude, but we
would expect it to be considerably higher than the mother’s own alcohol abuse or
dependence both because of the measure (which likely includes drinking that does not
cause functional impairment) and because this variable reflects the perceived drinking
behavior of both parents, rather than a single individual. In fact, this number is close to

7

For an application in health services research, see McWilliams et al. (2003).

21

national estimates of the share of adults reporting that they lived with an alcoholic parent
any time before age 18. In a topical supplement to the 1988 National Health Interview
Survey, 18.6 percent of the adult, non-institutionalized population (19.6 percent of
females) reported that they lived with an alcoholic parent during their childhood
(Schoenborn 1991). In contrast, mothers report very low rates of anxiety and/or
depression among their parents, less than 4 percent, in contrast to national estimates
which are substantially higher.8 To address the potential for under-reporting of
depression and anxiety and possible over-reporting of problem drinking, where available,
we used sibling reports to increase the specificity of problem drinking questions and to
increase the sensitivity of questions regarding anxiety and depression among maternal
grandparents.
A second factor that may seem surprising at first is the difference between sibling
rates of depression (based on the 1980 Rosenberg scale) compared to mothers, and the
differences between mothers and siblings on measures of alcohol abuse/dependence and
marijuana use. Note that mother’s siblings may include both male and female siblings.
These numbers in fact line up well with estimates of the differential prevalence of
depression and substance use disorders by sex. Women are nearly twice as likely to
report depression symptoms than men. In contrast, women are only one half to one third
as likely to report symptoms of alcohol abuse or dependence (Kessler et al. 2005).

Outcome models
8

Given epidemiological evidence on rates of depression (over 6%) and anxiety (18%) in the adult
population, these adult children clearly are not aware of symptoms their parents may have experienced.
This is consistent with anecdotal evidence suggesting that even significant life struggles, such as those
overcome by immigrants to the U.S., are not shared with children (Kirk Semple, “Family Stories as Secret
Text for Immigrants,” The New York Times, March 16, 2009, p. A16).

22

To examine how maternal depression and substance use/abuse affect children, we
estimate models of both maternal inputs (the HOMES scales) and continuous child
outcomes. We estimate models of the following form:
(3)

Yi = α + β 1 * DEPRESSED + β 2 * ALCOHOL + β 3 * MARIJUANA + δ k + ΓX i

Where the measures of depression, symptoms of alcohol abuse or dependence, and heavy
marijuana use are the main variables of interest, and are coded as described above. The
model includes a set of age dummies to reflect the age of the child at the time the
outcome Y was measured in relation to a reference age, the modal age at which an
assessment occurred. This is important because child cognitive and behavior scores vary
widely with the age of the child. The vector X includes individual characteristics of the
child, the child’s mother, and the household at the time the outcome was measured.
These variables (defined in table 2) include: child sex, whether child is the oldest, number
of child’s siblings, whether the child was born to a teenage mother, mother’s marital
status, mother’s years of education, and a measure of permanent income (average annual
household income 1986-2004). Table 2 clearly demonstrates that the mothers in this
sample are atypical, because they are younger, on average, than all mothers (related to
our desire to follow child outcomes over a long period of time which required following a
sample of young mothers), and due to the oversampling of disadvantaged populations in
the NLSY. One third of the mothers are black, just over one fifth are white, and the
remaining mothers are Hispanic in origin (of any race). The mothers average just over 12
years of education (at the time of the child assessments), and about 60 percent of mothers
were married at the time that child assessments occurred. Finally, the mothers fall
relatively low in the distribution of AFQT scores. These characteristics may affect how

23

one generalizes results, but they are of interest because currently in the U.S.,
disadvantaged Hispanic and black women are disproportionately represented among
mothers due to higher fertility rates.
In addition to the OLS models described earlier, we have one binary outcome for
children, suspension/expulsion from school at any point during the schooling years. We
estimate logit models of the same variables in (2), but the dependent variable is a
dichotomous indicator of ever being expelled or suspended. For all of the models above,
we re-estimated (2) adding in the covariates from the propensity score model in (2) to
verify that our results would be doubly robust to errors that could arise from any
misspecification in the propensity score model. Variance estimates may be reduced by
the addition of the covariates from the propensity score model to outcome models as in 2.
In our case, the estimates of parameters on maternal depression, alcohol abuse, and
marijuana use were very similar, so for parsimony, we present only estimates with the
covariates described for equation (3).
Because we balance depressed and non-depressed mothers based on an extensive
set of early life characteristics, including behavioral health of mother and her family
members, we interpret the estimated β coefficients as the effect of proximate symptoms
of depression, alcohol abuse, and heavy marijuana use on maternal inputs and child
outcomes. By specifying the model in this way, we hope to isolate symptoms of
depression, for example, that are most amenable to treatment. We also aim to obtain
evidence on the nature of the mechanism linking depression and substance abuse to child
human capital formation by studying how these factors relate to maternal emotional and
cognitive inputs.

24

4. Main Results
Maternal Inputs:
Table 3 displays results for our first set of outcome models, those estimating how
maternal emotional and cognitive stimulation varies with maternal depression and
maternal substance use or abuse. Two patterns emerge from this table. First, maternal
depression is estimated to have a significant influence on the supply of maternal
emotional stimulation measures to school aged children in both primary and middle
school years. The emotional stimulation sub-component of the HOMES falls by about 6
points (or one fifth of a standard deviation) if a mother has symptoms of depression.
Second, the magnitude of this adverse effect of depression is large, especially if one
compares it to the magnitude of other indicators that we think are likely to be important,
like household income. For example, the 6 point drop in the emotional sub-scale is larger
than the drop that occurs with an increase of one in the log of household income. Third,
the effect of maternal depression on the emotional stimulation scale does not hold for the
cognitive stimulation scale. Recall that the cognitive scale averages over 990, with a
standard deviation of nearly 150. Thus, the statistically insignificant 7 point drop in the
cognitive stimulation scale for mothers who are likely to be depressed versus those that
aren’t depressed is small. Finally, the table reveals a similar lack of influence of
symptoms of alcohol abuse or dependence among mothers on the cognitive stimulation
provided by mothers. In contrast, symptoms of alcohol abuse and/or dependence have
moderately large, and statistically significant, effects on the emotional stimulation
subscale measured when children were age 11 to 14. Together, our results imply that
behavioral health symptoms among mothers may have moderate effects on inputs that

25

influence a child’s emotional development and behavior, but have few measureable
effects on our measure of mother’s cognitive input.
Table 4 shows models of child math and reading comprehension scores on the
PIAT. The main message from these models is that maternal depression (after
controlling for early life circumstances of the mother) has little or no measureable effect
on cognitive outcomes for their children. For young adolescents, age 11 to 14, having a
mother with symptoms of alcohol abuse is estimated to lower math test scores. Finally,
there is no discernable effect of contemporaneous maternal marijuana use on cognitive
outcomes among children.
Table 5 reports the results for similar models of child behavior outcomes.
Strikingly, scores on the BPI are 7 points higher (indicating more behavior problems)
among children with mothers who are depressed. These results are consistent with the
decrement to emotional stimulation among these depressed mothers based on the
HOMES scale. As in the earlier results on emotional stimulation, these effects are
sizeable, especially in comparison to other measures such as household income.
However, it is difficult to link maternal depression to either delinquency of 10-14 year
olds, or suspension/expulsion, since these parameter estimates are small and not precisely
estimated. The estimated effects of maternal alcohol abuse on child behavior are mixed.
For younger children, alcohol abuse is associated with worse (higher) BPI measures. For
older children, this is not the case. Surprisingly, children with mothers who have
symptoms of alcohol abuse are significantly less likely to be suspended or expelled. The
mechanism for this is unclear, although the literature on children of alcoholics suggests
that some children respond to parental alcoholism by acting as parents and becoming

26

overachievers during school years, rather behaving less responsibly (American Academy
of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry 2002).9 Another surprising effect is that children of
mothers who are heavy marijuana users tend to engage in less delinquent behavior than
other children. In the case of marijuana, this may reflect our relatively crude measure of
use since use does not necessarily coincide with any functional impairment.
5. Factor Models
As described earlier we examine several indicators of cognitive development
(PIAT reading and math scores) and several behavioral measures (BPI, reports of
suspension/expulsion, delinquency). Because few studies have assessed more moderate
effects of depression and substance use on cognitive and behavioral outcomes during the
school years, there is little guidance to indicate which behavioral measure or which
cognitive measure might be most important among children who have mothers with
behavioral health problems. Also, given the large number of outcomes we examine, we
want to reduce the dimensionality of our analysis to avoid problems of multiple
comparisons (the notion that with many outcomes, our variables of interest will randomly
predict our outcomes of interest with significance in at least some cases). Because these
measures seek in part to measure fundamental phenomena related to cognitive
development, learning, and social and emotional development, we develop summary
measures of cognitive development and behavior. This approach has the added advantage
of allowing us to combine very concrete measures, such as suspension/expulsion and the
delinquency scale, with more impressionistic indicators such as the BPI that might be
influenced by symptoms of depression in mothers.

9

Such children do not escape negative consequences of growing up with alcoholics, however, as they
remain at elevated risk for alcoholism later in life, and they suffer from other behavioral health issues.

27

We create our factor measures by estimating a factor model. A factor that
combines our multiple outcome measures will increase the variation available compared
with any single measure. Also, because the factor analysis will use only information that
pertains to a single concept, the underlying factor in the analysis, to the extent that this
factor reflects cognitive or behavioral outcomes, the factor analysis will increase the
signal to noise ratio compared to the signal from any one measure alone. Thus, we
expect that the use of factors will increase our statistical power to estimate the effect of
depressive symptoms and substance abuse on child cognitive and behavioral outcomes.
Our approach follows previous work (Fryer, Heaton et al. 2006). We estimate these
models in two steps. First, we conduct the factor analysis from which we construct our
cognitive and behavior outcome measures. We follow Fryer et al. (2006) and focus on a
single factor with the greatest explanatory power if it explains more than 50% of the
variance in the proxy measures. In these data, the cognitive factor accounts for over 67%
of the variation in the proxies, while the behavioral factor accounts for 53% of the
variation in those proxies (see Table 6).
Results of Factor Analyses
Table 6 displays results of the factor analysis. It shows that, as we suspected, the
cognitive measures capture related constructs and they contribute relatively equal weights
to the first factor. Similarly, the behavioral measures contribute comparable weight to
the underlying behavior factor. As noted earlier, the first factor accounts for more than
half the variation in both sets of proxy variables.
Table 7 displays the results of analyses using our constructed behavior and
cognitive indices as the outcomes of interest. This table confirms the results of the earlier

28

analyses. Maternal depression has relatively little effect on cognitive outcomes among
children in primary and middle school years. In contrast, it has a moderately large
negative effect on child behavior (about one third of a standard deviation). Heavy
marijuana use by mothers is estimated to have a negative effect on the cognitive score
that is significantly different from zero at conventional levels. Surprisingly maternal
alcohol abuse and dependence is estimated to have a positive and significant effect on the
cognitive factor for the 7-11 year olds. This puzzling result is stable to changes in
specification.
6. Fixed Effect Models
Our preferred models are those presented in tables 3 through 6 because they allow
us to capture the influence of contemporaneous maternal behavioral health at different
points in time for children in primary and middle school years. We deliberately chose not
to look “within child” at the effect of maternal depression because depression might
matter differently for children at different ages and we did not want to assume that the
effect of behavioral health problems should be the same at different ages. However, most
women in our sample have more than one child, allowing us to examine the impact of
maternal behavioral health for different children, measured at similar ages. Thus, for an
expanded sample of NLSY women with multiple children (not just the mothers of our
1587), we estimated age 7-10 outcomes as a function of maternal depression symptoms,
controlling for mother-specific fixed effects. With the inclusion of fixed effects, it was
no longer necessary to use the propensity score weighting. However, we did control for
the time varying covariates used in the rest of our child outcome models. The results of

29

these within mother models for 2653 women with 2 or more children are shown in Table
9.
As in our previous results, maternal depression seems to be exerting the most
important effect on child behavior measures but not for child cognitive measures. The
BPI is 3.3 points higher for children who are assessed during a period shortly before,
during, or after an interview in which the mother had symptoms of depression according
to her responses on the CESD. Given that the measures of depression do not necessarily
match up to child assessments as well as in the earlier models, and considering the
variation absorbed by the maternal fixed effects, we view this result as strong
confirmation of our main finding, that maternal depression interferes with child
behavior.10 Our results from the HOMES scales suggest that this negative influence of
maternal depression operates mainly through decrements in emotional stimulation at
home, rather than through lowered opportunities for cognitive stimulation.

7. Conclusions and Implications
The analysis reported here shows that symptoms consistent with a high likelihood of
depression in mothers of young school age children interfere with measures of social and
emotional development. This result is robust to a variety of empirical specifications. We
uncover evidence suggesting that the mechanism through which depression affects the
social and emotional development of grammar school aged children is through the
disruption of parenting activity that manages anger, misbehavior and other emotions of

10

We also estimated models of behavior using sub-scale for internalizing mental health problems (anxiety
and depression) and externalizing behavior (conduct disorder). The results indicate that a high likelihood
maternal depression affects both types of behavior problems. Detailed results are available from the authors
upon request.

30

young children. At the same time we do not find any evidence that maternal depression
has a meaningful effect on measures of cognitive development (reading and math).
To put the magnitude of the effects in context we use the parameter estimates
from our models of the BPI for young children (7-11) to consider the increase in
household income that would compensate for the impact of maternal depression. We
estimate that an increase in household income of about $63,000, assessed at the sample
mean, would produce an increase in BPI sufficient of offset the impact of mother’s
depression.
The results for indicators of maternal alcohol abuse and dependence are
somewhat mixed. We find some evidence that alcohol abuse/dependence affects both
cognitive and social and emotional development. The estimates are less consistent across
models than were those for depression. We did find evidence suggesting that alcohol
abuse/dependence indicators interfere with mother’s activities aimed at emotional
support. We are therefore more tentative in our view about the impacts of mother’s
substance abuse on human capital formation in young children. More investigation of the
mechanism and the impact on outcome of substance abuse problems in mothers is
warranted.
Heckman and coauthors have produced evidence showing the importance of
investment in the social and emotional development of children to economic successes
later in life (Heckman, Stixrud et al. 2006). Our results highlight the role of maternal
behavioral health as an input into the social and emotional development of young
children. Specifically, we find that maternal depression can be especially disruptive of
child social and emotional development

31

There are a number of effective strategies for the treatment of depression. They
can include psychotherapies, antidepressant medications and combinations of these
inputs. A number of these approaches have been tested on low income mothers of young
children and have been found to be highly effective (Miranda, Chung et al. 2003). This
means that recognizing and treating depression in mother’s of young children may
constitute an effective investment in human capital formation. Given the modest costs of
treating most cases of depression ($1200-$2000), and the potentially significant and
lasting effects that interruptions in social and emotional development can have of human
capital formation, greater attention to screening and treatment of at risk women (e.g.
Head Start mothers) with young children may be warranted.

References
Achenbach, T. M. and C. Edlebroch (1978). "The Child Behavior Profile: Boys 6-11."
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 46: 476-488.
Achenbach, T. M. and C. Edlebroch (1979). "The Child Behavior Profile II: Boys Aged
12-16 and Girls Aged 6-11 and 12-16." Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology 47: 223-233.
American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry (2002) "Children of Alcoholics."
Volume, DOI:
Beck, C. T. (1999). "Maternal Depression and Child Behavior Problems: a metaanalysis." Journal of Advanced Nursing 29(3): 623-629.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (2005) "NLS Handbook, 2005." Volume, DOI:
Caldwell, B. M. and R. H. Bradley (1984). Home Observation for Measurement of the
Environment. Little Rock, Arkansas, University of Arkansas.
Caspi, A. and T. E. Moffit (2006). "Gene-environment Interactions in Psychiatry:
Joining Forces with Neuroscience." Neuroscience 7: 583-590.
Chatterji, P. and S. Markowitz (2001). "The Impact of Maternal Alcohol and Illicit Drug
Use on Children's Behavior Problems: Evidence from the Children of the
National Longitudinal Survey." Journal of Health Economics 20(5): 703-731.
Cogill, S. R., H. L. Caplan, et al. (1986). Impact of maternal postnatal depression on
cognitive development of young children. 292: 1165-1167.
Cunha, F. and J. Heckman (2007). "The Technology of Skill Formation." American
Economic Review 97(2): 31-47.

32

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, et al. (2006). Interpreting the Evidence on Life Cycle Skill
Formation. Handbook of the Economics of Education. E. Hanushek and F. Welch,
Elsevier.
Currie, J. and B. C. Madrian (1999). Health, Health Insurance and the Labor Market.
Handbook of Labor Economics. O. Ashenfelter and D. Card. New York, Elsevier.
3c: 3309-3407.
Currie, J. and M. Stabile (2008). Mental Health in Childhood and Human Capital. An
Economic Perspective on the Problems of Disadvantaged Youth. J. Gruber.
Cambridge, MA, University of Chicago Press.
Currie, J. and D. Thomas (1999). "Does Head Start Help Hispanic Children?" Journal of
Public Economics 74(2): 235-262.
Ettner, S., R. G. Frank, et al. (1997). "The Impact of Psychiatric Disorders on Labor
Market Outcomes." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 51(1): 64-81.
Frank, R. G. and C. Koss (2005). Mental Health and Labor Markets Productivity Loss
and Restoration. Disease Control Priorities Project. Geneva, Switzerland, World
Health Organization.
Heath, A. C. and E. C. Nelson (2002). "Effects of the Interaction between Genotype and
Environment: Research into the Genetic Epidemiology of Alcohol Dependence."
Alcohol Resarch and Health 26: 193-201.
Heckman, J. (2006). "Skill Formation and the Economics of Investing in Young
Children." Science 312(5782): 1900-1902.
Heckman, J., J. Stixrud, et al. (2006). "The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive
Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior." Journal of Labor
Economics 24(3): 411-482.
Heckman, J. J. (2007). "The Economics, Technology, and Neuroscience of Human
Capability Formation." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
104(33): 13250-13255.
Hirano, K. and G. W. Imbens (2001). "Estimation of Causal Effects using Propensity
Score Weighting: An Application to Data on Right Heart Catheterization."
Health Services and Outcomes Research Methodology 2: 259-278.
Kendler, K. S., C. O. Garnder, et al. (2002). "Toward a Comprehensive Developmental
Model for Major Depression in Women." American Journal of Psychiatry 159:
1133-1145.
Kessler, R. C., P. Berglund, et al. (2005). "Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset
distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication." Arch Gen Psychiatry 62(6): 593-602.
Kim-Cohen, J., T. E. Moffit, et al. (2005). "Maternal Depression and Children's
Antisocial Behavior." Arch Gen Psychiatry 62: 173-181.
Knudsen, E. L., J. J. Heckman, et al. (2006). "Economic, Neurobiological, and
Behavioral Perspectives on Building America's Future Workforce." Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 103: 10155-10162.
Li, F., A. M. Zaslavsky, et al. (2007). Propensity Score Analysis with Hierarchical Data.
Boston, MA.
McEwan, B. S. and T. Seeman (1999). Protective and Damaging Effects of Mediators of
Stress: Elaborating and Testing the Concepts of Allostasis and Allostatic Load.
Socioeconomic Status and Health in Industrial Nations: Social Psychological and

33

Biological Pathways. N. E. Adler, M. Marmot, B. S. McEwen and J. Stewart.
New York. 686.
Miranda, J., J. Chung, et al. (2003). "Treating Depression in Predominantly Low-Income
Young Minority Women: A Randomized Controlled Trial." Journal of the
American Medical Association 290(1): 57-65.
National Research Council and Institute of Medicine, Ed. (2000). From Neurons to
Neighborhoods: The Science of Early Childhood Development. Washington D.C.,
Institute of Medicine.
National Scientific Council on the Developing Child (2005). Excessive Stress Disrupts
the Architecture of the Developing Brain. National Scientific Council on the
Developing Child Working Paper. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University.
Petterson, S. M. and A. B. Albers (2001). Effects of Poverty and Maternal Depression on
Early Child Development. 72: 1794-1813.
Radloff, L. S. (1977). "The CES-D Scale: A Self-report Depression Scale for Research
in the General Population." Applied Psychological Measurement 1: 385-401.
Rosenbaum, P. R. and D. B. Rubin (1983). "The Central Role of the Propensity Score in
Observational Studies for Causal Effects." Biometrika 70: 41-55.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the Adolescent Self-Image. Princeton, NJ, Princeton
University Press.
Schoenborn, C. A. (1991). Exposure to Alcoholism in the Family: United States, 1988.
Advance Data from Vital and Health Statistics of the National Center for Health
Statistics. Number 205. Hyattsville, MD, National Center for Health Statistics
(DHHS/PHS): 1-15.
Sullivan, P. F., Neale, M. C. & Kendler, K. S. (2000). The genetic epidemiology of major
depression: review and meta-analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry 157, 15521562.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (1999). Mental Health: A Report of the
Surgeon General. S. A. a. M. H. S. A. U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Center for Mental Health Services, National Institutes of Health,
National Institute of Mental Health. Rockville, MD.

34

APPENDIX
Table A1 displays the questions used to construct an indicator variable for maternal
alcohol abuse or dependence. The variable was equal to one if the mother had two or
more of the following symptoms.
Appendix table A1: Common Questions in both the 1989 and 1994 NLSY
surveys – used to construct measure of symptoms of alcohol abuse or
dependence
1. Continued to drink alcohol although threat to health
2. Cut down on activities with friends in order to drink
3. Drinking could have caused someone else to be injured
4. Drinking has hurt chances for job promotion
5. Drove a care after having too much to drink
6. Ended up drinking much more than intended to
7. Found it difficult to stop drinking once started
8. Frequency got into physical fights during/after drinking
9. Hangover interfered with things supposed to be doing
10. Heard/seen things not really there after drinking
11. Kept drinking although caused emotional problems
12. Kept drinking although caused problems at home/work
13. Lost ties to family member/friend because of drinking
14. Need to drink more to get same effect
15. Drank for longer period of time than intended to
16. Heavy sweating/shaking after drinking/morning after
17. Same amount of alcohol having less effect than before
18. Taking a drink to stop shaking after drinking
19. Sick or vomited after drinking or the morning after
20. Spent a lot of time drinking or getting over effects
21. Spouse/someone else threatened to leave due to drinking
22. Stayed away from work/gone to work late because drinking
23. Tried to stop drinking but could not do it

35

In 1985, there were fewer questions regarding symptoms of alcohol abuse. Table A2
displays the six questions we used to construct symptoms of alcohol abuse or
dependence.
Table A2: Questions in the 1985 NLSY surveys used to construct 1985 measure of symptoms
of alcohol abuse or dependence
1. Once you started drinking, was it difficult for you to stop before you became completely
intoxicated?
2. During the past year have you often taken a drink the first thing when you got up in the morning?
3. Have you stayed away from work because of a hangover?
4. Has drinking hurt your chances for promotion or raises or a better job?
5. During the past year have you gotten into a fight while drinking?
6. Once you started drinking, was it difficult for you to stop before you became completely
intoxicated.

Delinquency scale (used for children aged 10 to 14)
Below are the nine questions asked to create the delinquency scale for children aged 10 to
14. Children aged 10 and older were asked, Have you ever:
1. stayed out later than your parents said;
2. hurt someone bad enough to need a doctor;
3. lied to parents about something important;
4. taken something without paying for it;
5. damaged school property on purpose;
6. gotten drunk;
7. did wrong at school so that parent had to come pick them up;
8. skipped a day of school without permission;
9. stayed out one night without permission;

36

Table A3 below displays the regression coefficients from the propensity score model
predicting mother’s depression in 1992 and 1994
Table A3: Regressions Predicting Maternal Depression, 1992 & 1994
Coefficient
(SE)
Depression & SA
Poor Mental Health 1980 (Rosenberg Score<10)
Alcohol Abuse/Dependence1 1985
Heavy Marijuana Smoker2 1984
Mother’s Sibling Depression & SA
Poor Mental Health 1980 (Rosenberg Score<10)
Alcohol Abuse/Dependence1 1985
Heavy Marijuana Smoker2 1984
Maternal Grandparent Depression/Anxiety & Alcohol
Maternal grandparent had anxiety or depression Dx

0.161
(0.264)
0.53
(0.504)
0.002
(0.560)

-0.617
(0.328)
0.009
(0.341)
-0.506
(0.312)
0.564*
(0.241)

One or both of mother's parents had problems with alcohol

-1.393
(0.932)

AFQT percentile score (1980)

-0.031**
(0.005)

Log of Mean household income 1979-1984

0.092
(0.063)

Maternal Grandmother Education
High school graduate

-0.685*
(0.275)

Some college

-0.307
(0.469)

Parents married at baseline interview (1979)

0.174
(0.222)

# of siblings (1979)

-0.016
(0.042)

Mother is Oldest child

-0.027

37

(0.277)

Mother’s Race-Ethnicity
African-American

-0.134
(0.253)

Hispanic

-0.110
(0.275)

Mother is Foreign Born

-0.741
(0.560)

Constant

-1.842**
(0.711)

Number of Observations

1,587
Note: p < 0.01, p < 0.05, p < 0.10; Regressions estimated using logistic models; All observations
weighted based on 1979 sample weight.
***

**

*

38

Figure 1: Timeline of Mother’s Early Life Measures of Depression, Marijuana, and Symptoms of Alcohol Abuse/Dependence

Figure 2: Timeline of Child Outcome Measures and Maternal Measures of Depression, Marijuana, and Symptoms of Alcohol
Abuse/Dependence for Child Outcome Models

40

Table 1. Child Outcomes for 1587 Children of NLSY79 women
Age 7-10
Mean
(SD)
COGNITIVE
Piat Math Standardized Score
Piat Reading Standardized Score

Age 11-14
Mean
(SD)

99.74
(12.79)
102.1
(13.89)

99.15
(13.85)
96.35
(13.45)
0.037
(1.012)

106.8
(14.93)

107.64
(15.22)

Cognitive factor score
BEHAVIOR
Behavior Problems Index Total
Internalizing behavior subscale
-Externalizing behavior subscale
Anxiety/Depression subscale

-104.1
(13.12)

Child Delinquency Scale Standardized
-Behavior factor score

--

103.63
(17.50)
105.88
(16.39)
105.4
(12.95)
0.055
(0.643)
-0.023
(1.006)

Ever Suspended or Expelled (all ages)

22.37%

INTERMEDIATE OUTCOMES – Measures of Maternal Involvement
Cognitive stimulation score
991.5
(148.3)
Emotional stimulation score
48.91
(29.43)
985.3
Total stimulation score
(147.3)

990.7
(149.1)
48.38
(30.02)
984.3
(151.7)

Mother reads to child 3+ times per week (age 7-10)

49.45%

Table 2. Characteristics of 1587 NLSY79 Women & Their Families
% or
Mean
Characteristics of mother & her family at baseline
(SD)
Grandparent Alcoholic
21.36
Grandparent Anxiety/Depression
4.158
Mother Depressed 1980 (Rosenberg scale)
18.65
Mother's Sibling Depressed 1980 (Rosenberg scale)
14.85
Mother Symptoms of Alcohol Abuse/Dependence 1985
3.019
Mother's Sibling Symptoms of Alcohol Abuse/Dependence 1985 7.763
Mother Heavy Marijuana User 1984
Mother's Sibling Heavy Marijuana User 1984
Mother Oldest Child
Maternal Grandmother Education

4.806
9.452
20.16

Did not graduate from high school
High school graduate
At least some college

54.95
35.17
9.890

Mother's Parents Married 1979

64.27

Mother's Mean Real Family Income 1979-1984
(in 2006 $)
Mother Mean Number of Siblings 1979

34,521
(22,884)
4.395
(2.804)

Race-Ethnicity
Black
Hispanic
White
AFQT Percentile 1980-1981
Covariates in models of child outcomes

32.88
22.18
45.05
34.71
(26.97)
%

Gender of child
Male
Female

47.57
52.36

42

Table 2, ctd.
Oldest Child
# of Siblings
Teen Mother

44.23
1.82
9.10

Mother Marital Status when child took ages 7-10 tests
Never married
Married
Divorced, Separated or Widowed

13.86
61.06
24.95

Mother Marital Status when child took age 11-14 tests
Never married
Married
Divorced, Separated or Widowed

11.97
59.86
28.05

Mother Immigrant

6.11

Mother Poor Mental health 1992 and 1994
(CES-D score of 16+)
Mother Heavy Marijuana Smoker
1992
1998
Mother Symptoms of Alcohol Abuse/Dependence
1989
1994

11.34

Mother Years of Education at Child’s Age 7-10 Test

12.35
(1.66)
12.55
(2.02)

Mother Years of Education at Child’s Age 11-14 Test
Average Annual Household Income 1986-2004 ($2006)

4.10
2.46
9.64
11.03

48,833
(43,145)

43

Table 3: Regressions of the Impact of Maternal Mental Health on home cognitive and
emotional stimulation – weighted on 1992/94 depression
Mom
Home Stimulation
Home Stimulation
Reads to
Emotional Sub-Scale
Cognitive Sub-Scale
Child
Score
Score
3x/week
Age 7-10
Age 11-14 Age 7-10
Age 11-14 Age 7-10
Mother’s Depression & SA
Mother Depressed 1992 & 1994 -6.136** -5.472**
-2.888
-7.274
-0.082
(2.432)
(2.558)
(13.15)
(12.99)
(0.236)
Alcohol Abuse/Dependence1

1.572
(3.929)

-7.012**
(3.568)

-7.583
(20.26)

-11.66
(18.16)

0.126
(0.361)

Heavy Marijuana Smoker2

-3.015

-1.390

-42.584

14.236

-0.613

(6.310)

(4.871)

(37.736)

(47.051)

(0.614)

24.60**
(10.80)
13.89
(8.960)

13.57**
(6.846)
0.122
(5.419)

17.61
(113.4)
-7.500
(92.13)

6.969
(37.86)
-61.820**
(31.02)

2.172
(1.497)
0.129
(1.067)

19.00**
(9.036)

3.739
(5.477)

-29.34
(91.98)

-13.02
(30.50)

-0.301
(1.071)

5.789
(3.931)
1.502
(3.666)

1.851
(4.797)
-4.246
(4.303)

6.604
(22.10)
-8.222
(20.48)

3.012
(25.75)
-33.81
(24.87)

-0.008
(0.370)
0.323
(0.336)

3.886
(3.842)

3.774
(4.545)

-40.53*
(23.19)

-39.59
(26.55)

-0.015
(0.380)

15.284*** 2.692
(3.278)
(2.615)

24.79
(19.71)

-6.107
(17.80)

-0.175
(0.318)

1.850
(3.946)

1.762
(4.161)

3.902
(30.39)

6.658
(22.45)

-1.142***
(0.429)

Child is female

4.604**
-2.214

-0.926
-2.32

34.08***
-12.75

45.91***
-12.777

-0.056
-0.213

Oldest child

1.578
3.322
-2.402
-2.368
-2.255*** -1.776**

47.56***
-13.56
-5.785

32.75**
-14.69
-9.024*

0.926***
(0.224)
0.145*

Age at test (reference = 8/14)
7/11
9/12
10/13
Region (reference=North East)
North Central
South
West
# of Adults in Household
(reference=1)
2
3 or more

# of siblings

44

Ln (Annual Household Income)
Mother's education (yrs) at time
of assessment

Mother was a teenage mother
Mother’s Marital Status at test
(reference=never married)
Married
Divorced , Separated, Widowed,
Other
Constant

R2

-0.781

-0.791

-4.761

-5.591

-0.088

3.981**
(1.921)

4.889**
(2.257)

61.94***
(10.67)

58.25***
(11.864)

0.167
(0.192)

-1.043
(0.740)

-1.645**
(0.828)

8.779**
(3.61)

13.70***
(4.125)

0.082
(0.075)

-0.590
(3.571)

-1.152
(4.594)

5.793
(23.35)

11.69
(21.80)

-0.159
(0.340)

11.013**
(4.335)

20.067***
(4.156)

26.57
(24.93)

2.347
(23.18)

0.116
(0.385)

-6.162
(4.167)

-1.494
(3.457)

13.62
(25.16)

-19.76
(21.678)

0.021
(0.371)

-19.12
(20.12)

4.621
(21.61)

146.2
(141.2)

178.6
(128.8)

-4.104
(2.162)

0.284

0.248

0.266

0.325

note: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.10; Regressions 1-4 are estimated using OLS regression 5 is estimated
with logistic regression;
1
1989 for age 7-10 outcomes and 1994 for age 11-14 outcomes; 2 1992 for age 7-10 outcomes and 1998
for age 11-14 outcomes. All observations weighted based on propensity scores from models of maternal
depression in 1992 and 1994.

45

Table 4: Regressions of the Impact of Maternal Mental Health and Substance
Use/Abuse on Individual Cognitive Outcomes – weighted on depression
PIAT Math Scores

PIAT Reading Scores

Age 7-10

Age 11-14

Age 7-10

Age 11-14

-0.186
(0.960)

0.715
(1.028)

-0.074
(1.053)

0.870
(0.979)

Alcohol Abuse/Dependence1

-0.580
(1.606)

-4.359***
(1.407)

0.090
(1.827)

-0.417
(1.376)

Heavy Marijuana Smoker2

2.939
(1.931)

1.668
(2.616)

1.386
(2.105)

-0.475
(2.781)

6.510**
(3.150)
-1.064
(0.953)
4.582
(3.087)

-0.725
(2.674)
2.948*
(1.778)
0.155
(1.007)

0.512
(2.259)
-3.603***
(1.080)
-6.002**
(2.678)

-1.449
(2.060)
1.676
(2.064)
0.269
(0.993)

0.293
(1.732)
-3.212**
(1.528)
-3.789**
(1.685)

3.139*
(1.929)
-1.369
(1.657)
-0.993
(1.809)

0.798
(1.956)
-4.607***
(1.710)
-4.238**
(1.987)

-0.131
(1.949)
-4.068**
(1.673)
-2.727
(1.732)

1.062
(1.514)
-2.686
(1.903)
-0.747**
(0.367)
-0.334
(0.945)
-0.076
(1.157)
4.079***
(0.987)

-1.689
(1.108)
-0.742
(1.370)
-1.051**
(0.408)
-2.470**
(0.972)
0.134
(1.201)
4.166***
(1.097)

0.646
(1.475)
-2.108
(2.179)
-1.097***
(0.409)
1.400
(1.046)
1.453
(1.202)
5.608***
(1.086)

-0.216
(1.048)
0.114
(1.483)
-0.837**
(0.388)
-0.489
(0.929)
1.822
(1.152)
4.558***
(0.963)

1.203***

0.632**

0.817***

0.805***

Mother’s Depression & SA
Mother Depressed 1992 &
1994

Age at test (reference = 8/14)
7/11
9/12
10/13
Region (reference=North
East)
North Central
South
West
# of Adults in Household
(reference=1)
2
3 or more
# of siblings
Child is female
Oldest child
Ln (Mean Household Income)
Mother's education (yrs) at
time of test

46

Mother was a teenage mother
Mother’s Marital Status at
time of test (reference=never
married)
Married
Divorced , Separated,
Widowed, Other
Constant
R2

(0.251)
0.729
(1.353)

(0.314)
2.291
(1.646)

(0.296)
0.921
(1.611)

(0.244)
2.345
(1.527)

0.371
(1.732)

4.428***
(1.679)

0.943
(1.832)

5.057***
(1.665)

3.433**
(1.476)
37.68 ***
(9.334)

2.285
(1.453)
49.23
(10.20)

3.394**
(1.484)
-0.074
(1.053)

4.175***
(1.385)
36.43
(9.426)

0.178

.186

0.225

0.219

note: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.10; Regressions are estimated using OLS; All observations weighted
based on propensity scores from models of maternal depression in 1992 and 1994.
1
1989 for age 8 outcomes and 1994 for age 14 outcomes; 2 1992 for age 8 outcomes and 1998 for age 14
outcomes

47

Table 5: Regressions of the Impact of Maternal Mental Health and Substance
Use/Abuse on Individual Behavioral Outcomes – weighted on 1992/94 depression
Ever
Behavior Problems
Delinq.
suspended
Index Total Score
Scale
or expelled
Age 7-10
Age 11-14
Age 11-14 Any age
Mother’s Depression & SA
Mother Depressed 1992 & 1994

6.816*** 7.106***
(1.150)
(1.190)

0.008
(0.053)

0.029
(0.199)

Alcohol Abuse/Dependence1

4.259**
(1.968)

-0.229
(2.085)

0.092
(0.083)

-0.843**
(0.327)

Heavy Marijuana Smoker2

1.634
(2.669)

1.319
(3.332)

-0.176*
(0.096)

0.700
(0.605)

-0.342
(4.231)
-0.001
(1.170)

0.034
(2.164)
-1.924
(2.321)

-0.029
(0.163)
-0.150*
(0.078)

-0.177
(0.550)
-0.536
(0.402)

-7.75***
(2.609)

-0.320
(1.353)

-0.097*
(0.059)

-0.338
(0.220)

2.752
(2.017)
0.502
(1.728)

-0.569
(1.895)
-2.776
(1.750)

-0.003
(0.109)
-0.082
(0.103)

0.209
(0.397)
0.231
(0.372)

0.851
(1.850)

-1.730
(1.976)

-0.082
(0.099)

0.182
(0.416)

-0.499
(1.523)

-0.025
(1.514)

0.109*
(0.062)

0.325
(0.238)

3 or more

0.986
(2.355)

4.010*
(2.144)

-0.019
(0.085)

0.885***
(0.333)

# of siblings

-0.751
(0.514)

-0.953*
(0.527)

0.016
(0.024)

0.070
(0.070)

Child is female

-3.363*** -2.150*
(1.113)
(1.198)

-0.120**
(0.054)

-0.577***
(0.205)

Age at test (reference = 8/14)
7/11
9/12
10/13
Region (reference=North East)
North Central
South
West
# of Adults in Household
(reference=1)
2

Oldest child

1.871

0.533

-0.164***

0.159
48

(1.349)
Ln (Annual Household Income)
Mother's education (yrs) at time
of assessment
Mother was a teenage mother
Mother’s Marital Status at test
(reference=never married)
Married
Divorced , Separated, Widowed,
Other

(1.335)

(0.060)

(0.229)

-4.887*** -5.983***
(1.067)
(1.025)

-0.021
(0.052)

-0.976***
(0.178)

-0.597
(0.315)

0.249
(0.330)

-0.022
(0.016)

0.104**
(0.051)

-2.386
(1.992)

0.730
(2.153)

0.062
(0.105)

0.401
(0.286)

4.966**
(1.947)

1.995
(2.326)

-0.240**
(0.096)

-0.905***
(0.296)

0.006
(0.087)

-0.464*
(0.270)

5.063*** 2.381
(1.797)
(2.201)

Constant

159.9***
(10.50)

171.4***
(10.3)

0.941
(.556)

R2

0.155

0.138

0.081

8.668***
(1.793)

Note: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.10; Regressions 1-3 are estimated using OLS; Regression 4 is
estimated using a logit. All observations weighted based on propensity scores from models of maternal
depression in 1992 and 1994.
1
1989 for age 7-10 outcomes and 1994 for age 11-14 outcomes; 2 1992 for age 7-10 outcomes and 1998
for age 11-14 outcomes

49

Table 6: Factor Loadings for Cognitive and Behavior Measures
Factor Loading
Cognitive Ability Measures
Piat Math Score Age 7-10
Piat Reading Score Age 7-10
Piat Math Score Age 11-14
Piat Reading Score Age 11-14
Share of variation explained by
factor

0.823
0.816
0.832
0.833
0.675

Behavior Measures
Child Delinquency Scale
Behavior Problems Index
Ever Suspended or Expelled
Share of variation explained by
factor

0.712
0.726
0.751
0.531

Table 7: Regressions of the Impact of Maternal Mental Health and Substance
Use/Abuse on Cognitive and Behavioral Factor Indices
Cognitive Index Behavioral
Score
Index Scores
Age 7-14

Age 11-14

Mother’s Depression & SA
Mother Depressed 1992 and 1994

0.016
(0.071)

Alcohol Abuse/Dependence 1994

0.090
(0.117)
-0.290**
(0.113)
0.294**
(0.136)
-0.088
(0.162)

Heavy Marijuana Smoker 1998
Alcohol Abuse/Dependence 1998
Heavy Marijuana Smoker 1992

0.229***
(0.081)
-0.055
(0.111)
0.012
(0.206)
-----

note: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.10; Regressions are estimated using OLS. Regressions are estimated
using OLS; All observations weighted based on propensity scores from models of maternal depression in
1992 and 1994.Cognitive index model includes covariates from both age 7-10 models and age 11-14
models, as in Table 3. Behavior index model includes covariates from age 11-14 models shown in Table 3.

50

Table 8: Fixed Effect Model Predicting Cognitive and Behavioral Outcomes
Piat Math

Piat
Reading

Behavior
Problem
Index

Ever
Repeat
Grade

Mother depressed

-0.439
(1.213)

-0.312
(1.268)

3.297***
(1.289)

-0.065
(0.037)

Symptoms of alcohol
Abuse or dependence
Heavy Marijuana use

1.754
(1.783)

1.057
(1.863)

0.019
(1.894)

-0.023
(0.054

3.796
(2.734)

1.545
(2.857)

-1.716
(2.905)

0.139
(0.083)

Includes covariates?

Yes

Yes

Yes

2,653
0.020

2,653
0.054

2,653
0.063

Number of observations
R2
note:

Yes
2,653
0.031

***

p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.10

51

