                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    INDUCED INNOVATION AND SOCIAL INEQUALITY:
                       EVIDENCE FROM INFANT MEDICAL CARE

                                           David M. Cutler
                                             Ellen Meara
                                            Seth Richards

                                        Working Paper 15316
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15316


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2009




We are grateful to the National Institutes on Aging for research support and to seminar participants
at the American Economics Association Annual Meetings, The American Society of Health Economists
Meeting, and Dartmouth for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by David M. Cutler, Ellen Meara, and Seth Richards. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Induced Innovation and Social Inequality: Evidence from Infant Medical Care
David M. Cutler, Ellen Meara, and Seth Richards
NBER Working Paper No. 15316
September 2009
JEL No. I1,I12,J1,J15

                                               ABSTRACT

We develop a model of induced innovation where research effort is a function of the death rate, and
thus the potential to reduce deaths in the population. We also consider potential social consequences
that arise from this form of induced innovation based on differences in disease prevalence across population
subgroups (i.e. race). Our model yields three empirical predictions. First, initial death rates and subsequent
research effort should be positively correlated. Second, research effort should be associated with more
rapid mortality declines. Third, as a byproduct of targeting the most common conditions in the population
as a whole, induced innovation leads to growth in mortality disparities between minority and majority
groups. Using information on infant deaths in the U.S. between 1983 and 1998, we find support for
all three empirical predictions. We estimate that induced innovation predicts about 20 percent of
declines in infant mortality over this period. At the same time, innovation that occurred in response
to the most common causes of death favored the majority racial group in the U.S., whites. We estimate
that induced innovation contributed about one third of the rise in the black-white infant mortality ratio
during our period of study.


David M. Cutler                                       Seth Richards
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
Harvard University                                    University of Pennsylvania
1875 Cambridge Street                                 3718 Locust Walk
Cambridge, MA 02138                                   Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER                                              serichar@econ.upenn.edu
dcutler@harvard.edu

Ellen Meara
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115-5899
and NBER
meara@hcp.med.harvard.edu
       Technological change is a source of substantial aggregate welfare improvements.

Several studies suggest that technological change accounts for up to a third of aggregate

economic growth (Jorgenson 2000). Yet overall welfare gains do not imply equal benefit

for all individuals. If technological change is biased towards some industries or groups,

some parts of the population will benefit more than others.

       In this paper, we investigate biased technological change using a particular

example – medical technology for treating at risk infants. Infant mortality provides a

useful setting to learn about induced innovation because the outcome is easy to measure

(deaths) and disparities in outcomes are so widely noted. Further, there has been

enormous technological progress. In the early 1960s, about 25 of every 1,000 infants

died before their first birthday, most before leaving the hospital. Much of this death was

in premature infants – infants born before normal gestation, and typically low birth

weight, or under 2500 grams.

       The situation of newborns dying so young created a moral imperative to reduce

those deaths. The highly publicized death of John F. Kennedy’s infant son shortly after

his premature birth attracted further attention to the magnitude of deaths to infants.

Clinicians treating infants began to innovate, starting what would spur the development

of neonatal intensive care units (Baker 1996; Anspach 1997). Grant money followed,

and physicians and scientists became energized. Treatment progress was impressive. In

the four and a half decades since 1960, mortality for low birth weight babies declined 70

percent, almost entirely as a result of improved medical care (Cutler and Meara, 2000).

       The first part of our empirical analysis shows the link between humanitarian need

and technological change. We look at the role of induced innovation using data on death




                                                                                             2
by cause. We investigate whether causes of death with higher mortality rates early in the

time period experienced larger reductions in infant mortality over time. Our results

support this prediction. Every death per 1,000 births attributed to a particular cause in

1983-85 is associated with a 20 percent greater reduction in mortality from that cause

over the subsequent 13 years.

       We then go on to examine the impact of these changes on social inequities in

health. We focus specifically on the ratio of black to white infant deaths, which

characterizes the relative rate of progress for blacks compared to whites. Since there are

nearly four times as many white than black births, leading causes of death will inherently

be those which whites suffer from relatively more. When progress was made on leading

causes of death, therefore, it benefited white newborns more than black newborns. Using

counterfactual simulations, we show that racial gaps in birth weight-specific mortality

have widened over time as a direct result of the research progress that was made. As a

result, medical need has led to improved aggregate outcomes, but with a disproportionate

share of those benefits accruing to majority groups.

       The paper is structured as follows. The first section presents a simple model of

induced innovation in medicine that shows why research would be allocated to more

common diseases and how induced innovation could increase disparities in health

outcomes. The second section describes infant mortality trends in recent decades and

presents a case study of a particular cause of death, respiratory distress syndrome (RDS).

Section three presents the data, and section four empirically tests for induced innovation.

Section five then translates these estimates into the social consequences of induced

innovation. The last section concludes.




                                                                                             3
II.       A Model of Induced Innovation

          In this section, we use a simple framework to explore how the obvious and

painful suffering of people near death could lead to technological change, and how that

change might affect different population groups. For simplicity, we consider the setting

we employ in our empirical analysis: survival of low birth weight infants.

          A significant body of recent research has considered models of endogenous

innovation. In most of these models, innovation is posited to respond to profits – either

greater demand for some industries (Schmookler, 1966; Romer, 1990; Grossman and

Helpman, 1991; Aghion and Howitt, 1992; Kremer, 2002; and Acemoglu and Linn,

2004) or differential factor costs (as in Newell, Jaffee, Stavins, 1999; and Popp, 2002).

          The medical sector is not well characterized by pure profit motives, however.

Most hospitals are not-for-profit and much innovation is done by independent, university-

based researchers. We posit an alternative framework in which the humanitarian desire

to improve health drives innovation. Lichtenberg (2001) and Bhattacharya and Packalen

(2008) similarly model the allocation of public spending and innovation in the non-profit

sector.

          We consider a set of diseases that might result in death, abstracting from quality

of life. Let the mortality rate for a particular diagnosis i at a point in time t be denoted dit.

We consider two periods, a base period t = 0 and a later period t = 1, where individuals

from time 0 are no longer in the relevant population. The death rate is given by

          n
D t = ∑ d it , where n is the number of distinct diseases.
      i=1




                                                                                               4
          Medical research on a particular condition will improve survival according to a

(probabilistically) known innovation possibility function. We model this as a function

fi(ri), that converts research between periods 0 and 1 into a survival probability at time 1.

We assume straightforwardly that fi(0) = 0, fi < 1, fi’ > 0, and fi’’ < 0. The death rate for

condition i at time 1 is then di1 = di0 · (1 – fi(ri0)), and the aggregate death rate in period 1

            n
is D 1 = ∑ d i0 ⋅ (1 − f i (ri ) ).
           i=1


          Note that this formulation assumes no spillovers across diseases – that is, research

conducted on one disease affects mortality only for that condition. We argue below that

this assumption is conservative in our setting.

          We consider a social planner wishing to maximize social welfare. This might be

the National Institutes of Health, which funds a large share of basic biomedical research,

or university researchers on their own, thinking about valuable projects to explore. The

social planner wishes to minimize mortality in period 1, with a total research budget fixed

at R.

          The planner would then solve the following problem:

            n                                n

           ∑ d i0 (1 − f i (ri ))
            i=1
                                      s.t.   ∑r < R .
                                             i=1
                                                   i                                      (1)


The first-order condition is straightforward:

          di0 · fi'(ri*) = dn0 · fn'(rn*), for all i.                                     (2)

          Equation (2) states that the expected marginal benefit of research should be the

same across all diseases. Provided the fi functions are not too different across conditions,




                                                                                                 5
this means that more common diseases deserve research that is less productive on the

margin, and thus get more research funding.1

         Disparities in health outcomes will be related to research innovation. Because

more medical research is done for more common diseases, the socially optimal allocation

of research dollars will tilt towards diseases that are relatively more common in larger

population groups.

         To see this, consider the case where there are two groups, a majority group a and

a minority group b (in our empirical example, whites and blacks). Let the initial death

rates per condition for two groups be d a0,i and d b0,i and their respective sums across

conditions be Da0 and Db0. At time 1, the death rates are given by

                              d a1,i = d a0,i · (1 – fi(ri))        and       d b1,i = d b0,i · (1 – fi(ri)),

and the mortality ratio at each time is given by Dbt/Dat. This ratio increases over time if

Db1/Db0 > Da1/Da0, which in our model expands to

           n                     d b0,i       n                  d a0,i
         ∑ (1 − f (r )) D
          i=1
                      i   i         0
                                          > ∑ (1 − f i (ri ) )
                                             i=1                 Da0
                                                                          ,                                     (3)
                                    b


or

           n             ⎛ d a0,i d b0,i ⎞
         ∑      f i (ri )⎜ 0 − 0 ⎟ > 0 .
                         ⎜D              ⎟
                                                                                                                (4)
          i=1            ⎝ a Db ⎠

Thus the mortality ratio rises when increases in survival probabilities (fi(ri)) are correlated

with higher initial shares of deaths per condition among the majority group

⎛ d a0,i d b0,i ⎞ 2
⎜       −       ⎟.
⎜ D0 D0 ⎟
⎝ a          b ⎠


1
          In our work, we do not observe differences in the innovation function, so we consider it similar
across diseases. Bhattacharya and Packalen (2008) attempt to model this empirically, assuming a structural
model of research opportunity for pharmaceuticals that declines as drugs get older.


                                                                                                                      6
         Such a correlation can be present for several reasons. The difference in the initial

shares of deaths attributed to a given condition across groups may arise because a

particular disease is more prevalent in the majority population than in the minority

population, or more fatal for the majority group. For example, among infants born

prematurely, black infants tend to have less severe illness than do white infants along a

number of dimensions, holding gestation constant (Hulsey et al. 1993; Richardson et al.

1994; Richardson et al. 1999; Berman et al. 2001). In particular, at any given gestation,

black infants are less likely to have RDS, and, on illness severity measures, black infants

score better than whites even given the presence of a condition like RDS (Hulsey et al.

1993; Richardson et al. 1994). Thus, death rates from RDS are greater among whites

than among blacks, even within narrow birth weight categories. As a result, research on

RDS will disproportionately benefit whites over blacks. Thus, if research favors common

causes of death, we can expect (fi(ri)) to be positively correlated with higher death rates in

a majority group.

          In this model, the increasing disparity occurs as a consequence of the differences

in population sizes, not because deaths are valued differently by the social planner. To

see this more formally, consider two diseases, one with a greater prevalence among

whites and the second with a greater prevalence among blacks. Let e10 be the prevalence

of disease 1 among whites in the base period, and θe10 be the prevalence among blacks,

where θ<1. Conversely, let e20 be the prevalence of disease 2 among blacks and θe20 be

the prevalence among whites. To simplify notation, suppose that each case of the disease

is fatal, so that death rates are equal to prevalence rates.


2
 Note that in the model, increases in survival probabilities (fi(ri)) are assumed to be constant for the two
groups.


                                                                                                               7
                                                         e10 N a + θe10 N b
                                                                 0
        The overall mortality rate from disease 1 is d =         1          , where Na and Nb
                                                             Na + Nb

are the number of white and black births respectively. Similarly, the mortality rate for

                      θe20 N a + e20 N b
disease 2 is d 20 =                      . Combining these mortality rates with equation (2)
                          Na + Nb

gives a formula for the marginal product of research on each disease in equilibrium:

                                    f 1' (r1 ) ⎛ e20    ⎞ ⎛ θN a + N b   ⎞
                                              =⎜        ⎟ ⋅ ⎜⎜           ⎟⎟              (5)
                                    f 2' (r2 ) ⎜⎝ e10   ⎟ N + θN
                                                        ⎠ ⎝ a        b    ⎠

        If θ<1 and Na > Nb, the second expression on the right hand side of equation (5) is

less than 1, and hence the overall expression on the right hand side is less than the ratio of

disease incidence in the two groups. As a result, disease 1 should receive relatively

greater funding than if the populations were the same, with the disparity rising as the

population disparity rises.

        The induced innovation hypothesis has several predictions, which we test in the

empirical section of the paper. First, the theory predicts that initial death rates and

subsequent research effort should be positively correlated. Second, innovation should be

associated with more rapid mortality declines. As a result, induced innovation leads to

growth in mortality disparities between minority and majority groups.



II.     Background on Infant Mortality and Neonatal Medicine

        Infant mortality, or death during the first year of life, used to be much more

common than it is today. In 1915, for example, infant mortality was 150 babies per 1,000

born alive. With improved nutrition and advances in public health, that rate fell to 26 per

1,000 in mid-century.



                                                                                               8
        The latter half of the 20th century witnessed continued declines in infant mortality.

Figure 1 demonstrates that white infant mortality rates fell from 26 deaths per 1,000 live

births in 1950 to 5.7 in 2004. Black infants experienced higher rates of mortality at every

point in time, but infant mortality fell dramatically for blacks as well, from 43.9 deaths

per 1,000 live births in 1950 to 13.8 deaths per 1,000 births in 2004. The economic value

of this improvement is immense. Using the common estimate of $7 million per life, the

value of reduced mortality is roughly $210,000 per black birth and $140,000 per white

birth. With about 3 million black and white births per year in the United States, this

translates to roughly $550 billion per year.

        A good share of the reduction in infant mortality in the past half century has come

from reduced mortality of low birth weight infants, consistent with the concentration of

deaths among babies born low birth weight. In 2004, nearly 70 percent of infant deaths

occurred among the 8 percent of babies born weighing under 2500 grams. Figure 2

depicts the gain in survival by birth weight. Mortality for the lightest infants (500-999

grams) fell from nearly 90 percent in 1960 to 30 percent in 1998. Mortality among

infants weighing 1,000 to 1,499 grams fell from 50 percent to below 10 percent. Over

half of improved survival for all infants between 1960 and 2005 was a result of lower

mortality in low birth weight infants.3

        Unlike early in the century, when improved nutrition and public health were the

keys to improved survival, advances in medical care were much more important in the

last few decades. Low birth weight infants die of many causes, but respiratory-related


3
  Compared with the actual infant mortality rate of 6.86 per 1000 live births in 2005, the infant mortality
rate would have been 14.79 in 2005 based solely on improved rates of survival among low birth weight
infants. Compared to the 1960 mortality rate of 25.14, this represents 57 percent of the actual improvement
in survival from 1960 to 2005.


                                                                                                         9
conditions and congenital anomalies are particularly important. Among the very lightest,

or Very Low Birth Weight births (< 1500 g), respiratory-related conditions were the most

common cause of death in 1980. An infant’s lungs do not develop the capacity to

transfer oxygen into the blood until about 23 to 25 weeks of gestation, and even after that

time difficulties breathing are common. In the 1970s and 1980s, RDS and the related

bronchopulmonary dysplasia, which often resulted as a consequence of treatment with

ventilators, were the primary causes of mortality among Very Low Birth Weight infants,

and an important condition for low birth weight infants. At that time, RDS caused about

10,000 deaths per year. A major part of medical care for premature infants is helping

them breathe. Other major causes of infant death include sudden infant death syndrome,

congenital anomalies (especially heart defects), infections, and pneumonia.

       Starting in the 1960s and continuing today, neonatal intensive care emerged as a

field of medicine to treat those conditions. Neonatal intensive care embodies hundreds of

small innovations often adopted from care for adults, but adapted to very light infants.

The innovations range from improving the technology for ventilation, improving the

ability to monitor newborn blood and respiratory function, to the development of

synthetic surfactant that can be administered to infants with RDS. These innovations do

not guarantee survival, but they increase its chances. Cutler and Meara (2000) show that

improved care during the neonatal period for critically ill infants collectively accounted

for essentially all of the reduction in neonatal mortality after 1960.

       Even as overall infant mortality fell from 1950 on, the ratio of black to white

infant death rates rose. In 1950, the ratio of black to white infant mortality was about 1.6.

In the early 1980s, it was just above 2.0. By the late 1990s, the ratio was about 2.5. The




                                                                                           10
increase in this ratio has been widely noticed. The U.S. government’s Healthy People

2010 initiative has called for the elimination of racial disparities in health outcomes. Yet

the most prominent indicator of racial inequality is moving adversely to goals. As a

result, there has been a good deal of focus on how to improve black infant outcomes

(AHRQ 2001; AHRQ 2008; Howell 2008).

        Some of this adverse trend for blacks relative to whites is a greater incidence in

low birth weight births among blacks. But that is not the entire story; our calculations

(described below) indicate that adverse trends in the birth weight distribution account for

only one-third of the increase in the black-white infant mortality ratio. The rest comes

from differential improvements in survival at any given birth weight -- racially-biased

technological progress.



An Example: Respiratory Distress Syndrome

        To understand the effects we analyze, consider the specific example of RDS.4

Somewhere between 24 and 28 weeks of gestation, a healthy, developing fetus begins to

produce surfactant. The role of surfactant is to help keep the lung sacs, or alveoli, open.

Without ample surfactant, the alveoli collapse during breathing, causing damaged cells to

collect in airways, and impeding breathing ability. Death is a frequent result. By 35

weeks gestation, most babies have developed enough surfactant to maintain appropriate

surface tension in lung airways. In the interim between 24 weeks and 35 weeks

(approximately), infants are at decreasing risk of death from RDS.




4
         A review by Clements and Avery (1998) characterized the progress leading to modern day
treatment for RDS in detail.


                                                                                                  11
       The first observations about the biological process of RDS were made as early as

1903. However, it was not until after 1950 that surfactant was discovered in lung

extracts and eventually connected to what is now known as RDS. Between the late 1950s

and the early 1990s, a wave of government, industry, and academically sponsored

research helped to uncover the treatments for RDS. The first scientists experimented in

uncontrolled settings and reported the use of animal surfactant from rabbits and cows.

This early research, reported by 1980, spurred other researches to launch controlled

clinical trials using animal surfactant. Synthetic surfactant was developed later on, with

continuing trials to determine the appropriate timing of treatment and optimal delivery of

the drug. The effort was immense; an estimated 30,000 infants across North America,

Europe, and Japan were enrolled in clinical trials of surfactants by 1990. The results of a

subset of these, over 35 randomized controlled trials of 6,000 infants, have been reported.

Surfactant was approved for wide use by the FDA in August, 1990.

       Figure 3 shows the resulting trend in RDS mortality. To hold constant need, we

present RDS mortality for two specific weight ranges: 500-999 grams, and 1,000-1,499

grams. These ranges correspond to the greatest respiratory impairment.

       Both blacks and whites had high mortality rates from RDS in the early 1980s.

The rate for whites was about 120 deaths per 1,000 births for the lighter infants, and 50

deaths per 1,000 births for the heavier ones. The rate for blacks was high as well,

although a bit lower in each case. As noted above, black infants experience faster

maturation of lungs than white infants (Richardson et al. 1999; Berman et al. 2001).

       Because surfactant was so promising, a large share of very low birth weight

babies was enrolled in clinical trials of the drug in the 1980s. Thus, the decline in RDS




                                                                                            12
mortality in the 1980s is likely due to surfactant. The approval of surfactant in 1990

coincided with a further immediate decline in death rates and a continuing decline over

the next few years. Between 1983 and 1998, RDS-related mortality for black and white

babies combined fell 63 percent among those weighing 500 to 999 grams, and by 87

percent among those weighing 1,000 to 1,499 grams. Because RDS was more important

for white babies than black babies, however, the reduction in RDS mortality led to

significantly greater survival improvements for whites than for blacks. Thus, even with

equal declines in mortality across racial groups, there was an increase in the racial gap in

outcomes. Between 1983 and 1998, we estimate that about 20 percent of the increase in

the ratio of black to white infant mortality resulted from improvements in RDS survival.



III.     Data

         To understand the sources of innovation in infant medical care, and the

consequences of those innovations, we use data on mortality by race and cause, and on

medical innovation. We describe the sources in turn.

         The mortality data we employ come from cohort linked birth / infant death

(LBID) files produced by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS, various

years). These files contain a nearly universal sample of births and infant deaths in the

United States, formed by compiling data from birth and death certificates.5 Deaths that

occur within one year of birth are matched back with their birth certificates to create the

linked records. The files are organized by annual, calendar year birth cohorts, so deaths




5
         In 1983 and 1984, some states created records for only half of births, randomly selected, but all
deaths were entered. Birth records have weights to adjust for the sampling.


                                                                                                             13
may be from the same year or the following year as long as they occur within 365 days of

birth.

         The earliest LBID data is from 1960. However, only published tabulations of

those data exist, and the published tabulations do not have the detail we need. The next

year of linked data are from 1983, and are available in micro data. We thus use data from

1983-85 as our early time period. We pool years to improve death rate estimates for

relatively rare conditions. Fortunately, changes in infant mortality were ongoing in this

time period, and the profile of deaths by cause in 1983-85 is similar to that for 1960. As

figure 2 shows, mortality among low birth weight infants roughly halved between 1983

and 1998. Changes in the coding of cause of death after 1998 led to substantial

differences in cause-specific death rates among low birth weight births after that year, so

our later time period uses data from 1996-98.

         From these records, we use information on birth weight, the mother’s race and

Hispanic ethnicity, singleton or plurality of birth, and the underlying cause of death. We

include births only to black or white mothers, excluding births to Hispanic mothers to

limit the effect of increasing immigration over time. We further exclude plural births to

limit the effect of secular changes in multiple births due to fertility treatment and a

contemporaneous rise in maternal age, which increases the risk of multiple births

(Blondel and Kaminski 2002).

         Summary statistics for the mortality data are shown in Table 1. In 1983-85, the

infant mortality rate for whites was 8.2 per 1,000 births and the rate for blacks was 17.1

per 1,000 births, for a corresponding black-white ratio of 2.09. Because blacks are a

smaller share of the population than whites (84 percent of births are for whites, excluding




                                                                                           14
Hispanics), however, there are many more white deaths than black deaths. Over 70

percent of infant deaths are among white infants.

          The next column of the table shows the substantial reduction in infant mortality

over time. The infant mortality rate for whites fell by 37 percent between 1983-85 and

1996-98; the comparable reduction for blacks was 23 percent. As a result, the black-

white infant mortality ratio rose to 2.4, a 30 percentage point increase.

          Our model does not address changes in the birth weight distribution over time.

We thus purge from the increase in the black-white mortality ratio the contribution of

unequal changes in birth weight by race. The fourth column of Table 1 shows a

simulation of infant mortality rates in 1996-98 if the race-specific distribution of births by

500 gram intervals had not changed over the time period. In both cases, infant mortality

rates would be lower, reflecting a trend towards more low birth weight infants over time.

But the changes are not large. Relative to the 30 percentage point increase in the

unadjusted black-white infant mortality ratio, the adjusted increase is 21 percentage

points.

          In the final column, we modify the simulation further to give both races the same

percent reduction in deaths for each cause within 500 gram weight groups. This

eliminates changes in mortality ratios that would arise due to differential reductions in

mortality for a given cause, for example because access to care differs. The only reason

mortality changes differ in this scenario is because the causes of death differ for black

and white babies, and relatively more progress is made on some causes of death. This

simulation implies a 12 percentage point increase in the black-white ratio of infant

mortality. It is this aspect of rising mortality ratios, the part that arises from induced




                                                                                             15
innovation, that we will explore with the model and empirical analysis that follow. The

difference between the 21 percentage point growth in black-white mortality ratios and

this 12 percentage point increase, or 9 percentage points, represents changes that occurred

because of differential reductions in cause-specific mortality. That is, for some causes of

death, the rate at which infant deaths fell was faster for whites than for blacks.

       A faster survival gain for whites may relate to several underlying factors. If a

disease manifests itself differently among white versus black infants, then efficacy of

treatment may vary across races because induced innovation focuses more on the

majority group, whites. If differential efficacy of treatments occurs, then we have

underestimated the role of induced innovation by ignoring this portion of the rising

mortality ratio, since we have no way to disentangle this from two other potential sources

of differential survival gains: access and quality of care. Differences in survival gains

might also reflect differential access to care, or differential quality of care conditional on

access. These latter two explanations do not relate to induced innovation.



Causes of death

       For each infant who dies, the LBID data reports an underlying cause of death.

We use this to calculate death rates for specific conditions, separately by race. The

causes of death are grouped into categories based on an NCHS categorization of the

International Classification of Diseases -9th Revision (ICD-9) codes (the 61 Cause

Recode); the data appendix has details, including a full list of the condition categories.

After making adjustments to the causes, we identified 69 independent conditions, and one

residual category.




                                                                                             16
       Death rates by leading cause of death are shown in Table 2a. To highlight the

role of differing causes within birth weights, we show mortality rates as if blacks and

whites had the same distribution of births in each weight category. The 14 conditions

listed in the table account for half of all infant deaths in 1983-85. The top three causes,

Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS), RDS, and congenital heart anomalies (heart

defects), stand out in magnitude, accounting for nearly 30 percent of deaths. SIDS

primarily occurs outside of the hospital setting and affects children of all birth weights.

The other causes are predominant in low birth weight babies.

       The ranking of the conditions is different for blacks and whites. Respiratory

conditions tend to be a greater cause of death for whites than blacks. In contrast, issues

that arise because of conditions at the time of delivery such as birth asphyxia, or

complications relating to the placenta or umbilical cord are more likely to cause deaths

among blacks. For example, RDS is the second most important causes of death for

whites (accounting for 9.1 percent of deaths), but the third most important cause for

blacks (accounting for 5.6 percent of deaths). Among low birth weight infants, death

rates due to RDS in 1983-85 (14 per 1000) were over 50% higher than they were for

black infants (9 per 1000), as table 2b shows. Thus, any advance in RDS led to more

rapid reductions in infant mortality among whites.



       Measures of Innovation

       We construct two measures of innovation related to infant conditions: the number

of NIH grants associated with each condition, and the number of peer-reviewed journal

publications associated with each condition. Each of these has been used as a measure of




                                                                                              17
innovation in past studies. The grants data come from the Computer Retrieval of

Information on Scientific Projects (CRISP) database of biomedical research grants,

maintained by the National Institutes of Health. Each entry includes a thesaurus of key

words, allowing us to search for relevant grants. A complete list of our search terms is

available from the authors upon request. In cases when the use of multiple search terms

returned duplicate grants, we removed duplicates from the final counts. We created

counts of grants for two periods, 1975-82 and 1983-98, to capture new innovative effort

during our study period as well as earlier research that may have produced clinically

useful results between 1983 and 1998.6

         The publications data come from the MEDLINE database of medical journal

articles, maintained by the National Library of Medicine. This database has an index of

hierarchical subject headings, so identifying articles that are relevant to a particular cause

of death can be accomplished by searching on the appropriate headings, when available.

First, we identified subject headings denoted as “major” topics, and searched on these

major topics that closely matched causes of death.7 In some cases, there were no “major”

topic subject headings matching the cause of death (or category) sufficiently, so we

searched for terms in the titles and abstracts of articles. A complete list of our search

commands is available from the authors upon request. For all causes, we counted articles

that were published during the study period (1983 to 1998).




6
  We elected to start counting grants in 1975 due to data availability at the start of this study (at that time
data were not available earlier), and because we felt that eight years offered ample time for grant activity to
begin to disseminate through various channels. In practice, our results show little sensitivity to the choice
of time period, except that earlier grants are somewhat stronger predictors of mortality changes compared
with later grants.
7
          We identified the appropriate headings by searching the database of subject headings for terms
from the NCHS categories and ICD-9 entries.


                                                                                                            18
        For many of the conditions we study, peer-reviewed publications reflect

innovation that has already occurred, since they tend to summarize evidence from

completed clinical trials. In some cases, as in the case of treatments for premature

infants, multi-site trials may actually affect a large share of the relevant population.

Thus, our measure of innovation likely captures innovation that occurs just before and

during our period of study.

        In some cases, categories are too broad to identify a relevant subject category for

grants or publications (e.g., “viral diseases,” or “remainder of diseases of respiratory

system”). In the absence of a subject heading that captured a given condition, we did not

include that grant or article. Out of 69 possible categories (not counting the residual

category), we successfully constructed grants counts for 49 conditions and journal article

counts for 41 conditions. The conditions with both measures account for over 85 percent

of deaths not in the residual category, or 66 percent of all deaths, in the initial period.

Over the 1983-98 time period, the mean number of grants per condition was 136, with an

interquartile range of 34 to 156. Journal articles are more numerous than grants. The

average condition had 1,315 journal articles devoted to it over the 1983-98 time period,

with an interquartile range of 336 to 1,810.



IV.     Testing for Induced Innovation

        In this section, we test the predictions of the induced innovation model. We start

with the prediction that initial death rates and subsequent research should be related. We

estimate equations of the form:

        ri = α0 + α1 di0 + εi                                                   (6)




                                                                                              19
        Figure 4 shows the relation between initial mortality rates and research

graphically. The upper panel shows that conditions with higher mortality rates in 1983-

85 have more journal articles devoted to them in the subsequent 15 years. The lower

figure shows that the same is true about the number of NIH grants. In both cases, a good

part of the line is defined by conditions with very high mortality rates. That is not

necessarily problematic, although we examine the sensitivity to this in our results below.

        The magnitude of these relations, and potential other correlates, are shown in

Table 3. The first column shows the relation graphed in figure 4(a). Each death per

1,000 births due to a particular cause in 1983-85 is associated with nearly 500 NIH grants

on that disease from 1983 to 1998. The second column explores the sensitivity of this

result to SIDS, RDS, and heart defects. Without those three conditions, the coefficient

estimate is still positive, but smaller and not statistically significant. At least some of our

results are related to the fact that very big causes of death get more research effort. Since

there is no obvious reason to exclude these causes of death from our analysis, our

subsequent findings include those data.

        The third column shows that each death per 1,000 births is associated with over

2,700 articles in the 1983-98 time period. As with the grant data, the coefficient falls and

is no longer statistically significant when SIDS, RDS, and heart defects are excluded. As

the fifth, sixth, and seventh columns show, the initial death rate is proxying for grant

activity – generally with a lag. Every additional grant in the 1975-82 time period is

associated with eight additional articles in the 1983-98 time period. More recent grants

have a smaller impact on articles, although this may be a function of the specific timing

of grants in this interval.




                                                                                            20
         The second part of the analysis looks at the impact of initial mortality and

research on subsequent mortality changes. The theory predicts that declines in mortality

should be negatively correlated with higher initial mortality rates, and that this

relationship should be mediated by research activity. To look at the relation between

initial mortality and subsequent mortality changes, we estimate equations of the form:

         ln (d i1 / d i0 ) = β 0 + β1 d i0 + ε i                                          (7)

Because of the heteroskedasticity induced by very low mortality rates, we express the

dependent variable in logarithms. We also weight the regressions by the theoretical

standard error.8

         To control for changes in the birth weight distribution over time, we measure both

initial and final mortality using a constant birth weight distribution, equal to the birth

weight distribution at baseline in 1983-1985.

         Taken literally, our theoretical model implies β0 = 0; a condition with no deaths

should have no research, and hence no change in the death rate. In reality, the constant

term captures a variety of departures from the model, such as a reduction in overall

mortality risk over time that results independent of research (due to improved nutrition,

for example), innovations that affect all conditions, and spillovers in research across

conditions. Also, to the extent that research allocation is non-optimal (for example, due

to political pressure) or the fi are not equal, β1 would be diminished and β0 would differ

from zero.




8
           In particular, we weight the regressions by the inverse of the standard error of the dependent
variable, the ln change in mortality. This is calculated using the Delta method and the asymptotic variances
of the individual mortality rates.


                                                                                                         21
         Figure 5 shows the relation between initial mortality and the decline in subsequent

mortality. There is a negative relationship between the two, again with a large

component played by SIDS, RDS, and heart defects. The first column of Table 4 shows

the corresponding regression coefficient. Across all 69 conditions, initial mortality is

negatively and statistically significantly related to mortality changes. The coefficient on

initial mortality implies that each additional death per 1,000 births is associated with a 20

percent greater mortality reduction. The constant term is negative and implies a 31

percent reduction in mortality over time. The relatively large magnitude indicates that

induced innovation is not the only effect in the data. As the second column shows, the

coefficient on initial mortality is actually larger excluding SIDS, RDS, and heart defects,

but the standard errors are larger as well. The big causes of death are a large part of our

story.

         The theory suggests that the relation between initial mortality and subsequent

mortality declines will be mediated by the amount of research devoted to the disease. We

test this in the next columns. The third column shows the same regression as in column

(1), but limited to the 41 conditions for which we have journal article data. The

coefficient on initial mortality is negative, although smaller than the corresponding

coefficient in column (1). The fourth column shows very little relationship between

articles and changes in mortality. The coefficient on journal articles is near zero and

insignificant, and the coefficient on initial mortality remains negative.

         The next two columns show the analogous results using research grants as the

measure of innovation. Initial mortality rates are negatively related to changes in

mortality, and this relationship is mediated by the number of research grants. Controlling




                                                                                           22
for the number of research grants, the initial mortality rate is positively related to

subsequent mortality changes, although not statistically significantly so.

         Grants and research articles are both noisy measures of innovation. Assuming the

errors in each are uncorrelated, we can use one to instrument for the other and obtain

more efficient estimates. The last column of the table instruments for journal articles

with the number of research grants.9 The coefficient on research articles is now large and

negative, and the coefficient on initial mortality is positive. The constant is much lower

as well; more of the results are explained by the number of journal articles related to the

condition.

         The results in Table 4 permit two estimates of the magnitude of induced

innovation. One estimate comes from the constant term. The difference between the

average rate of mortality reduction and the constant term in equation (7) indicates the

average mortality reduction due to induced innovation. The second measure is the

change in predicted final death rates attributable to the relation between initial mortality

and subsequent mortality. Because of the non-linear model,10 the first estimate

understates the inducement effect, while the second overstates it.

         The constant term in the first column of Table 4 implies a decline of 31 percent in

mortality ( i.e. -.31 = e-.374-1) compared with the total reduction in the death rate of 37

percent. This suggests that about 6 percent, or one-sixth of the actual improvement in

mortality is due to induced innovation. The contribution of induced innovation implied

by the constant term in column 7, the instrumental variables regression that includes

9
          The F-statistic on the instrument is 4.43.
10
          In a linear model, these would be the same, but our model is not linear. The regression equation
implies E[di1] = di0 exp(β0) exp(β1 di0), so the relative change di1/ di0 – 1 equals exp(β0) exp(β1 di0) – 1. The
two measures of induced innovation are thus D1/D0 – [exp(β0) – 1], the impact calculated based on the
constant term, and E[exp(β1 di0)] – 1, the impact of the slope coefficient.


                                                                                                              23
research articles devoted to the condition, is even larger. Using the estimate of β1 to

calculate predicted mortality, in contrast, generates a 7.5 percent decline in mortality (i.e.

E[exp(β1 di1)]-1), about one-fifth of the actual change.11 In column 7, using the implied

change in mortality from the coefficient on research articles, the magnitude of the role for

induced innovation rises to two thirds of the change.12 Conservatively choosing

estimates that are closer to our lower bound, we estimate that about one fifth of the

reduction in infant mortality over time is a result of induced innovation.



         The role of competing risks

         One potential concern about our estimates is the possibility of competing risks. If

vulnerable infants saved from one disease are still likely to die of another, decreased

mortality for one cause of death will not result in as great a reduction in total mortality.

Alternatively, if research in one disease leads to progress in another, we will understate

the impact of research on improved outcomes. However, infants differ from adults in the

sense that, unlike older adults who are at risk of multiple conditions (hypertension, high

cholesterol, and diabetes are all related to obesity, for example), infants saved from one

condition are much less likely to develop other conditions. In contrast to older adults,

infants face lower risks of disease incidence as they age, mitigating the disease risk

problem.

         To test for competing risks though, we return to the RDS example. RDS is

important both because of its contribution to the overall evaluation and because

respiratory distress is so central to infant mortality. We take advantage of the time series

11
        For this estimate, the death rate for the residual category was held constant.
12
        For this estimate, the death rates for all categories without publications data were held constant.
The implied change in mortality is a 24 percent decline.


                                                                                                              24
variation to look for competing risks. If a substantial portion of infants in low birth

weight groups who died from RDS were at risk from other diseases as well, we would

expect years with large drops in the RDS death rate to have smaller reductions in deaths

from other causes.

       Figure 6 shows annual mortality change for RDS and non-RDS causes among

births 1000-1499 g. The results are, if anything, the opposite of the competing risk

explanation. In years where RDS mortality fell most – especially 1990, the year of

widespread diffusion of surfactant – non-RDS mortality fell as well; the correlation

between mortality changes for RDS and all other causes is 0.34. These results suggest no

issue of competing risks. If anything, it appears that as a major cause of death like RDS

falls, the innovations that contribute to this fall may reduce deaths from other causes as

well. One example of this would be bronchopulmonary dysplasia, a condition related to

extended periods of mechanical ventilation in premature infants. With the advent of

surfactant, time on ventilation fell, thus reducing the incidence of bronchopulmonary

dysplasia (Soll 1998). Other NICU technologies developed in the treatment of infants

with RDS could also benefit infants with unrelated conditions. So, for example,

improved ventilation techniques developed in response to the wave of RDS infants, might

also benefit other infants on ventilators. To the extent that such spillovers exist, our

estimates of induced innovation yield a lower bound, since they only capture the

differential mortality reductions that occur across causes of death receiving more research

effort, and not any potential spillover from induced research effort.



       Is Innovation Race Neutral?




                                                                                             25
        In our model, medical innovation is race-neutral: doctors and research funders

seek to reduce the major causes of death, whether they affect blacks or whites. This may

not be right, however. For example, research might be tilted toward conditions that

whites suffer from, ignoring conditions that are common among blacks.

        One way to test this is to differentiate black and white deaths in the equation for

subsequent mortality changes. Consider equation (8), an expanded version of equation

(7):

        ln (d i1 / d i0 ) = β 0 + β1 dwi0 + β 2 dbi0 + ε i                           (8)

where dw and db refer to race-specific deaths as a share of all births. Thus, dw and db are

not standard death rates since the race-specific number of deaths are divided by the sum

of black and white births. One can thus view dw as capturing the death rate from the

bundle of causes that kill white infants and db as capturing the death rate from the bundle

of causes that kill blacks. A theory of racially biased innovation suggests that black

deaths should count less than white deaths, i.e., | β 2 | < | β1 | .

        Table 5 shows results of regressions separating black and white deaths. The first

three columns present results for the impact of initial mortality on subsequent changes in

mortality. Independently, black deaths count more than white deaths for subsequent

mortality changes (column 1 versus column 2), although the standard errors on each are

large. The regression has difficulty determining the relative weight to put on the two

when included in the regression jointly (column 3), but the coefficient on black deaths is

negative while the coefficient on white deaths is positive. However these coefficients are

not statistically different from each other.




                                                                                           26
         The next columns show the relation between race-specific initial mortality and the

number of journal articles and NIH grants. When included together, white deaths are

more associated with journal articles than are black deaths, but black deaths are more

associated with NIH grants. In these regressions the coefficients are statistically

different, but their magnitudes suggest a co-linearity problem. Overall, we find no

consistent pattern of race-based bias in the innovative process.



         Induced Innovation and Social Inequality

         As shown in our model, induced innovation can have an unintended consequence

on disparities in health outcomes. In the model, greater gains in survival occur for causes

of death that are relatively more common among the majority group. Thus, the overall

disparity of health outcomes widens. As discussed in section II, this result arises

mechanically when the difference in initial death rates across races (majority – minority)

are positively correlated with survival gains. We test for evidence of this positive

correlation empirically, by correlating changes in condition-specific death rates to the

difference in initial shares of death for majority and minority groups. The correlation of

0.08 is indeed positive and statistically significant.13

         The overall impact of this correlation on subsequent inequality changes is shown

in Table 1. The last column of the table shows the simulated mortality rates if mortality

for each cause declined at the same rate for whites and blacks.14 In this scenario, the

black-white ratio would change only because white and black babies die of differing

causes. As the table shows, the black-white infant mortality ratio still rises by 12

13
          Here we control for birth weight by calculating death rates and survival gains within 500-gram
intervals and then taking a weighted average based on the number of births in each interval.
14
          As in the preceding column, the analysis is conditional on birth weight.


                                                                                                           27
percentage points in this scenario. Thus, about one-third of the increase in the black-

white mortality disparity, (.12/.30), is a result of induced innovation. Another one-third,

(.21-.12)/.30, results from the differentially greater reduction in mortality for whites

relative to blacks within causes. The remaining one-third, (.30-.21)/.30, is a result of

differential growth of low birth weight babies among blacks. Notably, the magnitude of

rising black-white mortality ratio is comparable to that of the role of induced innovation

in mortality reductions documented earlier. In other words, black-white infant mortality

ratios in the US are responsive to induced innovation, growing with induced

improvements in survival for infants.



       A Falsification Exercise: Education-Based Disparities

       One concern about our findings is that we may be measuring the impact of being

in an economically disadvantaged group, not necessarily a minority population group. It

may be that the economically disadvantaged are doing worse over time, regardless of

whether they are majority or minority groups. Since blacks are both a population

minority and economically disadvantaged, we cannot completely differentiate between

these theories with our data.

       We test this using data on deaths by maternal education, restricting the sample to

non-Hispanic whites. Women with some college education represent a minority of births

(40 percent), but are better off economically. Thus, if the effect we find is a result of

economic disadvantage, babies of women with some college should fare better over time

than babies of women who never attended college. If the result is due to population size,

babies of women who attended college should fare no better than babies of less educated




                                                                                            28
women. Table 6 displays numbers similar to those in table 1, but dividing mothers into

groups based on college attendance. As the second column of the table shows, women

who never attended college have a 53 percent higher mortality rate in 1983-85 than

women who attended some college. That ratio increased to 88 percent in 1996-98.

       About one-third of that increase is a result of adverse trends in the birth weight

distribution for women who did not attend college relative to women who did. Our

model does not explain such effects. The entirety of the remainder is a result of more

rapid declines in mortality within cause for women with some college education. Indeed,

as the last column shows, there is no increase in the mortality ratio, or if anything a slight

decrease, when mortality reductions by cause are assumed to be the same. Thus, our

results do not suggest that the causes of death predominant among the economically

advantaged are declining by more than the causes among the economically

disadvantaged. Indeed, the two seem about the same.

       The reason why women with some college education benefitted more from

progress within causes of death than women without any college education is not clear. It

may reflect differences in access to care or the quality of that care, which we do not

explore. Overall, however, these results support the conclusion that it is induced

innovation resulting from minority status itself that leads to less rapid mortality declines

for blacks, and hence lagging health outcomes.



VII.   CONCLUSIONS

       The dynamics of the medical sector have been a subject of much debate. Most of

medical care cost increases are a result of technological progress (Newhouse, 1992), and




                                                                                            29
some studies suggest that health benefits emanate from the same source (Cutler, 2004;

Cutler, Rosen, and Vijan 2006).

       For at least the last two decades, economists have speculated about the underlying

source of these technological innovations (Weisbrod, 1991). The idea that progress is a

result of perceived need has been common in the literature, although not tested to any

great extent. We test the importance of induced innovation by considering care for a

group that is particularly needy: low birth weight infants.

       We reach two primary conclusions. First, there is a strong impact of induced

innovation on technological change. Disease conditions with higher initial mortality rates

had more grant effort devoted to them, saw more journal articles about them, and

experienced a greater reduction in subsequent mortality. Induced innovation explains

about 20 percent of the reduction in mortality over time.

       But endogenous technology also benefits majority groups over minority groups.

Majority groups are of necessity a larger share of total deaths than are minority groups.

Thus, conditions that affect them more will receive more research attention. Our results

show that this leads to a significant increase in the disparity between blacks and whites as

innovation allows premature white newborns to “catch up” to their black counterparts,

who, for a given gestation and birth weight, tend to have better health.

       Our results do not arise because medical research is racially biased; our best

estimates suggest that it is not. Rather, growing disparities result from the seemingly

benign tendency of ‘treating what we see’. If we want disparities to fall over time, our

results suggest that we will need to treat based on factors beyond the headline numbers.




                                                                                            30
References

Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Linn, “Market Size and Innovation: Theory and Evidence
        from the Pharmaceutical Market”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (2004),
        1049-1090.
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Excellence Centers To Eliminate
        Ethnic/Racial Disparities (EXCEED): Program Brief. Agency for Healthcare
        Research and Quality, Rockville, MD. 2001, (accessed July 9, 2009 at
        http://www.ahrq.gov/research/exceed.htm). AHRQ Publication No. 01-P021.
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 2007 National Healthcare Disparities
        Report. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Agency
        for Healthcare Research and Quality; February 2008. AHRQ Pub. No. 08-0041.
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction”,
        Econometrica, 60 (1992), 323-351.
Berman, Susan K, Milenko J. Tanasijevic, Juan G. Alvarez, Jack Ludmir, E. Lieberman
        and D. K. Richardson, “Racial Differences in Predictive Value of the TDx FLM
        S/A Assay,” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 175 (1996), 73-77.
Bhattacharya, Jay, and Mikko Packalen, “Is Medicine an Ivory Tower? Induced
        Innovation, Technological Opportunity, and For-Profit Vs. Non-Profit
        Innovation”, NBER Working Paper No. 13862, March 2008.
Blondel, Beatrice, and Monique Kaminski, “Trends in the Occurrence, Determinants, and
        Consequences of Multiple Births, Seminars in Perinataology, 26 (2002), 239-249.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Racial/Ethnic Disparities in Infant
        Mortality --- United States, 1995—2002,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
        Report, 54 (2005), 553-56.
Cutler, David M., Your Money or Your Life, (New York: Oxford University Press.)
Cutler, David M. and Ellen Meara, “The Technology of Birth: Is It Worth It?” in Alan
        Garber, ed., Frontiers in Health Policy Research, Volume 3. (Cambridge, MA:
        MIT Press, 2000, 33-67.)
Cutler, David M., Allison B. Rosen, and Sandeep Vijan, “The Value of Medical
        Spending in the United States,” 1960-2000, The New England Journal of
        Medicine, 355 (2006), 920-927.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy.
        (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1991.)
Howell, Elizabeth A., “Racial Disparities in Infant Mortality: A Quality of Care
        Perspective,” Mount Sinai Journal of Medicine: A Journal of Translational and
        Personalized Medicine, 75 (2008), 31-35.
Hulsey Thomas C., Greg R. Alexander, Pierre Y. Robillard, David J. Annibale, and
        Andrea Keenan, “Hyaline Membrane Disease: the Role of Ethnicity and Maternal
        Risk Characteristics.” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 168
        (1993), 572-576.
Kremer, Michael, “Pharmaceuticals and the Developing World”, Journal of Economic
        Perspectives, 16 (2002), 67-90.
Lichtenberg, Frank, “The Allocation of Publicly Funded Biomedical Research,” in Ernst
        Berndt and David Cutler, eds., Medical Care Output and Productivity. (Chicago:
        University of Chicago Press, 2001.)



                                                                                    31
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Kevin.J. Stiroh, “Raising the Speed Limit: U.S. Economic
       Growth in the Information Age,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2000
       (2000), 125-212.
National Center for Health Statistics, Linked Birth Infant Death Data, Various Years.
       (Hyattsville, MD.)
Newell, Richard, Adam Jaffee, and Robert Stavins, “The Induced Innovation Hypotehsis
       and Energy-Saving Technological Change,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114
       (1999), 907-940.
Newhouse, Joseph P., “Medical Care Costs: How Much Welfare Loss?” Journal of
       Economic Perspectives, 6 (1992), 3-21.
Popp, David, “Induced Innovation and Energy Prices,” American Economic Review, 92
       (2002), 160-180.
Richardson, Douglas K. and John S. Torday, “Racial Differences in Predictive Value of
       the Lecithin-sphingomyelin Ratio,” American Journal of Obstetrics and
       Gynecology, 170 (1994) 1273-1278.
Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy, 98
       (1990), S71-S102.
Schmookler, Jacob, Invention and Economic Growth. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
       University Press, 1966.)
Soll, Roger, “Synthetic Surfactant for Respiratory Distress Syndrome in Preterm Infants,”
       Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 1998, Issue 3.
Weisbrod, Burton, “The Health Care Quadrilemma: An Essay on Technological Change,
       Insurance, Quality of Care and Cost Containment”, Journal of Economic
       Literature, 29 (1991), 523-552.




                                                                                      32
Appendix



Cause of Death Data

        We start with cause of death as identified on ICD-9 forms and tabulated by the

National Center for Health Statistics. We then modify this in several ways. First, we

formed 10 additional categories by breaking apart two NCHS categories that grouped

together distinct conditions with over 100 deaths in 1983-85: 770.xx and codes 775.2-

775.9. We also formed five categories by identifying conditions within the NCHS

residual group with over 250 deaths in this period, based on ICD-9, 3-digit codes. In

addition, we moved four of the NCHS categories into a residual category because they do

not identify a specific condition, but are rather residual catchall categories (e.g.,

“...unspecified,” or “all other”).

        Specifically, our modifications from the NCHS 61 Cause Recode were: the

category for “other respiratory conditions of newborn” (ICD-9 code 770) was subdivided

into congenital pneumonia (770.0), massive aspiration syndrome (770.1), interstitial

emphysema and related conditions (770.2), pulmonary hemorrhage (770.3), primary

atelectasis (770.4), other and unspecified atelectasis (770.5), and chronic respiratory

disease arising in the perinatal period (Bronchopulmonary dysplasia, Wilson-Mikity

syndrome) (770.7); “all other and ill-defined conditions originating in the perinatal

period” (codes 775.2-775.9, and 776.1-779) was subdivided into disseminated

intravascular coagulation in newborn (776.2), necrotizing enterocolitis in fetus or

newborn (777.5), and hydrops fetalis not due to isoimmunization (778.0); and categories

were created for disorders of fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base balance (276),



                                                                                          33
cardiomyopathy (425), primary pulmonary hypertension (416.0), cardiac arrest (427.5),

and renal failure, unspecified (586). The final 69 categories are shown in Table A1.



Table A1. Cause of Death Categories

                                                                             Articles*      NIH Grants*
  ICD-9 Codes       Condition(s)                                             1983-98     1983-98 1975-82
001-007, 010-032,   Remainder of infectious and parasitic diseases               a          a         a
    034-035, 037,
039-041, 042-044,
 080-088, 091-139
         008-009    Certain intestinal infections                               b         172        38
             033    Whooping cough                                               b        113        17
             036    Meningococcal infection                                     b          b         b
             038    Septicemia                                                 2466       160        94
         045-079    Viral diseases                                               a         a          a
             090    Congenital syphilis                                         b         23         3
         140-208    Malignant neoplasms, including neoplasms of lymphatic        a         a          a
                    and hematopoietic tissues
         210-239    Benign neoplasms, carcinoma in situ, and neoplasms of       a          a          a
                    uncertain behavior and of unspecified nature
              254   Diseases of thymus gland                                     b         b          b
              276   Disorders of fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base balance     1640       145         62
              277   Cystic fibrosis                                              b        224        158
          280-289   Diseases of blood and blood-forming organs                 3689       30          8
          320-322   Meningitis                                                 1630       223        48
          323-389   Other diseases of nervous system and sense organs            a          a          a
              416   Primary pulmonary hypertension                              336       277         54
              425   Cardiomyopathy                                             924        17          0
            427.5   Cardiac arrest                                              287        77        23
          460-465   Acute upper respiratory infections                           a          a          a
    466, 490-491    Bronchitis and bronchiolitis                               694        186        109
          480-486   Pneumonia                                                  1810       351        107
              487   Influenza                                                    b        156        61
470-478, 492-519    Remainder of diseases of respiratory system                  a          a          a
520-534, 536-543,   Remainder of diseases of digestive system                    a          a          a
          562-579
    535, 555-558    Gastritis, duodenitis, and noninfective enteritis and       b          0         0
                    colitis
    550-553, 560    Hernia of abdominal cavity and intestinal obstruction       b          b         b
                    without mention of hernia
            586     Renal failure, unspecified                                 1088       120        68
            740     Anencephalus and similar anomalies                         681        31         52
            741     Spina bifida                                               777        153        69
           742.3    Congenital hydrocephalus                                   1301       88         60




                                                                                                34
                                                                              Articles*      NIH Grants*
ICD-9 Codes        Condition(s)                                               1983-98     1983-98 1975-82
    742.0-742.2,   Other congenital anomalies of central nervous system           b         52         0
742.4-742.9, 743   and eye
        745-746    Congenital anomalies of heart                                8334       364        375
             747   Other congenital anomalies of circulatory system             2525       147        61
             748   Congenital anomalies of respiratory system                   1137       64          5
        749-751    Congenital anomalies of digestive system                     2717       27          3
        752-753    Congenital anomalies of genitourinary system                 980         8          0
        754-756    Congenital anomalies of musculoskeletal system               2047       34         12
             758   Down's syndrome                                              1242       153        156
     758.1-758.9   Other chromosomal anomalies                                   474       74          1
             760   Newborn affected by maternal conditions which may be           b         b          b
                   unrelated to present pregnancy
            761    Newborn affected by maternal complications of                1144       119        25
                   pregnancy
            762    Newborn affected by complications of placenta, cord,         419         87         3
                   and membranes
            763    Newborn affected by other complications of labor and          b          34         0
                   delivery
           764     Slow fetal growth and fetal malnutrition                       b         b          b
           767     Birth trauma                                                 1815       74         47
    768.2-768.4    Fetal distress in liveborn infant                             289       101         38
    768.5-768.9    Birth asphyxia                                               1161       19          1
           769     Respiratory distress syndrome                                2803       776        509
           770     Congenital pneumonia                                          26         3          3
          770.1    Massive aspiration syndrome                                   256        3          7
          770.2    Interstitial emphysema and related conditions                319        42         12
          770.3    Pulmonary hemorrhage                                           86        37         2
          770.4    Primary atelectasis                                           73        37         13
          770.5    Other and unspecified atelectasis                              b         b          b
          770.7    Chronic respiratory disease arising in the perinatal         879        621        29
                   period (Bronchopulmonary dysplasia, Wilson-Mikity
                   syndrome)
            771    Infections specific to the perinatal period                  1162       125        37
            772    Neonatal hemorrhage                                          825        150        54
        773-774    Hemolytic disease of newborn, due to isoimmunization,        2287       55         54
                   and other perinatal jaundice
    775.0-775.1    Syndrome of "infant of a diabetic mother" and neonatal        b          b          b
                   diabetes mellitus
           776     Hemorrhagic disease of newborn                               153        34         20
          776.2    Disseminated intravascular coagulation in newborn             106        23         10
          777.5    Necrotizing enterocolitis in fetus or newborn                624        163        28
           778     Hydrops fetalis not due to isoimmunization                     1         2          4
           798     Sudden infant death syndrome                                 2703       673        387
     E911-E912     Inhalation and ingestion of food or other object causing       c          c          c
                   obstruction of respiratory tract or suffocation
           E913    Accidental mechanical suffocation                             c          c          c




                                                                                                 35
                                                                      Articles*      NIH Grants*
  ICD-9 Codes     Condition(s)                                        1983-98     1983-98 1975-82
     E800-E910,   Other accidental causes and adverse effects             c          c         c
      E914-E949
           E967   Child battering and other maltreatment                 c          c         c
     E960-E966,   Other homicide                                         c          c         c
      E968-E969
* Data are not available for all categories. See the discussion on page 19 for further
information. Specific reasons for the absence of data are as follows:
a. Overly broad category.
b. Lack of appropriately targeted search terms. In some cases, in the MEDLINE
database, we were unable to effectively restrict searches to infant conditions despite the
presence of an “infant” qualifier.
c. Not a medical condition.




                                                                                         36
                                              Figure 1: Infant Mortality by Race, 1950-2004
                   50                                                                                2.70


                   45
                                                  Black                          Black/White Ratio   2.50
                   40

                   35
                                                                                                     2.30

                   30
Deaths per 1,000




                                                                                                            Mortality Ratio
                   25                                                                                2.10
                                                  White
                   20
                                                                                                     1.90
                   15

                   10
                                                                                                     1.70

                    5

                    0                                                                                1.50

                        1950 1954 1958 1962 1966 1970 1974 1978 1982 1986 1990 1994 1998 2002
                                                                 Year
                   Source: Data are from Vital Statistics of the United States


                                                                                                                              337
                               Figure 2: Infant Mortality by Birth Weight, 1960, 1983, and 1998



                                      1000
                                       900
                                                                        1960       1983    1998
                                       800
                                       700
                                       600
            deaths per 1,000




                                       500
                                       400
                                       300
                                       200
                                       100
                                         0




                                                                                                  +
                                               9




                                                           9




                                                                       9




                                                                                       9
                                             99




                                                         49




                                                                     99




                                                                                     49




                                                                                              00
                                           0-




                                                       -1




                                                                   -1




                                                                                   -2



                                                                                            25
                                         50




                                                     00




                                                                 00




                                                                                 00
                                                   10




                                                               15




                                                                               20




                                                               birth weight (grams)




Note: Data for 1960 do not present all birth weights. Infant mortality rate for births
below 1,000 grams are assumed to be for infants weighing 500-999 grams.




                                                                                                      38
                                                       Figure 3: The RDS Example
                                                           (a) 500-999 gram babies

                   140                                                                                              0


                   120                                                                                              ‐5

                                                                                                                    ‐10




                                                                                                                            B lac k‐White differenc e
                   100
deaths per 1,000




                                                                                                                    ‐15
                    80
                                                                                                                    ‐20
                    60
                                                                                                                    ‐25
                    40
                                                                                                                    ‐30
                                                                  W hite
                    20                                            B lac k                                           ‐35
                                                                  B lac k‐W hite Differenc e

                        0                                                                                           ‐40
                            83

                                 84

                                       85

                                            86

                                                  87

                                                       88

                                                             89

                                                                  90

                                                                        91




                                                                                               95

                                                                                                     96

                                                                                                          97

                                                                                                               98
                    19

                             19

                                      19

                                           19

                                                 19

                                                      19

                                                            19

                                                                 19

                                                                       19




                                                                                           19

                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                              19
                                                       (b) 1,000-1,499 gram babies

                   60                                                                                               0


                                                                                                                    ‐5
                   50



                                                                                                                          B lac k‐White differenc e
                                                                                                                    ‐10
                   40
deaths per 1,000




                                                                                     W hite                         ‐15
                   30                                                                B lac k
                                                                                     B lac k‐W hite Differenc e     ‐20

                   20
                                                                                                                    ‐25

                   10
                                                                                                                    ‐30


                    0                                                                                               ‐35
                        83

                                 84

                                      85

                                            86

                                                 87

                                                       88

                                                            89

                                                                  90

                                                                       91




                                                                                               95

                                                                                                    96

                                                                                                          97

                                                                                                               98
                   19

                             19

                                  19

                                           19

                                                19

                                                      19

                                                           19

                                                                 19

                                                                      19




                                                                                          19

                                                                                                19

                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                              19




                                                                                                                                       39
Figure 4: Relationship between initial mortality rate and research effort

Panel A: Number of NIH grants, 1983-98



                                                         RDS

                                                                      SIDS
            Bronchopulmonary
                Dysplasia




                                                 Heart
                                                Defects




Panel B: Number of journal articles, 1983-98


                                                Heart
                                               Defects




                                                     RDS             SIDS




Panel B: Number of NIH grants, 1983-98




                                                                             40
Figure 5: Relationship between initial mortality rate and declines in death rates




                                       Heart
                                      Defects
                                                                          SIDS




                                            RDS




                                                                                    41
                                          Figure 6: Annual Change in RDS and Other Mortality

                              4

                              2

                              0
Change in deaths per 1,000




                                   1984      1986      1988     1990                       1996   1998
                              -2

                              -4

                              -6

                              -8

                             -10

                             -12

                             -14

                                                                  RDS      Other




                                                                                                     42
Table 1: Actual and Simulated Change in Racial Disparity
                       1983-85                                       1996-98
                              Infant         Actual Infant Holding Holding birth weight constant
                    Share of Mortality        Mortality birth weight       and same change in cause
Race                 Births    Rate              Rate        constant        specific mortality rates
White                84%       8.2                5.2           5.0                     5.0
Black                16%       17.1              12.4          11.4                    11.0
Black/White                    2.09              2.40          2.30                    2.21
Change in ratio                                  0.30          0.21                    0.12
Note: Data are based on the linked birth-death infant data. Deaths are per 1,000 births. In the 1996-98
columns, the second column is a simulation showing changes in infant mortality if the birthweight
distribution were the same in that time period as in the 1983-85 time period, separately by race. The
third column includes that assumption and also simulates the same change in infant mortality rates by
cause for blacks and whites. The decline for both races is assumed to be the rate observed for whites.




                                                                                                      43
Table 2a: Leading causes of death among infants, all births (1983-85)
                                                                            All Births
Cause of death (ICD-9)                      All races   Rank   Share    Whites Rank      Share   Blacks Rank Share
Sudden infant death syndrome                  1.42       1     15%       1.29      1     13%      1.95   1   18%
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS)           0.78       2      8%       0.89      2      9%      0.60   3    6%
Congenital anomalies of heart                 0.68       3      7%       0.71      3      7%      0.61   2    6%
Congenital anomalies of respiratory system    0.26       4      3%       0.30      4      3%      0.17   9    2%
Birth asphyxia                                0.23       5      2%       0.22      9      2%      0.29   4    3%
Infections specific to the perinatal period   0.23       6      2%       0.24      6      2%      0.23   7    2%
Newborn affected by complications of
placenta, cord, and membrane                  0.22        7     2%       0.26      5      3%      0.19    8    2%
Other congenital anomalies of circulatory
system                                        0.21        8     2%       0.20     11      2%      0.27   6     3%
Other chromosomal anomalies                   0.19        9     2%       0.23     7       2%      0.11   12    1%
Congenital anomalies of musculoskeletal
system                                        0.18       10     2%       0.21     10      2%      0.11   11    1%
Pneumonia                                     0.18       11     2%       0.15     14      2%      0.28   5     3%
Anencephalus and similar anomalies            0.17       12     2%       0.23     8       2%      0.06   14    1%
Newborn affected by maternal complications
of pregnancy                                  0.16       13     2%       0.20     12      2%      0.12   10    1%
Congenital anomalies of genitourinary         0.14       14     1%       0.17     13      2%      0.07   13    1%

All other causes                                  4.72    --- 48%        4.50      --- 46%       5.74 --- 53%
Note: Sample restricted to singleton births that are non-Hispanic. Deaths are per 1,000 births and are adjusted to a
common birth weight distribution.

Table 2b: Leading 5 causes of death among infants born under 2500 grams, 1983-85

Cause of death (ICD-9)                        All races Rank            Whites Rank              Blacks Rank
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS)            12.40     1              14.35   1                 9.17   1
Suddent infant death (SIDS)                     4.24     2               3.70   2                 5.27   2
Newborn affected by complications of
placenta, cord, and membrane                    2.97      3              3.69      3              2.00    5
Congenital anomalies of respiratory system      2.80      4              3.55      4              1.50    9
Infections specific to the perinatal period     2.67      5              2.82      6              2.38    3
Note: Sample restricted to singleton births that are non-Hispanic. Deaths are per 1,000 births and are
adjusted to a common birth weight distribution.




                                                                                                                       44
Table 3: Regressions of Research Effort and Initial Infant Mortality Rates
                            Grants (1983-98)                 Journal Articles (1983-98)
Independent Variable       (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)      (6)      (7)
Initial mortality         488          135        2748         984         2456     -77      251
 per 1,000 births         (73)        (222)       (797)      (1923)       (1142) (1222)     (1220)

Grants (83-98)             ---        ---           ---         ---        0.59      ---    -2.68
                                                                          (1.63)            (1.76)

Grants (75-82)             ---        ---           ---         ---         ---     8.24    11.17
                                                                                   (2.85)   (3.40)
                                 Without SIDS,            Without SIDS,
                                  RDS, heart               RDS, heart
Sample                    All       defects        All       defects       All      All      All

N                         49          46            41          38          41       41       41
 2
R                          0.484       0.008         0.234       0.007        0.236 0.371 0.409
Note: Each column is a separate regression. Standard errors are shown in ()s. Initial mortality is
mortality in 1983-85 for singleton, non-Hispanic births.




                                                                                                     45
Table 4: Regressions of Decline in Infant Death Rate, Initial Mortality, & Research Effort
                                        No SIDS,                                                              IV model
                                        RDS, heart                                                            grants and
                              All        defects           With article data        With grant data            articles
Independent Variable          (1)           (2)             (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)              (7)
Initial mortality           -0.222        -0.715          -0.146      -0.149      -0.168      0.374             0.243
 per 1,000 births          (0.096)       (0.726)         (0.116)     (0.127)      (0.107)    (0.205)           (0.315)

Grants (75-98)                ---           ---            ---         ---          ---      -0.070              ---
(100s)                                                                                       (0.023)

Articles (83-98)              ---           ---            ---       0.002          ---         ---             -0.226
(1000s)                                                             (0.028)                                    (0.144)

Constant                    -0.374        -0.285         -0.457      -0.460        -0.432     -0.373            -0.117
                           (0.067)        (0.112)        (0.088)    (0.098)       (0.080)    (0.076)           (0.261)

N                             69            66             41          41           49          49               41
 2
R                           0.074         0.015           0.039      0.039         0.050      0.207              NA

Each column is a separate regression. Birthweight distribution is held constant using 500 gram intervals. All regressions
are weighted by 1/SE( ln-chg ). The last column instruments for journal articles with the number of research grants.




                                                                                                         46
Table 5: Testing for Race-Biased Innovation
                      Change in Death Rates       Journal Articles                  NIH Grants
Independent variable (1)       (2)      (3)    (1)      (2)       (3)          (4)     (5)      (6)
Black deaths         -0.837    ---    -2.515  8089      ---    -28672         1856     ---     2999
 per 1,000 births   (0.335)          (1.650) (3018)             (9660)        (251)            (953)
 (both races)
White deaths           ---   -0.298 0.682      ---     3989 14484               ---     648      -449
 per 1,000 births           (0.134) (0.657)           (1071) (3668)                    (103)    (361)
 (both races)
F test for equal       ---     ---     1.94    ---      ---      10.64          ---      ---    6.98
 coefficients                        [0.169]                   [0.002]                         [0.011]

N                       69       69      69         41      41        41         49       49        49
  2
R                     0.085 0.068 0.100           0.156 0.262 0.401             0.537 0.455 0.552
Note: Each column is a separate regression. Standard errors in ()s and p-values in []s. In columns 1-3,
the regression are weighted by 1/SE( ln-chg ) and the birthweight distribution is held constant using
500 gram intervals.




                                                                                                    47
Table 6: Actual and Simulated Change in Educational Disparity
                          1983-85                             1996-98

                                                   Actual               Holding birthweight
                                  Infant           Infant     Holding    constant and same
                        Share of Mortality        Mortality birthweight   change in cause-
Race                     Births    Rate             Rate     constant specific mortality rates
No College                60%       9.5              5.9         5.7             4.9
College attendee          40%       6.2              3.2         3.3             3.3
Ratio (No college:college)         1.53             1.88        1.73            1.49
Change in ratio                                     0.35        0.21           -0.03
Note: Data are based on the linked birth-death infant data for white births. Deaths are per 1,000
births. In the 1996-98 columns, the second column is a simulation showing changes in infant
mortality if the birthweight distribution were the same in that time period as in the 1983-85 time
period, separately by education group. The third column includes that assumption and also
simulates the same change in infant mortality rates by cause for both groups. The change is
assumed to be the rate observed for the high education group.




                                                                                                48
