                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 INTEREST RATE DETERMINATION IN
                      DEVELOPING COUNTRIES:
                     A CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK


                       Sebastian Edwards

                         Mohsin S. Khan



                     Working Paper No. 1531




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                          January 1985




This paper was written while the first author was a consultant in
the Research Department of the International Monetary Fund in the
summer of 1984. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in International Studies and project in
Productivity (World Economy). Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #1531
                                             January 1985




                  Interest Rate Determination in
                       Developing Countries:
                      A Conceptual Framework


                               ABSTRACT




         As a number of developing countries move towards more liberalized
financial systems, the question of how interest rates respond to foreign
influences and domestic policies is one that policymakers in these countries
have started to face. Most existing studies of interest rates typically treat
only the extreme cases of either a fully open economy, where some form of
interest rate arbitrage holds, or a completely closed economy, in which
interest rates are determined solely by domestic monetary factors. Developing
countries, however, generally fall somewhere between these two extremes, so
that the standard models of interest rate determination would not seem to be
relevant to their case.

         The purpose of this paper is to outline a theoretical framework that
can serve as a starting point for analyzing interest rate determination in
those developing countries that are in the process of removing controls on the
financial sector and restrictions on capital flows. The approach suggested
here combines elements of the closed—economy and open—economy models, and thus
is able to incorporate the influences of foreign interest rates, expected
changes in exchange rates, and monetary developments on domestic interest
rates. An interesting feature of the resulting model is that the approximate
degree of financial openness, defined as the extent to which domestic interest
rates are linked to foreign interest rates, can in fact be ascertained from
the data of the particular country,.

         To illustrate the empirical validity of the proposed model it was
applied to two countries —— Colombia and Singapore. These two countries are
quite different in terms of levels of financialdevelopment and degrees of
openness, and thus provide a useful first test of the general nature of the
model. The model is able to represent both these cases quite adequately. The
estimates indicate that in Colombia both foreign and domestic factors are
important, while domestic interest rates in Singapore are fully determined by
foreign interest rates and variations in the exchange rate. This is precisely
what would have been expected, given the characteristics of the respective
financial systems in the two countries.

Sebastian Edwards                     Mohsin S. Khan
Department of Economics               Research Department
UCLA                                  International Monetary Fund
Los Angeles, CA 90024                Washington, D.C. 20431
(213) 825—1011                        (202) 473—7679
                                                              Revised Draft
                                                              November 27, 1984



           Interest Rate Determination in Developing Countrie
                           A Conceptual Framework

                                    by

                   Sebastian Edwards and Mohsin S. Khan


                            I. Introduction

    During the last decade or so economists have emphasized the critical

role that interest rate policies play in the development process.    The

growing literature on financial "ref orm'   and financial "liberalization"

in developing countries has dealt with a variety of issues, such as the

relation between financial intermediation and economic growth, the sensi-

tivity of the volume of savings to changes in real interest rates, and the

relation between investment and interest rates. Generally speaking, the

empirical evidence indicates that there is indeed a positive association

between the degree of development of the financial sector, including in

particular freer interest rates, and economic performance in developing

countries. 1/ This finding has undoubtedly prompted the authorities in a

number of such countries to pursue policies to remove controls on interest

rates, and allow market forces to play a relatively greater role in their

determination.

     Now, however, that the process of financial liberalization is well

underway, economists and policymakers are faced with a different set of

issues relating to interest rates in developing countries.     The focus has


  * The authors are grateful to a number of colleagues for comments on an
earlier draft. Abdel R. Ismael provided very helpful assistance.
  1/ See, for example, McKinnon (1973), Fry (1982), Lanyi and Saracoglu
(1983), Mathieson (1983), and Townsend (1983).
                                  —2—

begun to shift away from investigating the effects of freeing interest

rates to how interest rates are in fact determined once the domestic

financial market has been liberalized. The interest in this particular

issue has been heightened by two factors. First, the recent experiences

of the Southern Cone countries——Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay——where

domestic interest rates rose to extraordinary high levels following the

implementation of financial reform policies. 1/ Second, the evidence

that has accumulated suggesting that the high and volatile world interest

rates in recent years were at least partially transmitted into developing

countries. Both these factors have been a cause of concern to policymakers

and have generated some very basic questions about the behavior of interest

rates in developing countries, and in particular what should be expected

when controls on interest rates are eliminated. At present, however, there

are few studies dealing with this general issue, and even fewer specifically

examining the respective roles of foreign factors and domestic monetary

conditions in affecting interest rates in developing countries. 2/

     It is obvious that the process of determination of interest rates

will be significantly different under alternative degrees of openness

of the capital account of the balance of payments. For example, in the

case of a fully open capital account some form of interest arbitrage will

hold, with domestic interest rates depending on world interest rates, ex-

pected devaluation and perhaps some risk factors. On the other hand, in


  1/ See, for example, Diaz—Alejandro (1981), Edwards (1985a), Hanson and
de Melo (1984), Harberger (1982), Sjaastad (1983), and Zahier (1983).
  2/ The only studies we are aware of that include both open—economy and
domestic monetary factors in the analysis of interest rates are Mathieson
(1982), (1983) on Argentina and Chile respectively, Blejer and Gil Diaz
(1984) and Hanson and de Melo (1984) on Uruguay, and Edwards (1985b) on
Colombia.
                                         —3—

the case of countries with a completely closed economy (closed capital

and current accounts), open economy factors will play no role, and the

nominal interest rate will be determined by conditions prevailing in the

domestic money market, and on expected inflation. Most developing coun-

tries, however, do not fall in either of these two extreme categories, so

that interest rates will generally depend on domestic money market condi-

tions, as well as on the expected rate of devaluation and world interest

rates. !   From a policy perspective it is important to determine the way

these different factors actually affect interest rates. For example, how

expected devaluations and/or changes in domestic monetary conditions af-

fect interest rates in developing countries is important for assessing

the significance of one of the possible mechanisms through which stabili-

zation policies will affect aggregate demand. Typically, stabilization

programs involve both exchange rate adjustments and tighter credit and

monetary policies. If these policies generate an increase in the domes-

tic (real) interest rate, there will be an additional channel, which has

usually not been considered in formal studies on stabilization programs in

developing countries, through which aggregate demand will be affected. 2/


  1/ Even in the case where the capital account of the balance of pay-
ments is closed, but there is some trade with the rest of the world,
open economy factors can still indirectly affect domestic interest rates.
For example, a terms of trade shock can result in changes in real income
and prices, which will affect the domestic demand for credit, and thus
equilibrium interest rates.
  21 Until now most studies that have analyzed the effect of stabili-
zation policies on output, prices and the balance of payments in develop-
ing countries have not included the interest rate as a possible transmis-
sion mechanism. The main reason for this is that the experience with
liberalized capital markets is still relatively recent. A theoretical
discussion, however, of the effects of a stabilization program working
through increases in real interest rates is contained in Dornbusch (l982b).
                                       —4—

       In this paper a framework for empirically analyzing the determination

of nominal interest rates in developing countries is proposed. Even

though the model is quite general and of relevance for any small country,

the discussion is carried out with the case of those developing countries

in mind that have liberalized their domestic financial sector, in the

sense of having removed controls on interest rates. The model, which is

,4acrr4horl   it, Cartlnn TT rrrn.h4nac n1rc,aA— anA nnnannnr.ntr   S   LAS O CanA

it   is shown that the relative importance of the domestic monetary conditions

and the open economy factors will depend essentially on the openness of

the capital account. An interesting property of the model is that the

approximate degree of openness of the financial sector in a particular

country can be estimated from the data. In Section III of the paper the

usefulness of this framework for analyzing interest rate behavior is

illustrated using data for Colombia and Singapore. The results obtained

indicate that, as expected, in Singapore only open economy factors appear

to matter; in Colombia, on the other hand, both domestic monetary disquili—

bria and open economy conditions have influenced nominal interest rates

during the last fifteen years. Section IV describes some areas in which

the analysis could be extended, including, for example, analyzing the

behavior of real interest rates, the determination of interest rates

under changing degrees of openness, the modelling of the effects of

expected exchange rate changes, and finally taking into account the role

of currency substitution. The concluding section summarizes the main

ideas and results of this paper.
                                                         —5—

             II. Theoretical Models of Interest Rate Determination


     In this section three basic models for analyzing interest rate be-

havior in developing economies are briefly presented. First, we describe

a simple model that assumes that the country in question is completely

closed to the rest of the world. Under these circumstances it is assumed

that the nominal interest rate depends on the real interest rate and on

          41..-4-
            ..Lak...LJtL.
            LLLL              r1
                              1. LLC   OC L.LILLI.L   U.L¼1L.LCL ....LJLL S¼1C k   '-   -s---
                                                                                   L.&L 'J *LLCJ.. Cflá USC WLLC 4. =

the capital account is completely open. In this case domestic interest
rates are closely linked to world interest rates through the interest

arbitrage condition. Finally a more general model that allows both f ore—

ign and domestic factors to affect the behavior of the nominal interest

rate, and thus contains the other two models as special cases, is presen-

ted and discussed.

1.   Interest rates in a closed economy

     Following the standard Fisher approach, the nominal interest rate

can be specified as equal to: 1/

     (1) i =rrt+4
where,

     i = nominal            rate of interest;

     rr =    real   (ex—ante) rate of interest; and

         = expected rate of inflation.

     The real interest rate in turn can be specified as:

     (2) rrt = p — A EMSt ÷


  1/ We are ignoring here, for example, the effects of taxation on the
relation between expected inflation and the nominal interest rate. On
this topic see Darby (1975), and Tanzi (1976).
                                       —6—

where p is a constant, and represents the long—run equilibrium real in-

terest rate. The variable EMS represents the excess supply for money,

A is a parameter (A >0), and t a random error term. According to

equation (2) the real rate of interest would deviate from its long—run

value p if there is monetary disequilibrium; an excess demand (supply)

for real money balances will result in a temporarily higher (lower) real

interest rate. This relationship has been termed the "liquidity effect"

in the literature (Mundell (1963)). In the long run, however, the money

market would be in equilibrium and the variable EMS would play no role

in the behavior of rrt. 1/ Introducing this liquidity effect into the

model, contrary to most recent empirical studies of interest rate behavior,

allows the real rate of interest to be variable in the short—run. 2/ As

such, even though the Fisher equation (1) is assumed to hold continuously,

the possibility of slow adjustment of the real interest rate (given by

A) implicitly allows for the possibility of delayed response of the

nominal interest rate to monetary changes.

     The solution for the nominal interest rate in a closed economy is

therefore:

               = p —
                     AEMS
                          +     ÷ wt
     In   order to estimate equation (3), however, some assumptions have to

be made regarding the unobserved variables, such as e and EMS. The

expected rate of inflation can be specified in a variety of ways. One


  1/ Note that more generally EMSt could also affect . Furthermore,
it is assumed here that changes in ir have no direct effects on rr.
On these types of effects see MundeLt (1963).       -



  2/ For recent empirical studies on interest rates behavior in the U.S.
see, for example, Fama (1975), Tanzi (1980), Makin (1982), and Melvin
(1983).
                                      —7—

way is to utilize the traditional adaptive—expectations model, in which

the expected rate of Inflation is assumed to be a (geometrically) distrib-

uted lag function of past rates of inflation. An empirical generalization

of this approach is to assume an autoregressive process for the rate of

inflation, and use the predicted values as representing the expected

rate of inflation. 1/ Other possible methods include the use of survey

data, 2! or models that allow for the influence of additional economic

variables other than only past rates of inflation in the formation of

expectations. 3/ Of course, it can also be assumed that actual and ex-

pected rates of inflation are the same, which would imply a strict form

of rational expectations (i.e., perfect foresight). There is really no

compelling theoretical reason for preferring one method over any other,

and the choice is ultimately an empirical one.

     The excess supply of money is defined as:

     (4) EMS = log   tnt
                           — log Z4

where m is the actual stock, and d the desired equilibrium stock, of real

money balances. 4/ In an economy which has completed the financial reform

process we would expect substitution to take place between both money and


  !/ In this formulation the weights of the lag distribution are not
assumed to follow any specific pattern.
  2/ For example, the Livingston series on inflationary expectations.
  3/ These would be the empirical representations of the rational expecta-
tions model in which economic agents are assumed to take into account all
available information in forming their (conditional) expectations.
  4/ It should be noted that equation (4) is only one of the alternative
ways to specify excess money supply, or monetary disequilibrium. For
example, it can be postulated that only money surprises will influence.
the real interest rate,(Makin (1982)). In such a case EMS would have
to be replaced by some measure of unanticipated monetary changes in
equation (2).
                                                —8—

goods, as well as money and financial assets, so that the demand for money

would be a function of two opportunity cost variables, namely the expected

rate of inflation and the rate of interest, along with a scale variable

(real income). 1/ The equilibrium demand for money can therefore be written

as:




                                                                                  .
                logm   =   +
                               all yt —                  + i)     —



        It    should be noted that long—run demand for money is assumed to be

  £ ULLL.JLL .-.. ..t.
             Vi. I..LL          LIL £ULU I .JLUiLL   .   .LULeL   bL L       UJ. LUeU db Lile

equilibrium      real interest rate (p) plus the expected rate of inflation,

rather than the current nominal interest rate.

        The model can be closed by assuming that the stock of real money

balances adjusts according to:

        (6)    logm = 8[log$      —
                                      lOgm_11
where         is a first—difference operator, logm =                     logm     —
                                                                                      1°t—l,   and

8 is the coefficient of adjustment, 0                       8         1. If the nominal stock of

money is exogenous, then equation (6) really describes an adjustment mecha-

nism for domestic prices. Basically, equation (6) introduces a process

through which the nominal interest rate returns eventually to its equilibrium

level.

      The workings of the model given by equations (3), (4), and (6)., can

be conveniently described within the framework of Figure 1.                              In this

figure the initial equilibrium is point A where the long—run demand for

real money balances is equal to the supply (ENS'O),                         the   nominal interest


  1/ Of course, one could also introduce an "own" rate of return into
themoñey demand formulation. This would certainly be advisable when
dealing with broad definitions of money that include deposits paying
positive rates of interest (see Mathieson (1982), (1983)). In our
case, however, since we work with narrow money (currency plus demand
deposits) throughout, this omission is obviously not serious, as
demand deposits are typically non—interest bearing.
                            — 8a




                                 FIGURE 1
                    INTEREST RATE DETERMINATION:
                          CLOSED ECONOMY


Interest Rate (I)




 101= p +




            Ii




                            m0              m1   Real Money Balances (ml
                                              —9—

rate is at its equilibrium level (p + rre), and the actual stock of

real money balances is equal to rn0.             Suppose now that there is an

increase in the supply of money from                 to m. This would create

an excess supply of real money balances (EMS>O), and the nominal inter-

est rate would fall below its equilibrium value (say to i1). The move-

ment from A to B essentially represents the short—run liquidity effect we

referred to earlier. However, B is only a temporary equilibrium position,

since in the next period the (unchanged) long—run demand for money is less

than the actual stock in the previous period, 4+ < m (my), and

therefore by equation (6), the actual stock of real money balances would

begin to decline. In Figure 1 the mS schedule would shift to the left

until the actual money supply is once again equal to the equilibrium

money demand, and consequently the nominal interest rate would be given

by    +

      Equation      (6) can be simplified to:

       (6a)   logm = 8logt4 +      (l—$)logm_1
and   combining     equations (4) and (6a) we obtain:

       (7) EMS = (l—)[lograt....1       —
                                            logr4]
Using equations (1), (5), and (7) we can derive the reduced—form equation

for the nominal interest rate:

      (8) i =           + ','1logy + y2logm_1 + 4 +

where the composite parameters are:

       Yo       p   +   X(l—)(cj   —
                                       a2p)
       ii =
       12     = — X(l—8)

       13     = [l—X(l—B)(a7 + a3)J
                                    — •lO   —




     Once       is replaced by some appropriate measured variable,

equation (9) can be directly estimated. In the estimation it would

be expected that ii > 0, and 12 < 0; the sign of 'Y3 would be

negative or positive depending on whether X(l—)(c2 + 3) is

greater or less than one.

2.   Interest rates ma fuliy open economy

     if the economy IS completely open to the rest of the world, and there

are no impediments to capital flows, domestic and foreign interest rates

will be closely linked. In particular in a world with no transaction

costs and risk neutral agents the following uncovered interest arbitrage

relation will hold:



where i is the world interest rate for a financial asset of the same

characteristics (maturity and so on) as the domestic instrument, and et

is the expected rate of change of the exchange rate. 11 If, however, agents

are assumed to be risk averse et should be replaced by the forward premium,

or alternatively, a (time—varying) risk premium term should be added to

equation (9).

     Usually the analysis of interest rate behavior in open economies has

amounted to investigating the extent to which (9), or some variant of it,

holds. One way of doing this is by adding transaction costs and defining

a band within which the interest parity differential can vary, without

violating the arbitrage condition. Another way of testing equation (9)

is through the analysis of the time series properties of the interest


  1/ The exchange rate is defined as the domestic price of foreign
currency.
                                    — 11 —




parity,   differential. If these time series are not serially correlated,

i.e., they are white noise, it is usually concluded that the. domestic

interest rate depends only on open economy factors.       Frenkel and

Levich (1975, 1977), for example, have analyzed the extent to which the

covered arbitrage condition, which replaces et by the forward premium in

(9), held for industrialized countries during the period following the

adoption of finating rats in 1971      They showed that nnc transaction

costs are allowed into the analysis, this arbitrage condition has worked

well for these countries. Using a similar methodology, Lizondo (1983),

on the other hand found evidence of large and persistent deviations in

the case of Mexico during 1979—80, Cumby and Obstfeld (1981) adopted

the second of the two approaches and analyzed the time series properties

of the uncovered interest arbitrage differential using weekly data for

six industrialized countries, and found that, in five of the six cases,

these series exhibited strong serial correlation. They interpret these

results as providing evidence that there exists a (time varying) foreign—

exchange premium for most currencies. 2/ The tests performed by Blejer

(1982) using monthly data for Argentina for June 1977—August 1981, however,

could not reject the hypothesis that the uncovered interest rate differential


  1/ However, from a methodological point of view, even if interest
parity arbitrage differentials are white noise it is still possible that
other variables, besides the world interest rate and the expected rate
of devaluation, will affect the domestic interest rate. For this reason
a more appropriate procedure is to directly test whether other variables
suggested by the theory have an effect on i.
  2/ See Levich (1984) for a review on other studies that have dealt with
related issues.
                                 — 12 —



was white noise for Argentina during this period. 1/ Broadly speaking,

the evidence appears fairly mixed on the interest parity condition in open

economies.

     There, of course, exists the possibility that due to frictions aris—

ing from transactions costs, information lags, etc., that domestic interest

rates respond with delay to any changes in the foreign rate of interest or

in exchange rate expectations. This type of lagged response can be model-

led straightforwardly in a partial—adjustment framework as follows:

     (10)     = O[(i      —



where 8 is the adjustment parameter, 0 < 8 < 1. If the financial market

adjusts very rapidly this parameter 0 will tend towards unity. Conversely,

a small value of 0 would imply slow adjustment of the domestic interest

rate. 2/ The solution of equation (10) in terms of the domestic interest

rate is:

     (11) 1 =   0(i +)   + (l—e)i_i
3.   The general case

     The preceding discussion has dealt with interest rate determination

in the two polar cases regarding the degree of openness of the economy.

If, however, the economy under consideration is one that has some controls


  1/ In a more recent study for Uruguay, Blejer and Gil Diaz (1984) found
that the risk premium was highly serially correlated.
  2/ During the period when the parity condition does not exactly hold
there would obviously be unexploited profit opportunities. The attempts
by transactors to take advantange of these opportunities would set in
motion the very forces that would bring about equality between domestic
and foreign interest rates (adjusted for expected exchange rate changes).
How long this process takes is an empirical question and would have to
be estimated from the data.
                                    — 13 —



on capital movements, as most developing countries do, it is possible to

visualize that, at least in the short—run, both open and closed economy

factors will affect the behavior of domestic interest rates. A straight-

forward way of constructing a model for such an economy is to combine the

closed economy and open economy extremes. In particular, it can be as—

sumed that the equation for the nominal interest rate can be specified as

a weighted average, or linear combination, of the open and closed economy

expressions discussed above. Denoting the weights by ji       and(l   —   i) and   com-

bining equations (1) and (9), the following model for the nominal interest

rate can be specified:

      (12) i =   p(i + e)     + (1 — 1p)(rrt +   e)
where the parameter      can be interpreted as an index measuring the degree

of financial openness of the country. If ip   =1   the economy is fully open

and equation (12) collapses into the interest arbitrage condition (9).

If, on the other hand,     = 0 the capital account is closed and equation

(12) becomes equal to the Fisher closed—economy equation (1). In the

intermediate case of a semi—open (semi—closed) economy the parameter i             will
lie between zero and one; the closer it is to one the more open the

economy will be. In some sense by estimating L'       from the data it is
possible to determine the degree of openness of the financial sector

in a particular country. This estimated degree of openness will provide

some information on the actual degree of integration of the domestic

capital market to the world financial market. To the extent that official

capital and exchange controls are not fully effective, the empirically
                                               —14—

estimated "economic" degree of openness can be significantly higher than

the "legal" degree of openness implied by the system of capital controls

in the country. 1/

     If we assume slow adjustment to interest parity and thus use equation

(11) instead of equation (9), the appropriate form for the general case

becomes:

     (13) i =            p8(i   + e.) +     l,(l—e)it1 + (l—ip)(rrt   + r?)

In this case full interest parity would require the condition                 = 0 =   1;

when p = 0 the Fisher closed—economy condition would emerge. It should

be noted that there will be some relation between the index of financial

openness, , and the speed of adjustment, 0. For example, if the

domestic financial market is fully integrated with the international

capital markets it is also likely that domestic interest rates would

adjust very rapidly.

     Assuming that the excess money supply term is given by equation (4),

and that the demand for real money function by equation (5), we obtain

from (13) the following expression for the nominal interest rate: 2/

     (14) it O +             i(t    + et) +     2   log yt + 53 log nlt..l

               +    S4    7T + S5   i1 +
where the reduced—form parameters S are:
           =   (l )E—           + X(l   —
                                            8)(z0 — a2p)
           =   p0



constant over time. The implications of relaxing this assumption, and
the procedures one could adopt to do so, are considered in Section IV.
  2/ Note that when 0 = 1 the lagged interest rate term would drop from
the specification, so that the equilibrium model is only a restric-ted
version of this formulation.
                                                             —15—

              =   (1 — p)X(l        —
                                         8)a1
              = --(1      i4)X(l —          8)
              =   (1 —   p)[l   —       X(l      —   8)(a', +     cL3)}
         S5 =     (1 —    0)

        If we assume that the income elasticity of the demand for money is

unity, then the model can be further simplified. In this case 12 = — 13

and real income and lagged real money balances can be combined into one

composite variable, i.e., [logy —                            logm_}.
        Equation (14) is quite general as it not only incorporates open

economy and closed economy features, but further permits the possibility

of slow adjustment on both the foreign and domestic sides. 1/ One can

see that in the case of a completely open economy with instantaneous

adjustment of the domestic interest rate (i.e., ,i                              =0   =   1.0),   51 becomes

equal to 1.0 and 5c        =2           =
                                            53
                                                     =   4   =
                                                                 S5
                                                                      = 0. According to equation (14)

the nominal interest rate will then be equal, both in the long— and

short—run, to (i +         et).          In the case of a completely closed economy

(ip   = 0)   the parameters CS1 and S will be equal to zero, and equation (14)

collapses to the closed economy equation (8).

       The preceding discussion has assumed that agents are risk neutral.

However, as mentioned, if agents are risk averse equation (14) should be

modified to take this fact into account. The simplest way of doing this

is by replacing the expected rate of devaluation et by the forward


      It should be noted that an equation of the form of (14) can be
derived from a portfolio model with imperfect substitutability between
domestic and foreign assets.
                                  — 16 —




premium.   From a practical viewpoint, however, this poses difficulties

since there are very few developing countries which have forward markets

for their currencies. An alternative way to deal with the risk aversion

problem is to explicitly introduce a risk premium into the analysis, and

to make some assumptions about its statistical properties. For example,

it can be assumed that the risk premium is equal to a constant plus a

random term. In this case the constant part of the premium will be

added to the constant in equation (14), while the random component becomes

a part of the error term. In principle, it would be possible to incorporate

any number of alternative assumptions regarding the behavior of the risk

premium into the empirical analysis. !'

    III.   Empirical Tests of the Model of Interest Rate Determination

     To assess the ability of the general model to describe the process

of interest rate determination in developing countries, it was estimated

using quarterly data for Colombia and Singapore. Since these two coun-

tries are quite different, both in terms of the development of their

domestic financial markets as well as in the degrees of controls over

capital flows, they should provide a fair test of the basic model. As

both countries are open in varying degrees it would have been preferable

to round out the picture by including an example of a closed economy as

well in the analysis. For obvious reasons this was not possible. 2/


  1/ Notice that the present formulation also ignores the presence of
political risk factors.
  2/ First of all there are few developing countries that can be viewed
as completely closed, and second, those that would qualify do not have
developed financial systems with market—determined interest rates.
                                  — 17 —




     Since 1967 Colombia has basically followed a growth strategy based

on export promotion. During the last fifteen years a crawling—peg ex-

change rate system has been in effect, and at least in a segment of the

capital market interest rates have been allowed to fluctuate freely. 1/

Over this period the domestic capital market was slowly liberalized, but

a number of restrictions to capital movements were maintained. For

example, there were restrictions on the minimum maturity of loans obtained

from abroad (usually 5 years); the movement of capital in and out of the

country required formal approval from a number of government agencies,

including the Exchange Office, the Ministry of Finance, and the National

Planning Department; and there was a 95 percent advance payment deposit

on all capital outflows. 2/ While there was some capital mobility the

existence of such legal restrictions make it best for practical purposes

to characterize Colombia as a semi—open economy rather than fully open.

As such in terms of our model we would expect to obtain a positive value

for the openness parameter , and a value of 0 of less than unity.

     On the other hand, the Singapore economy can be regarded as highly

open, with virtually no restrictions on trade and capital flows. 31   For

  1/ See Diaz—Alejandro (1976), Wiesner (1980), and Montes and Candelo
(1982).
  2/ See INF, Annual Report on Exchange Restrictions, for a detailed
description of the nature and extent of capital controls in Colombia.
  3/ See Blejer and Khan (1983).
                                   — 18 —




example, imports are mostly unrestricted, with a very small number subject
to tariffs, and all payments can be made freely. As far as the capital

account is concerned, the last elements of exchange controls were elimina—

ted in June 1978, and there are no hindrances to the movement of capital. !'

After   being pegged to sterling, the Singapore dollar floated from June 1973

to late 1975. From then on the currency has been pegged to a trade—weighted

basket of the currencies of its major trading partners. The floating of

the Singapore dollar led to a rapid development of the foreign exchange

market, and although the volume of transactions is not as large as in the

major financial centers, the Singapore market has over the years become

the largest in developing countries. A very active forward market,

covering transactions of various maturities, has also developed, with

quotations being given on a daily basis by participating banks. In

general, the progressive freeing of financial transactions, the exchange

rate policy, and direct encouragement by the government through its

financial development program, have combined to make Singapore into an

important financial center with close links to other major financial

markets. These institutional factors would lead one to expect that in

the case of Singapore the openness parameter, , would be close to unity,

 and that domestic interest rates would respond rapidly to foreign devel-

opments, (0     1).


  1/ In fact, even prior to 1978 there were no limits on residents in-
vestments in the Scheduled Territories (comprising the former Sterling
Area). Since Hong Kong was included in the Scheduled Territories, resi-
dents could, in theory, transfer funds anywhere via the Hong Kong market,
so that this restriction was not particularly effective.
                                  — 19 —




     Equation (14), and its equilibrium variant excluding the lagged
interest rate term, were estimated by ordinary least squares for the two

countries using quarterly data. For Colombia the data was for the period

running from the third quarter of 1968 to the fourth quarter of 1982,

while for Singapore it covers the period from the third quarter of 1976

through the last quarter of 1983. 1/ In the estimation equations for

Colombia the expected rate of devaluation between period t and t+1 (et)

was replaced by the actual rate of depreciation in period t. This assumption

implies that during the period under consideration, the rate of devalution

in Colombia can be represented approximately as a random walk process

with zero drift. 2/ Since forward rates are available for the Singapore

dollar, we used the forward premium to proxy the expected exchange rate

change. It is implicitly assumed in the analysis that the exchange rate

risk premium is captured in the constant and error terms. For both coun-

tries the expected rate of inflation was calculated by fitting an auto-

regressive process (with seven lags) to the actual rate of inflation,

and then using the predicted values to represent 4.   3/   Finally,

for reasons of efficiency, the income elasticity for money was set equal

to unity and thus we were able to combine the income and lagged money

variables. 4/ The results for the two countries are shown in Table 1.


  1/ See the Appendix for the data sources.
  2/ See Edwards (1985a).
  3/ Using the actual rate of inflation (i.e., the perfect foresight
model) did not produce any significant differences in the estimations.
  4/ This assumption is consistent with independent empirical evidence
on the demand for money relationship for both the countries. See, for
example, Montes and Candelo (1982) for Colombia, and Khan (1981) for
Singapore.
                                            Table   1.   Results:   General Interest Rate Model *




                                                    Foreign                                                Lagged
                                                                                                                                     .
                                                    Interest           Real Income —          Expected    Interest
                                  Constant            Rate 1/   Lagged Real Money Balances    Inflation    Rate       R2     D.W.    H
Country          Period              o                   ol                  2                      3

Colombia         1968:111—         —0.189             0.353                0.303               0.256       0.484     0.820          —1.29
                 1982:Iv           (3.08)            (1.98)                (3.03)              (2.00)      (3.89)
                                   —0.326             0.786                 0.517              0.422                 0.768   1.41
                                   (5.78)            (4.99)                (5.49)              (3.11)

                                                                                                                               —            I

Singapore        1976:111—         —0.200            0.922                  0.052              0.026       0.001     0.991           0.39
                 1983:IV           (0.20)           (23.68)                (0.24)              (1.40)      (0.02)

                                   —0.203             0.923                 0.053              0.026                 0.991   1.83
                                   (0.21)           (39.62)                (0.25)              (1.42)




  *    The values reported in parentheses are t—ratios; R2  is the coefficient of determination; D.W. is the Durbin—Watson test
statistic;   and H is the l)urbin statistic for serial correlation in model with lagged dependent variables.
  1/    Adjusted for expected exchange rate change.
                                    — 21 —




       Taking the case of Colombia first, we can see from Table 1 that the
results are very satisfactory. All    the    coefficients have the correct

signs and are significant at the conventional levels. 1/ In particular,

the significance of the coefficients of (i +      e)   and logm_1
clearly indicate that the nominal interest rate in Colombia has been

sensitive to both foreign and domestic influences, and ignoring either

of these factors——as is the case when more traditional approaches to

interest rate determination are used——important elements are left out of

the story. Since the coefficient of the lagged interest rate is signifi-

cantly different from zero at the 5 percent level, implying that 8 is

significantly different from unity, excluding this variable from the

specification could obviously not be warranted. This is borne out by

the results where the restricted version of the equation yields a poorer

fit.

       We further calculated the values of what we regard as the key

structural parameters, namely the openness parameter (), and the

adjustment parameter for the interest rate (8). The value of        turns

out to be 0.84 (with a t—value of 5.94), which is quite high, indicating

that the Colombian financial sector has, in practice, been more integrated

to the rest of the world than what one might be lead to believe after

analyzing the nature and extent of capital controls during this period.


  1/ Noting that the signof the reduced—form coefficient for expected
inflation (13) was ambiguous, the result in Table 1 indicates that
           +   3)   < 1.
                                 — 22 —




According to this estimated value of , a 10 percentage point increase
in the world interest rate, for example, will be translated into an

increase of the domestic interest rate of over 8 percentage points in the

long run. However, as the coefficient of adjustment (0) is equal to

0.422 (with a t—value of 2.5), this implies that the average, or mean—time,

lag in adjustment of the nominal interest rate to a change in either the

foreign interest rate or the exchange rate is between 3 and 4 quarters.

     The results for Singapore are quite different from those of Colombia,

with foreign factors playing the clearly dominant role in the determina-

tion of the domestic interest rate. The coefficient of the foreign in-

terest rate and expected exchange rate change, S, is not significantly

different from unity at the 5 percent level. The remaining coefficients

in the equation have the expected signs, but are all statistically insigni-

ficant. This result implies that for all intents and purposes the openness

parameter   is unity, which is a result one would have expected in the

case of Singapore. Domestic monetary developments have no direct effect

on the interest rate, although it is possible that they still could indi-

rectly through their effect on the forward premium.   This particular channel,

however, has not been considered here. 1/ Also as the value of B is unity,

implying that the adjustment of the domestic interest rate is instantaneous

and interest parity is maintained continuously, it is clearly a matter of


  1/ See Section IV.
                                    — 23 —



indifference   which of the two specifications for Singapore is considered.

Both the equations, i.e., with and without the lagged interest rate term,

appear equally well—specified.

     The results reported above were obtained using the excess supply of

real money balances as the appropriate formulation for the monetary

disequilibrium terra. However, as mentioned earlier, there are other

ways in which a monetary disequilibrium could affect nominal interest

rates. For example, it has been recently argued that nominal monetary

surprises can have a temporary impact on nominal interest rates. 1/ In

order to investigate this proposition equation (14) was re—estimated

replacing [logm —   iog4j   in equation (4) by a nominal money surprise

variable, defined as the residuals from an equation in which the rate of

growth of nominal money was regressed on its lagged values up to seven

periods. The results for both countries with this formulation were quite

similar to those reported in Table 1.


                       IV. Limitations and Extensions

     The model presented here has its limitations and can obviously be

expanded in several directions. In this section we briefly discuss four

possible extensions, namely, (1) the analysis of the determinants of real

interest rates in developing countries; (2) the analysis of interest rate

behavior during the process of liberalization of the capital account of

the balance of payments; (3) the explicit modelling of the expected rate

of devaluation in the context of interest rate behavior in open developing

countries; and (4) the role of currency substitution. This list is by no


  1/ See, for example, Nakin (1982).
                                   — 24 —



                                                                econometric
means exhaustive, and specifically does not incorporate various

issues that could arise in estimating a model of interest rate determination.
                                                                      of the
Such issues would include, inter alia, simultaneity, specification

underlying dynamics, and the proper treatment of the error structure. Here

we focus mainly on what we see are the main theoretical extensions.

1.   Realinterest rates in developing countris

     Recently,   some studies have empr1cally analyzed the behavior of

real interest rates in industrialized countries, placing special emphasis

on whether these rates have tended to be equalized across countries. 1/

From a theoretical perspective, even if there are no exchange controls and

the capital account is fully open, and further that the nominal arbitrage

condition holds, real interest rates can still differ across countries.

For example, an expectation of a real depreciation would result in a

country having a higher real interest rate than the rest of the world 2/

     The framework discussed in this paper can be easily extended to

 analyze the process of determination of (ex-post and ex—ante) real inter-

 est rates. Since the ex—post real interest rate is defined as the nominal

 rate minus the actual rate of inflation, a simple way of doing this is to

 add an explicit inflation equation to the model. 3/ The resulting two—


   1/ For example, Cumby and Nishkin (1984).
  -2/ On the relation between real exchange rates and real interest
 rates see Dornbusch (1982b).
   3/ Note that the adjustment equation (6) in our model could be inter-
 preted as an inflation equation, although we do not explicitly do so.
                                   — 25




equation model could then be used to determine simultaneously the nominal

interest rates and the rate of inflation, and the ex—post real interest

rates can then be directly obtained from these two equations. 1/ Further-

more, if the inflation equation is used to determine the expected rate

of inflation, then one can calculate the ex—ante real rate of interest.

     To keep within the spirit of the model outlined here, the inflation

equation specified should be general enough to allow both closed and open

economy factors to play a role. In the extreme case of fully open economy,

domestic monetary conditions will have no direct effect, and the inflation

rate will depend solely on world inflation and the (actual) rate of deval—

uation. If, in addition, it is assumed that the expected real exchange

rate will remain constant, the model will predict the equality of domestic

and foreign real interest rates. On the other hand if the economy is

completely closed, the domestic rate of inflation, as well as the nominal

and real interest rates, will have no relation to their world counterparts.

2.   Interest rates and liberalization

     One of the limitations of the model presented in this paper is that

it assumes a constant degree of openness of the financial sector in the

country under study. However, a number of developing countries have

recently gone through liberalization processes characterized by among

other things, the relaxation or removal of existing capital controls.

To the extent that these liberalization processes result in a higher


  1/ Blejer and Gil Diaz (1984) specify a two—equation model for the
real interest rate and inflation. Naturally their model can be used to
determine the nominal interest rate as a well.
                                     — 26 —


                                                            markets, the
degree of integration of the domestic and the world capital
assumption of a constant j is clearly inappropriate. 1/

    There are several possible ways to proceed if the degree of openness

is changing through time. The simplest way to model this would be to make

the openness parameter a linear function of time as follows:

        (15)     =    +
                                                                    is   a time
where    4 is   the constant part of the openness parameter and t

trend. We would expect that         > 0. If the level and intensity of

capital controls vary smoothly and gradually over the period of study

then equation (15) would be a reasonable approximation.       One could use

equation (15) to substitute for 4     in   the interest rate equation and then

directly estimate the resulting reduced form.       This simple form would

obviously break down if the changes in capital controls were abrupt or

erratic, and it would be necessary to consider other methods to formally

capture the liberalization process.

        Ideally, of course, one would wish to have some type of index that

directly measured the degree of legal capital controls. It would then be

 possible to specify openness as a function of this index (C) as follows:

        (16) Pt =      +   i1(C)

 In the estimation process a number of possible alternative functional

 forms can be assumed. 2/ The main problem with this formulation, how-

 ever, is obtaining data for the capital controls index (C). A possible


               shouldaObefbtedtha0u1ddepend0nthemntere5t
 chosen. For different interest rates one could easily have different
 values of . We are indebted to Michael Mussa for this point.
   2/ In formulating such types of equations one has to recognize that
 the endogenous variable () is in fact bounded (0,1). To properly take
 this into account the precise functional forms would be more complicated
 than the linear ones described here.
                                            — 27 —




way would be to construct a subjective measure from information- that is

actually available on the system of capital controls in the country in

question. Alternatively, some type of proxy measuring the severity of

capital controls can be used, and one candidate for this proxy might be

the black market exchange premium. 1/

3.   Exoected
          —   devaluation and interest rate determination
                         -j-.                  -...--.-—.--
                                .-..—.—...-—-—-,—-.—-——.




     Throughout the discussion in this paper no mention has been made to

the way in which the expected rate of devaluation or the forward pre-

mium are determined. For purposes of the present exercise these were

assumed to be exogenous. This is quite a restrictive assumption and a

more realistic analysis would have to recognize that the expected ex-

change rate change is likely to be affected by movements in domestic

interest rates, and more generally, by domestic monetary conditions.

However, recognizing this issue and actually doing something about it

are two quite different things, since in practice endogenizing the ex-

pected rate of devaluation or the forward premium has generally proved

to he exceedingly difficult.

     The way one would proceed will depend on the exchange rate system

that the country in question has. If the country has a floating exchange

rate, standard modern theories of exchange rate behavior can perhaps be

used. Even so it should be recognized that this is no easy task since

these models have not been particularly successful in predicting exchange


  1/ A problem with the black market premium is that it will tend to
capture a variety of factors, including for example, the effect of actual
and expected capital controls.
                                    — 28 —




rate   movements. 1/ Under fixed rates the problem becomes even more

complicated since the probability of an exchange rate crisis has then to

be modelled explicitly. Some initial attempts have been made in this

direction, but the modelling of exchange rate crises is still in its

infancy. 2/ By and large it seems that the present state of the art of

exchange rate modelling would preclude paying anything more than lip

service to this particular issue.

4.     The role of currency substitution

       In combining the closed—economy version of the interest rate model

with the open—economy formulation, the basic money demand function was

left unchanged. This function, it will be recalled, allows for substi-

tution to take place between money and domestic bonds and goods. While

this is the appropriate specification in the case of a closed economy,

it does prove to be somewhat restrictive once the possibility of substi-

tution between domestic and foreign money, defined generally as currency

substitution, is admitted. In other words one now has another asset in

the system, i.e., foreign money, whose rate of return also has to be taken

into account. Thus, in combining the two models one has to recognize that

the demand for money function in an open economy could be different from

the function relevant for a closed economy.

       The importance of the currency substitution phenomenon has been

documented ih a number of studies. In contrast to earlier opinion,


   1/ See Levich (1984) for a survey of such models for the major incus—
 trial countries.
   2/ See Blanco and Garber (1983) for a discussion of one such model
 for the case of Mexico.
                                               — 29 —



which held that currency substitution was relevant only in countries

with developed financial and capital markets, several writers have

recently shown that currency substitution takes place frequently in

developing countries as well. Furthermore, it has been found to occur

in countries that differ considerably in levels of financial develop-

ment, the degree of integration with the rest of the world, and types

of exchange rate regimes and practices. Clearly currency substitution

is a factor that should be explicitly taken into account in any

realistic analysis.

      How one would go out and model the effects of currency substitution

is riot, however, all that clear. The general consensus is that the prin-

cipal determinant of currency substitution is the expected change in the

exchange rate, although as pointed out in the previous sub—section (IV.3)

there is a great deal of controversy on how this ought to be measured.

Other things equal, an expected depreciation of the domestic currency,

for whatever reason, would cause residents to switch out of domestic

money into foreign money, and vice versa. Once, however, the difficult

problems associated with the choice of an appropriate empirical proxy

for exchange rate expectations are surmoutned, the rest becomes relatively

straightforward. The demand for (domestic) money function in an open

economy could be re—specified as:

       (5a) logm =            + 1l0gy      —
                                               a2 (p +
                                                              —         —




The last term in this modified equation would then capture the effects of

currency substitution.
                                 —30—


     It should be mentioned that this type of formulation would not

be applicable for the extreme cases of interest rate determination

in a completely closed or completely open economy. In the former case

the variable e would obviously not enter, while in the latter domestic

monetary disequilibrium, and thus the demand for money, with or without

currency substitution, does not matter. Equation (5a) would certainly

be relevant in the intermediate case, which of course does correspond to

the actual situation of most developing countries.

                             V. Conclusions

     As more developing countries proceed to liberalize their domestic

financial systems and remove restrictions on capital flows, the issue of

interest rate determination becomes increasingly important.   In particular,

how interest rates can be expected to behave in the changed environment,
                                                                          are
and how they will respond to foreign influences and domestic policies,

questions policymakers in a number of developing countries have to consider.

Only when interest rate behavior is well understood, will it be really pos-

sible to predict the effects of interest rate changes on key macroeconomic

variables, such as savings, investment, the balance of payments, and

economic growth, which are really the purposes for which presumably the

 liberalization policies were originally designed.

     In this paper we derived a theoretically—consistent model that we

 believe can serve as a starting point for analyzing the process of in—

 terest rate determination in those developing countries that have under-

 taken financial reform policies. Although this model has a fairly simple

 structure it is nevertheless able to incorporate the principal determinants

 of interest rates, such as foreign interest rates, expected changes in
                                    31 —



exchange rates, and domestic monetary developments. One of the interesting

characteristics of the model is that it is sufficiently general so as to be

applicable to a variety of developing countries that differ widely in terms

of the degree to which they are financially open. Indeed it is possible

to empirically determine the degree of financial openness, defined both

as the extent to which domestic interest rates are 1inked to foreign in-

terest rates, as well as the speed which they respond to changes in the

latter, from the data for the individual country. This measure of

"economic openness may differ quite significantly from the official"

or "legal" degree of openness implied by the prevailing system of capital

controls.

     For illustrative purposes the model was applied to two countries——

Colotnbia and Singapore. These two countries are at quite different

stages of financial development and thus are able to provide a useful

first test of the general nature of the model. For example, Colombia

still maintains restrictions on capital movements and only part of the

financial sector can be characterized as free, while Singapore is a

highly open economy with a dynamic and sophisticated financial market

that has close links with the major financial centers. The estimates

confirmed our priors, in the sense that we found that both foreign and

domestic factors were important in interest rate determination in the

Colombian case, but that only foreign factors appeared to matter in the

case of Singapore. It is also worth noting that our results indicated

that Colombia is more open than suggested by the actual system of capital
                                  — 32 —




controls.   In conclusion, while one should obviously be careful in

generalizing from the results of only two countries, we nonetheless feel

this model has considerable potential and can serve as a useful starting

point for studying the behavior of interest rates in developing countries.
                                     — 33 —                          APPENDIX




                          Data Definitions and Sources


A.   Colombia (1968—82)

     The basic sources for the data were Montes and Candelo (1982),
Departamento Nacional de Planeacion (DNP), DANE, Boletin Mensual de
Estadistica, and IMF, International Financial Statistics (IFS).

     The definitions of the variables and specific sources are as follows:

e    =   official buying rate for export receipts and capital inflows——
         Montes and Candelo (1982) and DNP; the variable   is defined as
         the percentage change in e.

i    =   domestic interest rate; for 1968—69 this is the average rate on
         mortgage bills, and for 1970—82 it is the effective annual yield
         on 3—month Certificados de Abono Tributario——Montes and Candelo
         (1982) and DNP.

1*   =   3—month U.S. Treasury Bill Rate——IFS.

M    =   narrow (Ml) money balances; for 1968—80 the data were obtained
         from Montes and Candelo (1982), and for the subsequent period
         1981—82 from DNP.

P    =   consumer price index——DANE, Boletin Mensual de Estadistica;
         is defined as the percentage change in this index.

y    =   quarterly   real GDP——Montes and Candelo (1982).

B.   Singapore (1976—83)

     The sources of the data are IMF, International Financial Statistics
(IFS), and Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS).

     The definitions and specific sources are as follows:

e    =   3—month forward premium——MAS.

I    =   3—month interbank rate——MAS.

i =      3—month Eurodollar rate——IFS.

N    =   narrow (Ml) money balances——IFS.
P    =   consumer price index——IFS; the variable 11   is   defined as the
         percentage change in this index.

y    =   quarterly  real GD?; the annual series were obtained from IFS
         and interpolated to a quarterly basis using an index of manu-
         facturing pr6ductiori (IFS).
                                          — 34   -.




                                       References



Blanco, Herminio, and Peter M. Garber, "Recurrent Devaluation and Spe—
    culative Attacks on the Mexican Peso," (December 1983).

Blejer, Mario I., "Interest Rate Differentials and Exchange Risk:
    Recent Argentine Experience," IMF Staff Papers, 29, (June 1982),
    pp. 270—280.

_________ and Mohsin-S. Khan, "The Foreign Exchange Market in a Highly—
 -

     Open Developing Economy: The Case of Singapore," Journal of
     ment Economics, 12 (February 1983), pp. 237—249.

__________ and Jose Gil Diaz, "On the Determination of the Real Interest
    Rate in a Small Open Economy: Domestic Versus External Factors," un-
    published, (January 1984).

Cumby, Robert E, and Maurice Obstfeld, "A Note on Exchange—Rate Expecta-
    tions and Nominal Interest Differentials: A Test of the Fisher
    Hypothesis," Journal of Finance, 36, (June 1981), pp. 697—703.

_________ and Mishkin, Frederic S., "The International Linkage of Real
     Interest Rates: The European—U.S. Connection," unpublished, (1984).

Darby, Michael R., "The Financial and Tax Effects of Monetary Policy on
    Interest Rates," Economic Inquiry, 13, (June 1975), pp. 266—276.

Diaz—Alejandro, Carlos F., Colombia, (New York: National Bureau of
    Economic Research, Columbia University Press), 1976.

___________ "Southern—Cone Stabilization Plans" in William R. Cline and
     Sidney Weintrub (eds.), Economic Stabilization in Developing Countries,
     (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution), 1981.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, "PPP Exchange—Rate Rules and Macroeconomic Stability,"
    Journal of Political Economy, 90, (February l982a), pp. 158—165.

__________ "Stabilization Policies in Developing Countries: What Have
    We Learned?" World Development, 10, (September l982b), pp. 701—708.

Edwards, Sebastian, "Money, the Rate of Devaluation and Interest Rates
    in a Semi—Open Economy: Colombia 1968—1982," National Bureau of
    Economic Research Working Paper No. 1380; forthcoming Journal of
    Money, Credit and banking (February l985a),

__________    "Stabilization with Liberalization: An Evaluation of Ten
      Years of Chile's Experiment with Free Market Policies, 1973—1983,"
      Economic Development and Cultural Change (forthcoming January 1985b).
                                                  — 35 —



Fama, Eugene, F., "Short—Term Interest Rates as Predictors of Inflation,"
     American Economic Review, 65, (June 1975), PP. 269—282. -

Frenkel,      Jacob A., and Richard M. Levich, "Covered Interest Arbitrage:
          Unexploited Profits?" Journal of Political Economy, 83, (April
          1975), pp. 325—338.

__________ "Transactions Costs and Interest Arbitrage: Tranquil versus
     Turbulent Periods," Journal of Political Economy, 85, (December
     1977), pp. 1209—1226

 J. y ,      I.L.i.   .
                      J .
                            .r1_11_
                             I.1ULLLS   Ui.
                                                   -Il
                                              1' LtLy    y
                                                         veJupJL1   uLLu1Le,
          World Development, 10, (September 1982), pp. 731—750.

Hanson, James and Jaime de Melo, "An Assessment of Reforms and Macro-
     economic Developments in Uruguay: 1974—1982," unpublished, World
     Bank, 1984.

Harberger, Arnold C., "The Chilean Economy in the 1970s: Crisis,. Stabil-
     ization, Liberalization, Reform," in Karl Brunner and Allan M.
     Meltzer (eds.), Economic Policy in a World of Change, Carnegie—
     Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 17, (Amsterdam),
     1982, pp. 115—152.

Khan, Mohsin S., "The Dynamics of Money Demand and Monetary Policy in
     Singapore," in MAS, Papers on Monetary Economics (Singapore: Singapore
     University Press), 1981, pp. 46—76.

Lanyi, Anthony, and Rusdu Saracoglu, "The Importance of Interest Rates
     in Developing Economies," Finance and Development, 20, (June 1983),
     pp. 20—23.

Levich, Richard M., "Empirical Studies of Exchange Rates: Price Behavior,
     Rate Determination and Market Efficiency," in Peter B. Kenen and
     Ronald W. Jones (eds.), Handbook of International Economics,
     (Amsterdam: North—Holland), forthcoming 1984.

Lizondo, Jose Saul, "Interest Differential and Covered Arbitrage," in
     P. Aspe, R. Dornbusch, and M. Obstfeld (eds.), Financial Policies
     and the World Capital Market (Chicago: University of Chicago Press),
     1983, pp. 221—240.

Makin, John H., "Effects of Inflation Control Programs on Expected Real
     Interest Rates," IMF Staff Papers, 29, (June 1982), pp. 204—232.

Mathieson, Donald J., "Inflation, Interest Rates, and the Balance of
     Payments During a Financial Reform: The Case of Argentina,"
     World Development, 10, (September 1982), pp. 813—828.
                                     36




_________    "Estimating Models of Financial Market Behavior During
     Periods of Extensive Structural Reform: The Experience of Chile,"
     IMF Staff Papers, 30, (June 1983), pp. 350—393.

McKinnon, Ronald I,., Money and Capital in Economic Development,
     (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution), 1973.

Melvin, Michael, "The Vanishing Liquidity Effect of Money on Interest
     Rates: Analysis and Implications for Policy," Economic Inquiry,
     21, (April 1983), pp. 188—202.

Montes, Gabriel and Candelo, Ricardo, "El Enfoque Monetario de la
     Balanza de Pagos: El Caso de Colombia 1968—1980," Revistade
     Planeacion y Desarrollo, 7, (Mayo—Agosto 1982), pp. 11—40.

Mundell, Robert A., "Inflation and Real Interest, Journal of Political
     Economy, 71, (June 1963), pp. 280—283.

Sjaastad, Larry A., "Failure of Economic Liberalism in the Cone of Latin
     America," The World Economy, (March 1983), pp. 5—26.

Tanzi, Vito, "Inflation, Indexation and Interest Income Taxation,"
     Banco Nazionale delLavoroouarterly Review, 29, (March 1976),
     pp. 64—76.

_________   "Inflationary Expectations, Economic Activity, Taxes, and
     Interest Rates," American Economic Review, 70, (March 1980),
     pp. 12—21.

Townsend, Robert M., "Financial Structure and Economic Activity," American
     Economic Review, Vol. 73, (December 1983), pp. 895—911.

Wiesner, Eduardo, "Devaluacjon y Mecanismo de Ajuste en Colombia," in
     Politica Econoniica Externa Colombiana (Bogota: Asociacion Bancaria


Zahier, Robert, "Recent Southern Cone Liberalization Reforms and
     Stabilization Policies: The Chilean Case, 1974—1982," Journal
     of Interamerlcan Studies and World Affairs, (November 1983),
    5-76.
