                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               MUTUAL FUND TAX CLIENTELES

                                           Clemens Sialm
                                            Laura Starks

                                        Working Paper 15327
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15327


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2009




The authors thank Federico Belo, Li Jin, Jennifer Huang, Sheridan Titman, and seminar participants
at the Australian National University, the City University of Hong Kong, the College of William and
Mary, Dartmouth College, the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Notre Dame, Southern
Methodist University, Texas A&M University, the University of Texas at Austin, the University of
Toronto, and conference participants at the European Summer Symposium on Financial Markets in
Gerzensee, the ISCTE Business School – Nova Annual Finance Conference on Mutual Funds and
Investment Management in Lisbon, and the University of Oregon Institutional Investor Conference
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Clemens Sialm and Laura Starks. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Mutual Fund Tax Clienteles
Clemens Sialm and Laura Starks
NBER Working Paper No. 15327
September 2009
JEL No. G11,G12,G23,G35,H24

                                               ABSTRACT

Mutual funds are pooled investment vehicles with diverse tax clienteles. Whereas many mutual funds
are held primarily by taxable investors, a significant fraction of mutual fund assets are held in tax-qualified
retirement accounts. Our paper investigates whether the characteristics, investment strategies, and
performance of mutual funds held by diverse tax clienteles differ. Examining both mutual fund income
distributions and mutual fund holdings, we find that funds held primarily by taxable investors tend
to be more tax-efficient than funds held primarily in tax-deferred retirement accounts. Despite these
differences, we find no evidence that any investment constraints that may arise from the funds that
pursue tax efficient management strategies result in performance differences between funds held by
different tax clienteles.


Clemens Sialm
University of Texas at Austin
McCombs School of Business
1 University Station; B6600
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
clemens.sialm@mccombs.utexas.edu

Laura Starks
University of Texas at Austin
McCombs School of Business
1 University Station; B6600
Austin, TX 78712
laura.starks@mccombs.utexas.edu
       The preferences of portfolio managers’ clientele should be an important part of

the managers’ investment strategies. For example, portfolio managers with high net

worth or trust clients commonly consider tax effects in making investment decisions. On

the other hand, managers of defined benefit pension plans have no need to consider tax

effects because the portfolio is not taxed on capital gains or dividends. The decisions of

both of these groups of portfolio managers are straightforward as they can focus on the

tax consequences (or lack of tax consequences) in their portfolio decisions. Mutual fund

portfolio managers, however, face a more complicated task. The complication is caused

in part because mutual funds are pooled investment vehicles with potentially diverse tax

clienteles and in part because their incentives may encourage them to ignore their

investors’ tax situations.

         From the taxable shareholder’s perspective, the choice of mutual fund may

depend on the fund’s tax efficiency. Empirical evidence suggests that this is the case –

the tax efficiency of mutual funds is important for shareholders’ mutual fund choice.

Morningstar provides mutual fund investors with information on funds’ embedded capital

gains (termed “capital gains overhang”) and these tax burdens appear to affect investor

inflows as documented by Bergstresser and Poterba (2002). In our sample, the average

annual tax burden of a mutual fund (taxes on dividends and capital gains) is about 1.25%.

This burden is the same order of magnitude as the average fund’s expense ratio in our

sample as well as previous estimates of trading costs, yet although the expense ratio and




                                                                                        1
trading costs have received substantial attention in recent literature, the tax burden has

received relatively little.1

        The decisions of mutual fund managers as well as their shareholders have become

more complicated in recent years due to the increase in diversity of the shareholders’ tax

status. The increased diversity is a result of the large growth in tax-deferred assets being

invested in mutual funds. Investment in 401(k) and other defined contribution retirement

plan accounts has grown significantly since the plans were first given special tax

treatment by a 1978 change in the tax code, and has grown even more so over the last two

decades from about $1 trillion in 1991 to $4.5 trillion by 2007, before dropping back to

$3.5 trillion at the end of 2008. Moreover, more than half of the 2007 total was invested

in mutual funds before dropping lower in 2008. This overall growth of tax-deferred

assets in mutual funds has resulted in increasing proportions of defined contribution

assets in equity mutual funds, reaching almost 27 percent by 2008.2 Despite the potential

changing perspectives of the mutual fund managers and shareholders, there has to date

been little research on whether the investment strategies of mutual funds differ according

to their tax clienteles.

           In this paper we examine whether the presence of tax-deferred assets affects the

strategies of the mutual funds in which they are primarily invested. We address the

question of whether systematic differences exist in the investment strategies or

performance of mutual funds according to the relative degree of defined contribution

assets in the funds. We hypothesize such differences should exist because of differences

1
  See, for example, Sirri and Tufano (1998), Edelen (1999), Chalmers, Edelen and Kadlec (2001), Deli
(2002), Deli and Varma (2002), Barber, Odean and Zhang (2005), Foster, Gallagher, and Looi (2005),
Christoffersen, Keim and Musto (2006), Edelen, Evans, and Kadlec (2007), Chan, Faff, Gallagher, and
Looi (2008).
2
  ICI, Research Fundamentals: The U.S. Retirement Market, 2008, June 2009


                                                                                                  2
in shareholder tax preferences. If the tax preferences are unimportant to the managers

and investors, then we would expect no systematic differences across the mutual funds.

Related to this hypothesis is the question of the source of the systematic differences.

These differences could arise due to mutual fund managers choosing tax efficient

strategies because of their investors’ preferences or due to the mutual fund investors

choosing funds based on their tax efficiency.

       To address these questions we first examine whether the characteristics of mutual

funds differ according to their proportions of defined contribution assets. Mutual funds

in defined contribution plans are typically chosen to be included on a menu by plan

sponsors and then selected in individual plans by the plan participants. Thus, one would

expect that the preferences of both the plan sponsors and participants would be reflected

in the characteristics of the mutual funds so chosen. In line with this expectation, we find

significant differences in the characteristics of mutual funds with high versus low levels

of defined contribution assets. For example, funds held extensively in DC plans tend to

have lower expense ratios and lower load fees, have greater assets under management, be

part of larger families of funds, and be better diversified as compared to the funds with

lower defined contribution assets. These results support the hypothesis that plan sponsors

or fund investors effectively screen the mutual funds included in DC plans.

       We then examine whether the mutual fund managers’ investment strategies are

related to the composition of their shareholder base by examining two outcomes of the

fund managers’ investment decisions. We investigate the funds’ distributions (capital

gain distributions and dividend distributions) and their disclosed equity holdings to

determine whether fund shareholder tax status is related to the time horizon of the




                                                                                          3
holdings. Our results document differences in investment strategies between funds with

high amounts of defined contribution assets and those with low amounts. Examining

both distributions and mutual fund holdings, we find that mutual funds with primarily

defined contribution accountholders tend to be less tax-efficient than funds held primarily

by taxable investors as would be expected if either mutual fund managers or fund

investors were considering tax consequences. In particular, we find that capital gain

distributions are increasing in the proportion of defined contribution assets in the fund

and that mutual funds held primarily by taxable investors have higher propensities to

realize capital losses.

        To examine whether the principal source of these differences in investment

strategies is the decision of the mutual fund manager or the investor, we examine changes

in funds’ investment strategies after an exogenous event. If substantial numbers of

mutual fund managers are making at least some investment strategy decisions based on

their clienteles’ tax status, then we would expect to see changes in investment strategies

after a change in the tax code that affects their clientele. After the 2003 legislative tax

reforms, which reduced capital gains and dividend taxes, we find systematic differences

across mutual funds in their investment strategy changes. Specifically, we find that

mutual funds with low levels of defined contribution assets increased their relative

propensities to realize long-term capital gains and to hold high-dividend stocks.

        Finally, we address the question of whether the fund’s performance is related to

the tax status of its participants. We hypothesize that maintaining the tax efficiency of a

mutual fund may constrain the managers’ investment strategies, resulting in their having

to give up return to achieve tax efficiency. We test whether fund performance differs




                                                                                         4
according to their shareholders’ tax status We find no significant return differences

according to the tax clientele, suggesting that any tax efficiency constraints do not appear

to have costs in terms of lower before-tax returns.

        Our paper is related to several literatures. First, it is related to the literature on

whether mutual fund investors take tax effects into account in their investment decisions.

We examine whether mutual funds differ across the taxability of the investors.3 Second,

our paper is related to the literature on mutual fund managers’ investment decisions in

light of the tax consequences. This literature has provided evidence that mutual fund

managers appear to consider taxes in their decisions, but that the decision is complex.4

Barclay, Pearson, and Weisbach discuss the conflict that mutual fund managers face in

determining their capital gains distribution policy, arguing that managers have an

incentive to realize some capital gains (reducing the capital gain overhang) in order to

attract prospective investors.          Their empirical evidence supports their arguments.

Dickson, Shoven, and Sialm (2000) analyze tax externalities of mutual funds across

investors and show that these tax externalities are important determinants of the after-tax

performance of equity mutual funds. Three other papers employ the actual trading of

mutual fund managers in order to infer whether they consider the tax consequences of

their decisions. Gibson, Safieddine, and Titman (2000) find evidence of mutual fund

managers engaging in tax loss selling just before a year end. Huddart and Narayanan

(2002) find differences in the propensities to realize capital gains between mutual funds



3
   See, for example, Dickson and Shoven (1995), Bergstresser and Poterba (2002), Barber and Odean
(2003), Ivkovic, Poterba and Weisbenner (2005), Johnson and Poterba (2008), Fong, Gallagher, Lau, and
Swan (2009), and Ivkovic and Weisbenner (2009).
4
  In addition, the tax burden can have an effect on other decisions by mutual fund managers. Khorana and
Servaes (1999) provide evidence that the level of capital gain tax overhang is associated with the decision
to open a new fund in the same category.


                                                                                                         5
and tax-exempt institutions. The results of both of these papers suggest that the mutual

fund managers pay attention to the tax consequences of their investment decisions.

Another paper that considers the tax decisions of mutual fund managers is that of

Christoffersen, Geczy, Musto and Reed (2005) who find that in 2003 managers’ decisions

with respect to cross-border dividend payments differ according to the proportion of

defined contribution assets in their funds. Finally, our paper is related to the literature on

the tax selling by institutional investors.5

        We examine the question of whether mutual fund managers consider their tax

clienteles from a different perspective. We examine whether mutual fund characteristics,

investment strategies, and performance vary systematically with the proportion of defined

contribution assets in mutual funds over the 1997 through 2006 time period.                          An

important distinction is that in our analysis rather than examining the investment decision

itself to infer whether managers consider taxes, we examine the tax outcome of the

investment decision in terms of the dividend and capital gain distributions including the

timing of these distributions.

        In the next section we describe our data, followed by Section II in which we

present our empirical results on the determinants of defined contribution assets across

mutual funds. In Section III we examine whether differences in investment strategies

exist and in Section IV we examine whether differences in performance exist. We

conclude in Section V.



5
  See, Jin (2006), Desai and Jin (2008), Sikes (2008), and Cohn and Sikes (2009). Neither of these papers
include mutual funds in their institutional investor samples. Further, evidence exists that institutional
investors have some preferences regarding a firm’s dividend policy, which would also be consistent with
managers considering the tax effects on their investors (e.g., Del Guercio, 1996, Gompers and Metrick,
2001, Bennett, Sias and Starks, 2003, Grinstein and Michaely, 2005, and Brav, Graham, Harvey, and
Michaely, 2005).


                                                                                                       6
I. Data

          The main data source for the size of the mutual fund assets in the Defined

Contribution (DC) retirement accounts is based on the annual survey of mutual fund

families by the publication Pensions & Investments.6                     Since 1997, Pensions &

Investments has conducted an annual survey of mutual fund families that manage DC

contribution plans. The surveys ask the mutual fund families to report the total assets

managed in DC accounts for the mutual funds most used by DC plans in broad

investment categories (Domestic Equity Funds, Domestic Fixed Income Funds,

International Equity Funds, Balanced Funds, Money Market Funds). We obtain data for

the surveys between 1997 and 2006, which cover the assets managed in DC plans as of

December 31st of the year prior to the survey date. Fund families are asked to list the

dollar amount of DC plans in the funds.7 Generally, mutual fund families are asked in the

survey to report the DC plan assets for the twelve funds in each category with the largest

DC assets. Therefore, for the largest fund families, we do not have DC assets for all of

their funds. However, we can surmise from our data that the unlisted funds in these

families tend to have relatively low DC assets.

          We focus on actively-managed domestic equity funds held by families that

participate in the annual surveys.8 For example, in 2006, 63 mutual fund families,


6
  We thank David Klein from Pensions & Investments for providing us with the survey data. Additional
information about the survey can be obtained from the website at http://www.pionline.com. The same data
source has been used previously by Christoffersen, Geczy, Musto and Reed (2005) in their study of
managers’ decisions with respect to cross-border dividend payments in 2003.
7
  This specifically excludes assets in IRAs, Keoghs and SARSEPs, sponsoring company stock, and assets
under administration.
8
  Focusing on equity mutual funds does not allow us to address the location of assets between taxable and
tax-deferred accounts. See Shoven and Sialm (2003), Dammon, Spatt, and Zhang (2004), and Huang
(2008) for a discussion of optimal portfolio decisions between tax-deferred and taxable accounts. Asset


                                                                                                       7
including the three largest mutual fund DC providers: Fidelity, Capital Research &

Management, and Vanguard, participated in the survey. These 63 mutual fund families

reported the DC plan assets for 550 equity mutual funds in 2006.

        We merge the survey data with the CRSP Survivorship Bias Free Mutual Fund

database using the funds’ ticker symbols and names. In addition, we merge the CRSP

database with the Thomson Financial CDA/Spectrum holdings database and the CRSP

stock price database using the MFLINKS file based on Wermers (2000) and available

through the Wharton Research Data Services. The CRSP mutual fund database includes

information on fund returns, total assets under management, fees, investment objectives,

and other fund characteristics. The Thomson Financial database provides long positions

in domestic common stock holdings of mutual funds. The data are collected both from

reports filed by mutual funds with the SEC and from voluntary reports generated by the

funds. The majority of the mutual funds in our sample disclose their portfolio holdings at

a quarterly frequency over the sample period.

        To focus our analysis on actively-managed domestic equity mutual funds, we

eliminate balanced, bond, index, international, money market, and sector funds, as well as

funds not invested primarily in equity securities.9 To avoid the incubation bias described

by Evans (2006), we exclude funds which in the previous month manage less than $10

million, funds with missing fund names in the CRSP database, and funds where the year

for the observation is in the same year or in an earlier year than the reported fund starting

year. For funds with multiple share classes, we combine the classes into one observation


location decisions are analyzed empirically by Barber and Odean (2003) and Bergstresser and Poterba
(2004).
9
  We select funds according to their S&P objectives: Domestic Equity Funds (AGG, GMC, GRI, GRO,
ING, SCG). Mutual funds that, on average, hold less than 80 percent of common stocks are eliminated. The
classification of index funds is made according to the fund names.


                                                                                                      8
for fund and compute the fund-level variables by aggregating across the different share

classes. Finally, we only include equity mutual funds from fund families that participate

in the Pensions & Investments surveys.

       Our sample includes 6,811 fund-year observations between 1997 and 2006 from

1,348 distinct equity mutual funds. Since mutual funds are only asked to give the DC

assets for a limited number of funds, we have DC values for 3,554 fund-year

observations. However, the funds with reported DC asset values account for 87.1 percent

of the assets under management of the surveyed fund families.

       Table I provides summary statistics for the sample fund characteristics. The

equal-weighted mean of the proportion of assets held in DC plans is 24 percent with a

median of 19 percent. The size of these statistics suggests that managers should be aware

of their tax clientele differentials. Figure 1 shows the distribution of the proportions of

assets held in DC plans across mutual funds. Panel A summarizes the distribution by the

number of funds and Panel B by the funds’ total assets under management. Panel A of

Figure 1 shows that although funds have a relatively small proportion of DC assets, there

are also a number of funds with substantial proportions.   Panel B of Figure 1 shows that

large funds tend to be over-represented in DC plans and the weighted average by assets

under management equals 31 percent. The proportion of assets held in DC plans does not

represent all assets held in tax-qualified accounts because mutual funds can be held in

Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs), Keoghs, and other tax-qualified investment

vehicles.

       An important consideration in examining mutual fund managers’ investment

decisions is the way in which mutual fund income is considered under tax law. Although




                                                                                         9
mutual funds are considered corporations, there is usually no double taxation of their

income because according to the Investment Company Act of 1940, mutual funds

registered under the Act can pass-through their dividend and capital gains income to the

fund shareholders on an annual basis. Thus, an investment company distributing all its

realized income to its shareholders would have no tax liability.            However, these

distributions are taxable to the mutual fund shareholder, whether or not that shareholder

had been holding the stock when the gain was received. Thus, when funds realize capital

gains, they accelerate the payment of taxes on those gains for their current shareholders.

Alternatively if the funds have price appreciation on their shares, but have not sold them,

they have a capital gain tax “overhang” that is faced by current shareholders as well as

future shareholders.

       We obtain the distributions of dividends and short- and long-term capital gains

from the CRSP mutual fund database. In a few cases (representing only 2.4 percent of

the total value of capital gains distributions), the CRSP mutual fund database does not

classify the term of the capital gains. In these cases, we assume that unclassified gains

correspond to long-term capital gains.

       Table I also gives the summary statistics for the funds’ capital gains and dividend

distribution yields over the prior year. We compute the capital gains and dividend yields

of each individual distribution as the distribution amount divided by the net asset value

(NAV) immediately prior to the distribution. The distribution yields throughout the year

are then added to obtain annual distribution yields. Mutual funds in our sample distribute

on average 1.06 percent of their initial value as short-term capital gains and 3.11 percent

as long-term capital gains. Figure 2 depicts the time series variation in these distributions




                                                                                          10
over our sample period. It shows that there were large variations over time, with higher

yields in the late 1990s, falling to very low yields after the market downturn in 2000, and

then climbing back up with market appreciation. Table I also shows that dividend

distributions amount on average to 0.40 percent of the initial value of a fund. According

to Figure 2, this amount remains relatively stable over the sample period with some

decrease early and then a slight increase after 2003. These dividend distributions are

relatively small because mutual funds commonly subtract fund expenses before making

the distributions. As an alternative measure we compute the dividend yield of the fund’s

holdings, which is the weighted average dividend yield of the fund’s equity positions.

This dividend yield proxies for the dividend yield of a fund prior to subtracting their

expense ratio. Over our sample, the dividend yield based on the holdings averages 1.14

percent per year.

       To obtain a measure of the overall tax costs of an equity mutual fund, we define

the tax burden (TB) as:

       TB f ,t = y DIV
                   f ,t τ t
                           DIV
                               + y SCG
                                   f ,t τ t
                                           SCG
                                               + y LCG
                                                   f ,t τ t
                                                           LCG
                                                               ,                        (1)

where yDIV, ySCG, and yLCG are the dividend and short- and long-term capital gains

distribution yields, and τDIV, τSCG, and τLCG are the average marginal tax rates on

dividends, and short- and long-term capital gains for taxable investors, as described in

Sialm (2008). The average marginal tax rates are defined as the weighted averages of the

marginal tax rates of investors in different income brackets, where the weights

correspond to the declared amounts of dividends and capital gains. The tax rates include

the impact of federal and state taxes. The tax burden measures the tax costs from

dividend and capital gains taxation as a percentage of the assets under management.



                                                                                        11
However, the tax burden captures only the direct tax costs based on mutual fund

distributions. It ignores any tax costs that occur if an investor liquidates a mutual fund

and realizes additional capital gains on the mutual fund trades.

       Figure 3 summarizes the time-series variation of the average marginal dividend

and capital gains tax rates since 1997. The most significant change in tax laws over our

sample period was the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act (JGTRRA) of

2003, which reduced the marginal federal tax rate on qualified dividends and long-term

capital gains to 15 percent.

       The annual tax burden has a mean of 1.25 percent and a standard deviation of

1.79 percent. Around one-quarter of mutual funds do not make any taxable distributions,

one-quarter of funds have tax burdens exceeding 2.00 percent per year, and ten percent of

funds have tax burdens exceeding 3.59 percent per year. It is notable that the annual tax

costs of mutual funds are of a similar order of magnitude as their annual expense ratios.

However, the tax burden exhibits significantly higher cross-sectional variation than the

expense ratio. Moreover, although fund expenses have received a great deal of attention

in the literature (e.g., French, 2008; and Fama and French, 2008), the tax burden of

mutual funds has not obtained nearly as much attention.

       Using the equity holdings from Thomson Financial over the period from 1980

through 2006, we obtain a measure of the short- and long-term capital gains overhang of

a mutual fund. Specifically, at the end of every quarter we compute for each equity

position the unrealized capital gain as the percentage difference between the current price

of the position and the price of the position on the last trading day in the quarter the

position was acquired. If the current position was acquired across multiple quarters, then




                                                                                        12
we compute the weighted average capital gain of the different lots. An unrealized capital

gain is classified as short-term if the position has been held for less than four quarters.

The unrealized short-term and long-term capital gains are then aggregated over all stock

positions of a fund. As Table I shows, the short- and long-term capital gain overhangs

equal 2.65 and 10.68 percent, respectively. The large standard deviations of these capital

gain overhangs indicate that there are significant cross-sectional differences in tax

overhangs across funds.

       Table I reports additional summary statistics for fund characteristics used in our

paper. The average return of mutual funds based on the CRSP database equals 0.71

percent per month with a monthly standard deviation of 5.55 percent. We also compute

the gross holdings return based on the most recently disclosed quarter-end Thomson

equity holdings and the asset allocation weights from CRSP. The holdings database

includes long positions in domestic common stocks and excludes other non-equity

holdings. To adjust fund holdings returns for various asset classes, we proxy for these

asset returns using published indices. For bonds and preferred stocks we use the total

return of the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, while for cash holdings and other

assets we use the Treasury bill rate. The mean gross holdings return equals 0.82 percent

per month and has a correlation of 96.4 percent with the net investor return across the

mutual funds in our sample.

       The mean of Total Net Assets (TNA) equals $2.13 billion, although the median is

about $400 million. The average fund family in our sample manages $63.19 billion in

equity funds. The average age of a fund is 13.65 years with a standard deviation of 14.50

years. The mean expense ratio is 1.26 percent per year and the mean turnover ratio is




                                                                                        13
about 92 percent per year. Not surprisingly, since we focus on equity funds, the vast

majority of the assets are invested in common stocks (94.84 percent) and cash (3.98

percent).   Bonds, preferred stocks, and other securities comprise a relatively small

proportion of the total holdings.

       Based on the CRSP data we compute the new money growth (NMG), which is

defined as the growth rate of the assets under management after adjusting for the

appreciation of the mutual fund’s assets (RFt), assuming that all the cash flows are

invested at the end of the period:

                     TNAf ,t − TNAf ,t −1 (1 + RFf ,t )
        NMG f ,t =                                                                       (2)
                                TNAf ,t −1

       Since estimated fund flows are very volatile, we winsorize both the top and the

bottom parts of the distribution at the 2.5 percent level. The winsorized new money

growth rate has a mean of 1.40 percent per month and a standard deviation of 4.10

percent over the prior year.

       The number of stocks held by a mutual fund is computed based on the holdings

information from Thomson Financial. The average fund holds approximately 121 stocks.

We also summarize holdings-based style characteristics for the mutual funds in our

sample. Each stock listed in CRSP is grouped into respective quintiles according to its

market value (using NYSE cutoff levels) and its industry-adjusted book-to-market ratio.

Using the quintile information, we compute the value-weighted size and value scores for

each mutual fund in each period following Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2005). For

example, a mutual fund that invests only in stocks in the smallest size quintile has a size

score of one, whereas a mutual fund that invests only in the largest size quintile has a size

score of five. Mutual funds in our sample tend to hold stocks in the largest size quintile.


                                                                                          14
II. Determinants of Defined Contribution Assets in Mutual Funds

       The sponsors of defined contribution plans offer the participants a menu of

investment opportunities and the participants choose their investments from these menus.

According to a survey of plan sponsors by Deloitte Consulting (2006), 17 percent of the

responding plans had fewer than 10 investment options, while 19 percent of plans had at

least 20 investment options. Most of the options in the plans were mutual funds. Thus,

the presence of defined contribution assets in a mutual fund depends on the choices of

both the plan sponsor and the individual participant.

       The first question we address is whether certain mutual fund characteristics attract

plan sponsors and participants to a particular fund. For each year in our sample, we

divide the mutual funds into quartiles according to the ratio of defined contribution assets

to total assets invested in the fund. We then calculate the averages of the mutual fund

characteristics for each quartile and average across the years. We present these statistics

in Table II. Since we do not have DC ratios for all the funds, in the first column we

include average characteristics for a fifth group, the funds with missing data (which by

definition should be funds with low or no amounts of defined contribution assets because

they were not reported as one of the funds with a significant amount of such assets). In

the middle four columns of the table we show the average characteristics for the defined

contribution quartiles. The last column reports the differences in the characteristics

between the top and the bottom quartile and the standard errors clustered by fund.

Overall the results show that defined contribution assets are a significant portion of many




                                                                                         15
funds’ assets under management. The bottom quartile has an average DC ratio of 4.49

percent and the top quartile has a DC ratio of 52.62 percent of total assets.

       Table II also shows that many of the mutual fund characteristics differ

significantly across the groups. The funds in the highest DC ratio quartile have lower

expenses, lower maximum loads, greater assets under management, are part of larger

fund complexes, and have a larger number of stocks in the portfolio. Mutual funds

extensively held in DC plans also have significantly lower turnover levels, despite the

fact that the portfolio managers of such funds should not be as worried about the tax

consequences of trading activities in their portfolios.

       Funds with relatively high DC assets tend to have a lower mean growth rate of

new money, probably because they tend to be significantly larger. Furthermore, the

standard deviation of the new money growth rate is also slightly lower for funds with

above median DC assets. This result might occur because retirement flows are smoother

than non-retirement flows into mutual funds.

       Many reasons exist for mutual fund managers to trade securities other than for tax

purposes. To capture some of these reasons we examine other characteristics of the

mutual fund holdings for differences across the DC asset groups. We calculate the

average percentage stock and cash allocations in each group as well as the size and value

scores of their equity positions (based on the holdings). We do not find significant

differences in the asset allocations and the investment styles of the various funds. While

the former would be expected since our sample is restricted to funds with at least 80%

allocation to equities, the latter result suggests that there does not exist preferential




                                                                                       16
differences in investment styles between retirement and non-retirement shareholders in

these fund families.

        Finally we examine the short-term and long-term capital gain overhangs for each

fund and find that high DC ratio funds tend to have slightly lower short-term capital gains

overhangs and higher long-term capital gains overhangs. This result would be driven

primarily by the fact that high DC ratio funds tend to have lower turnovers and to hold a

larger proportion of stocks for longer than a year.

        Table II provides a univariate perspective of which individual mutual fund

characteristics are associated with assets held in defined contribution plans.             In a

multivariate test of these factors, we consider the determinants of the DC assets in mutual

funds by regressing the proportion of fund assets invested by defined contribution

participants (DC-ratio) against the mutual fund characteristics. Besides running an OLS

specification, we also run a Heckman selection model because we do not have

information on the defined contribution assets in all funds. The Heckman selection model

uses the number of funds in a family as an additional variable to explain the selection of

funds in our sample.

        The results for the OLS estimation model and the Heckman selection model are

provided in Table III. The coefficient on the logarithm of family size is significant,

indicating that funds from large families are over-represented in DC accounts. This

should not be surprising since some of the largest fund families (e.g., Vanguard, T. Rowe

Price, Fidelity) provide recordkeeping services to defined contribution plans and their

funds are typically included in the choices for these plans.10 The coefficient on fund size


10
  See, for example, “Vanguard, T. Rowe Win Highest Rankings from 401(k) Plan Sponsors,” Managing
401(k) Plans, April 2005.


                                                                                             17
is positive in both econometric specifications, but is only statistically significant after

correcting for sample selection. Consistent with the univariate results, we find that funds

with significant DC investments tend to have lower expense ratios and loads suggesting

that plan sponsors consider fund fees in their selection process. Mutual funds held

predominantly in retirement accounts also tend to be better diversified than funds held

predominantly in taxable accounts. The coefficient on the return over the prior 36

months is significantly negative, indicating that funds held extensively in DC plans tend

to chase performance less aggressively than funds held outside DC plans.



III. Differences in Investment Strategies

A. Evidence from Mutual Fund Distributions

       In this section we consider hypotheses related to differences in the investment

strategies of funds with primarily taxable versus nontaxable investors.            Portfolio

managers with primarily taxable investors presumably would be interested in improving

the tax-efficiency of their funds by taking several actions that lower the taxes faced by

the investors in a given year. First, the managers can defer the realization of capital gains

(by not selling appreciated stocks). Second, the managers can accelerate the realization

of capital losses (by selling depreciated stocks). Third, the managers can tilt their

portfolios toward stocks with low dividend yields, lowering dividend distributions. The

benefit of shifting towards stocks with low dividend yields has been reduced significantly

after the implementation of the 2003 tax reform. These potential activities imply that if

managers consider the tax profiles of their shareholders, funds with low proportions of

defined contribution assets should have different distribution patterns than those with




                                                                                          18
high proportions of such assets. Similarly, mutual fund investors might also choose

funds with different distribution properties. That is, we should expect to see, controlling

for other differences, significant differences across capital gain distributions and dividend

yields for funds held in different tax environments.



1. Univariate Analysis

       We first employ a univariate analysis to test the hypothesis that the distribution

characteristics of mutual funds should vary according to the proportion of defined

contribution assets. As in the previous tests, we divide the sample funds into quartiles

according to the mutual fund’s ratio of DC assets and include a fifth group for funds for

which the DC asset information is missing.          The results are shown in Table IV.

Consistent with the hypothesis that the portfolio managers pay attention to the tax status

of their shareholders we find that funds with high DC ratios tend to distribute

significantly larger capital gains and exhibit significantly higher tax burdens than funds

with low DC ratios. For example, funds in the bottom DC quartile distribute capital gains

of 3.75 percent of their assets compared to the funds in the top DC quartile who distribute

capital gains equal to 4.58 percent of their assets, a 22% higher distribution rate.

Furthermore, as would be expected if mutual fund managers are tailoring their investment

strategies, at least in part, by the tax preferences of their shareholders, we find the tax

burden for the set of funds with large numbers of shareholders who do not pay taxes is

about 23% higher than the tax burden for the set of funds with low numbers of such

shareholders.




                                                                                          19
       On the other hand, we do not find significant differences in dividend yields across

funds with different tax clienteles.       This result likely occurs because dividend

distributions are relatively small due to the deductibility of fund fees and because

changes in dividend yields would require large changes in the fund investment strategies

(e.g., focus on high-dividend paying or non-dividend paying stocks), which could

generate significant tracking errors relative to the relevant benchmarks.

       Figure 4 summarizes the cumulative distribution functions of the capital gains

distributions (Panel A) and of the tax burdens (Panel B) over our sample period between

1997 and 2006. We depict the cumulative distribution functions for funds in the top and

the bottom DC quartiles. Consistent with the average results summarized in Table IV, we

find that high DC funds tend to distribute higher annual capital gains than low DC funds

over the entire depicted range. We find that 49.08 percent of funds in the bottom quartile

and 46.14 percent of funds in the top quartile do not make any capital gains distributions

in a particular year. Panel B shows a similar pattern using the total tax burden of dividend

and capital gains distributions. These results are broadly consistent with Barber and

Odean (2003) who examine the differences in distribution characteristics for mutual

funds held by individual investors in their taxable versus nontaxable brokerage accounts

over the 1991-1996 time period.

       It is interesting that funds held primarily by taxable investors tend to distribute

large capital gains, indicating that these funds do not take full advantage of opportunities

to defer capital gains for their investors. A relatively small proportion of the funds in our

sample (about 2.3 percent) identify themselves as tax-efficient or tax-managed mutual

funds. These funds make significantly smaller capital gains distributions than other




                                                                                          20
actively managed funds (0.67 vs. 4.16 percent per year). Not surprisingly, these tax-

efficient funds are rarely held in DC accounts (2.76 vs. 24.01 percent). Index funds also

tend to be significantly more tax-efficient than actively managed funds. For example,

investors holding the Vanguard 500 Index fund would have received dividend

distributions of 1.48 percent, and short- and long-term capital gains distributions of just

0.05 and 0.15 percent over our sample period. On average over the sample period, index

funds make total capital gains distributions of 1.68 percent per year, whereas actively

managed funds distribute 4.08 percent per year.        However, index funds tend to be

overrepresented in DC accounts relative to actively managed funds (38.33 vs. 23.98

percent).



2. Multivariate Analysis

       We examine the determinants of mutual fund distributions in a multivariate

framework that includes the proportion of defined contribution assets in the mutual fund

as an independent variable. Our major control variables are the short- and long-term

capital gains overhangs, the flows and variation in flows to the fund over the previous

year, the funds’ expenses, load, fund size, family size, and fund age. We also control for

time fixed effects and cluster the standard errors by fund. Table V shows the results of

these regressions where our dependent variables are the fund’s capital gains distributions

and dividend yield normalized by net asset value. Our independent variable of interest is

the ratio of defined contribution assets to total assets (DC ratio). Panel A reports the OLS

regression coefficients and Panel B reports the Tobit coefficients, which take into account

the inability of distributions to be negative.




                                                                                         21
        The first column of Panel A of Table V shows the results when the dependent

variable is the fund’s total capital gains distribution. Consistent with the results from

Table IV, we find a positive relation between the DC ratio and the capital gains

distribution. Moreover, this relation is economically meaningful. We find that a one-

standard deviation increase in the DC ratio increases total capital gains distributions over

the subsequent 12 months by around 0.32 percentage points. The relation is positive and

significant for both short- and long-term capital gains distributions. In contrast, funds

with higher DC ratios tend to hold stocks with slightly lower dividend yields. However,

the results are economically relatively small. For example, a one-standard deviation

increase in the DC ratio increases the dividend yield of the holdings by only around 4

basis points per year.11

        As would be expected, a positive relation exists between the current capital gains

overhang and the subsequent capital gain distribution. Consistent with Dickson, Shoven,

and Sialm (2000), we find that funds that experience negative or highly volatile new

money growth over the prior year tend to distribute higher capital gains over the

subsequent year since these funds are more likely to sell off shares and recognize capital

gains. Thus, taxes correspond to an additional source of strategic complementarities

across investors in open-ended funds besides the liquidity-based externalities discussed

by Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2009).




11
   Using the actual dividend distributions of mutual funds instead of the dividend yields of the holdings
changes the coefficient on the DC ratio from -0.002 to -0.001 and the coefficient becomes insignificantly
different from zero. The actual dividend distributions of funds differ from the dividend yields of their
holdings primarily because mutual funds commonly subtract expenses from dividend distributions.


                                                                                                      22
       Panel B reports the coefficients of Tobit regressions taking into account that

dividend and capital gains distributions are censored at zero. Our main conclusions are

not affected significantly using this alternative econometric methodology.



3. Changes in Clienteles and Tax Reforms

       The results in Tables IV and V do not allow us to determine the causality of the

results. The results could be driven by the fact that mutual funds catering to different

clienteles follow different investment strategies. An alternative interpretation is that

mutual funds follow fixed investment strategies and that different tax clienteles select

into different mutual funds according to their predetermined investment strategies. To

shed some light on this question, we conduct two additional tests taking advantage of

time-series variation in the DC ratio and taking advantage of the 2003 tax reforms, which

reduced the taxes on dividends and long-term capital gains substantially.

       To investigate whether changes in investor clienteles have an impact on capital

gains distributions, we focus on the total capital gains distributions and decompose the

DC-ratio into its lagged and changed components, where we meaure the change over one,

two, three and four years respectively. That is, we regress total capital gains distributions

over the subsequent year on the lagged DC ratio, the subsequent change in the DC ratio,

and other potential determinants included in Table V. The results of these regressions are

reported in Table VI, where the four different columns correspond to the different lags.

For example, column two uses DCt-3 as the lagged DC ratio and DCt-1 – DCt-3 as the

change in the DC ratio. We find that the coefficient on the change in the DC ratio is

positive and very similar in magnitude to the coefficient on the lagged DC ratio, which is




                                                                                          23
consistent with the hypothesis that mutual fund managers adjust their capital gains

distributions when their tax clienteles change. It is also important to recognize that the

regression specifications include time fixed effects, which control for aggregate time

trends in capital gains realizations and DC ratios.

       During our sample period a major reform in the tax code with respect to mutual

fund investments occurred in 2003, as summarized in Figure 3. The top federal marginal

tax rate on dividends was reduced from 38.6 to 15 percent and the top federal long-term

capital gains tax rate was reduced from 20 to 15 percent.

       The 2003 tax reform provides a useful natural experiment to study whether

mutual funds changed their investment behavior depending on their tax clienteles. We

expect that the outcomes of investment strategies of those funds held primarily by taxable

investors should be affected more by these tax changes than funds held by the non-

taxable investors if the managers were responding to the tax preferences of their

shareholders.

       Table VII reports the average dividend yields and the average short- and long-

term capital gains distributions for funds below and above the median DC ratio before

and after the 2003 tax reforms, with dividend yield in Panel A, short-term capital gains in

Panel B, and long-term capital gains in Panel C. The table also reports the differences-in-

differences estimators.

       Panel A summarizes the dividend yields based on the equity holdings of funds.

We observe that dividend yields generally increased across both groups after the 2003 tax

reforms. This is consistent with the Chetty and Saez (2005) finding that a larger number

of firms initiated or increased dividend payments after the 2003 tax reform. In support of




                                                                                        24
our hypothesis that mutual fund managers have changed their investment strategies in

response to the tax reforms, we find that the increase in the dividend yield is more

pronounced for funds with below median DC assets.            Thus, as the tax penalty on

dividends was reduced in 2003, mutual funds with taxable clienteles have been more

willing to hold stocks paying relatively high dividend yields.

       Due to the relatively poor stock market performance since 2003, capital gains

distributions were lower over the second sample period, which is reflected in Panels B

and C for short and long term distributions. Examining the differences-in-differences

estimation, it is not surprising that we do not find a significant time effect between high

and low DC funds for short-term capital gains distributions, because short-term capital

gains tax rates did not change significantly in 2003, as shown in Figure 3. However, as

Panel C shows, we find a significant difference-in-difference for long-term capital gains.

The reduction in long-term capital gains distributions has been significantly less

pronounced for low DC funds than for high DC funds, which is consistent with a less

severe tax penalty on long-term capital gains and with the hypothesis that mutual fund

managers take the tax preferences of their shareholders into consideration in making

investment decisions.

       In summary, our two tests on the direction of influence support the hypothesis that

mutual fund managers consider the tax preferences of their shareholders. When the

proportion of taxable shareholders changes or the tax laws change, the evidence suggests

that mutual fund managers change their investment strategies accordingly.




                                                                                        25
B. Evidence from Mutual Fund Holdings

         If mutual fund managers make investment decisions considering their tax

clienteles, the differences should be reflected in the timing of their investment decisions.

Consequently in this section we examine the timing of changes in funds’ holdings using

the 1,552,216 position-quarters from the mutual funds with available DC ratios.

         Specifically, we test whether differences in liquidation decisions vary between

funds with large amounts of DC assets as compared to those with small amounts using a

linear probability model. We present the results from the model in Table VIII where the

dependent variable in the first two columns is an indicator variable for whether the fund

liquidates a position and the dependent variable in the last two columns is the proportion

of the fund position liquidated.12

         We first examine the unconditional trading in the funds. As the first column of

Table VIII shows, the longer a position is held, the less likely the fund is to liquidate that

position. However, that relation is convex as the duration squared measure is positive.

We find that the interaction terms between the length of the position (short-term or long-

term) and the magnitude of the capital loss or gain are generally positive. The first

column indicates that mutual funds are more likely to liquidate a position if the capital

loss or the capital gain is relatively large.              Moreover, the coefficients tend to be

significantly larger for capital losses, indicating that mutual funds are more likely to sell a

stock with a capital loss than a stock with a similar capital gain. This behavior is

consistent with our hypothesis of tax sensitive strategies, which require funds to realize

12
  These results are related to several recent papers that investigate the disposition effect of institutional
investors. (See, Frazzini (2005), Ben-David, and Doukas (2006), Cici (2006), and Jin and Scherbina
(2006)).


                                                                                                         26
short-term capital losses. However, this result can also be consistent with the momentum

strategies followed by funds documented by Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1995). For

example, the propensity for a mutual fund to liquidate a position held for less than four

quarters increases by 4.42 percent if a position exhibits a ten percentage point larger

capital loss. On the other hand, the propensity for a mutual fund to liquidate a position

held for less than four quarters increases by 0.31 percent if a position exhibits a ten

percentage point larger capital gain. The impact of capital gains or losses on long-term

positions on fund liquidations is less sensitive than on short-term positions. Column 3

indicates that the results are very similar if we use the proportion of a position sold in a

given quarter as the dependent variable.

       The second column tests whether the propensities to liquidate positions with

specific capital gains or losses depend on the DC ratio of a fund. We find that funds with

low DC ratios (bottom quartile) are more likely to realize short- and long-term capital

losses than funds with intermediate DC ratios (middle two quartiles) and that high DC

ratio funds (top quartile) are significantly less likely to realize short- and long-term

capital losses than funds with medium DC assets. This behavior is consistent with our

hypothesis that funds held primarily by participants in DC plans are less sensitive to tax

considerations than funds held primarily outside DC plans.

       These results based on the portfolio holdings confirm the results based on fund

distributions. Mutual funds held widely in defined contribution accounts tend to be less

tax-efficient than funds held primarily by taxable investors. However, mutual funds held

primarily by taxable investors are not completely tax-efficient. They still have relatively

high propensities to realize capital gains, which would be consistent with the tradeoffs




                                                                                         27
suggested by Barclay, Pearson and Weisbach (1998) that mutual fund managers face

between satisfying current versus future shareholders.



IV. Differences in Performance

       Mutual fund managers who consider tax efficiency in their investment decisions

face a more constrained investment opportunity set than those mutual fund managers who

do not consider tax efficiency. The issue that we address in this section is whether tax

efficiency activities cause the manager to give up return and consequently lead to lower

before-tax performance.     If this is the case, we would expect to find systematic

differences in returns between funds with substantial levels of DC assets versus those

without as the former do not need to be as concerned with the tax efficiency of their

portfolio.

       To evaluate these differences, we employ eight different measures of mutual fund

return performance. We again divide the mutual funds into quartiles according to their

lagged DC ratio and include also the group of mutual funds with missing DC data, giving

us five different groups in which we employ each model over the sample period to obtain

average performance for the group.        The results, based on monthly returns, are

summarized in Table IX with the first column showing the return performance measures

for the missing DC data group followed by the DC asset quartiles. The last column

shows the results from tests of the differences in performance between the lowest and

highest DC ratio groups.

       Our first return measure is the raw return and we do not find significant

differences in performance between the lowest and highest DC group.




                                                                                     28
         We also examine several risk-adjusted measures of return. We first employ the

alpha from the Capital Asset Pricing Model:

         Ri,t – RF,t = αi + βi,M(RM,t – RF,t) + εi,t                                                  (3)

where Ri,t – RF,t and RM,t – RF,t are the monthly excess returns on the fund portfolio and

the market portfolio respectively. We also estimate alphas from the Fama-French (1993)

model:

         Ri,t – RF,t = αi + βi,M(RM,t – RF,t) + βi,SMBSMBt + βi,HMLHMLt + εi,t                        (4)

and the Carhart (1997) model:

         Ri,t – RF,t = αi + βi,M(RM,t – RF,t) + βi,SMBSMBt + βi,HMLHMLt + βi,UMDUMDt + εi,t (5)

where SMBt , HMLt and UMDt are the monthly size, value and momentum factor returns.

In addition, we use the Ferson and Schadt (1996) conditional model that nests the Carhart

model.

         Ri,t – RF,t = αi + βi,M(RM,t – RF,t) + βi,SMBSMBt + βi,HMLHMLt + βi,UMDUMDt +

                    +Σj βi,j MACRO j,t-1(RM,t – RF,t) + εi,t,                                         (6)

         where MACROj,t-1 denotes one of five demeaned lagged macro-economic

variables including the Treasury bill yield, the dividend yield of the S&P Composite

Index, the Treasury yield spread (long- minus short-term bonds), the quality spread in the

corporate bond market (low- minus high-grade bonds), and an indicator variable for the

month of January.13

         Using these factor-based models, we find that the funds show no significant

difference in abnormal performance over the sample period. We also find that all fund

13
   The market, size, book-to-market, momentum factors and the risk-free rate are obtained from Ken
French's website (http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/index.html). The dividend yield
of the S&P Index is obtained from Shiller's website (http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm). The bond
yields are obtained from the Federal Reserve Board (http://www.federalreserve.gov).


                                                                                                       29
groups tend to have significantly negative future alphas when employing the Fama-

French or Fama-French-Carhart models.

        To this point our performance measures are based on the monthly returns of the

funds and the benchmark portfolios. Alternatively we employ two measures to evaluate

the return performance of the funds using their actual holdings. We first use the DGTW

selectivity and style timing models (Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers, 1997)

        CSi,t = Σk wi,k,t-1 Rk,t – Σk wi,k,t-1 BRk,t(t-1)                                      (7)

        CTi,t = Σk wi,k,t-1 BRk,t(t-1) - Σk wi,k,t-5 BRk,t(t-5)                                (8)

where wi,k,t-1 is the weight of stock k in fund i’s portfolio for period t-1, Rk,t is the return on

stock k for period t and BRk,t(t-s) is the characteristic-based benchmark return for stock k

for period t to which stock j was allocated during quarter t-s according to its size, value,

and momentum characteristics.

        Finally we estimate the return gap between the actual fund return and the

hypothetical return of the most recently disclosed fund positions as developed by

Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008):

        RGi,t = Ri,t – Σk wi,k,t-1 Rk,t .                                                      (9)

    Again when employing performance evaluations based on the funds’ holdings rather

than their returns, we find no significant differences between the high and low DC ratio

funds in any of the return measures.

        In Table X we take our analysis further by conducting a more comprehensive test

of the hypothesis that engaging in tax efficient strategies constrains a manager’s choices

and can lead to lower investment returns. If funds with fewer DC assets have more

constrained investment strategies because of the need to engage in tax efficient strategies,



                                                                                                30
then we should examine whether the funds’ performance is related to lagged

characteristics of the fund, including whether the ratio of DC assets to total assets affects

the performance. We find that while some fund characteristics affect the performance of

the funds, the presence of a large amount of DC assets does not improve the future

performance of a fund as one would presume if tax efficient strategies affect the

managers’ opportunity sets.



V. Conclusions

       In this paper we examine whether the preferences of portfolio managers’ clientele

are an important influence on the managers’ investment strategies as reflected in

differences across mutual funds with primarily tax-deferred accounts as compared to

other mutual funds. Using information on the amount of defined contribution assets in a

sample of mutual funds that covers the largest fund families, we develop and test several

hypotheses regarding differences across mutual funds.

       We first hypothesize that plan sponsors and their participants would be attracted

to certain fund characteristics.    Consistent with this hypothesis we find significant

differences in the characteristics of funds with the highest amount of defined contribution

assets as compared to funds with the lowest amount of defined contribution assets. The

high DC funds tend to have lower expense ratios, lower or no load fees, have greater

assets under management, be part of larger families of funds, and have a larger number of

stocks in the portfolio as compared to the low DC funds. These differences imply that

plan sponsors are selective in their choice of funds to include on the plan platform.




                                                                                          31
       Our second hypothesis addresses differences in mutual fund investment strategies

across funds with different proportions of defined contribution assets.      That is, we

hypothesize that if managers consider the tax preferences of their shareholders, we should

find differences in the investment strategies of mutual funds with high defined

contribution assets as compared to those funds with low defined contribution assets and

that these differences should reflect the preferences of tax-deferred versus taxable

shareholders. Using two types of empirical tests, tests on mutual fund distributions and

tests on mutual fund holdings, we document that such differences exist. We find that

mutual funds held primarily by retirement account holders tend to be less tax-efficient

than other types of funds, presumably held primarily by taxable investors. In particular,

we find that long-term capital gain distributions are increasing in the proportion of

defined contribution assets in the fund and that mutual funds held primarily by non-

taxable investors have lower propensities to realize capital gains. These results suggest

that the managers of mutual funds held primarily by taxable investors consider the tax

consequences of their investment decisions.

       Finally, we hypothesize that maintaining the tax efficiency of a mutual fund may

constrain the managers’ investment strategies, resulting in lower returns for the tax

efficient funds. We do not find significant performance differences between funds held

primarily by retirement accounts versus those held primarily by taxable investors,

suggesting that any constraints faced by tax efficient fund managers do not appear to

have costs in terms of lower risk-adjusted returns or the fund managers are not practicing

tax efficiency to the extent it is affecting their performance.




                                                                                       32
       Overall, our evidence shows that mutual fund managers consider the tax

consequences of their actions when they have a smaller component of defined

contribution plan shareholders. However, even in this case the tax considerations do not

appear to be of first-order importance as one would expect with a diverse clientele. The

question that arises is how the tax considerations will evolve as defined contribution

plans become the dominant shareholders of mutual funds.




                                                                                     33
References

Barber, B. and T. Odean, 2004, Are Individual Investors Tax Savvy? Asset Location
    Evidence from Retail and Discount Brokerage Accounts, Journal of Public
    Economics 88, 419-442.
Barber, B., T. Odean, and L. Zheng, 2005, Out of Sight, Out of Mind: The Effects of
    Expenses on Mutual Fund Flows, Journal of Business 78, 2095-2120..
Barclay, M., N. Pearson, and M. Weisbach, 1998, Open End Mutual Funds and Capital
    Gains Taxes, Journal of Financial Economics 49, 3-43.
Ben-David, I., and J. Doukas, 2006, Overconfidence, Trading Volume, and the
    Disposition Effect: Evidence from the Trades of Institutional Investors, Working
    Paper, University of Chicago and Old Dominion University.
Bennett, J., R. Sias, and L. Starks, 2003, Greener Pastures and the Impact of Dynamic
    Institutional Preferences, Review of Financial Studies 16, 1203-1238.
Bergstresser, D. and J. Poterba, 2002, Do After-Tax Returns Affect Mutual Fund
    Inflows? Journal of Financial Economics 63, 381-414.
Bergstresser, D. and J. Poterba, 2004, Asset Allocation and Asset Location: Household
    Rvidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances, Journal of Public Economics 88,
    1893-1915.
Brav, A., J. Graham, C. Harvey, and R. Michaely. 2005, Payout Policy in the 21st
    Century. Journal of Financial Economics 77(3): 483-527.
Carhart, M., 1997, On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance, Journal of Finance, 52,
    57–82.
Chalmers, J., Edelen, R., and G. Kadlec, 2001, Fund Returns and Trading Expenses:
    Evidence on the Value of Active Fund Management, Working Paper, University of
    Oregon.
Chan, H.W.H., R. Faff, D. Gallagher, and A. Looi, 2008, Fund Size, Fund Flow,
    Transaction Costs and Performance: Size Matters! Forthcoming: Australian Journal
    of Management.
Chen, Q., I. Goldstein, and W. Jiang, 2009, Payoff Complementarities and Financial
    Fragility: Evidence from Mutual Fund Outlfows, Working Paper, Duke University,
    University of Pennsylvania, and Columbia University.
Chetty, R. and E. Saez, 2005, Dividend Taxes and Corporate Behavior: Evidence from
    the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 791-833.
Christoffersen, S., C. Geczy, D. Musto, and A. Reed, 2006, Cross-border Dividend
    Taxation and the Preferences of Taxable and Non-taxable Investors: Evidence from
    Canada, Journal of Financial Economics 78, 121-144.
Christoffersen, S., D. Keim, and D. Musto, 2005, Valuable Information and Costly
    Liquidity: Evidence from Individual Mutual Fund Trades, Working Paper, McGill
    University and Wharton.
Cohn, J. B. and S. A. Sikes, 2009, Capital Gains Tax Overhang and Payout Policy,
    Working Paper, University of Texas at Austin and Duke University.


                                                                                  34
Cici, G., 2005, The Relation of the Disposition Effect to Mutual Fund Trades and
     Performance, Working Paper, College of William and Mary.
Dammon, R., C. Spatt, and H. Zhang, 2004, Optimal Asset Location and Allocation with
     Taxable and Tax-Deferred Investing, Journal of Finance 59, 999-1037.
Daniel, K., M. Grinblatt, S. Titman, and R. Wermers, 1997, Measuring Mutual Fund
     Performance with Characteristic-Based Benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035-
     1058.
Del Guercio, D., 1996, The Distorting Effect of the Prudent-Man Laws on Institutional
     Equity Investments, Journal of Financial Economics 40, 31-62.
Deli, D., 2002, Mutual Fund Advisory Contracts: An Empirical Investigation, Journal of
     Finance 57, 109-133.
Deli, D., and R. Varma, 2002, Contracting in the Investment Management Industry:
     Evidence from Mutual Funds, Journal of Financial Economics 63, 79-98.
Deloitte Consulting, 2006, Annual 401(k) Benchmarking Survey: 2005/2006 Edition.
Desai, M., and L. Jin, 2008, Institutional Tax Clienteles and Payout Policy, Working
     Paper, Harvard University.
Dickson, J., and J. Shoven, 1995, Taxation and Mutual Funds: An Investor Perspective,
     Tax Policy and the Economy 9, 151-180.
Dickson, J., J. Shoven, and C. Sialm, 2000, Tax Externalities of Equity Mutual Funds,
     National Tax Journal 53, 607-628.
Edelen, R., 1999, Investor Flows and the Assessed Performance of Open-End Fund
     Managers, Journal of Financial Economics 53, 439-466.
Edelen, R., R. Evans, and G. Kadlec, 2007, Scale Effects in Mutual Fund Performance:
     The Role of Trading Costs,
Evans, R., 2006, Does Alpha Really Matter? Evidence from Mutual Fund Incubation,
     Termination and Manager Change, Working Paper, Boston College.
Fama, E., and K. French, 1993, Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and
     Bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
Fama, E., and K. French, 2008, Mutual Fund Performance, Working Paper, University of
     Chicago and Dartmouth College.
Ferson, W., Schadt, R., 1996, Measuring Fund Strategy and Performance in Changing
     Economic Conditions, Journal of Finance 51, 425–461.
Fong, K., D. Gallagher, S. Lau, and P. Swan, 2009, Do Active Fund Managers Care
     About Capital Gains Tax Efficiency? Pacific-Basin Finance Journal 17, 257-270.
Foster, D., D. Gallagher, and A. Looi, 2006, Institutional Trading and Share Returns,
     Working Paper, University of New South Wales.
Frazzini, A., 2006, The Disposition Effect and Under-Reaction to News, Journal of
     Finance 61, 2017-2046.
French, K., 2008, Presidential Address: The Cost of Active Investing, Journal of Finance
     63, 1537-1573.



                                                                                     35
Gibson, S., A. Safieddine and S. Titman, 2000, Tax Motivated Trading and Price
     Pressure: An Analysis of Mutual Fund Holdings, Journal of Financial and
     Quantitative Analysis 35, 369–386.
Gompers, P., and A. Metrick, 2001, Institutional Investors and Equity Prices, Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 116, 229–259.
Grinblatt, M., S. Titman, and R. Wermers, 1995, Momentum Investment Strategies,
     Portfolio Performance, and Herding: A Study of Mutual Fund Behavior, American
     Economic Review, 1088-1105.
Grinstein, Y. and R. Michaely, 2005, Institutional Holdings and Payout Policy, Journal of
     Finance 60, 1389-1426.
Huang, J., 2008, Taxable and Tax-Deferred Investing: A Tax-Arbitrage Approach,
     Review of Financial Studies 21, 2173-2207.
Huddart, S., and V. Narayanan, 2002, An Empirical Examination of Tax Factors and
     Mutual Funds' Stock Sales Decisions, Review of Accounting Studies 7, 319–341.
Ivković, Z., J. Poterba, and S. Weisbenner, 2005, Tax Loss Trading by Individual
     Investors, American Economic Review 95, 1605-1630.
Ivković, Z. and S. Weisbenner, 2009, Individual Investor Mutual Fund Flows, Journal of
     Financial Economics 92, 223-237.
Jin, L., 2006, Capital Gains Tax Overhang and Price Pressure, Journal of Finance 61,
     1399-1431.
Jin, L., and A. Scherbina, 2006, Inheriting Losers, Working Paper, Harvard University.
Johnson, W., and J. Poterba, 2008, Taxes and Mutual Fund Inflows around Distribution
     Dates, working paper, University of Oregon and MIT.
Kacperczyk, M., C. Sialm, and L. Zheng, 2005, On the Industry Concentration of
     Actively Managed Equity Mutual Funds, Journal of Finance 60, 1983-2011.
Kacperczyk, M., C. Sialm, and L. Zheng, 2008, Unobserved Actions of Mutual Funds,
     Review of Financial Studies 21, 2379-2416.
Khorana, A. and H. Servaes, 1999, The Determinants of Mutual Fund Starts, Review of
     Financial Studies 12, 1043-1074.
Shoven, J. and C. Sialm, 2003, Asset Location in Tax-Deferred and Conventional
     Savings Accounts, Journal of Public Economics 88, 23-38.
Sialm, C., 2008, Tax Changes and Asset Pricing, Forthcoming: American Economic
     Review.
Sikes, S., 2008, The January Effect and Institutional Investors: Tax-Loss-Selling or
     Window-Dressing? Working Paper, Duke University
Sirri, E., and P. Tufano, 1998, Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows, Journal of Finance
     53, 1589-1622.
Wermers, R., 2000, Mutual Fund Performance: An Empirical Decomposition into Stock-
     Picking Talent, Style, Transaction Costs, and Expenses, Journal of Finance 55,
     1655-1702




                                                                                      36
                                   Table I: Summary Statistics
This table presents the summary statistics for the sample of equity mutual funds over the period 1997 to
2006.
                                                                            Mean     Median    Standard
                                                                                               Deviation
DC Ratio (Proportion of Assets held in Defined Contribution Plans) (in %)    23.98     19.18      20.39
Short-Term Capital Gains Yield over Prior Year (in % per year)                1.06      0.00       2.81
Long-Term Capital Gains Yield over Prior Year (in % per year)                 3.11      0.23       5.05
Dividend Distributions over Prior Year (in % per year)                        0.40      0.03       0.85
Dividend Yield of Holdings (in % per year)                                    1.14      1.05       0.75
Tax Burden of Fund Distributions (in % per year)                              1.25      0.36       1.79
Short Term Capital Gains Overhang (in %)                                      2.65      1.64       6.45
Long Term Capital Gains Overhang (in %)                                      10.68      7.68      17.78
Investor Return (in % per month)                                              0.71      0.97       5.55
Holdings Return (in % per month)                                              0.82      1.10       5.91
TNA (Total Net Assets) (in Billions)                                          2.13      0.40       6.40
Family TNA (in Billions)                                                     63.19     20.58     118.81
Age                                                                          13.65      9.00      14.50
Expense Ratio (in %)                                                          1.26      1.23       0.44
Total Maximum Load (in %)                                                     2.32      1.28       2.37
Proportion Invested in Stocks (in %)                                         94.84     96.54       6.42
Proportion Invested in Cash (in %)                                            3.98      2.70       4.91
Turnover Ratio (in %)                                                        92.30     73.00      80.44
Mean of Prior-Year New Money Growth (in % per month;5% winsorized)            1.40      0.09       4.52
Standard Deviation of Prior-Year New Money Growth (in % per month;            4.10      1.93       6.09
5% winsorized)
Number of Stock Held                                                        121.49     87.00     147.15
Size Score (Score between 1-5 using Size Quintiles)                           4.26      4.69       0.88
Value Score (Score between 1-5 using Book-to-Market Quintiles)                2.76      2.75       0.41




                                                                                                     37
                    Table II: Characteristics of Mutual Funds by DC-Ratio
This table summarizes the main characteristics of mutual funds by the proportion of assets held in defined
contribution retirement accounts in the prior year. The dependent variable is measured at an annual
frequency and the standard errors are clustered by fund number.

                                      Quartiles by Ratio of Assets Held in DC Retirement Accounts
                                   Missing       Low          Q2           Q3       High     High-Low
DC-Ratio (in %)                                4.49        13.89        25.12     52.62      48.13

Expenses (in %)                    1.30         1.32        1.32          1.19       1.06      -0.27***
                                                                                               (0.03)
Total Maximum Load (in %)          2.34         2.46        2.98          2.49       1.30      -1.16***
                                                                                               (0.20)
TNA (in Billions)                  0.58         1.33        3.17          4.32       5.41       4.07***
                                                                                               (1.08)
Family TNA (in Billions)          74.66        21.55       31.71        70.42      87.29       65.74***
                                                                                              (13.09)
Number of Stocks                 121.88       100.40       113.04       112.38     158.68      58.28***
                                                                                              (16.91)
Age (in Years)                     9.58        15.50       19.37         19.09     15.31       -0.18
                                                                                               (1.49)
Turnover (in %)                   97.28        92.40       93.53         88.89     76.47      -15.93***
                                                                                               (5.82)
Mean Monthly New Money             1.85         1.43        1.08          0.76       0.79      -0.64***
Growth (in %)                                                                                  (0.22)

Standard Deviation of Monthly      4.81         4.24        3.24          2.88       3.60       -0.64*
New Money Growth (in %)                                                                         (0.34)

Prior 36-Month Mean Return         0.79         0.86        0.87          0.85       0.83       -0.03
(in %)                                                                                          (0.06)

Prior 36-Month Standard            5.08         5.30        5.24          5.37       5.40        0.10
Deviation (in %)                                                                                (0.17)

Stock Allocation (in %)           94.99        94.48       96.22         94.17     94.92         0.44
                                                                                                (0.41)
Cash Allocation (in %)             3.91         4.15        3.73          4.20       4.07       -0.08
                                                                                                (0.31)
Size Score                         4.23         4.23        4.32          4.35       4.23        0.00
                                                                                                (0.08)
Book-to-Market Score               2.77         2.78        2.74          2.75       2.75       -0.03
                                                                                                (0.03)
Short Term Capital Gains           2.81         2.62        2.83          2.52       2.14       -0.48*
Overhang (in %)                                                                                 (0.27)

Long Term Capital Gains            9.87         9.76       11.69        12.15      11.91         2.15**
Overhang (in %)                                                                                 (0.97)

Number of Annual                    3,232        891          889         890         884
Observations




                                                                                                         38
                      Table III: Determinants for Assets Held in DC Plans
This table summarizes the determinants of the proportion of mutual funds assets invested in DC retirement
accounts relative to total assets under management. The dependent variable is measured at an annual
frequency and the standard errors are clustered by fund number. All specifications include time-fixed
effects.

                                     OLS                                 Heckman
                                                                      Selection Model
Dependent Variable             DC Ratio (in %)           DC Ratio (in %)              Selection
Log of Family Total                  1.165*                  -5.282***                 -0.229***
Assets                              (0.619)                  (0.639)                   (0.024)
Log of TNA                           0.257                    9.582***                  0.428***
                                    (0.631)                  (0.646)                   (0.026)
Expenses (in %)                     -9.488***                -2.052                     0.072
                                    (2.095)                  (2.374)                   (0.099)
Total Load (in %)                   -1.283***                -1.400***                 -0.063***
                                    (0.400)                  (0.422)                   (0.017)
Turnover (in %)                     -0.022***                -0.009                    -0.043
                                    (0.006)                  (0.008)                   (0.031)
Age                                 -0.171***                -0.114**                  -0.002
                                    (0.039)                  (0.048)                   (0.002)
Number of Stocks Held                0.030***                 0.018**                   0.000
                                    (0.009)                  (0.008)                   (0.000)
Prior 36-Month Return               -2.186***                -1.709**                  -0.036
(in %)                              (0.630)                  (0.760)                   (0.033)
Prior 36-Month Standard              0.576*                   1.005**                   0.038**
Deviation (in %)                    (0.350)                  (0.400)                   (0.017)
Number of Funds in the                                                                 -0.008***
Family                                                                                 (0.001)
Lambda                                                        0.240***
                                                             (0.010)
Number of Observations               3,105                   5,276




                                                                                                      39
         Table IV: Distribution Characteristics of Mutual Funds by DC-Ratio
This table summarizes the main characteristics of mutual funds by the proportion of assets held in defined
contribution retirement accounts in the prior year. The dependent variable is measured at an annual
frequency and the standard errors are clustered by fund number.

                                      Quartiles by Ratio of Assets Held in DC Retirement Accounts
                                   Missing       Low          Q2           Q3       High     High-Low
All Capital Gains (in %)           3.99        3.75         4.12         4.23      4.58       0.83**
                                                                                             (0.35)
Tax Burden of Fund                 1.19        1.09         1.21         1.23      1.34       0.25**
Distributions (in %)                                                                         (0.10)

Short Term Capital Gains           0.97         0.90        1.02          0.88       1.08        0.18
(in %)                                                                                          (0.16)

Long Term Capital Gains            3.02         2.85        3.10          3.35       3.50        0.65**
(in %)                                                                                          (0.28)

Dividend Distributions             0.37         0.34        0.38          0.36       0.41        0.07
(in %)                                                                                          (0.07)

Dividend Yield of Holdings         1.18         1.15        1.15          1.08       1.08       -0.08
(in %)                                                                                          (0.07)

Number of Annual                    3,221        886          882         888         883
Observations




                                                                                                         40
                   Table V: Determinants of Mutual Fund Distributions
This table summarizes the coefficients of OLS and Tobit regressions of the determinants of mutual fund
distributions. The dependent variables are measured at an annual frequency. The regressions include time-
fixed effects and the standard errors are clustered by fund number.

Panel A: OLS Regressions
                                   Total Capital      Short Term        Long Term        Dividend Yield
                                      Gains          Capital Gains     Capital Gains      of Holdings
                                   Distributions     Distributions     Distributions         (in %)
                                      (in %)            (in %)             (in %)
DC-Ratio                               0.016***         0.007**           0.010**          -0.002*
(in %)                                (0.006)          (0.003)           (0.004)           (0.001)
Short Term Capital Gains               0.058**          0.049***          0.010            -0.028***
Overhang (in %)                       (0.024)          (0.016)           (0.016)           (0.004)
Long Term Capital Gains                0.023**         -0.035***          0.059***         -0.006***
Overhang (in %)                       (0.011)          (0.005)           (0.011)           (0.002)
Prior Year Mean New Money             -0.390***        -0.069***         -0.320***          0.002
(in %)                                (0.047)          (0.021)           (0.039)           (0.006)
Prior Year Std. Dev. New               0.105***         0.015             0.090***         -0.003
Money (in %)                          (0.034)          (0.017)           (0.027)           (0.004)
Current Year Mean Return               0.294***         0.290***          0.003             0.029**
(in %)                                (0.099)          (0.068)           (0.080)           (0.012)
Prior Year Mean Return                 0.705***         0.330***          0.375***          0.064***
(in %)                                (0.132)          (0.082)           (0.102)           (0.015)
Expenses                              -0.200            0.183            -0.383            -0.571***
(in %)                                (0.348)          (0.179)           (0.287)           (0.083)
Total Load                             0.020           -0.035             0.055             0.061***
(in %)                                (0.056)          (0.026)           (0.047)           (0.014)
Log of Total Assets                   -0.003           -0.031             0.028             0.004
                                      (0.105)          (0.046)           (0.089)           (0.022)
Log of Family Total Assets            -0.172            0.041            -0.214***         -0.047**
                                      (0.097)          (0.046)           (0.083)           (0.020)
Age                                    0.001            0.005            -0.004             0.001
                                      (0.008)          (0.004)           (0.006)           (0.002)
Number of Observations                 3,255            3,255              3,255              3,208
R-Squared                              0.400            0.285             0.338             0.162




                                                                                                       41
Panel B: Tobit Regressions
                                Total Capital    Short Term      Long Term      Dividend Yield
                                    Gains       Capital Gains   Capital Gains    of Holdings
                                Distributions   Distributions   Distributions       (in %)
                                    (in %)         (in %)           (in %)
DC-Ratio (in %)                   0.021**          0.018***        0.011          -0.002*
                                 (0.010)          (0.007)         (0.008)         (0.001)
Short Term Capital Gains         -0.003            0.017          -0.041          -0.028***
Overhang (in %)                  (0.036)          (0.027)         (0.027)         (0.004)
Long Term Capital Gains           0.047***        -0.062***        0.087***       -0.006***
Overhang (in %)                  (0.015)          (0.011)         (0.014)         (0.002)
Prior 12-Mth Mean New Money      -0.409***        -0.048          -0.349***        0.002
(in %)                           (0.070)          (0.044)         (0.059)         (0.006)
Prior 12-Mth Std. Dev. New        0.087*          -0.024           0.079*         -0.003
Money (in %)                     (0.050)          (0.033)         (0.042)         (0.004)
Current Year Mean Return          0.838***         0.844***        0.436***        0.029**
(in %)                           (0.137)          (0.116)         (0.115)         (0.011)
Prior Year Mean Return (in %)     1.546***         1.077***        1.049***        0.063***
                                 (0.193)          (0.157)         (0.158)         (0.015)
Expenses (in %)                  -0.323            0.019          -0.660          -0.571***
                                 (0.658)          (0.435)         (0.562)         (0.082)
Total Load (in %)                 0.038           -0.080           0.090           0.061***
                                 (0.102)          (0.071)         (0.086)         (0.014)
Log of Total Assets               0.067           -0.056           0.107           0.004
                                 (0.186)          (0.118)         (0.161)         (0.022)
Log of Family Total Assets       -0.319*           0.116          -0.379***       -0.047**
                                 (0.165)          (0.111)         (0.144)         (0.020)
Age                               0.001            0.005          -0.006           0.001
                                 (0.014)          (0.009)         (0.012)         (0.002)
Number of Observations              3,255          3,255            3,255            3,208




                                                                                              42
              Table VI: Determinants of Total Capital Gains Distributions
This table summarizes the coefficients of OLS and Tobit regressions of the determinants of mutual fund
total capital gains distributions. The dependent variable is the total capital gains distribution and is
measured in percent per year. The two main independent variables are the lagged DC ratio and the
subsequent change in the DC ratio. The four different columns correspond to different lags ranging
between one and four years. For example, column two uses DCt-3 as the lagged DC ratio and DCt-1 – DCt-3
as the change in the DC ratio. The regressions include time-fixed effects and the standard errors are
clustered by fund number.

Panel A: OLS Regressions
                                                Change in DC Ratio Over the Time Period of
                                     One Year         Two Years        Three Years         Four Years
Lagged DC-Ratio                      0.020***           0.024***         0.021***           0.024***
(in %)                              (0.007)           (0.008)           (0.008)            (0.008)
Change in DC-Ratio                   0.016*             0.019*           0.023**            0.026***
(in %)                              (0.010)           (0.011)           (0.011)            (0.010)
Short Term Capital Gains             0.033              0.033            0.065**           -0.027
Overhang (in %)                     (0.027)           (0.029)           (0.026)            (0.029)
Long Term Capital Gains              0.024*             0.040***         0.039***           0.044***
Overhang (in %)                     (0.013)           (0.014)           (0.013)            (0.015)
Prior Year Mean New Money           -0.375***         -0.229***         -0.111*            -0.077
(in %)                              (0.062)           (0.061)           (0.061)            (0.075)
Prior Year Std. Dev. New Money       0.076              0.032           -0.038             -0.049
(in %)                              (0.052)           (0.059)           (0.039)            (0.046)
Current Year Mean Return             0.160              0.154            0.700***           0.826***
(in %)                              (0.115)           (0.129)           (0.188)            (0.178)
Prior Year Mean Return               0.872***           0.622***         0.594***           0.196
(in %)                              (0.161)           (0.167)           (0.180)            (0.141)
Expenses                            -0.543            -0.370            -0.287              0.088
(in %)                              (0.410)           (0.451)           (0.472)            (0.495)
Total Load                           0.105              0.091            0.094              0.021
(in %)                              (0.064)           (0.067)           (0.069)            (0.073)
Log of Total Assets                 -0.057            -0.253*           -0.182             -0.139
                                    (0.122)           (0.146)           (0.135)            (0.146)
Log of Family Total Assets          -0.221*           -0.002             0.001             -0.066
                                    (0.113)           (0.117)           (0.111)            (0.120)
Age                                 -0.004              0.002           -0.002             -0.004
                                    (0.008)           (0.008)           (0.008)            (0.008)
Number of Observations                 2,391              1,920            1,519              1,140
R-Squared                            0.393              0.372            0.386              0.258




                                                                                                     43
Panel B: Tobit Regressions
                                             Change in DC Ratio Over the Time Period of
                                  One Year         Two Years        Three Years         Four Years
Lagged DC-Ratio                   0.030**            0.038***         0.037**            0.045**
(in %)                           (0.013)           (0.015)           (0.016)            (0.018)
Change in DC-Ratio                0.033**            0.034*           0.046**            0.045**
(in %)                           (0.017)           (0.020)           (0.021)            (0.022)
Short Term Capital Gains         -0.033            -0.029             0.018             -0.157
Overhang (in %)                  (0.045)           (0.049)           (0.046)            (0.104)
Long Term Capital Gains           0.054***           0.076***         0.097***           0.128***
Overhang (in %)                  (0.018)           (0.021)           (0.022)            (0.034)
Prior Year Mean New Money        -0.360***         -0.105             0.119              0.171
(in %)                           (0.094)           (0.103)           (0.124)            (0.169)
Prior Year Std. Dev. New Money    0.022            -0.021            -0.127             -0.190*
(in %)                           (0.082)           (0.099)           (0.082)            (0.106)
Current Year Mean Return          0.768***           0.805***         2.446***           2.457***
(in %)                           (0.158)           (0.189)           (0.334)            (0.472)
Prior Year Mean Return            1.809***           1.489***         1.679***           2.206***
(in %)                           (0.234)           (0.273)           (0.304)            (0.476)
Expenses                         -0.942            -0.896            -0.983             -1.278
(in %)                           (0.841)           (0.969)           (1.067)            (1.248)
Total Load                        0.166              0.167            0.195              0.121
(in %)                           (0.126)           (0.141)           (0.148)            (0.178)
Log of Total Assets               0.018            -0.329            -0.261             -0.335
                                 (0.240)           (0.284)           (0.294)            (0.361)
Log of Family Total Assets       -0.472**          -0.182            -0.118             -0.190
                                 (0.214)           (0.242)           (0.255)            (0.305)
Age                              -0.007              0.006           -0.002              0.003
                                 (0.017)           (0.019)           (0.021)            (0.024)
Number of Observations              2,391              1,920            1,519              1,140




                                                                                                 44
                            Table VII: Impact of 2003 Tax Reform
This table summarizes the impact of the 2003 tax reform on dividend and capital gains distributions. The
table reports the average dividend yield of the equity holdings of mutual funds and the average short- and
long-term capital gains distributions. The sample is divided according to the time period (before and after
the 2003 tax cut) and according to the proportion of assets invested in DC retirement accounts (below and
above median DC ratio). The standard errors are clustered by fund.

Panel A: Dividend Yield of Holdings
                                 Low DC                       High DC                High DC – Low DC
1997-2002                     0.997***                        0.993***                  -0.004
                             (0.041)                         (0.042)                    (0.053)
2003-2006                     1.346***                        1.184***                  -0.162***
                             (0.045)                         (0.042)                    (0.058)
Difference                    0.349***                        0.191***                  -0.158***
                             (0.045)                         (0.037)                    (0.062)

Panel B: Short-Term Capital Gains Distributions
                                 Low DC                       High DC                High DC – Low DC
1997-2002                     1.435***                        1.407***                  -0.028
                             (0.126)                         (0.125)                    (0.180)
2003-2006                     0.396***                        0.472***                   0.076
                             (0.051)                         (0.061)                    (0.073)
Difference                   -1.039***                       -0.935***                   0.104
                             (0.144)                         (0.135)                    (0.192)

Panel C: Long-Term Capital Gains Distributions
                                Low DC                        High DC                High DC – Low DC
1997-2002                    3.523***                         4.307***                   0.784***
                            (0.189)                          (0.230)                    (0.285)
2003-2006                    2.331***                         2.384***                   0.053
                            (0.165)                          (0.180)                    (0.233)
Difference                  -1.191***                        -1.923***                  -0.731**
                            (0.243)                          (0.281)                    (0.354)




                                                                                                        45
                            Table VIII: Propensity to Liquidate Positions
This table summarizes the coefficients of a linear probability model. The dependent variable is either an
indicator variable depending on whether a mutual fund liquidated a particular position in a specific quarter
(columns one and two) or the proportion of a position liquidated in a particular quarter (columns three and
four). The duration is the length of time measured in quarters since a position was first acquired. Short and
long term are indicator variables for whether a position has been held for less than four quarters or for four
quarters or more, respectively. Capital gain and capital loss correspond to the proportional capital gains and
losses of a position since it was initially acquired using the valuations on the holdings disclosure dates.
Low and High DC are indicator variables for whether a mutual fund is ranked in the bottom or the top DC
ratio quartile. The regressions include time-fixed effects and the standard errors are clustered by fund
number.


Dependent Variable                                     Indicator Variable if Fund    Proportion of Fund Position
                                                          Liquidates a Position               Liquidated
Duration (Divided by 100)                            -0.785***       -0.752***      -0.825***      -0.789***
                                                     (0.040)         (0.037)        (0.048)        (0.044)
Duration Squared (Divided by 100)                     0.008***        0.008***       0.008***       0.007***
                                                     (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)
Short Term                                           -0.008**        -0.003         -0.033***      -0.028***
                                                     (0.004)         (0.005)        (0.004)        (0.006)
Short Term x Capital Loss                             0.442***        0.471***       0.439***       0.464***
                                                     (0.017)         (0.020)        (0.017)        (0.020)
Short Term x Capital Gain                             0.031***        0.028***       0.071***       0.067***
                                                     (0.005)         (0.007)        (0.006)        (0.008)
Long Term x Capital Loss                              0.268***        0.296***       0.250***       0.277***
                                                     (0.016)         (0.020)        (0.017)        (0.021)
Long Term x Capital Gain                              0.005***        0.004***       0.010***       0.010***
                                                     (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.002)        (0.002)
Short Term x Capital Loss x Low DC                                    0.050*                        0.057*
                                                                     (0.031)                       (0.032)
Short Term x Capital Gain x Low DC                                    0.001                         0.002
                                                                     (0.010)                       (0.012)
Long Term x Capital Loss x Low DC                                     0.058*                        0.065**
                                                                     (0.030)                       (0.031)
Long Term x Capital Gain x Low DC                                     0.003                         0.004
                                                                     (0.002)                       (0.004)
Short Term x Capital Loss x High DC                                  -0.125***                     -0.116***
                                                                     (0.033)                       (0.034)
Short Term x Capital Gain x High DC                                   0.011                         0.014
                                                                     (0.010)                       (0.012)
Long Term x Capital Loss x High DC                                   -0.082***                     -0.082***
                                                                     (0.022)                       (0.023)
Long Term x Capital Gain x High DC                                    0.002                         0.000
                                                                     (0.002)                       (0.003)
Short Term x Low DC                                                  -0.017**                      -0.022**
                                                                     (0.008)                       (0.009)
Long Term x Low DC                                                   -0.013**                      -0.021***
                                                                     (0.005)                       (0.007)
Short Term x High DC                                                 -0.029***                     -0.038***
                                                                     (0.009)                       (0.010)
Long Term x High DC                                                  -0.021***                     -0.027***
                                                                     (0.007)                       (0.008)
Number of Observations                                  1,552,216      1,552,216       1,552,216     1,552,216
R-Squared                                             0.043           0.045          0.039          0.042




                                                                                                             46
                   Table IX: Performance of Mutual Funds by DC-Ratio
This table summarizes the performance of mutual funds by the proportion of assets held in defined
contribution retirement accounts in the prior year. The explanatory variables are taken at a monthly
frequency and are expressed in percent. The standard errors are clustered by time.


                                  Quartiles by Ratio of Assets Held in DC Retirement Accounts
                          Missing         Low            Q2            Q3          High      High-Low
Return                    0.749*       0.713         0.645           0.607       0.701      -0.012
                         (0.414)      (0.433)       (0.440)        (0.440)      (0.433)     (0.044)
CAPM Alpha               -0.068       -0.002        -0.082         -0.103       -0.034      -0.032
                         (0.074)      (0.090)       (0.077)        (0.083)      (0.084)     (0.041)
Fama-French Alpha        -0.147*** -0.131**         -0.164**       -0.168**     -0.150**    -0.019
                         (0.052)      (0.062)       (0.064)        (0.067)      (0.062)     (0.032)
Fama-French-Carhart      -0.168*** -0.172*** -0.213***             -0.195*** -0.166***       0.006
Alpha                    (0.053)      (0.064)       (0.065)        (0.067)      (0.063)     (0.031)
Ferson-Schadt Alpha      -0.114*      -0.074        -0.162**       -0.109       -0.087      -0.012
                         (0.065)      (0.078)       (0.078)        (0.078)      (0.081)     (0.039)
DGTW-Selectivity          0.020        0.036         0.035           0.004       0.011      -0.025
                         (0.043)      (0.054)       (0.052)        (0.059)      (0.051)     (0.027)
DGTW-Timing               0.061        0.073         0.082           0.101       0.057      -0.016
                         (0.057)      (0.077)       (0.090)        (0.089)      (0.074)     (0.013)
Return Gap                0.042***     0.042**       0.017           0.016       0.027**    -0.015
                         (0.013)      (0.017)       (0.019)        (0.017)      (0.013)     (0.017)
Expense Ratio             0.108        0.111         0.110           0.099       0.088      -0.022***
(Monthly)                                                                                   (0.000)
Number of Annual             39,268        10,620       10,569       10,595    10,499
Observations




                                                                                                  47
                            Table X: Performance of Mutual Funds
This table summarizes the determinants for the monthly performance of mutual funds. The explanatory
variables are all lagged. The regressions include time fixed effects and the standard errors are clustered by
time.

                               CAPM         Fama-French     Fama-French-        DGTW           Return Gap
                               Alpha           Alpha           Carhart         Selectivity      (in bp per
                             (in bp per      (in bp per         Alpha          (in bp per         month)
                               month)          month)         (in bp per         month)
                                                                month)
DC Ratio (in %)             -0.034           -0.076          -0.060            -0.064           0.019
                            (0.100)          (0.075)         (0.071)           (0.055)         (0.055)
Log of Total Assets         -7.656***        -0.510          -2.836**          -0.480          -2.968***
                            (1.661)          (1.217)         (1.170)           (1.001)         (0.697)
Log of Family Total          4.895***         2.279*          2.566**           0.172           2.614***
Assets                      (1.539)          (1.220)         (1.182)           (0.947)         (0.723)
Age                         -0.071           -0.082          -0.044            -0.099           0.035
                            (0.102)          (0.074)         (0.063)           (0.061)         (0.045)
Expenses                    -0.796           -1.074*         -1.852***         -0.667           0.592
(in bp per month)           (0.729)          (0.551)         (0.567)           (0.466)         (0.390)
Total Load                  -1.256           -1.037          -0.423             0.762          -0.997***
(in %)                      (0.839)          (0.688)         (0.671)           (0.588)         (0.375)
Turnover                    -0.016           -0.005          -0.071***         -0.018          -0.002
(in %)                      (0.024)          (0.018)         (0.023)           (0.018)         (0.011)
Number of Observations     39,364           39,364          39,364            38,539          38,407




                                                                                                         48
          Figure 1: Distribution of Proportion of Mutual Fund Assets held in
                               DC Retirement Accounts
These figures summarize the histogram for the proportion of mutual fund assets held in DC retirement
accounts.

Panel A: Histogram by Number of Funds

                                               0.09

                                               0.08

                                               0.07
              Proportion of Observations




                                               0.06

                                               0.05

                                               0.04

                                               0.03

                                               0.02

                                               0.01

                                                 0
                                                      0.00   0.10   0.20   0.30   0.40   0.50   0.60   0.70   0.80   0.90
                                                                             Proportion of DC Assets



Panel B: Histogram by Assets Under Management

                                               0.08

                                               0.07
              Proportion of Total Net Assets




                                               0.06

                                               0.05

                                               0.04

                                               0.03

                                               0.02

                                               0.01

                                                 0
                                                      0.00   0.10   0.20   0.30   0.40   0.50   0.60   0.70   0.80   0.90
                                                                             Proportion of DC Assets




                                                                                                                            49
Figure 2: Time-Series Variation of Dividend and Capital Gains Distributions
This figure summarizes the percentage of short- and long-term capital gains and dividend distributions
relative to the net asset values of mutual funds over the sample between 1997 and 2006.
                                    8

                                                            Long-Term
                                                           Capital Gains


                                    6
              Distribution Yields




                                    4

                                                   Short-Term
                                                  Capital Gains


                                    2




                                                     Dividends
                                    0
                                    1997   1998     1999       2000        2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006




                                                                                                                     50
      Figure 3: Time-Series Variation of Dividend and Capital Gains Tax Rates
This figure summarizes the average marginal short- and long-term capital gains and dividend tax rates over
the sample between 1997 and 2006.
                                  0.5

                                 0.45

                                  0.4                     Short-Term
                                                         Capital Gains
                                 0.35
             Marginal Tax Rate




                                  0.3                     Dividends


                                 0.25
                                                          Long-Term
                                  0.2                    Capital Gains


                                 0.15

                                  0.1

                                 0.05

                                   0
                                   1997   1998   1999   2000    2001     2002   2003   2004   2005   2006




                                                                                                            51
  Figure 4: Cumulative Distribution Functions of Capital Gains Distributions and
                                   Tax Burden
This figure summarizes the cumulative distribution functions for capital gains distributions and for the tax
burden for funds with DC ratios in the top and bottom quartiles (High DC and Low DC) over the sample
period from 1997-2006.

Panel A: Total Capital Gains
                                        1


                                       0.9

                                                                Low DC
                                       0.8

                                                                                   High DC
                                       0.7
             Cumulative Distribution




                                       0.6


                                       0.5


                                       0.4


                                       0.3


                                       0.2


                                       0.1


                                        0
                                             0   0.02    0.04            0.06       0.08          0.1         0.12     0.14    0.16    0.18    0.2
                                                                                   Total Capital Gains Distributions




Panel B: Tax Burden
                                        1


                                       0.9


                                       0.8
                                                                Low DC

                                       0.7                                      High DC
             Cumulative Distribution




                                       0.6


                                       0.5


                                       0.4


                                       0.3


                                       0.2


                                       0.1


                                        0
                                             0   0.005   0.01        0.015          0.02        0.025         0.03     0.035   0.04   0.045   0.05
                                                                                             Tax Burden




                                                                                                                                                     52
