                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            RECENT TRENDS IN TOP INCOME SHARES IN THE USA:
    RECONCILING ESTIMATES FROM MARCH CPS AND IRS TAX RETURN DATA

                                        Richard V. Burkhauser
                                           Shuaizhang Feng
                                          Stephen P. Jenkins
                                            Jeff Larrimore

                                        Working Paper 15320
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15320


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2009

The research in this paper was conducted while Burkhauser and Larrimore were Special Sworn Status
researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau at the New York Census Research Data Center at Cornell University.
Conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the U.S.
Census Bureau. This paper has been screened to ensure that no confidential data are disclosed. Supports
for this research from the National Science Foundation (award nos. SES-0427889, SES-0322902, and
SES-0339191) and the National Institute for Disability and Rehabilitation Research (H133B040013
and H133B031111) are cordially acknowledged. Jenkins’s research was supported by core funding
from the University of Essex and the UK Economic and Social Research Council for the Research
Centre on Micro-Social Change and the United Kingdom Longitudinal Studies Centre. We thank Ian
Schmutte, the Cornell Census RDC Administrators, and all their U.S. Census Bureau colleagues who
have helped with this project. We also thank Melissa Kearney, Andrew Leigh, Robert Moffitt, Thomas
Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez for their helpful comments and suggestions on earlier drafts of this paper.
 The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Richard V. Burkhauser, Shuaizhang Feng, Stephen P. Jenkins, and Jeff Larrimore. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Recent Trends in Top Income Shares in the USA: Reconciling Estimates from March CPS
and IRS Tax Return Data
Richard V. Burkhauser, Shuaizhang Feng, Stephen P. Jenkins, and Jeff Larrimore
NBER Working Paper No. 15320
September 2009
JEL No. C81,D31

                                             ABSTRACT

Although the vast majority of US research on trends in the inequality of family income is based on
public-use March Current Population Survey (CPS) data, a new wave of research based on Internal
Revenue Service (IRS) tax return data reports substantially higher levels of inequality and faster growing
trends. We show that these apparently inconsistent estimates can largely be reconciled once one uses
internal CPS data (which better captures the top of the income distribution than public-use CPS data)
and defines the income distribution in the same way. Using internal CPS data for 1967–2006, we closely
match the IRS data-based estimates of top income shares reported by Piketty and Saez (2003), with
the exception of the share of the top 1 percent of the distribution during 1993–2000. Our results imply
that, if inequality has increased substantially since 1993, the increase is confined to income changes
for those in the top 1 percent of the distribution.


Richard V. Burkhauser                                  Stephen P. Jenkins
Cornell University                                     University of Essex
Department of Policy Analysis & Management             Institute for Social and Economic Research
125 MVR Hall                                           Colchester, ENGLAND CO4 3SQ
Ithaca, NY 14853-4401                                  stephenj@essex.ac.uk
and NBER
rvb1@cornell.edu                                       Jeff Larrimore
                                                       Cornell University
Shuaizhang Feng                                        Department of Economics
Princeton University                                   404 Uris Hall
Woodrow Wilson School and                              Ithaca NY, 14853
 the Program in Science Technology                     jhl42@cornell.edu
 and Environmental Policy
Princeton, NJ 08544
shuaizhang.feng@gmail.com
Introduction

         The March Current Population Survey (CPS) public-use files have been the primary data

source used to study income inequality trends in the USA.1 The consensus finding of research

based on these data is that household income inequality increased substantially in the 1970s and

1980s, and continued to increase but at a much slower pace starting in the 1990s (Gottschalk and

Danziger 2005, Daly and Valetta 2006, and Burkhauser, Feng and Jenkins 2009).

         The most notable alternative source for studying income inequality trends derives from

tax return data. In their seminal paper, Piketty and Saez (2003) use data from Internal Revenue

Service (IRS) Statistics of Income tax returns to analyze income inequality trends in the USA.

Their paper was one of the first in a rapidly expanding literature that has used tax return data to

examine income inequality trends around the world. See Piketty (2003) for France, Atkinson

(2005) for the UK, Saez and Vaell (2005) for Canada, Bach, Corneo and Steiner (2009) for

Germany, Dell (2005) for Germany and Switzerland, and Atkinson and Leigh (2007) for

Australia. Atkinson and Piketty (2007) and Leigh (2009) provide comprehensive reviews of this

literature.

         One of Piketty and Saez’s major contributions derives from being able to observe income

inequality trends over a much longer period than previous researchers: tax return data are

available for years well before any survey data on income was collected. However, their findings

have also sparked debate about inequality trends over relatively short periods, and recent years in

particular. For a flavor of the debate on this topic, see the blog postings by leading economists

and others on the Economists View website (2007). Reynolds (2007) provides an illustration of


1
  See Atkinson, Rainwater, and Smeeding (1995), Atkinson and Brandolini (2001) and Gottschalk and Smeeding
(1997) for reviews of the income distribution literature. For more recent examples of the use of the public-use CPS
in measuring inequality trends in the USA, see Gottschalk and Danziger (2005) and Burkhauser, Feng and Jenkins
(2009).


                                                                                                                      1
how the work by Piketty and Saez has altered the popular view of recent trends in income

inequality and a critique of their results.

        In contrast to research based on CPS data that finds income inequality slowing in the

1990s, Piketty and Saez (2003, 2008) find that the share of total income held by the very richest

groups grew during the 1990s and, with the exception of the period from 2000–2002, continued

to rise rapidly through the beginning of the 21st century as well. What explains the differences in

inequality trends found by researchers using these two types of data?

        One explanation is that there are deficiencies in one or both of these data sets that limit

researchers’ abilities to observe the true trends in inequality. Critics of those using the public-use

CPS to measure income inequality argue that topcoding and underreporting of top incomes

restricts the survey’s ability to observe income changes for those at the top of the distribution.

See inter alia Levy and Murnane (1992), Slemrod (1996), Burkhauser, Couch, Houtenville and

Rovba (2003-2004), Piketty and Saez (2006b), and Burkhauser, Feng, and Jenkins (2009). Thus,

to the extent that income inequality changes are due to changes in the topcoded portion of the

CPS, researchers using this data may mismeasure trends in income inequality.

        Using IRS data to measure income inequality also has potential limitations, however.

Critics point out that tax filers have a financial incentive to report their income in ways that limit

their tax liabilities and, as a result, filing behavior is sensitive to changes in the personal income

tax rate. There are several fiscal manipulation strategies that are sensitive to changes in marginal

tax rates and income reporting rules. These include reclassifying income as either wage earnings

or business profits depending on which is taxed less (Sivadasan and Slemrod 2006), receiving

untaxed fringe benefits in lieu of wage compensation (Woodbury and Hammermesh 1992), or

deferring compensation through stock options or deferred compensation packages (Scholes and




                                                                                                         2
Wolfson 1992, Goolsbee 2000). Since high income earners are the individuals most able to

adjust the way that they receive and report income, tax return data may especially not be able to

capture income at the top of the distribution accurately. For example, Slemrod (1995) and

Reynolds (2006) suggest that tax-law changes since the 1970s have provided incentives for the

very rich to switch their reported income from Subchapter-C corporation profits, which are not

reported on personal income tax forms, to S-corporation profits and personal wage income,

which are reported. They suggest that this, in turn, has led researchers using tax return data to

overstate the actual rise in income among the very rich. See Feenberg and Poterba (1993) for an

earlier discussion of this problem and a summary of the difficulties measuring top incomes with

tax records data.

       Piketty and Saez (2003) acknowledge that this type of fiscal manipulation may impact

measures of top income shares, but argue that such effects are only problematic for short-term

trends rather than the long run trends in income inequality which are their primary concern.

However, for researchers interested in the relatively short-term trends in income inequality of

recent years, time-shifting of income may still pose a problem depending on the time-frame of

the deferred compensation plan. Additionally, while time-shifting of income may only impact

income inequality in the short-term, income that is received in ways other than through labor

earnings – such as through higher non-taxable fringe benefits or the reporting of what had been

wage earnings in previous years as business profits – will never be reported on personal income

tax forms and thus could have implications on long-term income inequality trends. Thus, to the

extent that changes in reporting rules alter the way income is reported at the top of the

distribution, researchers using IRS tax return data may mismeasure actual changes in income

inequality.




                                                                                                    3
       Yet another potential explanation for the differences in estimated inequality trends is that

they result from differences in the definition of income and how its distribution is summarized

rather than differences in the data sources themselves. Although all the researchers using public-

use CPS data and IRS tax data examine “inequality” in the broad sense, there are substantial

differences in their definitions of “income” (the sources included – most especially the inclusion

of government transfers and non-taxable income in the former and its exclusion in the latter –

and whether there is adjustment for differences in “needs”), the income recipient unit (tax units

versus households and individuals within them), and how best to measure inequality (in terms of

top income shares versus a more comprehensive measure such as the Gini coefficient).

       To some extent, these differences in practice have evolved because of the nature of the

data examined. For example, researchers who use public-use CPS data, which has a high

prevalence of topcoded values at the top of the income distribution, often measure inequality

using the ratio of the 90th percentile to the 10th percentile (“p90/p10”) to mitigate problems

arising from topcoding. (See, Burkhauser, Feng, and Jenkins 2009 for a discussion of the

limitations of this measure.) Researchers using tax return data focus on top income shares since

many low income individuals do not file a tax return and so it is not possible to directly derive

measures of income inequality that take account of the income shares of poorer groups (Piketty

and Saez 2006a).

       To date, no researchers have attempted to bridge the gap between the CPS- and IRS-

based literatures to determine the extent to which the differences in inequality estimates

emanating from these two literatures arise from differences in the ability of these two data

sources to capture top incomes or from the application of different income constructs based on

these data sources. In this paper, we do just that.




                                                                                                    4
       Using internal CPS data, we examine the trends in income inequality since 1967 using

the inequality measures and income distribution definitions developed by Piketty and Saez

(2003) and others using tax return data. Doing so, we are able to closely match their results. Our

estimates of top income shares are nearly identical for groups in the richest tenth with the

exception of the richest 1 percent, and our estimates of trends differ only slightly. Even for

estimates of the share held by the top 1 percent, the two data sources are broadly in agreement

about trends over much of the past 40 years. It is only during a six year period in the late 1990s

that the trends diverge for reasons that are not easily explained by changes in the nature of the

two data sources.

       In the next section we describe the internal CPS data that we use and our methods for

overcoming topcoding problems. We then compare the definitions of “income” and income-

receiving unit used by Piketty and Saez with those used by researchers using CPS data. Using

internal CPS data we derive two series of estimates of top income shares, each one

corresponding to the two research traditions. We go on to show that the CPS-based series of

estimates based on Piketty and Saez-type definitions corresponds closely with Piketty and Saez’s

(2003) IRS-based series of estimates, though with some exceptions that we discuss. We also

consider the reasons for the divergences between the series.



Data

       Our analysis derives from access to internal CPS data which are identical to the data used

by Census Bureau researchers in their official work (see e.g. U.S. Census Bureau, various years).

These data measure top incomes much better than the data released in public-use CPS files. To

protect the confidentiality of its respondents, the Census Bureau censors (“top codes”) each of




                                                                                                     5
the income sources received by individuals. This practice must be addressed in order to derive

sensible estimates of top income shares using CPS data. The advantage of internal data over

public-use data is that the prevalence of topcoding is very much lower.2 For example, in 2004,

0.5 percent of individuals lived in a household in which some source of income was topcoded in

the internal data compared to 4.6 percent in the public-use data.

         Even the small extent of censoring in the internal CPS data produces biased estimates of

top income shares. To address this issue, we use a multiple imputation approach in which values

for censored observations in the internal data are multiply imputed using draws from a

parametric model of the income distribution fitted to the internal data.

         Our multiple imputation approach is the same as that used by Burkhauser et al. (2008)

and described in detail by Jenkins et al. (2009). The approach involves five steps. First, for each

year’s data, we fit a Generalized Beta of the Second Kind (GB2) distribution by maximum

likelihood, accounting for individual-level right-censoring.3 To ensure that model fit is

maximized at the top of the distribution, the GB2 is fitted using observations in the richest 70

percent of the distribution only (with appropriate corrections for left truncation in the ML

procedure). Second, for each observation with a censored income, we draw a value from the

income distribution that is implied by the fitted GB2 distribution, using an appropriate stochastic

procedure. Third, using the distribution comprising imputations for censored observations and


2
  For many measures of income inequality such as the Gini coefficient and General Entropy inequality measures
researchers can closely replicate the results from the internal CPS data by using cell-means of topcoded incomes that
are provided back to 1975 in Larrimore, et al. (2008). However, by design cell-means assume that all topcoded
individuals have the same income. As a result, using cell-means to approximate top income shares with the public-
use CPS data will lead to an overestimation of the income held by the 90th to 99th percentile groups and an
underestimation of the income held by the top 1 percent of the distribution.
3
  The GB2 model is widely used in the income distribution literature, and shown to fit income distributions
extremely well across different periods and countries: see e.g. Bordley, McDonald and Mantrala (1996), Brachmann,
Stich and Trede (1996), Bandourian, McDonald, and Turley (2003), and Jenkins (2009). Since the GB2 is a four-
parameter distribution, its shape is more much flexible than that of the commonly-used Pareto distribution, and
hence fits the data better.


                                                                                                                   6
observed incomes for non-censored observations, we estimate our various inequality indices.

Fourth, we repeat steps 2 and 3 one hundred times, and finally, we derive inequality estimates by

combining the one hundred sets of estimates from each of the one hundred data sets for each year

using the ‘averaging’ rules proposed by Rubin (1987) and modified by Reiter (2003) to account

for imputation variability.

         Internal CPS data augmented with multiply imputed values for censored incomes provide

the best available estimates of the income distribution using the CPS. These distributions are the

source for all the CPS-based estimates of top income shares reported below that we compare

with the top income share estimates of Piketty and Saez (2003).4 We have also undertaken all our

calculations of top income shares using CPS internal data used “as is”, without imputations for

censored values. All the conclusions we draw later regarding income shares for income groups

outside of the top 1 percent are unchanged. For the top 1 percent, using the unaltered internal

data rather than multiply imputed internal data reduces estimates of income shares, but

conclusions about trends are similar. See Appendix A for further details.



Methods: Three Definitions of the Income Distribution

         There are three substantial methodological differences between research based on the

CPS and research based on the IRS tax return data. The first is the inequality measures used.

Most CPS research uses either inequality indices such as the Gini or Theil coefficients that use

data on all incomes, or indices like p90/p10 that ignore incomes at the very top of the income

distribution. In contrast, tax data researchers focus on the top of the income distribution, defining

4
 Imputation of censored incomes has been used previously in inequality research based on public-use March CPS
data: see e.g. Fichtenbaum and Shahidi (1988) and Bishop, Chiou, and Formby (1994) who apply single imputation
methods using fitted Pareto distributions. Imputation is also nearly universally used in the inequality literature based
on tax return data since income is only reported in income bands that do not necessarily coincide with percentile cut-
points. See e.g. Piketty and Saez (2003), Piketty (2003), Dell (2005), or Saez and Vaell (2005).


                                                                                                                      7
inequality in terms of top income shares – the share of total income held by the richest 10

percent, the richest 5 percent, or the richest 1 percent, and so on – with larger income shares

indicating greater inequality.

         The other two differences in method concern the definition of the income distribution,

specifically: what is counted as “income” and what is the income-receiving unit. CPS-based

researchers have typically defined income as pre-tax post-transfer income excluding capital gains:

see e.g. Gottschalk and Danziger (2005) and Burkhauser et al. (2008).5 This income is

aggregated to the household level, and deflated using an equivalence scale to account for

differences in economies of scale and “needs” (the square root of household size is a commonly-

used scale). Attributing the same size-adjusted household income to each individual within the

same household, researchers examine the distribution of income among individuals.

         Piketty and Saez (2003) and other researchers using tax data use different definitions.

Piketty and Saez define income to include any income reported on IRS tax returns before

deductions and excluding capital gains. This encompasses “salaries and wages, small business

and farm income, partnerships and fiduciary income, dividends, interest, rents, royalties, and

other small income reported as income” (Piketty and Saez 2003, pp. 5–6). The most notable

difference between this income definition and the CPS one is that it excludes most transfer

income, which is generally not taxable and not included in the adjusted gross income reported on

tax returns. Hence it is close to the individual’s market income, which is also known as pre-tax

pre-transfer income in the broader income inequality literature.6 See Scholz and Levine (2002),


5
  In international comparisons of income inequality, it is most common to include the effect of both government
transfer programs and tax policies by measuring post-tax, post-transfer income. See Atkinson and Brandolini (2001)
and Gottschalk and Smeeding (1997) for reviews of this literature.
6
  In the wage inequality literature researchers tend to primarily be interested in how different types of workers – e.g.
low vs. high skilled, women vs. men, etc. – are rewarded in the labor market. Hence in this literature it is common to
measure pre-tax wage rates or labor earnings. Pre-tax pre-transfer market income is an extension of this concept to
all factors of production. Traditionally, researchers interested in income inequality have focused on how it relates to


                                                                                                                      8
Corneo and Fong (2008), and Bach, Corneo, and Steiner (2009) for examples of this type of

measure.

         Piketty and Saez (2003) aggregate income to the level of the tax unit rather than to the

level of the household, do not adjust for differences in tax unit size, and they examine the

distribution among tax units rather than among individuals. An important issue in this literature

is that not all individuals in the USA file a tax return, with non-filers generally having lower

incomes. Therefore, estimates of the income share of the top 10 percent of tax filers understate

the number of tax filers relative to the situation in which non-tax filers are included in the base.

That is, when the number of “potential tax filing units” (filers plus non-filers) is the base, a

higher share of actual tax filers and hence a larger share of reported pre-tax pre-transfer income

must be included in order to correctly measure overall income inequality. To address this issue,

Piketty and Saez (2003) estimate the total number of potential tax units and calculate the number

of returns that make up the top income groups using this number. They define a potential tax unit

as a married couple of any age, divorced or widowed individual of any age, or single individual

over the age of 20. See the Data Appendix of Piketty and Saez (2007) for further details.

         Definitions of income and the unit of analysis are important because variations in each

can be expected to lead to different estimates of the degree of inequality. For example, we expect

the inclusion of transfer income in income (as is done by CPS researchers) to reduce inequality

because transfer income is targeted at poorer families. Additionally, low income individuals who


one’s ability to consume and hence include government transfers in the US literature and both taxes and transfers in
the international comparative literature. Thus in those literatures pre-tax pre-transfer income is rarely used by itself
but rather to distinguish between incomes generated in the absence of government and a fuller measure of income
which includes government taxes and transfers. In the CPS-based literature this has generally meant including cash-
transfers for inequality calculations – thus using a pre-tax, post-transfer income definition. Some researchers,
including the National Research Council Panel on Poverty and Family Assistance, have advocated moving even
farther from the pre-tax, pre-transfer market income definition when analyzing poverty by including taxes and non-
cash transfers in US income inequality calculations. For a further discussion of the effect of such proposals on
poverty rates and income inequality, see Burtless and Smeeding (2002).


                                                                                                                      9
need to share costs and lower living expenses are more likely to live in larger households with

individuals outside of their tax unit. Therefore, aggregating income to the household level rather

than the tax unit, and adjusting for economies of scale using an equivalence scale, is expected to

yield an inequality estimate that is lower than for the distribution of pre-tax pre-transfer income

among tax units.

         The two CPS series that we use are defined as follows. First, our “traditional” CPS series,

labeled “CPS-Post-HH”, refers to the estimates based on the distribution of size-adjusted pre-tax

post-cash transfer household income among individuals. Size adjustment uses the square root of

household size.

         The second CPS-based series, “CPS-Pre-TU”, uses Piketty-Saez-type definitions of the

income distribution. That is, we consider distributions of non-size-adjusted pre-tax pre-transfer

tax unit income among tax units. Since tax unit identifiers are not provided in the CPS, we

follow Piketty and Saez’s procedures to determine potential tax units. All single individuals over

the age of 20, married couples, and divorced or widowed individuals are considered to head a tax

unit. Never-married children under the age of 20 are considered dependents and are assigned to

the tax unit of their parent or guardian.7 Our measure of pre-tax pre-transfer income includes

income from wages and salaries, self-employment, farm income, interest, dividends, rents, trusts,

and retirement pension income – which closely matches the taxable income sources included in

the IRS tax return data analyzed by Piketty and Saez. In both cases, capital gains are excluded.

Although a small number of taxable transfers are excluded by this definition, the broad income



7
  In the small number of cases where never-married individuals under age 20 live in a household without a parent or
guardian, we assigned them to the tax-unit of the primary family in the household or the oldest adult in the
household when there is no primary family. Only if there are no adults over the age of 20 in the household are they
considered their own tax-unit. Different procedures for classifying these individuals were tested, including removing
them from the sample, and assigning them their own tax units. These procedures produced substantively similar
results.


                                                                                                                  10
categories used by the CPS prior to 1987 make it difficult to separate these taxable transfers from

non-taxable transfers consistently across the entire period. Since the vast majority of transfer

income is non-taxable, our best approximation to Piketty and Saez’s income definition

necessarily excludes this income source.

       Comparisons between the CPS-Post-HH and CPS-Pre-TU series are informative about

how much of the difference in top share estimates can be attributed to differences in definitions,

whereas comparisons between the CPS-Pre-TU series and the “Piketty-Saez” estimates reported

by Piketty and Saez (2003, 2008) are informative about how much of the difference in estimates

can be attributed to differences in the underlying data source.

       In order to contrast the three series at several points in the income distribution, we

examine income shares for three groups within the top 10% of the distribution each year. We

consider the fortunes of those with incomes between the 90th and 95th percentiles of the

distribution (the “p90–p95 group”), those with incomes between the 95th and 99th percentiles of

the distribution (the “p95–p99 group”), and those in top 1 percent.



Top Income Shares: IRS- and CPS-based Series Compared

       In Figures 1 through 3 we provide our estimates of top income shares for three series

defined earlier. The income shares for the p90–p95 group are presented in Figure 1, the shares

for the p95–p99 group are presented in Figure 2, and the shares for the top 1 percent are

presented in Figure 3.

       For all three groups, the estimates of income shares according to the CPS-Post-HH series

are smaller than the corresponding ones from the Piketty-Saez series. This is unsurprising given

the two very different income definitions used. Because a much greater share of non-taxable




                                                                                                   11
government in-cash transfers – AFDC/TANF, Social Security benefits, etc. – are held by the

poorest 90 percent of the pre-tax post-transfer (CPS-Post-HH definition) distribution, we would

expect the income share of the top 10 percent of the pre-tax post-transfer income distribution to

be smaller than the income share for the top 10 percent of the Piketty-Saez gross income

distribution in all years. This is the case.

        But, once we control for differences in definitions, the differences in estimates of income

share held by these high income groups based on CPS and IRS data are much smaller in both

level and trend. This can be seen by comparing corresponding estimates in the CPS-Pre-TU and

Piketty-Saez series. For the p90–p95 group (Figure 1), the CPS-Pre-TU series and Piketty-Saez

share estimates are almost identical in the beginning of the period. The increase in the CPS-Pre-

TU series p90–p95 group’s income share over the 40 year period is somewhat greater than the

Piketty-Saez estimates: a rise from 10.9 percent to 12.5 percent, compared to a rise from 11.0

percent to 11.9 percent. But, even with the slight trend differences, the income shares in each

year are always close to each other. For the p95–p99 group (Figure 2), levels and trends using

the CPS-Pre-TU and Piketty-Saez series are even closer, although the CPS-Pre-TU series again

shows a slightly greater upward trend than the IRS data.

        In addition to comparing the income share of the p90–p95 and p95–p99 groups, we also

considered the sources from which individuals in these groups received their income. However,

the GB2-based multiple imputation procedure must be performed on total household income and

thus cannot distinguish source-level incomes for this analysis. While this prevents us from

comparing income sources for the top 1 percent of the distribution, since most individuals in the

p90–p95 and p95–p99 groups are not censored we can use the unadjusted internal data to

compare the sources of income for members of these groups. As discussed in Appendix B, for




                                                                                                  12
the p90–p95 and p95–p99 income groups, the sources of income for members of these groups are

also quite similar between the CPS Pre-TU series and the Piketty-Saez Series. For example, in

any given year between 85.1 to 89.3 percent of income received by members of the p90–p95

group comes from wages in the CPS Pre-TU data. This compared to a range of 86.9 to 91.6

percent of income received from wages in this group when using the IRS tax records data.

Among the p95–p99 income group, the income shares are equally as similar, with the 74.8 to

85.7 percent of income coming from wages in the CPS data and 73.3 to 84.4 percent of income

coming from wages in the IRS tax records data.

       Thus far, we have restricted our attention to groups with incomes lying between the 90th

and the 99th percentiles. What about the top 1 percent? It is only within this group that we see

larger differences in results across the datasets. Figure 3 shows that the CPS-Post-HH series

leads to a smaller share estimate than the other two series. This is similar to our findings for the

p90–p95 and p95–p99 income groups and is expected given the different income definitions.

However, in contrast to the earlier findings for the other two income groups, while controlling

for differences in definitions reduces this gap, a more sizable unexplained gap remains. It is

worth emphasizing, however, that while the remaining difference is greater than for the other two

income groups analyzed, the differences in absolute terms between the CPS Pre-TU series and

the IRS series are relatively small, at least in earlier years. Before 1986 the income share for the

top 1 percent is between 1 and 2 percentage points greater for the Piketty-Saez estimates relative

to the CPS-Pre-TU series, although this difference expands in later years.

       Arguably, inequality trends over time are more important to researchers than inequality

levels. In both the CPS Pre-TU series and the Piketty-Saez series we find slower growth in the

share of income held by the p90–p95 and p95–p99 groups starting in the early 1990s than was




                                                                                                   13
the case in the 1980s. Thus, both the CPS and IRS data sources seem to yield the result that

whatever inequality growth occurred in the 1990s was largely confined to increases in the share

of income held by the top 1 percent of the income distribution.

       So what precisely has been happening to the top 1 percent’s share? Prior to 1986, the

trends in the income share for this group are remarkably similar according to all three series.

Table 1 shows the average annual percent increases in the top 1 percent’s income share for seven

subperiods. The two pre-1986 periods are the relatively low inequality growth period of the

1970s and the higher inequality growth period from 1980–1986. Each of the three series shows

similarly small inequality growth in the 1970s, with the Piketty-Saez series and the CPS Post-HH

series each showing a very slight decrease in the top 1 percent income shares and the CPS Pre-

TU series showing a very slight increase. The 1980–1986 period is even more similar, as the

Piketty-Saez series shows almost identical average growth in the share held by the top 1 percent

as found using the two CPS series. It is only after 1986 that more substantial differences between

the series begin to appear. The first of these differences occurs from 1986–1988, when the

Piketty-Saez series shows a dramatic 22.1 percent annual increase in the share of income going

to the top one percent. The increase according to the CPS-Pre-TU series is a more moderate 2.0

percent.

       This divergence between series subsides in the period immediately after 1988. Compared

to the CPS-Post-HH series, the Piketty-Saez series shows moderately higher growth in the

income share of the top 1 percent – growth of 0.6 percent per year compared to no growth in the

CPS-Post-HH series from 1988 to 1992. Much of this difference, however, is simply due to the

different income distribution definitions. When the CPS-Pre-TU series is used instead, the

difference in the top 1 percent’s income share between this series and the Piketty-Saez one is a




                                                                                                   14
much smaller 0.2 percent per year. Thus, for the entire period between 1967 and 1992 with the

exception of 1986–1988, the trends in the income share of the top 1 percent are similar according

to both data sources – if similar income definitions are used.

       From 1992–1993, the trends diverge again across series. In this year, both CPS series

increase by over 40 percent while the IRS series falls by 4.9 percent. But it is only from 1993–

2000 that the IRS series shows a sustained increase in the share of income held by the top 1

percent relative to CPS-Pre-TU series. Over this period, the Piketty-Saez series estimates that the

top one percent’s share was rising at an accelerated pace. The 4.1 percent annual increase is more

than twice the rate of increase in the early 1980s. By contrast, the CPS-Pre-TU series yields an

annual increase of only 1.5 percent in the income share of the top 1 percent – which is a slower

rate of increase than seen in the 1980s.

       After the divergence for the 1990s, trends across series converged again from 2000–2006

if similar income distribution definitions are used. During this period, all three series show

similar increases of between 1.3 and 1.5 percent average annual increases in the income share for

the top 1 percent.

       So, for most of the past 40 years, the trends in top income shares are similar – once

similar income definitions are used. There are no major differences in the trends implied by the

difference sources for the income shares of those with incomes between the 90th and 99th

percentiles. It is only during the periods 1986–1988, 1992–1993, and 1993–2000, that the two

sources show markedly different trends and only for the top 1 percent of the population.




                                                                                                   15
Explaining the differences in trends in the share of the top 1 percent

       What explains the divergences between series in estimates of the share of the top 1

percent for the periods 1986–1988, 1992–1993, and 1993–2000. We believe that the results for

the first two periods arise from well-known limitations of the IRS tax return data and of the CPS,

respectively.

       For 1986–1988, we believe that the increased share of the top 1 percent shown by the

Piketty-Saez series primarily reflects a change in tax policy rather than any genuine change in

the incomes controlled by the richest 1 percent. The Tax Reform Act of 1986 provided

substantial incentives for the very richest tax units to switch reported income from Subchapter-C

corporations to Subchapter-S income and wage income. The tax law changes likely created a

behavioral effect in how income is reported, which led to the very large observed increase in top

income shares in IRS personal tax return data over the course of these two years. See Slemrod

(1996) and Reynolds (2006) for a fuller discussion of this type of issue in the Piketty and Saez

(2003) data, and see Feenberg and Poterba (1993) for a more general discussion of the problems

of measuring income inequality using tax return data. Of course, Piketty and Saez (2003)

recognize the potential impact of such “fiscal manipulation” (2003, p.3), but they do not address

the issue in detail because of their focus on long-run trends in top income shares.

       The divergence in series for 1992–1993 reflects fundamental changes in the design of the

CPS, rather than a real change in income inequality. Over these years, the Census Bureau

implemented a major redesign of the survey instrument, including a change to computerized

rather than paper-based data collection methods. (See Ryscavage 1995 and Jones and Weinberg

2000 for details.) These changes improved the ability of the CPS to record all incomes but

especially top incomes. We believe that this explains the increase of more than 40 per cent in the




                                                                                                   16
top 1 percent’s share according to the two CPS-based series (Table 1). Notice the much more

modest change in the Piketty-Saez series over these years.

       What explains the divergences for 1993–2000? It may be the case, as Reynolds (2006)

suggests, that changes in tax rules, requiring executive stock options to be reported as taxable

income, led to the estimated rise in income share of the top 1 percent according to the Piketty-

Saez series. According to this hypothesis, this group’s income share has always been higher than

observed (implying a greater difference between the Piketty-Saez and CPS-Pre-TU series). And

importantly, trends according to the two series are more similar on the grounds that the more

rapid increase in the Piketty-Saez series in the 1990s was an artifact of the changes in tax

accounting rules.

       Another possible explanation, also suggested by Reynolds (2006), is that a greater

increase in the use of tax-deferred savings accounts (401k plans, Keogh plans and IRA tax

shelters) by individual in top income groups outside the top 1 percent may explain part of the rise

in the income share of the top 1 percent in the Piketty-Saez series for the late 1990s. This

hypothesis would be consistent with our results for the p90–p95 and p95–p99 groups, for which

the CPS-based series showed very slightly higher increases in income shares than the Piketty-

Saez series.

       Either of these explanations for the diverging trends is plausible. So too may be the view

that the CPS did an increasingly poorer job of capturing top incomes in the late 1990s. But, if

this is the explanation, the timing of the differences is curious. After the CPS redesign in 1993, it

was better able to capture top incomes, as evidenced by the artificial jump in inequality in both

of our CPS series between 1992 and 1993. Moreover, the prevalence of censoring during this

period – after the internal data’s topcodes were increased – was lower than it was in the mid-




                                                                                                    17
1980s or in the early 21st century.8 So the CPS design changes should have increased the

survey’s ability to accurately observe top incomes during this period.

         Additional work is necessary to determine what precisely happened to the very highest

income shares over this period and thereby provide a comprehensive reconciliation of the

differences between the CPS-based and IRS tax return-based series.



Income inequality trends using Gini coefficients

         Thus far we have explored the ability of CPS data to capture trends in the share of pre-tax

pre-transfer income going to top tax units in the IRS tax record data as measured by Piketty and

Saez. In this section we explore the sensitivity of inequality levels and trends to one’s choice of

inequality index as well as sources of income and income receiving unit. Since a top income

share is the only inequality measure that can be readily derived from IRS tax record data we

focus this part of the analysis on the CPS data.9 Figure 4 compares Gini coefficients based on the

CPS Post-HH income series to those from the CPS Pre-TU income series. If the choice of

income definition and income sharing unit did not matter, we would expect to find similar levels

and trends in Gini coefficients using each of these two series. Instead we find that using pre-

transfer, tax-unit data rather than post-transfer household income yields substantially higher

observed levels of income inequality. Using post-transfer household income, estimates of the

Gini coefficient range from a low of 0.35 in 1968 to a high of 0.46 in 2006. Switching to pre-




8
  See Larrimore et al. (2008) for detailed information about the prevalence of censoring in the internal CPS data year
by year.
9
  Leigh (2007) uses unit record data to compare top income shares with other inequality estimates, but using panel
data regressions applied to cross-national comparative data. Ours is the first study to investigate this issue using a
long run of comparable microdata from the same country.


                                                                                                                   18
transfer tax-unit income increases observed inequality 30 to 40 percent over these levels, with a

minimum Gini coefficient of 0.47 in 1968 and a maximum of 0.59 in 2006.10

         This dramatic difference in income inequality levels occurs for two reasons. First,

defining the sharing unit as the tax unit causes adult children living with their parents or other

individuals who have little or no independent income but are supported by other household

members to be counted independently. As a result, the fraction of the population who appear to

have no income is much higher when considering tax-units than when considering households

resulting in increases in measured income inequality.

         Second, transfer income is predominantly received by individuals in the lower tail of the

income distribution. Ignoring transfer income therefore reduces the income of individuals at the

bottom of the distribution resulting in increases in measured income inequality. Of course, these

factors also affect calculations of income inequality when using the top income shares measure

as well. However, the difference in observed inequality between the household and tax-unit

income series is much larger when using the Gini coefficient than was seen for the top income

shares. This is because the Gini coefficient incorporates information about inequality differences

throughout the income distribution, and the top income share measures do not. Since transfers

are most relevant for individuals lower in the income distribution, they have a larger impact on

comprehensive inequality measures such as the Gini coefficient. The substantial differences in

levels of observed inequality from what appears to be a relatively innocuous change in income

and income receiving definitions, however, illustrates the importance of careful attention to

detail when comparing income inequality calculations. But, as can also be seen in Figure 4, these

10
  In addition to the difference in sharing unit and the inclusion of transfer income, the series also differ in that the
post-transfer household income (CPS Post-HH) is size-adjusted and evaluated at the individual level the pre-transfer
tax-unit income (CPS Pre-TU) is not. Not size-adjusting household income would slightly reduce the level
difference between the Gini coefficients in the two series, but most of the difference remains. The size-adjustment
does not affect estimates of the trends in inequality.


                                                                                                                     19
choices appear to be less critical with respect to trends. As will be seen below, this is not the case

with respect to the choice of income inequality index.



Comparing income inequality trends using Gini coefficients and top income shares

       Finally, we also consider how the choice of income inequality index affects measured

household income inequality. Using the two CPS-based series, we compare the observed growth

in income inequality using the Gini coefficient to the trend in the income share of the top 1

percent and the top 10 percent of the population. By using the same sample to compare results

for these three inequality measures, we can determine the extent to which the choice of

inequality measures influences the observed trends in income inequality.

       Table 2 shows the average annual percent increases using these three income inequality

measures for seven subperiods since 1967 and for the entire 40 year period. This is done using

the CPS Post-HH series and the CPS Pre-TU series – our two series for which all three inequality

metrics can be calculated. Using either income series, the two top income share series exhibit

faster inequality growth than the Gini series when considering the entire 40 year period.

However, much of this difference comes from the substantial, artificial jump in top income

shares between 1992 and 1993.

       When considering the subperiods, the pattern is mixed with the top 1 percent’s income

share exhibiting higher growth than the Gini coefficient in some periods (1980–1988, 1993–2000,

and 2000-2006) and slower growth in others (1967-1980 and 1988–1992). During the period of

greatest disagreement between the two literatures – the late 1990s where the IRS-based literature

has observed much larger increases in income inequality – this difference is quite large. Using

the CPS Post-HH series, the growth in inequality as measured by the top 1 percent’s income




                                                                                                   20
share grew an average of 1.6 percent per year. This compares to an average annual growth of just

0.2 percent per year in the Gini coefficient. The difference is similarly large when using the CPS

Pre-TU series, with the top 1 percent’s income share growing an average of 1.5 percent per year

and the Gini showing no growth over the period. (The growth in the top 10 percent’s income

share is much closer to that of the Gini.)

       These results can partially explain why researchers examining top income shares using

IRS tax records have found continued inequality growth through the 1990s while researchers

examining Gini coefficients using CPS data have not. We previously observed some differences

in inequality trends between the two datasets during this period even using the same inequality

measure. However, Table 2 shows that differences in the inequality trends observed in these two

literatures also stem from differences in the inequality index used. For researchers interested in

inequality across the entire distribution, which the Gini coefficient is superior for measuring,

inequality growth in the 1990s was dramatically slower than that in the 1980s. But for

researchers interested in comparing the income differentials between the very top income holders

and the rest of society, then the slowdown in inequality growth in the 1990s was far less

substantial.



Summary and Conclusions

       We analyze trends in top income shares in the USA over four decades (1967–2006), with

the goal of reconciling estimates derived from the CPS with those reported by Piketty and Saez

(2003) and derived from IRS tax return data. Our CPS-based estimates draw on the internal data

used by the Census Bureau to produce their official income statistics, which is a much better




                                                                                                     21
source for examining income distribution trends than CPS public-use data because the

prevalence of topcoding is substantially smaller.

       When applying a Piketty-Saez-type definition of the income distribution to CPS data, we

derive estimates of top income shares that are remarkably similar in terms of both levels and

trends to those reported by Piketty and Saez (2003, 2008) for both the p90–p95 and p95–p99

groups. The shares grew in the 1980s and then slowed starting in the early 1990s. For the top 1

percent, our CPS-Pre-TU series provides a slightly lower share estimates than the Piketty-Saez

series does but, with the exception of the period 1993–2000, the trends in the series are

remarkably similar. Thus, we conclude that the differences in inequality trends observed by

researchers using these two data sources are not primarily due to deficiencies in either data

source but rather to the traditions of income inequality measurement used in the two literatures.

       To explore this possibility further we also measure income inequality using Gini

coefficient in the March CPS data, and compare results using the Piketty and Saez–style source

of income and income receiving unit definitions (CPS Pre-TU) and those using standard source

of income and income receiving unit definitions (CPS Post-HH). Using Piketty-Saez pre-tax pre-

transfer, tax-units substantially increases observed levels of income inequality but does not

greatly impact trends (Figure 4). In contrast, when using identical data, source of income, and

income receiving units but different inequality measures, we found that the growth in the income

share of the top 1 percent of the population substantially outpaced measured inequality using the

Gini coefficient (Table 2).

       Thus, we conclude that at least part of the differing views in the two literatures about

recent trends in income inequality can be attributed to differences in the literatures’ measures of

income inequality. Specifically, while the income divergence between the very top income




                                                                                                  22
holders and the rest of society was growing in the 1990s, the growth in income inequality across

the entire distribution occurred at a more moderate pace.

     When we use the same measure of income inequality – the income share of the top 1

percent – and similar income definitions – pre-transfer, tax-unit income – with the CPS data we

are for the most part able to very closely capture the same levels and trends Piketty and Saez find

using the IRS tax record data. The only unexplained divergence in the observed income

inequality between the two datasets occurs over the period 1993–2000. It is possible that in this

period of rapid economic growth, the CPS was unable to capture the rise in pre-tax pre-transfer

income of the very richest people. It is also possible that behavioral effects caused by changes in

the tax laws made it more likely for an increase in the sheltering of income by those at the top of

the distribution but outside the top 1 percent, which then exaggerated the change in incomes

recorded by IRS tax return data. Hence the difficulty of disentangling real changes in the share of

income controlled by the very richest income tax units from changes in the way they report their

income as the source of these yearly changes in inequality. But despite this limitation, users of

both CPS and of IRS tax return data should be comforted by our finding that, for most groups at

the top and for most of the past four decades, the differences in estimates from the two data

sources are relatively minor.




                                                                                                    23
Acknowledgements:

The research in this paper was conducted while Burkhauser and Larrimore were Special Sworn

Status researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau at the New York Census Research Data Center at

Cornell University. Conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect

the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. This paper has been screened to ensure that no confidential

data are disclosed. Supports for this research from the National Science Foundation (award nos.

SES-0427889, SES-0322902, and SES-0339191) and the National Institute for Disability and

Rehabilitation Research (H133B040013 and H133B031111) are cordially acknowledged.

Jenkins’s research was supported by core funding from the University of Essex and the UK

Economic and Social Research Council for the Research Centre on Micro-Social Change and the

United Kingdom Longitudinal Studies Centre. We thank Ian Schmutte, the Cornell Census RDC

Administrators, and all their U.S. Census Bureau colleagues who have helped with this project.

We also thank Melissa Kearney, Andrew Leigh, Robert Moffitt, Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel

Saez for their helpful comments and suggestions on earlier drafts of this paper.




                                                                                               24
References

Atkinson, Anthony B. 2005. “Top Incomes in the UK Over the Twentieth Century.” Journal of
    the Royal Statistical Society, Series A 168: 325–343.

Atkinson, Anthony B. and Andrea Brandolini. 2001. “Promises and Pitfalls in the Use of
    Secondary Data Sets: Income Inequality in OECD Countries as a Case Study.” Journal of
    Economic Literature, 39 (3): 771–799.

Atkinson, Anthony B. and Andrew Leigh. 2007. “The Distribution of Top Incomes in Australia”,
    Economic Record, 83(262): 247–61.

Atkinson, Anthony B. and Piketty, Thomas 2007. Top Incomes over the Twentieth Century: A
    Contrast Between Continental European and English Speaking Countries, Oxford: Oxford
    University Press.

Atkinson, Anthony B., Lee Rainwater, and Timothy Smeeding. 1995. Income Distribution in
    OECD Countries. Evidence from the Luxembourg Income Study. Social Policy Studies No.
    18. Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.

Bach, Stefan, Giacomo Corneo, and Viktor Steiner. 2009. “From Bottom to Top: The Entire
    Income Distribution in Germany, 1992-2003.” Review of Income and Wealth, 55(2): 303-
    330.

Bandourian, Ripsy, James B. McDonald, and Robert S. Turley. 2003. “A Comparison of
   Parametric Models of Income Distribution Across Countries and Over Time.” Estadistica,
   55: 135–152.

Bishop, John A., Jong-Rong Chiou, and John P. Formby. 1994. “Truncation Bias and the Ordinal
       Evaluation of Income Inequality.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 12: 123–
       127.

Bordley, Robert F., James B. McDonald, and Anand Mantrala. 1996. “Something New,
    Something Old: Parametric Models for the Size Distribution of Income.” Journal of Income
    Distribution, 6: 91–103.

Brachmann, Klaus, Andreas Stich, and Mark Trede. 1996. “Evaluating Parametric Income
    Distribution Models.” Allgemeines Statistisches Archiv, 80: 285–298.

Burkhauser, Richard V., Kenneth A. Couch, Andrew J. Houtenville, and Ludmila Rovba. 2003-
      2004. “Income Inequality in the 1990s: Re-Forging a Lost Relationship?” Journal of
      Income Distribution, 12 (3–4): 8–35.

Burkhauser, Richard V., Shuaizhang Feng, Stephen Jenkins, and Jeff Larrimore. 2008.
      “Estimating Trends in US Income Inequality Using the Current Population Survey: The




                                                                                            25
       Importance of Controlling for Censoring,” NBER Working Paper number w14247,
       Cambridge MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Burkhauser, Richard V., Shuaizhang Feng, and Stephen P. Jenkins. 2009. “Using the P90/P10
      Ratio to Measure US Inequality Trends with Current Population Survey Data: A View
      from Inside the Census Bureau Vaults.” Review of Income and Wealth, 55(1): 166–185.

Burtless, Gary and Timothy M. Smeeding. 2002. “The Level, Trends, and Composition of
       Poverty.” in Understanding Poverty, ed. Sheldon Danziger and Robert H. Haveman,
       Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 27–68.

Corneo, Giacomo and Christina M. Fong. 2008. “What’s the Monetary Value of Distributive
      Justice?” Journal of Public Economics, 92(1-2): 289–308.

Daly, Mary C. and Robert G. Valletta. 2006. “Inequality and Poverty in the United States: The
       Effects of Rising Dispersion of Men’s Earnings and Changing Family Behavior.”
       Economica, 73, 75-98.

Dell, Fabien. 2005. “Top Incomes in Germany and Switzerland Over the Twentieth Century,”
       Journal of the European Economic Association, 3(2–3): 412–421.

Economists View website. 2007. “Increasing Inequality is Not a Statistical Illusion.”
      http://economistsview.typepad.com/economistsview/2007/01/increasing_ineq.html
      Last accessed August 28, 2009.

Feenberg, Daniel and James M. Poterba. 1993. “Income Inequality and the Incomes of Very
      High-Income Taxpayers: Evidence from Tax Returns,” in Tax Policy and the Economy,
      ed. James M. Poterba, Cambridge, MA: NBER/MIT Press, 145–177.

Fichtenbaum, Rudy and Hushang Shahidi. 1988. “Truncation Bias and the Measurement of
    Income Inequality.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 6: 335–337.

Goolsbee, Austan. 2000. “What Happens When You Tax the Rich? Evidence from Executive
      Compensation.” Journal of Political Economy, 108 (2): 352–378.

Gottschalk, Peter and Timothy M. Smeeding. 1997. “Cross-National Comparisons of Earnings
       and Income Inequality.” Journal of Economic Literature, 35 (2): 633–687.

Gottschalk, Peter and Sheldon Danziger. 2005. “Inequality of Wage Rates, Earnings and Family
       Income in the United States, 1975–2002.” Review of Income and Wealth, 51 (2): 231–
       254.

Jenkins, Stephen P. 2009. “Distributionally-Sensitive Inequality Indices and the GB2 Income
       Distribution.” Review of Income and Wealth, 55 (2): 392–398.




                                                                                                26
Jenkins, Stephen P., Richard V. Burkhauser, Shuaizhang Feng, and Jeff Larrimore. 2009.
       “Measuring Inequality with Censored Data: A Multiple Imputation Approach.” US
       Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies Working Paper CES-WP-09-05.
       http://www.ces.census.gov/index.php/ces/discussion_papers?detail_key=101854

Jones, Arthur F., Jr., and Weinberg, Daniel H. 2000. The Changing Shape of the Nation’s Income
       Distribution. U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Reports, P60-204. Washington,
       DC: GPO

Larrimore, Jeff, Richard V. Burkhauser, Shuaizhang Feng and Laura Zayatz. 2008. “Consistent
      Cell Means for Topcoded Incomes in the Public Use March CPS (1976–2007).” Journal
      of Economic and Social Measurement, 33(2–3): 89–128.

Leigh, Andrew. 2007. “How Closely do Top Income Shares Track Other Measures of
       Inequality?” Economic Journal, 117(524): F619–F633.

Leigh, Andrew. 2009. “Top Incomes” in The Oxford Handbook of Economic Inequality, eds.
       Wiemer Salverda, Brian Nolan, and Timothy M. Smeeding. New York: Oxford
       University Press, 150-176.

Levy, Frank and Murnane, Richard J. 1992. “U.S. Earnings Levels and Earnings Inequality: A
       Review of Recent Trends and Proposed Explanations.” Journal of Economic Literature,
       30(3): 1333–1381.

Piketty, Thomas. 2003. “Income Inequality in France, 1901–1998,” Journal of Political
        Economy, 111(5): 1004–1042.

Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913–
        1998.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (1): 1–39.

Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez, 2006a. “The Evolution of Top Incomes: A Historical and
        International Perspective,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 96(2):
        200–205.

Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez. 2006b. “Response by Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez
        to: The top 1% … of What? By Alan Reynolds,” Available online at:
        http://www.econ.berkeley.edu/~saez/answer-WSJreynolds.pdf

Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez, 2007. “Income and Wage Inequality in the United States,
        1913-2002” in Top Incomes over the 20th Century: A Contrast Between Continental
        European and English Speaking Countries, eds. Anthony B. Atkinson and Thomas
        Piketty, Cambridge, MA: NBER/MIT Press, 141–225.

Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez. 2008. “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-1998
        (Tables and Figures Updated to 2006),” available online at:
        http://www.econ.berkeley.edu/~saez/TabFig2006.xls



                                                                                           27
Reiter, Jerome P. 2003. “Inference for Partially Synthetic, Public Use Microdata Sets,” Survey
        Methodology, 29: 181–188.

Reynolds, Alan. 2006. Income and Wealth. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.

Reynolds, Alan. 2007. “Has U.S. Income Inequality Really Increased?” Policy Analysis, 586: 1–
      24.

Rubin, Donald B. 1987. Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys. New York: Wiley.

Ryscavage Paul 1995. “A Surge in Growing Income Inequality?” Monthly Labor Review, 188 (8):
      51–61.

Saez, Emmanuel and Michael R. Veall. 2005. “The Evolution of High Incomes in Northern
       America: Lessons from Canadian Evidence,” American Economic Review, 95(3): 831–49.

Scholes, Myron and Mark A. Wolfson. 1992. Taxes and Business Strategy: A Planning
       Approach. Englewood Cliffs: NJ: Prentice Hall.

Scholz, John K. and Kara Levine. 2002. “The Evolution of Income Support Policy in Recent
       Decades” in Understanding Poverty, ed. Sheldon Danziger and Robert H. Haveman,
       Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 193–228.

Sivadasan, Jagadeesh and Michael Slemrod. Forthcoming. “Tax Law Changes, Income Shifting,
       and Measured Wage Inequality: Evidence from India,” Journal of Public Economics.

Slemrod, Joel. 1995. “Income Creation or Income Shifting? Behavioral Responses to the Tax
      Reform Act of 1986,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 85(2): 175–
      180.

Slemrod, Joel. 1996. “High-income Families and the Tax Changes of the 1980s: The Anatomy of
      Behavioral Response,” in Empirical Foundations of Household Taxation, eds. Martin
      Feldstein and James M. Poterba. Chicago: University of Chicago Press (for NBER).

U.S. Census Bureau. Various years. Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in the
       United States: various years. Current Population Reports, P-60 series, Washington DC:
       GPO.

Woodbury, Stephen A. and Daniel S. Hamermesh. 1992. “Taxes, Fringe Benefits, and Faculty,”
     Review of Economics and Statistics, 74(2): 287–296.




                                                                                                 28
Figure 1: Estimates from CPS and IRS tax return data of the share of total income held by
units with incomes between the 90th and 95th percentiles, 1967–2006

         16.0


         15.0


         14.0


         13.0
Percentage




         12.0


         11.0


         10.0


             9.0


             8.0
               1967   1970   1973     1976     1979   1982   1985    1988    1991   1994    1997    2000     2003     2006

                         Piketty-Saez 90-95th share          CPS post-HH 90-95th           CPS pre-TU 90-95th share



Sources. The Piketty-Saez series is taken from Piketty and Saez (2003, 2008). It refers to the
distribution of pre-tax pre-transfer income among tax units. The CPS-based series were derived
by the authors from CPS internal data. The CPS-Pre-TU series was derived using the Piketty-
Saez definition; the CPS-Post-HH series refers to the distribution of size-adjusted pre-tax post-
transfer household income among individuals. See main text for further details.




                                                                                                                        29
Figure 2: Estimates from CPS and IRS tax return data of the share of total income held by
units with incomes between the 95th and 99th percentiles, 1967–2006

         16.0


         15.0


         14.0


         13.0
Percentage




         12.0


         11.0


         10.0


             9.0


             8.0
               1967   1970   1973     1976     1979   1982      1985    1988    1991     1994   1997    2000    2003       2006

                        Piketty-Saez 95-99th share           CPS post-HH 95-99th share          CPS pre-TU 95-99th share



Sources: see note to Figure 1.




                                                                                                                             30
Figure 3: Estimates from CPS and IRS tax return data of the share of total income held by
the top 1 percent, 1967–2006


             18.0


             16.0


             14.0
Percentage




             12.0


             10.0


              8.0


              6.0


              4.0
                1967   1970    1973      1976    1979   1982    1985    1988    1991    1994   1997   2000    2003   2006
                          Piketty-Sa ez top 1% share           CPS post-HH top 1% share          CPS pre-TU 1% share



Sources: see note to Figure 1.




                                                                                                                       31
Figure 4: Estimates from CPS data of income inequality measured by the Gini coefficient,
1967–2006

                   0.60




                   0.55
Gini Coefficient




                   0.50




                   0.45




                   0.40




                   0.35
                      1967   1970   1973   1976   1979   1982   1985   1988   1991    1994   1997   2000   2003   2006

                                              CPS Post-HH                            CPS Pre-TU

Sources: see note to Figure 1.




                                                                                                                         32
Table 1: Average annual percentage change in income share of the top 1 percent, by
subperiod between 1967 and 2006


Subperiod                            March CPS                         IRS tax return data
               Size-adjusted pre-tax post-  Pre-tax pre-transfer tax   Pre-tax pre-transfer
               transfer household income          unit income            tax unit income
                   among individuals            among tax units         among tax units
                   (“CPU-Post-HH”)             (“CPU-Pre-TU”)           (“Piketty-Saez”)
 1967–1980                 –0.5                           0.4                 –0.2
 1980–1986                  1.7                           1.9                   1.9
 1986–1988                  3.2                           2.0                 22.1
 1988–1992                  0.0                           0.8                   0.6
 1992–1993                 45.0                          42.5                 –4.9
 1993–2000                  1.6                           1.5                   4.1
 2000–2006                  1.3                           1.4                   1.5
Note: sources for calculations as described in the note to Figure 1.




                                                                                              33
Table 2: Average annual percentage change in income inequality using three inequality
measures, by subperiod between 1967 and 2006

                           CPS Post-HH                       CPS Pre-TU
                            Share of Share of                 Share of Share of
                    Gini    Top 1% Top 10%            Gini    Top 1% Top 10%
1967–1980           0.1      –0.5      –0.2            0.4       0.2     0.5
1980–1986           1.2       1.7       1.1            0.7       1.9     1.1
1986–1988           0.6       3.2       0.9           –0.1       2.0     0.5
1988–1992           0.4       0.0       0.5            0.9       0.8     1.0
1992–1993           6.6      45.0       9.6            4.6     42.5      9.2
1993–2000           0.2       1.6       0.7            0.0       1.5     0.4
2000–2006           0.6       1.3       0.5            0.5       1.4     0.7

1967–2006            0.6         2.3    0.7            0.6       2.8       1.0

Sources: see note to Figure 1.




                                                                                        34
Appendix A. Findings based on unadjusted internal CPS data

       To account for censoring (albeit limited) in the internal CPS data, we used a multiple

imputation (MI) approach, as described in the main text. Imputation of some kind is necessary

when one wishes to calculate income inequality for the entire income distribution including

topcoded observations, and have been commonly-used in both the CPS-based inequality

literature and the IRS-based inequality literature.

       To investigate the potential sensitivity of our findings to the use of imputation methods,

we have also undertaken all our calculations of top income shares using unadjusted internal CPS

data used “as is”, without imputations for censored values. Appendix Figures A1 through A3

provide the top income shares using the pre-tax, pre-transfer tax-unit income definition using

both the unadjusted internal CPS data series and our series derived using the MI procedure.

       For the p90–p95 income group and the p95–p99 income group, the levels and trends in

income shares derived from the unadjusted CPS data closely match those from the MI series, and

both are close to the levels and trends seen by Piketty and Saez (2003) using IRS tax records.

This is not unexpected as less than 1 percent of individuals lived in a household in which some

source of income was censored in the internal data so the censoring primarily impacts those in

the very top income group.

       For the top 1 percent income share, using the unadjusted CPS data results in a lower level

of measured income inequality and a slightly lower income inequality growth than when using

the MI series. The general patterns of the inequality increases are similar, however, with the top

1 percent income share increasing at a pace similar to that seen by Piketty and Saez in the 1980s

(although the unadjusted internal data observes the increase later in the 1980s than the other two

series). As with the MI series, the rate of increase in the top 1 percent income share then slows in




                                                                                                  35
the 1990s compared to that seen by Piketty and Saez before showing similar patterns again in the

early 21st century.

       Thus, even for researchers using the unadjusted internal data without our GB2-based

multiple imputations for the small number of internally censored observations, our main findings

hold. Controlling for differences in income definitions and inequality measurements, the results

using CPS and IRS data are extremely consistent for almost all of the past 30 years with the

exception of the mid- to late-1990s.




                                                                                               36
Appendix Figure A1: Estimates from CPS data with and without the GB2 imputation
procedure for censored observations of total income held by units with incomes between
the 90th and 95th percentiles, 1967–2006
         16.0


         15.0


         14.0


         13.0
Percentage




         12.0


         11.0


         10.0


             9.0


             8.0
               1967   1970   1973   1976   1979     1982     1985     1988    1991     1994     1997       2000   2003   2006
                                      Piketty-Saez 90-95th share
                                      CPS pre-TU 90-95th share (using unadjusted internal data)
                                      CPS pre-TU 90-95th share (using internal data with GB2 imputation)


Sources. The Piketty-Saez series is taken from Piketty and Saez (2003, 2008). It refers to the
distribution of pre-tax pre-transfer income among tax units. The CPS-based series were derived
by the authors from CPS internal data. The CPS-Pre-TU series with the GB2 imputation matches
the CPS-Pre-TU series from the main text, using our GB2 imputation to derive censored incomes
in the internal data. The CPS-Pre-TU series using unadjusted internal data uses the unadjusted
internal data “as is”. See Appendix A and the main text for further details.




                                                                                                                           37
Appendix Figure A2: Estimates from CPS data with and without the GB2 imputation
procedure for censored observations of total income held by units with incomes between
the 95th and 99th percentiles, 1967–2006

         16.0


         15.0


         14.0


         13.0
Percentage




         12.0


         11.0


         10.0


             9.0


             8.0
               1967   1970   1973   1976    1979    1982     1985     1988    1991     1994     1997       2000   2003   2006
                                      Piketty-Saez 95-99th share
                                      CPS pre-TU 95-99th share (using unadjusted internal data)
                                      CPS pre-TU 95-99th share (using internal data with GB2 imputation)


Sources: see note to Appendix Figure A1.




                                                                                                                           38
Appendix Figure A3: Estimates from CPS data with and without the GB2 imputation
procedure for censored observations of total income held by units with incomes in the top 1
percentile, 1967–2006


         18.0


         16.0


         14.0
Percentage




         12.0


         10.0


             8.0


             6.0


             4.0
               1967   1970   1973   1976       1979     1982     1985   1988      1991     1994    1997      2000   2003   2006
                                           Piketty-Saez top 1% share
                                           CPS pre-TU 1% share (using unadjusted interna l data)
                                           CPS pre-TU 1% share (using interna l data with GB2 imputa tion)


Sources: see note to Appendix Figure A1.




                                                                                                                             39
Appendix B. Sources of income: unadjusted internal CPS data versus Piketty-Saez data

       Having established that in general the share of income in March CPS data going to the

top 10 percent of the distribution closely matches that found in IRS tax record data by Piketty

and Saez (2007), we also seek to understand how the sources of income compare for these

individuals. When doing so, it is necessary to use the unadjusted internal data rather than the data

based on our GB2-based multiple imputation (MI) procedure. This is because the MI procedure

used to overcome the censoring problem must be performed on total income, rather than on each

individual income source. As such, it is not possible to distinguish information about income

sources in the imputed data.

       Of course, by using the unadjusted internal CPS data rather than the MI data, we are

unable to observe the actual incomes, or the sources of those incomes, for censored individuals.

Therefore, since many individuals in the top 1 percent of the income distribution are censored we

are only able to provide meaningful income source information for the p90–p95 and p95–p99

income groups where censoring is less restrictive.

       As illustrated in Appendix Table B1, the sources of income are quite similar for the p90–

p95 income groups in the CPS and IRS data. The percent of income among members of this

group received from wages ranges from 85.1 to 89.3 percent of income when using the CPS Pre-

TU data, compared to a range of 86.9 to 91.6 percent of income when using the IRS tax records

data. While there are some year-to-year fluctuations in the income received from wages, the level

is remarkably stable in both the IRS and CPS data over the 40 year period.

       Among the p95–p99 income group, the income shares are also as similar, with the share

of income received from wages ranging from 74.8 to 85.7 percent of income in the CPS data and

from 73.3 to 84.4 percent of income in the IRS tax records data (Appendix Table B2). There are




                                                                                                  40
only 2 years where the difference in the share of income received from wages is greater than 4

percent in the two datasets. Additionally, both datasets show increases in the portion of wages

from income of approximately 7.5 percent over the 40 year period while the income from

entrepreneurial activities declined. The only substantial difference between the series is that the

IRS tax records data indicate that the portion of income from assets declined since 1967, whereas

the CPS data suggest that asset income increased in importance to these high-income individuals.

In general, however, not only do the IRS and CPS data closely match the share of income

received by top earners in the income distribution, but they also provide similar results for the

sources of that income.




                                                                                                    41
Appendix Table B1: Income composition by source for tax-units with incomes between the
90th and 95th percentiles of the income distribution, 1967–2006

       Year          CPS Pre-TU (Unadjusted)                               Piketty-Saez
                 Wage    Entrepreneurial   Asset                Wage     Entrepreneurial   Asset
       1967      86.3         10.3         3.3                  88.2          7.3            4.6
       1968      87.3         9.5          3.2                  88.6          7.0            4.3
       1969      88.8         7.7          3.4                  88.6          6.8            4.6
       1970      89.3         7.5          3.2                  89.2          6.0            4.7
       1971      88.1         8.8          3.2                  90.1          5.6            4.3
       1972      87.9         8.9          3.2                  89.6          5.9            4.6
       1973      87.3         9.1          3.6                  88.8          6.4            4.9
       1974      86.9         9.2          3.9                  86.9          6.6            6.5
       1975      87.5         8.6          3.9                  88.7          5.6            5.7
       1976      87.9         7.7          4.3                  88.4          5.8            5.8
       1977      88.2         7.7          4.1                  88.7          5.4            5.9
       1978      88.7         7.0          4.3                  88.4          5.8            5.7
       1979      87.8         7.6          4.6                  89.1          5.2            5.7
       1980      89.1         6.0          5.0                  88.6          4.5            6.9
       1981      87.3         6.6          6.1                  88.1          3.7            8.2
       1982      87.2         6.0          6.8                  89.2          2.5            8.3
       1983      85.1         7.5          7.3                  89.5          3.4            7.1
       1984      86.2         6.1          7.7                  89.9          3.2            6.8
       1985      86.9         5.8          7.4                  89.9          3.2            6.8
       1986      86.9         6.4          6.6                  90.1          3.8            6.0
       1987      86.5         8.0          5.4                  90.1          4.3            5.6
       1988      86.7         6.9          6.4                  89.4          4.9            5.8
       1989      85.7         7.8          6.5                  88.6          4.9            6.5
       1990      85.7         7.5          6.8                  88.7          4.7            6.6
       1991      86.3         7.8          5.9                  89.4          4.7            5.9
       1992      87.0         7.4          5.7                  90.9          4.3            4.8
       1993      88.2         6.3          5.6                  90.9          5.0            4.2
       1994      89.2         5.6          5.2                  91.1          5.0            3.9
       1995      88.4         5.6          6.0                  91.6          4.5            3.9
       1996      86.4         6.4          7.2                  90.8          4.7            4.6
       1997      85.7         6.2          8.2                  91.0          4.8            4.2
       1998      86.1         6.1          7.8                  91.1          4.9            4.0
       1999      85.4         6.4          8.2                  90.6          5.5            3.9
       2000      87.4         5.7          6.9                  89.7          5.6            4.7
       2001      87.8         5.8          6.5                  91.2          5.0            3.8
       2002      89.2         5.5          5.3                  89.9          6.2            4.0
       2003      88.5         5.4          6.0                  90.1          6.3            3.6
       2004      88.9         5.3          5.8                  89.4          6.8            3.8
       2005      88.5         5.0          6.5                  88.1          7.5            4.4
       2006      86.9         6.1          7.1                  88.2          6.8           5.1

Sources: The Piketty-Saez series is calculated from Piketty and Saez (2007, 2008). The CPS-Pre-TU
series using unadjusted internal data uses the unadjusted internal data “as is”. See Appendix A and the
main text for further details.
Entrepreneurial income includes self-employment and farm income. Asset income includes interest from
interest, dividends, and rents. For comparability with the source-decomposition results presented in
Piketty and Saez (2007), income from other sources are excluded and the sum of incomes from wages,
entrepreneurial activities, and asset income is scaled to sum to 100 percent. Other forms of income
represent less than 4 percent of income in all years.


                                                                                                     42
Appendix Table B2: Income composition by source for tax-units with incomes between the
95th and 99th percentiles of the income distribution, 1967–2006

          Year       CPS-Pre TU (Unadjusted)                 Piketty-Saez
                  Wage Entrepreneurial Asset         Wage   Entrepreneurial   Asset
          1967    74.8        18.8         6.4       73.3       17.4          9.3
          1968    76.8        16.8         6.3       73.7       17.2          9.1
          1969    77.9        15.3         6.8       75.3       16.1          8.6
          1970    78.9        14.7         6.4       77.1       14.1          8.7
          1971    79.1        14.6         6.3       77.6       13.4          9.0
          1972    77.8        16.1         6.1       76.4       14.6          9.0
          1973    75.9        17.3         6.8       74.2       16.0          9.8
          1974    78.1        15.3         6.6       74.3       15.5          10.3
          1975    78.9        14.7         6.4       77.4       13.3          9.3
          1976    79.4        13.7         6.9       77.9       12.7          9.4
          1977    79.0        13.9         7.0       78.1       12.4          9.5
          1978    77.8        15.4         6.8       78.0       12.6          9.4
          1979    78.3        13.1         8.6       78.4       11.5          10.1
          1980    80.6        11.2         8.2       79.7        8.5          11.9
          1981    79.2        11.0         9.8       80.6        6.1          13.2
          1982    79.5        10.6        10.0       81.2        5.4          13.5
          1983    78.9        10.8        10.3       83.4        5.7          10.9
          1984    78.9        10.3        10.8       81.8        6.3          11.9
          1985    81.2         8.7        10.1       82.9        6.6          10.5
          1986    81.1        9.9          9.0       83.3        7.3          9.4
          1987    80.1        10.5        9.4        81.8        8.9          9.3
          1988    80.5        10.6         8.9       80.3       10.4          9.3
          1989    78.1        11.3        10.6       79.3       10.3          10.3
          1990    78.9        10.3        10.8       80.5        9.8          9.7
          1991    79.1        11.0         9.9       80.8       10.2          9.0
          1992    82.3        8.7          9.0       82.6       10.5          6.9
          1993    80.8        10.3         9.0       83.2       10.7          6.1
          1994    81.5        9.4          9.1       82.9       10.8          6.3
          1995    82.8         7.2        10.0       82.9       10.8          6.3
          1996    81.9         7.8        10.3       82.4       11.1          6.5
          1997    78.1         8.7        13.2       82.0       11.0          7.1
          1998    78.7         8.2        13.1       82.2       11.4          6.5
          1999    76.8        10.5        12.7       82.2       11.3          6.5
          2000    81.5        8.9          9.7       82.3       11.0          6.7
          2001    83.5        7.5          9.0       83.2       10.9          5.9
          2002    85.7        7.6          6.7       84.1       10.6          5.3
          2003    84.1        7.8          8.2       84.4       10.6          5.0
          2004    83.5        7.7          8.8       83.2       11.5          5.3
          2005    83.5        7.3          9.3       81.5       12.6          5.9
          2006    82.3         7.4        10.3       80.9       12.2          6.9

Sources: See note to Appendix Table B1.




                                                                                      43
