NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE FINANCING OF R&D AND INNOVATION
Bronwyn H. Hall
Josh Lerner
Working Paper 15325
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15325

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2009

Forthcoming 2010 in Hall, B. H. and N. Rosenberg (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation,
Elsevier-North Holland. We are grateful to Bruce Petersen for a careful reading of the manuscript.
The second author thanks the Harvard Business School’s Division of Research for financial support.
This chapter is based on material in Hall (2002) and Gompers and Lerner (2004). The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Bronwyn H. Hall and Josh Lerner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Financing of R&D and Innovation
Bronwyn H. Hall and Josh Lerner
NBER Working Paper No. 15325
September 2009
JEL No. G24,G32,O32,O38
ABSTRACT
Evidence on the “funding gap“ for investment innovation is surveyed. The focus is on financial market
reasons for underinvestment that exist even when externality-induced underinvestment is absent. We
conclude that while small and new innovative firms experience high costs of capital that are only partly
mitigated by the presence of venture capital, the evidence for high costs of R&D capital for large firms
is mixed. Nevertheless, large established firms do appear to prefer internal funds for financing such
investments and they manage their cash flow to ensure this. Evidence shows that there are limits to
venture capital as a solution to the funding gap, especially in countries where public equity markets
for VC exit are not highly developed. We conclude by suggesting areas for further research.

Bronwyn H. Hall
Dept. of Economics
549 Evans Hall
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
bhhall@nber.org
Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 214
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jlerner@hbs.edu

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

1. INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................................... 3
2. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT AS INVESTMENT ................................................................... 5
3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND ......................................................................................................... 8
3.1 ASYMMETRIC INFORMATION PROBLEMS ................................................................................................ 9
3.2 MORAL HAZARD PROBLEMS ................................................................................................................ 10
3.3 CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND R&D .......................................................................................................... 12
3.4 TAXES AND THE SOURCE OF FUNDS ..................................................................................................... 14
4. TESTING FOR FINANCIAL CONSTRAINTS................................................................................... 16
5. SMALL FIRMS, STARTUP FINANCE, AND VENTURE CAPITAL ............................................. 24
5.1 VENTURE INVESTING ........................................................................................................................... 26
5.2 EXITING ............................................................................................................................................... 29
5.3 VENTURE FUND-RAISING ..................................................................................................................... 31
5.4 THE GLOBALIZATION OF VENTURE CAPITAL ........................................................................................ 33
5.5 THE REAL EFFECTS OF VENTURE CAPITAL ............................................................................................ 34
5.6 GOVERNMENT FUNDING FOR STARTUP FIRMS ...................................................................................... 37
6. CONCLUSIONS...................................................................................................................................... 39

2

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

The Financing of R&D and Innovation
Bronwyn H. Hall and Josh Lerner

1. Introduction
It is a widely held view that research and development (R&D) and innovative activities are
difficult to finance in a freely competitive market place. Support for this view in the form of
economic-theoretic modeling is not difficult to find and probably begins with the classic articles of
Nelson (1959) and Arrow (1962), although the idea itself was alluded to by Schumpeter (1942).1 The
main argument goes as follows: the primary output of resources devoted to invention is the
knowledge of how to make new goods and services, and this knowledge is nonrival: use by one firm
does not preclude its use by another. To the extent that knowledge cannot be kept secret, the
returns to the investment in knowledge cannot be appropriated by the firm undertaking the
investment, and therefore such firms will be reluctant to invest, leading to the underprovision of
R&D investment in the economy.
Since the time when this argument was fully articulated by Arrow, it has of course been
developed, tested, modified, and extended in many ways. For example, Levin et al (1987) and
Mansfield et al (1981), using survey evidence, found that imitating a new invention in a
manufacturing firm was not free, but could cost as much as fifty to seventy-five per cent of the cost
of the original invention. This fact will mitigate but not eliminate the underinvestment problem.
Empirical support for the basic point made by Arrow concerning the positive externalities created
by research is widespread, mostly in the form of studies that document a social return to R&D that
1

See, for example, footnote 1, Chapter VIII of Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy.

3

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

is higher than the private level (Griliches, 1992; Hall, 1996). Recently, a large number of authors led
by Romer (1986) have produced models of endogenous macro-economic growth that are built on
the increasing returns principle implied by Arrow’s argument that one person’s use of knowledge
does not diminish its utility to another (Aghion and Howitt, 1997).
This line of reasoning is already widely used by policymakers to justify such interventions as
the intellectual property system, government support of R&D, R&D tax incentives, and the
encouragement of research partnerships of various kinds. In general, these incentive programs can
be warranted even when the firm or individual undertaking the research is the same as the entity that
finances it. However, Arrow’s influential paper also contains another reason for underinvestment in
R&D, again one which was foreshadowed by Schumpeter and which has been addressed by
subsequent researchers in economics and finance: the argument that an additional gap exists
between the private rate of return and the cost of capital when the innovation investor and financier
are different entities.
This chapter concerns itself with this second aspect of the market failure for R&D and other
investments in innovation: even if problems associated with incomplete appropriability of the
returns to R&D are solved using intellectual property protection, subsidies, or tax incentives, it may
still be difficult or costly to finance such investments using capital from sources external to the firm
or entrepreneur. That is, there is often a wedge, sometimes large, between the rate of return required
by an entrepreneur investing his own funds and that required by external investors. By this
argument, unless an inventor is already wealthy, or firms already profitable, some innovations will
fail to be provided purely because the cost of external capital is too high, even when they would pass
the private returns hurdle if funds were available at a “normal“ interest rate.
In the following, we begin by describing some of the unique features of R&D investment.
Then we discuss the various theoretical arguments why external finance for R&D might be more
4

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

expensive that internal finance, going on to review the empirical evidence on the validity of this
hypothesis and the solutions that have been developed and adopted by the market and some
governments, in particular the venture capital solution. Although we focus our attention on R&D in
the first three sections of the paper, much of what we discuss will apply to innovation investment
more broadly defined. However, for reasons of data availibility and measurement the empirical
literature has largely focused on R&D spending, at least up until now. The chapter concludes with a
discussion of policy options.

2. Research and development as investment
From the perspective of investment theory, R&D has a number of characteristics that make
it different from ordinary investment. First and most importantly, in practice fifty per cent or more
of R&D spending is the wages and salaries of highly educated scientists and engineers. Their efforts
create an intangible asset, the firm’s knowledge base, from which profits in future years will be
generated. To the extent that this knowledge is “tacit“ rather than codified, it is embedded in the
human capital of the firm’s employees, and is therefore lost if they leave or are fired.
This fact has an important implication for the conduct of R&D investment. Because part of
the resource base of the firm itself disappears when such workers leave or are fired and because
projects often take a long time between conception and commercialization, firms tend to smooth
their R&D spending over time, in order to avoid having to lay off knowledge workers. This implies
that R&D spending at the firm level usually behaves as though it has high adjustment costs (Hall,
Griliches, and Hausman, 1986; Lach and Schankerman, 1988), with two consequences, one
substantive and one that affects empirical work in this area. First, the equilibrium required rate of
return to R&D may be quite high simply to cover the adjustment costs. Second, and related to the
first, is that it will be difficult to measure the impact of changes in the costs of capital, because such
5

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

effects can be weak in the short run due to the sluggish response of R&D to any changes in its cost.
J. Brown and Petersen (2009) offer direct evidence that U. S. firms relied heavily on cash reserves to
smooth R&D spending during the 1998-2002 boom and bust in stock market returns.
A second important feature of R&D investment is the degree of uncertainty associated with
its output. This uncertainty tends to be greatest at the beginning of a research program or project,
which implies that an optimal R&D strategy has an options-like character and should not really be
analyzed in a static framework. R&D projects with small probabilities of great success in the future
may be worth continuing even if they do not pass an expected rate of return test. The uncertainty
here can be extreme and not a simple matter of a well-specified distribution with a mean and
variance. There is evidence, such as that in Scherer (1998), that the distribution of profits from
innovation sometimes has a Paretian character where the variance does not exist. When this is the
case, standard risk-adjustment methods will not work well.
In spite of the problems suggested by the nature of uncertainty in this area, the starting point
for the analysis of R&D investment financing has been the “neo-classical“ marginal profit condition,
suitably modified to take the special features of R&D into account. Following the formulation in
Hall and Van Reenen (2000), we define the user cost of R&D investment ρ as the pre-tax real rate of
return on a marginal investment that is required to earn a return r after (corporate) tax. The firm
invests to the point where the marginal product of R&D capital equals ρ:
MPK = ρ =

1 − Ad − Ac
( r + δ − ΔpR / pR + MAC )
1 −τ

(1)

τ is the corporate tax rate, δ is the (economic) depreciation rate, the term in pR is the relative
appreciation or depreciation of R&D capital, and MAC is the marginal adjustment cost.
In this equation, Ad and Ac are the present discounted value of deprecation allowances and
tax credits respectively. In most financial accounting systems, including those used by major OECD

6

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

economies, R&D is expensed as it is incurred rather than capitalized and depreciated, which means
that the lifetime of the investment for accounting purposes is much shorter than the economic life
of the asset created and that Ad is simply equal to τ for tax-paying firms. Many countries have a form
of tax credit for R&D, either incremental or otherwise, and this will be reflected in a positive value
for Ac.2 Note that when Ac is zero, the corporate tax rate does not enter into the marginal R&D
decision, because of the full deductability of R&D.
The user cost formulation above directs attention to the following determinants of R&D
financing:
1. tax treatment such as tax credits, which are clearly amenable to intervention by policy
makers.
2. economic depreciation δ, which in the case of R&D is more properly termed obsolesence.
This quantity is sensitive to the realized rate of technical change in the industry, which is in
turn determined by such things as competition, market structure and the rate of imitation.
Thus it is inappropriate to treat δ as an invariant parameter in this setting.
3. the marginal costs of adjusting the level of the R&D program.
4. the investor’s required rate of return r.
The last item has been the subject of considerable theoretical and empirical interest, on the
part of both industrial organization and corporate finance economists. Two broad strands of
investigation can be observed: one focuses on the role of asymmetric information and moral hazard
in raising the required rate of return abve that normally used for conventional investment, and the
latter on the requirements of different sources of financing and their differing tax treatments for the
rate of return. The next section of the paper discusses these factors.

2 See Hall and Van Reenen (2000) for details. For example, during the past three decades the US has had an incremental
R&D tax credit with a value for Ac of about 0.13 at the time of writing.

7

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

3. Theoretical background
This section of the paper reviews the reasons that the impact of financial considerations on
the investment decision may vary with the type of investment and with the source of funds in more
detail. To do this, we distinguish between those factors that arise from various kinds of market
failures in this setting and the purely financial (or tax-oriented) considerations that affect the cost of
different sources of funds.
One of the implications of the well-known Modigliani-Miller theorem (1958, 1961) is that a
firm choosing the optimal levels of investment should be indifferent to its capital structure, and
should face the same price for investment and R&D investment on the margin. The last dollar spent
on each type of investment should yield the same expected rate of return (after adjustment for
nondiversifiable risk). A large literature, both theoretical and empirical, has questioned the bases for
this theorem, but it remains a useful starting point.
Reasons why the theorem might fail in practice are several: 1) uncertainty coupled with
incomplete markets may make a real options approach to the R&D investment decision more
appropriate; 2) the cost of capital may differ by source of funds for non-tax reasons; 3) the cost of
capital may differ by source of funds for tax reasons; and 4) the cost of capital may also differ across
types of investments (tangible and intangible) for both tax and other reasons.
With respect to R&D investment, economic theory advances a plethora of reasons why there
might be a gap between the external and internal costs of capital; these can be divided into three
main types:
1. Asymmetric information between inventor/entrepreneur and investor.
2. Moral hazard on the part of the inventor/entrepreneur arising from the separation of
ownership and management.

8

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

3. Tax considerations that drive a wedge between external finance and finance by retained
earnings.
We discuss each of these reasons in separate sections below.

3.1 Asymmetric information problems
In the innovation setting, the asymmetric information problem refers to the fact that an
inventor frequently has better information about the likelihood of success and the nature of the
contemplated innovation project than potential investors. Therefore, the marketplace for financing
the development of innovative ideas looks like the “lemons“ market modeled by Akerlof (1970).
The lemons' premium for R&D will be higher than that for ordinary investment because investors
have more difficulty distinguishing good projects from bad when the projects are long-term R&D
investments than when they are more short-term or low-risk projects (Leland and Pyle, 1977). When
the level of R&D expenditure is a highly observable signal, as it is under current U.S. and U.K. rules,
we might expect that the lemons' problem is somewhat mitigated, but certainly not eliminated.3
In the most extreme version of the lemons model, the market for R&D projects may
disappear entirely if the asymmetric information problem is too great. Informal evidence suggests
that some potential innovators believe this to be the case in fact. And as will be discussed below,
venture capital systems are viewed by some as a solution to this “missing markets“ problem.
Reducing information asymmetry via fuller disclosure is of limited effectiveness in this arena,
due to the ease of imitation of inventive ideas. Firms are reluctant to reveal their innovative ideas to
the marketplace and the fact that there could be a substantial cost to revealing information to their
competitors reduces the quality of the signal they can make about a potential project (Bhattacharya
Since 1974, publicly traded firms in the United States have been required to report their total R&D expenditures in
their annual reports and 10-K filings with the SEC, under FASB rule No. 2, issued October 1974. In 1989, a new
accounting standard, SSAP 13, obligated similar disclosures in the UK. Most continental European countries have not
had such a requirement in the past, but this is changing as hamonized international standards come into force. JAPAN
3

9

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

and Ritter, 1983; Anton and Yao, 1998). Thus the implication of asymmetric information coupled
with the costliness of mitigating the problem is that firms and inventors will face a higher cost of
external than internal capital for R&D due to the lemons’ premium.
Some empirical support for this proposition exists, mostly in the form of event studies that
measure the market response to announcements of new debt or share issues.4 Both Alam and
Walton (1995) and Zantout (1997) find higher abnormal returns to firm shares following new debt
issues when the firm is more R&D-intensive. The argument is that the acquisition of new sources of
financing is good news when the firm has an asymmetric information problem because of its R&D
strategy. Similary, Szewcxyk, Tsetsekos, and Zantout (1996) find that investment opportunities (as
proxied by Tobin’s q) explain R&D-associated abnormal returns, and that these returns are higher
when the firm is highly leveraged, implying a higher required rate of return for debt finance in
equilibrium.

3.2 Moral hazard problems
Moral hazard in R&D investing arises in the usual way: modern industrial firms normally
have separation of ownership and management. This leads to a principal-agent problem when the
goals of the two conflict, which can result in investment strategies that are not share value
maximizing. Two possible scenarios may co-exist: one is the usual tendency of managers to spend
on activities that benefit them (growing the firm beyond efficient scale, nicer offices, etc.) and the
second is a reluctance of risk averse managers to invest in uncertain R&D projects. Agency costs of
the first type may be avoided by reducing the amount of free cash flow available to the managers by
leveraging the firm, but this in turn forces them to use the higher cost external funds to finance

See Campbell, Lo, and McKinlay (1997) for a descripion of this methodology, which infers the value of a firm’s action
when it is publicly announced by examining the market returns to a share of the firm’s stock in the period surrounding
the announcement.
4

10

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

R&D (Jensen and Meckling, 1976). Empirically, there seem to be limits to the use of the leveraging
strategy in R&D-intensive sectors. See Hall (1990, 1994) for evidence that the LBO/restructuring
wave of the 1980s was almost entirely confined to industries and firms where R&D was of no
consequence. As we discuss in the next section, it is still true that R&D-intensive firms tend to have
lower leverage than other firms on average.
According to the second type of principal-agent conflict, managers are more risk averse than
shareholders and avoid R&D projects that will increase the riskiness of the firm. If bankruptcy is a
possibility, both managers whose opportunity cost is lower than their present earnings and potential
bondholders may wish to avoid variance-increasing projects which shareholders would like to
undertake. The argument of the theory is that long-term investments can suffer in this case. The
optimal solution to this type of agency cost would be to increase the long-term incentives faced by
the manager rather than reducing free cash flow.
Evidence on the importance of agency costs as they relate to R&D takes several forms.
Several researchers have studied the impact of antitakeover amendments (which arguably increase
managerial security and willingness to take on risk while reducing managerial discipline) on R&D
investment and firm value. Johnson and Rao (1997) find that such amendments are not followed by
cuts in R&D, while Pugh, Jahara, and Oswald (1999) find that adoption of an Employee Stock
Ownership Plan (ESOP), which is a form of antitakeover protection, is followed by R&D increases.
Cho (1992) finds that R&D intensity increases with the share that managerial shareholdings
represent of the manager’s wealth and interprets this as incentive pay mitigating agency costs and
inducing long term investment.
Some have argued that institutional ownership of the managerial firm can reduce the agency
costs due to free-riding by owners that is a feature of the governance of firms with diffuse
ownership structure, while others have held that such ownership pays too much attention to short
11

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

term earnings and therefore discourages long term investments. Institutions such as mutual and
pension funds often control somewhat larger blocks of shares than individuals, making monitoring
firm and manager behavior a more effective and more rewarding activity for these organizations.
There is some limited evidence that this may indeed be the case. Eng and Shackell (2001)
find that firms adopting long term performance plans for their managers do not increase their R&D
spending but that institutional ownership is associated with higher R&D; R&D firms tend not to be
held by banks and insurance companies. Majumdar and Nagarajan (1997) find that high institutional
investor ownership does not lead to short-term behavior on the part of the firm, in particular, it
does not lead to cuts in R&D spending. Francis and Smith (1995) find that diffusely held firms are
less innovative, implying that monitoring alleviates agency costs and enables investment in
innovation.
Although the evidence summarized above is fairly clear and indicates that long term
incentives for managers can encourage R&D and that institutional ownership does not necessarily
discourage R&D investment, it is fairly silent on the magnitude of these effects, and whether these
governance features truly close the agency cost-induced gap between the cost of capital and the
return to R&D.

3.3 Capital structure and R&D
In the view of some observers, the leveraged buyout (LBO) wave of the 1980s in the United
States and the United Kingdom arose partly because high real interest rates meant that there were
strong pressures to eliminate free cash flow within firms (Blair and Litan, 1990). For firms in
industries where R&D is an important form of investment, such pressure should have been reduced
by the need for internal funds to undertake such investment and indeed Hall (1993, 1994) and Opler
and Titman (1993) find that firms with high R&D intensity were much less likely to experience an

12

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

LBO. Opler and Titman (1994) find that R&D firms that were leveraged suffered more than other
firms when facing economic distress, presumably because leverage meant that they were unable to
sustain R&D programs in the fact of reduced cash flow.
A more recent look at the consequences of these transactions is by Lerner et al. (2008). The
authors investigate 495 buyout transactions where there was a patent application in the nine years
around the buyout. They find no evidence that LBOs are associated with a decrease in patenting.
Relying on standard measures of patent quality, they find that patents granted to firms involved in
private equity transactions are more cited (a proxy for economic importance), show no significant
shifts in the fundamental nature of the research, and are more concentrated in the most important
and prominent areas of companies' innovative portfolios, suggesting a refocusing on the core
business, but not a reduction in innovative activity..
In related work using data on Israeli firms, Blass and Yosha (2001) report that R&Dintensive firms listed on the United States stock exchanges use highly equity-based sources of
financing, whereas those listed only in Israel rely more on bank financing and government funding.
The former are more profitable and faster-growing, which suggests that the choice of where to list
the shares and whether to finance with new equity is indeed sensitive to the expected rate of return
to the R&D being undertaken. That is, investors supplying arms-length finance require higher
returns to compensate them for the risk of a “lemon.“
Although leverage may be a useful tool for reducing agency costs in the firm, it is of limited
value for R&D-intensive firms. Because the knowledge asset created by R&D investment is
intangible, partly embedded in human capital, and ordinarily very specialized to the particular firm in
which it resides, the capital structure of R&D-intensive firms customarily exhibits considerably less
leverage than that of other firms. Banks and other debtholders prefer to use physical assets to secure
loans and are reluctant to lend when the project involves substantial R&D investment rather than
13

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

investment in plant and equipment. In the words of Williamson (1988), “redeployable“ assets (that
is, assets whose value in an alternative use is almost as high as in their current use) are more suited to
the governance structures associated with debt. Empirical support for this idea is provided by
Alderson and Betker (1996), who find that liquidation costs and R&D are positively related across
firms. The implication is that the sunk costs associated with R&D investment are higher than that
for ordinary investment.
In addition, servicing debt usually requires a stable source of cash flow, which makes it more
difficult to find the funds for an R&D investment program that must be sustained at a certain level
in order to be productive. For both these reasons, firms are either unable or reluctant to use debt
finance for R&D investment, which may raise the cost of capital, depending on the precise tax
treatment of debt versus equity.5 Confirming empirical evidence for the idea that limiting free cash
flow in R&D firms is a less desirable method of reducing agency costs is provided by Chung and
Wright (1998), who find that financial slack and R&D spending are correlated with the value of
growth firms positively, but not correlated with that of other firms.

3.4 Taxes and the source of funds
Tax considerations that yield variations in the cost of capital across source of finance have
been well articulated by Auerbach (1984) among others. He argued that under the U.S. tax system
during most of its history the cost of financing new investment by debt has been less that of
financing it by retained earnings, which is in turn less than that of issuing new shares. More
explicitly, if r is the risk-adjusted required return to capital, τ is the corporate tax rate, θ is the
personal tax rate, and c is the capital gains tax rate, we have the following required rates of return for
different financing sources:
5 There is also considerable cross-sectional evidence for the United States that R&D intensity and leverage are negatively
correlated across firms. See Friend and Lang (1988), Hall (1992), and Bhagat and Welch (1995).

14

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Debt

r(1-τ)

interest deductible at the corporate level

Retained earnings

r(1-θ)/(1-c)

avoids personal tax on dividends, but capital gains tax

New shares

r/(1-c)

eventual capital gains tax

If dividends are taxed, clearly financing with new shares is more expensive than financing with
retained earnings. And unless the personal income tax rate is much higher than the sum of the
corporate and capital gains rates, the following inequalities will both hold:

(1 − τ ) <

1−θ
1
<
1− c 1− c

(2)

These inequalities express the facts that interest expense is deductible at the corporate level,
while dividend payments are not, and that shareholders normally pay tax at a higher rate on retained
earnings that are paid out than on those retained by the firm and invested.6 It implicitly assumes that
the returns from the investment made will be retained by the firm and eventually taxed at the capital
gains rate rather than the rate on ordinary income.
It is also true that the tax treatment of R&D in most OECD economies is very different
from that of other kinds of investment: because R&D is expensed as it is incurred, the effective tax
rate on R&D assets is lower than that on either plant or equipment, with or without an R&D tax
credit in place. This effectively means that the economic depreciation of R&D assets is considerably
less than the depreciation allowed for tax purposes -- which is 100 percent -- so that the required
rate of return for such investment would be lower. In addition some countries offer a tax credit or
subsidy to R&D spending, which can reduce the after tax cost of capital even further.7

A detailed discussion of tax regimes in different countries is beyond the scope of this survey, but it is quite a common
in several countries for long term capital gains on funds that remain with a firm for more than one year to be taxed at a
lower rate than ordinary income. Of course, even if the tax rates on the two kinds of income are equal, the inequalities
will hold. Only in the case where dividends are not taxed at the corporate level (which was formerly the case in the UK)
will the ranking given above not hold.
6

7

See Hall and Van Reenen (2000) for details.

15

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

The conclusion from this section of the paper is that the presence of either asymmetric
information or a principal-agent conflict imply that new debt or equity finance will be relatively
more expensive for R&D than for ordinary investment, and that considerations such as lack of
collateral further reduce the possibility of debt finance. Together, these arguments suggest an
important role for retained earnings in the R&D investment decision, independent of their value as a
signal of future profitability. In fact, as has been argued by both Hall (1992) and Himmelberg and
Petersen (1994), there is good reason to think that positive cash flow may be more important for
R&D than for ordinary investment. The next section summarizes the results from empirical tests for
this proposition.

4. Testing for financial constraints
The usual way to examine the empirical relevance of the arguments that R&D investment in
established firms can be disadvantaged when internal funds are not available and recourse to
external capital markets required is to estimate R&D investment equations and test for the presence
of “liquidity“ constraints, or excess sensitivity to cash flow shocks. This approach builds on the
extensive literature developed for testing ordinary investment equations for liquidity constraints
(Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen, 1988; Arellano and Bond, 1991). It suffers from many of the same
difficulties as the estimates in the investment literature, plus one additional problem that arises from
the tendency of firms to smooth R&D spending over time.
The ideal experiment for identifying the effects of liquidity constraints on investment is to
give firms additional cash exogenously, and observe whether they pass it on to shareholders or use it
for investment and/or R&D. If they choose the first alternative, either the cost of capital to the firm
has not fallen, or it has fallen but they still have no good investment opportunities. If they choose
the second, then the firm must have had some unexploited investment opportunities that were not
16

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

profitable using more costly external finance. A finding that investment is sensitive to cash flow
shocks that are not signals of future demand increases would reject the hypothesis that the cost of
external funds is the same as the cost of internal funds. However, lack of true experiments of this
kind forces researchers to use econometric techniques such as instrumental variables to attempt to
control for demand shocks when estimating the investment demand equation, with varying degrees
of success.
The methodology for the identification of R&D investment equations is based on a simple
supply and demand heuristic, as shown in Figure 1. The curve sloping downward to the right
represents the demand for R&D investment funds and the curves sloping upward the supply of
funds. Internal funds are available at a constant cost of capital until they are exhausted, at which
point it becomes necessary to issue debt or equity in order to finance more investment. When the
demand curve cuts the supply curve in the horizontal portion, a shock that increases cash flow (and
shifts supply outward) has no effect on the level of investment. However, if the demand curve cuts
the supply curve where it is upward sloping, it is possible for a shock to cash flow to shift the supply
curve out in such a way as to induce a substantial increase in R&D investment. Figure 2 illustrates
such a case, where the firm shifts from point A to point B in response to a cash flow shock that
does not shift the demand curve.
Econometric work that tests the hypothesis that financing constraints matter for R&D
investment has largely been done using standard investment equation methodology. Two main
approaches can be identified: one uses a neoclassical accelerator model with ad hoc dynamics to
allow for the presence of adjustment costs, and the other an Euler equation derived from the

17

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

forward-looking dynamic program of a profit-maximizing firm that faces adjustment costs for
capital.8
The accelerator model begins with the marginal product equal to cost condition for capital:
MPK = C

(3)

Assuming that the production function for the ith firm at time t is Cobb-Douglas, solving out the
variable factors, and taking logarithms of this relationship yields
kit = sit + ai − cit

(4)

where k = log(R&D capital), s = log(output or sales), and c = log(cost of R&D). ai captures any
permanent differences across firms, including differences in the production function.
Lagged adjustment of R&D capital to changes in its cost or expected future demand is
allowed for by specifying an autoregressive distributed lag (ADL) for the relationship between
capital and sales. For example, specifying an ADL(2,2) and approximating the growth of the capital
stock Δk by R/K-δ yields an estimating equation of the following form:

⎛ R(−1)
⎞
R
= f⎜
, Δs, Δs (−1), k (−2) − s (−2), time dummies, firm dummies ⎟
K
⎝ K (−1)
⎠

(5)

The time dummies capture the conventional cost of capital, assumed to be the same for all firms.
Note that any variations in R&D capital depreciation common to all firms will be in the time
dummies, and any variations specific to a firm or sector but constant over time will be in the firm
dummies. Firm-specific costs related to financing constraints are included by adding current and
lagged values of the cash flow/capital ratio to this equation. Because of the presence of firm
dummies, estimation is done using first differences of this equation, instrumented by lagged values
of the right hand side variables to correct for the potential endogeneity of the contemporaneous

8 A detailed consideration of the econometric estimation of these models can be found in Mairesse, Hall, and Mulkay
(1999). See also Hall (1981).

18

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

values. In principle, this will also control for the potential simultaneity between current investment
and the disturbance. However, if the firm’s planning horizon for its R&D programs is long enough,
as we might expect in the biotechnology area, for example, we might be concerned about the validity
of lagged instruments.
The Euler equation approach begins with the following first order condition for investment
in two adjacent periods:

⎡
⎤
⎛α ⎞
Et −1 ⎢ MPK t + (1 − δ )( pt + MACt ) − (1 + r ) ⎜ t −1 ⎟ ( pt −1 + MACt −1 ) ⎥ = 0
⎝ αt ⎠
⎣
⎦

(6)

where MAC denotes the marginal adjustment costs for R&D capital and αt is the shadow value of
investment funds in period t, which will be unity if there are no financing constraints. After
specifying a Cobb-Douglas production function and quadratic adjustment costs, we obtain the
following estimating equation:
2
⎡R
⎤
R(−1)
S
⎛R⎞
E ⎢ − β1
− γ 1 − β 2 ⎜ ⎟ − time dummies − firm dummies Z ⎥ = 0
K (−1)
K
⎝K⎠
⎢⎣ K
⎥⎦

(7)

where Z is a set of appropriate instrumental variables. As in the case of the accelerator model, this
equation is usually estimated in differenced form to remove the firm dummies, with lagged values of
the right hand side variables as instruments.
When financial constraints are present, the coefficient of lagged R&D investment in the
Euler equation differs from (1+r) by the term (αt-1/αt). The implication is that when the firm changes
its financial position (that is, the shadow value of additional funds for investment changes) between
one period and the next, it will invest as though it is facing a cost of capital greater than r (when the
shadow value falls between periods) or less than r (when the shadow value rises between periods).
Clearly this is a very difficult test to perform because (αt-1/αt) is not constant across firms or across
time periods, so it cannot be treated as a parameter.
19

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Three solutions are possible: the first is to model (αt-1/αt) as a function of proxies for changes in
financial position, such as dividend behavior, new share issues, or new debt issues. The second is
more ad hoc: recall that this term also multiplies the price pt of R&D capital to create a firm-specific
cost of capital. Most researchers simply include the cash flow to capital ratio in the model to proxy
for the firm-specific cost of capital and test whether it enters in the presence of time dummies that
are the same for all firms. This method assumes that all firms face the same R&D price (cost of
capital), except for the cash flow effect.
The third possibility is to stratify firms in some way that is related to the level of cash
constraints that they face (for example, dividend-paying and non-dividend paying firms) estimate
separate investment equations for each group, and test whether the coefficients are equal. This last
was the method used by Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988) in the paper that originated this
literature. Note that these authors did not rely on the full Euler equation derivation, but used a
version of the neoclassical accelerator model (the first model given above). See also Kaplan and
Zingales (1997) for a critique of their approach, and Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (2000) for a
response to the critique.
During the past several years, various versions of the methodologies described above have
been applied to data on the R&D investment of U.S., U.K., French, German, Irish, and Japanese
firms. The firms examined are typically the largest and most important manufactuing firms in their
economy. For example, Hall (1992) found a large positive elasticity between R&D and cash flow,
using an accelerator-type model and a very large sample of U.S. manufacturing firms. The estimation
methodology here controlled for both firm effects and simultaneity. Similarly and using some of the
same data, Himmelberg and Petersen (1994) looked at a panel of 179 U.S. small firms in high-tech
industries and find an economically large and statistically significant relationship between R&D
investment and internal finance.
20

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

More recently, J. Brown et al. (2009) have shown that both cash flow and the issuance of
public equity are very important for younger U.S. firms during the 1990-2004 period, while they
have little impact on mature firm R&D investment. They focus on the high-technology sector
(drugs, office and computing equipment, communications equipment, electronic components,
scientific instruments, medical instruments, and software), which accounts for almost all of the
increase in R&D during this period, and use Euler equation methods with fixed firm effects and
industry-level year dummies to remove most of the variation due to unobserved differences in firm
characteristics and demand shocks across industry. A novel finding in this paper and a companion
paper by J. Brown and Petersen (2009) is the increased importance of public equity issuance in
financing R&D in the United States, which doubtless reflects a shift in expectations on the part of
investors during this period.
Harhoff (1998) found weak but significant cash flow effects on R&D for both small and
large German firms, although Euler equation estimates for R&D investment were uninformative due
to the smoothness of R&D and the small sample size. Combining limited survey evidence with his
regression results, he concludes that R&D investment in small German firms may be constrained by
the availability of finance. Bond, Harhoff, and Van Reenen (1999) find significant differences
between the cash flow impacts on R&D and investment for large manufacturing firms in the United
Kingdom and Germany. German firms in their sample are insensitive to cash flow shocks, whereas
the investment of non-R&D-doing UK firms does respond. Cash flow helps to predict whether a
UK firm does R&D, but not the level of that R&D. They interpret their findings to mean that
financial constraints are important for British firms, but that those which do R&D are a self-selected
group that face fewer constraints. This is consistent with the view that the desire of firms to smooth
R&D over time combines with the relatively high cost of financing it to reduce R&D well below the
level that would obtain in a frictionless world.
21

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Mulkay, Hall, and Mairesse (2001) perform a similar exercise using large French and U.S.
manufacturing firms, finding that cash flow impacts are much larger in the U.S. than in France, both
for R&D and for ordinary investment. Except for the well-known fact that R&D exhibits higher
serial correlation than investment (presumably because of higher adjustment costs), differences in
behavior are between countries, not between investment types, suggesting that they are due to
differences in the structure of financial markets rather than the type of investment, tangible or
intangible. This result is consistent with evidence reported in Hall, Mairesse, Branstetter, and Crepon
(1999) for the U.S., France, and Japan during an earlier time period, which basically finds that R&D
and investment on the one hand, and sales and cash flow on the other, are simultaneously
determined in the United States (neither one “Granger-causes“ the other, whereas in the other
countries, there is little feedback from sales and cash flows to the two investments. Using a
nonstructural R&D investment equation together with data for the US, UK, Canada, Europe, and
Japan, Bhagat and Welch (1995) found similar results for the 1985-1990 period, with stock returns
predicting changes in R&D more strongly for the US and UK firms.
Bougheas, Goerg, and Strobl (2001) examined the effects of liquidity constraints on R&D
investment using firm-level data for manufacturing firms in Ireland and also found evidence that
R&D investment in these firms is financially constrained, in line with the previous studies of US and
UK firms.
W. Brown (1997) argues that existing tests of the impact of capital market imperfections on
innovative firms cannot distinguish between two possibilities: 1) capital markets are perfect and
different factors drive the firm's different types of expenditure or 2) capital markets are imperfect
and different types of expenditure react differently to a common factor (shocks to the supply of
internal finance). He then compares the sensitivity of investment to cash flow for innovative and

22

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

non-innovative firms in the UK. The results support the hypothesis that capital markets are
imperfect, finding that the investment of innovative firms is more sensitive to cash flow.
The conclusions from this body of empirical work are several: first, there is solid evidence
that debt is a disfavored source of finance for R&D investment; second, the “Anglo-Saxon“
economies, with their thick and highly developed stock markets and relatively transparent ownership
structures, typically exhibit more sensitivity and responsiveness of R&D to cash flow than
continental economies; third, and much more speculatively, this greater responsiveness may arise
because they are financially constrained, in the sense that they view external sources of finance as
much more costly than internal, and therefore require a considerably higher rate of return to
investments done on the margin when they are tapping these sources. However, it is perhaps equally
likely that this responsiveness occurs because firms are more sensitive to demand signals in thick
financial equity markets; a definitive explanation of the “excess sensitivity“ result awaits further
research.9 In addition to these results, the evidence from Germany and some other countries
suggests that small firms are more likely to face this difficulty than large established firms (not
surpisingly, if the source of the problem is a “lemons“ premium).
From a policy perspective, these results point to another reason why it may be socially
beneficial to offer tax incentives to companies, especially to small and new firms, in order to reduce
the cost of capital they face for R&D investment. Many governments, including not only those in
the developed world (e.g., the United States and the United Kingdom), but also in the developing
world (e. g., Chile, Brazil, and Argentina) currently have such programs. Such a policy approach
simply observes that the cost of capital is relatively high for R&D and tries to close the gap via a tax

It is also true that much of the literature here has tended to downplay the role of measurement error in drawing
conclusions from the results. Measurement error in Tobin’s q, cash flow, or output is likely to be sizable and will ensure
that all variables will enter any specification of the R&D investment equation significantly, regardless of whether they
truly belong or not. Instrumental variables estimation is a partial solution, but only if all the errors are serially
uncorrelated, which is unlikely.
9

23

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

subsidy. However, there is an alternative approach relying on the private sector that attempts to
close the financing gap by reducing the degree of asymmetric information and moral hazard rather
than simply subsidizing the investment. We turn to this topic in the next section.

5. Small Firms, Startup Finance, and Venture Capital
As should be apparent from much of the preceding discussion, any problems associated with
financing investments in new technology will be most apparent for new entrants and startup firms.
For this reason, many governments already provide some of form of assistance for such firms, and
in many countries, especially the United States but also others such as Israel and Canada, there exists
a private sector “venture capital“ industry that is focused on solving the problem of financing
innovation for new and young firms. This section of the paper reviews what we know about these
alternative funding mechanisms, beginning with then discussing the venture capital solution and
then discussing public policy efforts. The discussion focuses on the United States for the most part,
since the sector there is often the model for other countries, and most of the empirical evidence is
based on US data.
Venture capital can be defined as independently managed, dedicated capital focusing on
equity or equity-linked investments in privately held, high-growth companies. Typically, these funds
are raised from institutional and wealthy individual investors, through partnerships with a decadelong duration. These funds are invested in young firms, typically in exchange for preferred stock
with various special privileges. Ultimately, the venture capitalists sell these firms to corporate
acquirers or else liquidate their holdings after taking the firms public.
The first venture firm, American Research and Development, was formed in 1946 and
invested in companies commercializing technology developed during the Second World War.

24

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Because institutions were reluctant to invest, it was structured as a publicly traded closed-end fund
and marketed mostly to individuals, a structure emulated by its successors.
By 1978 limited partnerships had become the dominant investment structure. Limited
partnerships have an important advantage in the United States: capital gains taxes are not paid by the
limited partnership. Instead, only the taxable investors in the fund pay taxes. Venture partnerships
have predetermined, finite lifetimes. To maintain limited liability, investors must not become
involved in the management of the fund.
Activity in the venture industry increased dramatically in early 1980s. Much of the growth
stemmed from the US Department of Labor’s clarification of Employee Retirement Income Security
Act’s ‘prudent man’ rule in 1979, which had prohibited pension funds from investing substantial
amounts of money into venture capital or high-risk asset classes. The rule clarification explicitly
allowed pension managers to invest in high-risk assets, including venture capital.
The subsequent years saw both very good and trying times for venture capitalists. Venture
capitalists backed many successful companies, including Apple Computer, Cisco, Genentech,
Google, Netscape, Starbucks, and Yahoo! But commitments to the venture capital industry were
very uneven, creating a great deal of instability. The annual flow of money into venture funds
increased by a factor of ten during the early 1980s. From 1987 through 1991, however, fund-raising
steadily declined as returns fell. Between 1996 and 2003, this pattern was repeated. Later in this
chapter we discuss the reasons behind this cyclicality.
Venture capital investing can be viewed as a cycle. In this section, we follow the cycle of
venture capital activity. We begin with the formation of venture funds. We then consider the process
by which such capital is invested in portfolio firms, and the exiting of such investments. We end
with a discussion of open research questions, including those relating to internationalization and the
real effects of venture activity.
25

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

5.1 Venture Investing
The heart of the venture capital process is the connection between venture capitalists and
the firms in which they invest. As discussed earlier, the economic and management literature
emphasizes the informational asymmetries that characterize young firms, particularly in hightechnology industries. These problems make it difficult for investors to assess firms, and permit
opportunistic behavior by entrepreneurs after finance is received. Specialized financial
intermediaries, such as venture capitalists, address these problems by intensively scrutinizing firms
before providing capital and monitoring them afterwards.
Economic theory examines the role that venture capitalists play in mitigating agency
conflicts between entrepreneurs and investors. The improvement in efficiency might be due to the
active monitoring and advice that is provided (Cornelli and Yosha, 2003; Hellmann, 1998; Marx,
1994), the screening mechanisms employed (Chan, 1983), the incentives to exit (Berglöf, 1994), the
proper syndication of the investment (Admati and Pfleiderer, 1994), or investment staging
(Bergmann-Hege, 1998; Sahlman, 1990).
Staged capital infusion is the most potent control mechanism a venture capitalist can
employ. The shorter the duration of an individual round of financing, the more frequently the
venture capitalist monitors the entrepreneur’s progress. The duration of funding should decline and
the frequency of re-evaluation increase when the venture capitalist believes that conflicts with the
entrepreneur are likely.
If monitoring and information gathering are important – as models such as those of Amit,
Glosten and Muller (1990) and Chan (1983) suggest – venture capitalists should invest in firms
where asymmetric problems are likely, such as early-stage and high-technology firms with intangible
assets. The capital constraints faced by these companies will be large and these investors will address
them.
26

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Gompers (1995) shows that venture capitalists concentrate investments in early-stage
companies and high-technology industries where informational asymmetries are significant and
monitoring is valuable. He finds that early-stage firms receive significantly less money per round.
Increases in asset tangibility are associated with longer financing duration and reduce monitoring
intensity, presumably because such assets increase the salvage value of the firm if the enterprise fails.
In a related paper, Kaplan and Strömberg (2003) document how venture capitalists allocate
control and ownership rights contingent on financial and non-financial performance. If a portfolio
company performs poorly, venture capitalists obtain full control. As performance improves, the
entrepreneur obtains more control. If the firm does well, the venture capitalists relinquish most of
their control rights but retain their equity stake.
Related evidence comes from Hsu (2004), who studies the price entrepreneurs pay to be
associated with reputable venture capitalists. He analyses firms which received financing offers from
multiple venture capitalists. Hsu shows that high investor experience is associated with a substantial
discount in firm valuation.
Venture capitalists usually make investments with peers. The lead venture firm involves
other venture firms. One critical rationale for syndication in the venture industry is that peers
provide a second opinion on the investment opportunity and limit the danger of funding bad deals.
Lerner (1994a) finds that in the early investment rounds experienced venture capitalists tend
to syndicate only with venture firms that have similar experience. He argues that, if a venture
capitalist were looking for a second opinion, then he would want to get one from someone of
similar or greater ability, certainly not from someone of lesser ability.
The advice and support provided by venture capitalists is often embodied in their role on the
firm’s board of directors. Lerner (1995) examines whether venture capitalists’ representation on the
boards of the private firms in their portfolios is greater when the need for oversight is larger, looking
27

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

at changes in board membership around the replacement of CEOs. He finds that an average of 1.75
venture capitalists are added to the board between financing rounds when a firm’s CEO is replaced
in the interval; between other rounds 0.24 venture directors are added. No differences are found in
the addition of other outside directors.
Hochberg (2005) studies the influence of venture capitalists on the governance of a firm
following its initial public offering (IPO). Venture-backed firms manage earnings less in the IPO
year, as measured by discretionary accounting accruals. Venture-backed firms also experience a
stronger wealth effect when they adopt a poison pill, which implies that investors are less worried
that the poison pill will entrench management at the expense of shareholders. Finally, venturebacked firms more frequently have independent boards and audit and compensation committees, as
well as separate CEOs and chairmen.
So far, this section has highlighted the ways in which venture capitalists can successfully
address agency problems in portfolio firms. During periods when the amount of money flowing into
the industry grows dramatically, however, competition between venture groups can introduce
distortions. This is shown in Figure 3, which shows relationship between venture returns and the
amount invested in these funds. The returns are measured by the Sand Hill Index, which is a valueweighted and continuously-invested index of the value of venture funded companies from their first
round of institutional funding to their exit.10 The money invested series (also from Sand Hill
Econometrics) is the total dollars invested in the companies in the Sand Hill Index each month.
Gompers and Lerner (2000) examine the relation between the valuation of venture deals and
inflows into venture funds. Doubling inflows leads to a 7–21 per cent increase in valuation levels.
But success rates do not differ significantly between investments made during periods of low inflows
and valuations on the one hand and those made in booms on the other. The results indicate that the
10

See the Sand Hill Econometrics website for details on the construction of this indes. http://www.sandhillecon.com

28

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

price increases reflect increasing competition for investment, rather than changes in the expected
returns.

5.2 Exiting
A third major area of research has been the process whereby venture funds exit investments.
This topic is important because, in order to make money on their investments, venture capitalists
must sell their equity stakes.
Initial research into the exiting of venture investments focused on Initial Public Offerings
(IPOs), reflecting the fact that the most profitable exit opportunity is usually an IPO. Barry et al.
(1990) and Megginson and Weiss (1991) document that venture capitalists hold significant equity
stakes and board positions in the firms they take public, which they continue to hold a year after the
IPO. They argue that this pattern reflects the certification they provide to investors that the firms
they bring to market are not overvalued. Moreover, they show that venture-backed IPOs have less
of a positive return on their first trading day, a finding that has been subsequently challenged (Lee
and Wahal, 2004; Kraus, 2002). The authors suggest that investors need a smaller discount because
the venture capitalist has certified the offering’s quality.
Subsequent research has examined the timing of the exit decision. Several potential factors
affect when venture capitalists choose to bring firms public. Lerner (1994b) examines how the
valuation of public securities affects whether and when venture capitalists choose to finance
companies in another private round in preference to taking the firm public. He shows that investors
tend to take the firm public when the market value is high, relying on private financings when
valuations are lower. Seasoned venture capitalists appear more proficient at timing IPOs. This
finding is consistent with the work by J. Brown, Fazzari, and Petersen on the importance of public
equity financing of R&D during the 1990s stock market boom.

29

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Another consideration may be the venture capitalist’s reputation. Gompers (1996) argues
that young venture firms have incentives to ‘grandstand’, or take actions that signal their ability to
potential investors. Specifically, young venture firms bring companies public earlier than older one
to establish a reputation and successfully raise new funds. Gompers shows that the effect of recent
IPOs on the amount of capital raised is stronger for young venture firms, providing them with
greater incentives to bring companies public earlier.
Lee and Wahal (2004) propose a variant of the ‘grandstanding’ hypothesis: they posit that
venture firms have an incentive to underprice IPOs. The publicity surrounding a successful offering
will enable the venture group to raise more capital than it could otherwise. Lee and Wahal confirm
this hypothesis by showing a positive relationship between first-day returns and subsequent fundraising by venture firms.
The typical venture firm, however, does not sell its equity at the time of the IPO. After some
time, venture capitalists usually return money to their limited partners by transferring the shares to
their investors, who are free either to hold or sell them. Gompers and Lerner (1998a) examine these
distributions. After significant increases in stock prices prior to distribution, abnormal returns
around the time of the distribution are negative. Cumulative excess returns for the 12 months
following the distribution also appear to be negative. While the overall level of venture capital
returns does not exhibit abnormal returns relative to the market (Brav and Gompers, 1997), there is
a distinct rise and fall around the time of the stock distribution. The results are consistent with
venture capitalists possessing inside information and with the (partial) adjustment of the market to
that information.
A related research area is venture-fund performance. Kaplan and Schoar (2005) show
substantial performance persistence across consecutive venture funds with the same general
partners. General partners that outperform the industry in one fund are likely to outperform in the
30

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

next fund, while those who underperform in one fund are likely to underperform with the next
fund. These results contrast with those of mutual funds, where persistence is difficult to identify.
Cochrane (2005) estimates the returns of venture capital investments. He notes that many
analyses of returns focus only on investments that go public, get acquired, or go out of business.
Such calculations may produce biased returns by concentrating only on the portfolio’s ‘winners’ and
outright failures, ignoring those firms that remain within the fund for longer periods. Cochrane
develops a maximum likelihood estimate that uses existing data, but adjusts for these selection
biases. While these papers – as well as Gompers and Lerner (1997) and Jones and Rhodes-Kropf
(2003) – represent a first step towards understanding these issues, much more work remains to be
done in this area.

5.3 Venture Fund-raising
Finally, research into the formation of venture funds has focused on two topics. First, the
commitments to the venture capital industry have been highly variable since the mid-1970s.
Understanding the determinants of this variability has been a topic of continuing interest to
researchers. Second, the structure of venture partnerships has attracted increasing attention.
First, Poterba (1987; 1989) notes that the fluctuations could arise from changes in either the
supply of or the demand for venture capital. It is very likely, he argues, that decreases in capital gains
tax rates increase commitments to venture funds, even though the bulk of the funds are from taxexempt investors. The drop in the tax rate may spur corporate employees to become entrepreneurs,
thereby increasing the need for venture capital. The increase in demand due to greater
entrepreneurial activity leads to more venture fund-raising.
Gompers and Lerner (1998b) find empirical support for Poterba’s claim: lower capital gains
taxes have particularly strong effects on venture capital supplied by tax-exempt investors. This

31

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

suggests that the primary mechanism by which capital gains tax cuts affect venture fund-raising is
the higher demand of entrepreneurs for capital. The authors also find that a number of other factors
influence venture fund-raising, such as regulatory changes and the returns of venture funds.
A second line of research has examined the contracts that govern the relationship between
investors (limited partners) and the venture capitalist (general partner). Gompers and Lerner (1999)
find that compensation for older and larger venture capital organizations is more sensitive to
performance than that of other venture groups. Also, the cross-sectional variation in compensation
terms for younger, smaller venture organizations is considerably lower. The fixed component of
compensation is higher for smaller, younger funds and funds focusing on high-technology or earlystage investments. Finally, Gompers and Lerner do not find any relationship between the incentive
compensation and performance.
The authors argue that these results are consistent with a learning model in which neither the
venture capitalist nor the investor knows the venture capitalist’s ability. With his early funds, the
venture capitalist will work hard even without explicit pay-for-performance incentives: if he can
establish a good reputation, he can raise subsequent funds. These reputation concerns lead to lower
pay for performance for smaller and younger venture organizations. Once a reputation has been
established, explicit incentive compensation is needed to induce the proper effort.
Covenants also play an important role in limiting conflicts in venture partnerships. Their use
may be explained by two hypotheses. First, because negotiating and monitoring covenants are costly,
they will be employed when monitoring is easier and the potential for opportunistic behaviour is
greater. Second, in the short run the supply of venture capital services may be fixed, with a modest
number of funds of carefully limited size raised each year. Increases in demand may lead to higher
prices when contracts are written. Higher prices may include not only increases in monetary
compensation, but also greater consumption of private benefits through fewer covenants.
32

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Gompers and Lerner (1996) show that both supply and demand conditions and costly
contracting are important in determining contractual provisions. Fewer restrictions are found in
funds established during years with greater capital inflows and funds, when general partners enjoy
higher compensation. The evidence illustrates the importance of general market conditions on the
restrictiveness of venture partnerships. In periods when venture capitalists have relatively more
bargaining power—for instance, when there is a big increase in the funds being invested in venture
funds—the venture capitalists are able to raise money with fewer strings attached.

5.4 The globalization of venture capital
While financial economists know much more about venture capital than they did a decade
ago, there are many unresolved issues. We highlight here three promising areas, beginning with the
globalization of the industry.
The rapid growth in the U.S. venture capital market has led institutional investors to look
increasingly at private equity alternatives abroad. To date, however, outside of the United Kingdom
(where performance of funds has been quite poor), Israel, Canada and New Zealand, there has been
little venture capital activity abroad. Figure 4 shows venture capital as a share of GDP in 2007 for a
number of countries.11 Black and Gilson (1998) argue that the key source of the U.S. competitive
advantage in venture capital is the existence of a robust IPO market. Venture capitalists can commit
to transfer control back to the entrepreneur when a public equity market for new issues exists. This
commitment device is unavailable in economies dominated by banks, such as Germany and Japan.
The rapid growth in the US venture capital market has led institutional investors to look
abroad. In a pioneering study, Jeng and Wells (2000) examine the factors that influence venture
11One

potential source of confusion is that the term venture capital is used differently different in Europe and Asia.
Abroad, venture capital often refers to all private equity, including buyout, late stage, and mezzanine financing (which
represent the vast majority of the private equity pool in most overseas markets). In the U.S., these are separate classes.
The data in Figures 3 and 4 are corrected for this fact and we confine our discussion of international trends to venture
capital using the restrictive, U.S. definition.

33

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

fund-raising internationally. They find that the strength of the IPO market is an important
determinant of venture commitments, supporting Black and Gilson’s hypothesis that the key to a
successful venture industry is the existence of robust IPO markets. Jeng and Wells find, however,
that the IPO market does not influence commitments to early-stage funds as much as those to laterstage ones. Much more remains to be explored regarding the internationalization of venture capital.
Certainly, with a few exceptions such as Australia, China, India, and Japan, venture capital remains
focused on the United States, as Figure 5 illustrates. Relative to the size of their GDP share, the
European Union countries have almost no seed and startup funding when compared to the rest of
the developed world.
A related question is why other financial intermediaries (such as banks) cannot duplicate
these features of the venture capitalists, and undertake the same sort of monitoring. Economists
have suggested several explanations for the apparent superiority of venture funds in this regard.
First, because regulations limit banks’ ability to hold shares, at least in the U.S., they cannot freely
use equity. Second, banks may not have the necessary skills to evaluate projects with few
collateralizable assets and significant uncertainty. Finally, venture funds’ high-powered compensation
schemes give venture capitalists incentives to monitor firms closely. Banks sponsoring venture funds
without high-powered incentives have found it difficult to retain personnel.

5.5 The real effects of venture capital
A second area is even thornier: the impact of venture capital on the economy. While
theorists have suggested a variety of mechanisms by which venture capital may affect innovation, the
empirical record is more mixed. It might be thought that establishing a relationship between venture
capital and innovation would be straightforward. For instance, one could look in regressions across
industries and time whether, controlling for R&D spending, venture capital funding has an impact

34

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

on various measures of innovation. But even a simple model of the relationship between venture
capital, R&D, and innovation suggests that this approach is likely to give misleading estimates.
Both venture funding and innovation could be positively related to a third unobserved
factor, the arrival of technological opportunities. Thus, there could be more innovation at times that
there was more venture capital, not because the venture capital caused the innovation, but rather
because the venture capitalists reacted to some fundamental technological shock which was sure to
lead to more innovation. To date, only a handful of papers have attempted to address these
challenging issues.
The first of these papers, Hellmann and Puri (2000), examines a sample of 170 recently
formed firms in Silicon Valley, including both venture-backed and non-venture firms. Using
questionnaire responses, they find empirical evidence that venture capital financing is related to
product market strategies and outcomes of startups. They find that firms that are pursuing what they
term an innovator strategy (a classification based on the content analysis of survey responses) are
significantly more likely to obtain venture capital and also obtain it more quickly. The presence of a
venture capitalist is also associated with a significant reduction in the time taken to bring a product
to market, especially for innovators. Furthermore, firms are more likely to list obtaining venture
capital as a significant milestone in the lifecycle of the company as compared to other financing
events.
The results suggest significant interrelations between investor type and product market
dimensions, and a role of venture capital in encouraging innovative companies. Given the small size
of the sample and the limited data, they can only modestly address concerns about causality.
Unfortunately, the possibility remains that more innovative firms select venture capital for financing,
rather than venture capital causing firms to be more innovative.

35

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Kortum and Lerner (2000), by way of contrast, examine whether these patterns can be
discerned on an aggregate industry level, rather than on the firm level. They address concerns about
causality in two ways. First, they exploit the major discontinuity in the recent history of the venture
capital industry: as discussed above, in the late 1970s, the U.S. Department of Labor clarified the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act, a policy shift that freed pensions to invest in venture
capital. This shift led to a sharp increase in the funds committed to venture capital. This type of
exogenous change should identify the role of venture capital, because it is unlikely to be related to
the arrival of entrepreneurial opportunities. They exploit this shift in instrumental variable
regressions. Second, they use R&D expenditures to control for the arrival of technological
opportunities that are anticipated by economic actors at the time, but that are unobserved to
econometricians. In the framework of a simple model, they show that the causality problem
disappears if they estimate the impact of venture capital on the patent-R&D ratio, rather than on
patenting itself.
Even after addressing these causality concerns, the results suggest that venture funding does
have a strong positive impact on innovation. The estimated coefficients vary according to the
techniques employed, but on average a dollar of venture capital appears to be three to four times
more potent in stimulating patenting than a dollar of traditional corporate R&D. The estimates
therefore suggest that venture capital, even though it averaged less than three percent of corporate
R&D from 1983 to 1992, is responsible for a much greater share—perhaps ten percent—of U.S.
industrial innovations in this decade. These findings have been supported by recent working paper
by Mollica and Zingales (2007), who also use an instrumental variable approach based on state
pension fund resources to look at the relationship of venture capital and innovation and find a
strong relationship.

36

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Some of the most interesting theoretical work in recent years has focused not on the
question of whether venture capitalists spur innovation, but rather on the societal consequences of
the relationship between venture-backed entrepreneurship and innovation. Landier (2006) presents a
model in which entrepreneurial venture succeed or fail on the basis of ability and luck.12 He argues
that as the venture progresses, the entrepreneur is likely to learn about the likely eventual success of
the venture, but that the decision to continue or abandon the venture will not be the same in all
environments. In particular, the decision depends critically on how expensive it would be to raise
capital for a new venture from investors after a failure. In this setting, Landier shows, multiple
equilibria can arise. If the cost of capital for a new venture after a failure is not very high,
entrepreneurs will be willing to readily abandon ventures, and failure is commonplace but not very
costly. Alternatively, if the cost of capital for failed entrepreneurs is high, only extremely poor
projects will be abandoned. Thus, societies may differ dramatically in the prevalence of
experimentation in high-risk, innovative ventures. But certainly, given the fact that even the question
of whether venture capitalists make private returns which compensate them for the risk that they
take on is controversial (Kaplan and Schoar, 2005), it is premature to conclude what the social
returns are.

5.6 Government funding for startup firms
One provocative finding from Jeng and Wells’s analysis is that government policy can
dramatically affect the health of the venture sector. Researchers have only begun to examine the
ways in which policymakers can catalyse the growth of venture capital and the companies in which
they invest (Irwin and Klenow, 1996; Lerner, 1999; Wallsten, 2000; Avnimelech and Teubal, 2004;
Gilson, 2008). Clearly, much more needs to be done in this arena.

12See

also Gromb and Scharfstein (2002) for a thoughtful theoretical analysis that touches on many of these issues.

37

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Examples of such programs are the U.S. Small Business Investment Company (SBIC) and
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) programs. Together, these programs disbursed $2.4
billion in 1995, more than 60% of the amount from venture capital in that year (Lerner 1998a). In
Germany, more than 800 federal and state government financing programs have been established
for new firms in the recent past (OECD 1995). In 1980, the Swedish established the first of a series
of investment companies (along with instituting a series of measures such as reduced capital gains
taxes to encourage private investments in startups), partly on the United States model. By 1987, the
government share of venture capital funding was 43 percent (Karaomerliolu and Jacobsson 1999).
Recently, the UK has instituted a series of government programs under the Enterprise Fund
umbrella which allocate funds to small and medium-sized firms in high technology and certain
regions, as well as guaranteeing some loans to small businesses (Bank of England 2001). There are
also programs at the European level.
A limited amount of evidence, most of it U.S.-based, exists as to the effectiveness and
“additionality“ of these programs (see Lerner (2009) for a review of the key programs and their
evaluaitons). In most cases, evaluating the success of the programs is difficult due to the lack of a
“control“ group of similar firms that do not receive funding.13 Therefore most of the available
studies are based on retrospective survey data provided by the recipients; few attempt to address the
question of performance under the counterfactual seriously. A notable exception is the study by
Lerner (1999), who looks at 1435 SBIR awardees and a matched sample of firms that did not receive
awards, over a ten-year post-award period. Because most of the firms are privately held, he is unable
to analyze the resulting valuation or profitability of the firms, but he does find that firms receiving
SBIR grants grow significantly faster than the others after receipt of the grant. He attributes some of

13 See Jaffe (2002) for a review of methodologies for evaluation such government programs. For a complete review of
the SBIR program, including some case studies, see the National Research Council (1998).

38

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

this effect to “quality certification“ by the government that enables the firm to raise funds from
private sources as well.14
A series of papers by Czarnitzki and co-authors (Aerts and Czarnitzki, 2003; Almus and
Czarnitzki, 2004; Czarnitzki and Hussinger, 2006) have looked at the performance of firms that
receive public R&D subsidies in several European countries such as Belgium and Germany, using
treatment effect analysis. They generally find that such subsidies do not completely displace private
expenditure on R&D (that is, they are additional) and that they are productive in the sense that they
result in patenting by the firm. Hall and Maffioli (2008) survey a similar set of results for large Latin
American economies and reach a more nuanced conclusion.

6. Conclusions
Based on the literature surveyed here, what do we know about the costs of financing R&D
investments and the possibility that some kind of market failure exists in this area? Several main
points emerge:
First, there is fairly clear evidence, based on theory, surveys, and empirical estimation, that
small and startup firms in R&D-intensive industries face a higher cost of capital than their larger
competitors and than firms in other industries. In addition to compelling theoretical arguments and
empirical evidence, the mere existence of the VC industry and the fact that it is concentrated
precisely where these startups are most active suggests that this is so. The fact that ex post venture
returns may lag the market, however, remains a puzzle and makes a clear-cut conclusion more
complex.

Also see Spivack (2001) for further studies of such programs, including European studies, and David, Hall, and Toole
(2000) and Klette, Moen, and Griliches Klette (2000) for surveys of the evaluation of government R&D programs in
general.
14

39

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Second, the evidence for a financing gap for large and established R&D firms is harder to
establish. It is certainly the case that these firms prefer to use internally generated funds for
financing investment, but less clear that there is an argument for intervention, beyond the favorable
tax treatment that currently exists in many countries.15
Third, the VC solution to the problem of financing innovation has its limits: First, it does
tend to focus only on a few sectors at a time, and to make investment with a minimum size that is
too large for startups in some fields. Second, good performance of the VC sector requires a thick
market in small and new firm stocks (such as NASDAQ) in order to provide an exit strategy for
early stage investors. Introducing a VC sector into an economy where it is not already present is
nontrivial as it requires the presence of at least three interacting institutions: investors, experienced
venture fund managers, and a market for IPOs.
Fourth, the effectiveness of government incubators, seed funding, loan guarantees, and other
such policies for funding R&D deserves further study, ideally in an experimental or quasiexperimental setting. In particular, studying the cross-country variation in the performance of such
programs would be desirable, because the outcomes may depend to a great extent on institutional
factors that are difficult to control for using data from within a single country.
Based on the survey of the literature presented here, other areas of interest for future
research appear to be worthwhile. A longstanding debate in the literature is over the interaction
between corporate governance and corporate finance and its impact on long term investment,
including investment in intangibles such as R&D. Although in principle one might have thought that
financial markets focused on quarterly performance, such as those in the Anglo-Saxon economies,

It is important to remind the reader of the premise of this paper: we are focusing only on the financing gap arguments
for favorable treatment of R&D and ignoring (for the present) the arguments based on R&D spillovers and externalities.
There is good reason to believe that the latter is a much more important consideration for large established firms,
especially if we wish those firms to undertake basic research that is close to industry but with unknown applications (the
Bell Labs model).
15

40

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

would discourage such investment, this appears not to be the case, at least in the United States.
However, for several large European countries, we have limited evidence that the required rate of
return to R&D investment is perhaps somewhat lower than in the U.S. and the U.K., especially
when the firm has a large majority shareholder (see the Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen chapter, this
volume). This fact suggests that for these firms at least, the stability provided by concentrated
ownership may encourage R&D. At the same time, the more fluid financial markets with active
markets for corporate control seem to be better at financing new entrants, startups, and more overall
investment in innovation. The future challenge is to understand more completely the interaction of
financial market discipline with various forms of corporate governance and how this influences the
organization and performance of innovation.

41

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

References
Admati, A., Pfleiderer, P. (1994). “Robust financial contracting and the role for venture capitalists.”
Journal of Finance 49, 371–402.
Aerts, K. and D. Czarnitzki (2006). “The Impact of Public R&D–Funding in Flanders.” Brussels,
Belgium: IWT Study No. 54.
Aghion, P., Howitt, P. (1997). Endogenous Growth Theory. The MIT Press, Cambridge.
Akerlof, G.A. (1970). “The Market for 'Lemons': Quality, Uncertainty, and the Market Mechanism.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 84, 488-500.
Alam, P., Walton, K.S. (1995). “Information Asymmetry and Valuation Effects of Debt Financing.”
Financial Review 30(2), 289-311.
Alderson, M.J., Betker, B.L. (1996). “Liquidation Costs and Accounting Data.” Financial Management
25(2), 25-36.
Almus, M. and D. Czarnitzki (2003). “The Effects of Public R&D Subsidies on Firms' Innovation
Activities: The Case of East Germany.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 21(2): 226236.
Amit, R., Glosten, L., Muller, E. (1990). “Entrepreneurial ability, venture investments, and risk
sharing.” Management Science 36, 1232–45.
Anton, J.J., Yao, D.A. (1998). “The Sale of Intellectual Property: Strategic Disclosure, Property
Rights, and Incomplete Contracts.” Working paper, The Wharton School, University of
Pennsylvania.
Arellano, M., Bond, S. (1991). “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte Carlo Evidence
and an Application to Employment Equations.” Review of Economic Studies 58, 277-297.
Arrow, K.J. (1962). “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention.” In: Nelson,
R. (Ed.), The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity. Princeton, NJ.
42

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Auerbach, A.J. (1984). “Taxes, Firm Financial Policy, and The Cost of Capital: An Empirical
Analysis.” Journal of Public Economics 23, 27-57.
Avnimelech, G. and M. Teubal (2004). “Emergence and Development of Venture Capital in Israel
and the Role of Policy: a Macro / Microeconomic Perspective.” In: Bartzokas, A. and S.
Mani (eds.), Financial Systems, Corporate Investment in Innovation and Venture Capital. London:
Edward Elgar.
Bank of England. (2001). Finance for Small Firms – An Eighth Report. Domestic Finance Division,
Bank of England, London.
Barry, C., Muscarella, C., Peavy III, J., Vetsuypens, M. (1990). “The role of venture capital in the
creation of public companies: evidence from the going public process.” Journal of Financial
Economics 27, 447–71.
Bergemann, D., Hege, U. (1998). “Venture capital financing, moral hazard, and learning.” Journal of
Banking and Finance 22, 703-735.
Berglöf, E. (1994). “A control theory of venture capital finance.” Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organizations 10, 247–67.
Bhagat, S., Welch, I. (1995). “Corporate Research and Development Investments: International
Comparisons.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 19, March-May.
Bhattacharya, S., Ritter, J.R. (1983). “Innovation and Communication: Signaling with Partial
Disclosure.” Review of Economic Studies L, 331-46.
Black, B., Gilson, R. (1998). “Venture capital and the structure of capital markets: banks versus stock
markets.” Journal of Financial Economics 47, 243–77.
Blair, M.M., Litan, R.E. (1990). Corporate Leverage and Leveraged Buyouts in the Eighties. Brookings
Institution, Washington, DC.

43

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Blass, A.A., Yosha, O. (2001). “Financing R&D in Mature Companies: An Empirical Analysis.”
Working Paper, Bank of Israel, Tel Aviv University, and CEPR.
Bond, S., Harhoff, D., Van Reenen, J. (1999). “Investment, R&D, and Financial Constraints in
Britain and Germany.” Institute of Fiscal Studies Working Paper No. 99/5, London.
Bougheas, S., Goerg, H., Strobl, E. (2001). “Is R&D Financially Constrained? Theory and Evidence
from Irish Manufacturing.” University of Nottingham, Nottingham.
Brav, A., Gompers, P. (1997). “Myth or reality? Long-run underperformance of initial public
offerings; evidence from venture capital and nonventure capital-backed IPOs.” Journal of
Finance 52, 1791–821.
Brown, J. R. and B. C. Petersen (2009). “Why has the investment-cash flow Sensitivity declined so
sharply? Rising R&D and equity market developments.” Journal of Banking and Finance 33:
971-984.
Brown, J. R. and B. C. Petersen (2009). “Cash holdings and R&D smoothing.” University of
Montana and Washington University in St. Louis: manuscript.
Brown, J. R., S. M. Fazzari, and B. C. Petersen (2009). “Financing innovation and growth: Cash
flow, external equity, and the 1990s R&D boom.” Journal of Finance LXIV(1): 151-185.
Brown, W. (1997). “R&D Intensity and Finance: Are Innovative Firms Financially Constrained?.”
London School of Economics Financial Market Group, London.
Campbell, J. Y., A.W. Lo, and A. C. MacKinlay (1997). The Econometrics of Financial Markets.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Chan, Y. (1983). “On the positive role of financial intermediation in allocation of venture capital in a
market with imperfect information.” Journal of Finance 38, 1543–68.
Cho, S. (1992). “Agency Costs, Management Stockholding, and Research and Development
Expenditures.” Seoul Journal of Economics 5(2), 127-52.
44

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Cochrane, J. (2005). “The risk and return of venture capital.” Journal of Financial Economics 75, 3–52.
Cornelli, F., Yosha, O. (2003). “Stage financing and the role of convertible debt.” Review of Economic
Studies 70, 1–32.
Czarnitzki, D. and K. Hussinger (2004). “he Link Between R&D Subsidies, R&D Spending, and
Technological Performance.” Mannheim, Germany: ZEW Discussion Paper No. 04-56.
Chung, K.H., Wright, P. (1998). “Corporate Policy and Market Value: A q Theory Approach.”
Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting 11(3), 293-310.
Eng, L. L., Shackell, M. (2001). “The Implications of Long Term Performance Plans and
Institutional Ownership for Firms' Research and Development Investments.” Journal of
Accounting, Auditing and Finance 16(2), 117-39.
Fazzari, S.M., Hubbard, R.G., Petersen, B.C. (1988). “Financing Constraints and Corporate
Investment.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1988(1), 141-205.
_____________. (2000). “Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Are Useful: A Comment on Kaplan
and Zingales.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, 695-705.
Francis, J., Smith, A. (1995). “Agency Costs and Innovation: Some Empirical Evidence,“ Journal of
Accounting and Economics 19(2/3), 383-409.
Gilson, R. J. (2003). “Engineering a Venture Capital Market: Lessons from the American
Experience.” Stanford Law Review 55: 1067.
Griliches, Z. (1992). “The Search for R&D Spillovers.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 94, S29-S47.
Gompers, P. (1996). “Grandstanding in the venture capital industry.” Journal of Financial Economics 42,
133–56.
__________. (1995). “Optimal investment, monitoring, and the staging of venture capital.” Journal of
Finance 50, 1461–89.

45

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

__________, Lerner, J. (2000). “Money chasing deals? The impact of fund inflows on private equity
valuations.” Journal of Financial Economics 55, 281–325.
__________, __________. (1999). “An analysis of compensation in the U.S. venture capital
partnership.” Journal of Financial Economics 51, 3–44.
__________, __________. (1998b). “What drives venture fundraising?.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity-Microeconomics, 149–92.
__________, __________. (1998a). “Venture capital distributions: short- and long-run reactions.”
Journal of Finance 53, 2161–83.
__________, __________. (1997). “Risk and reward in private equity investments: the challenge of
performance assessment.” Journal of Private Equity 1, 5–12.
__________, __________. (1996). “The use of covenants: an empirical analysis of venture
partnership agreements.” Journal of Law and Economics 39, 463–98.
Hajivassiliou, V., and F. Savignac (2008). “Financial constraints and a firm’s decision and ability of
innovate: Establishing direct and reverse effects.” London School of Economics and Banque
de France: manuscript.
Hall, B. H. (1996). “The Private and Social Returns to Research and Development.” In: Smith,
B.L.R, Barfield, C.E. (Eds.), Technology, R&D, and the Economy, 140-83. Brookings Institution
and the American Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC.
__________. (1994). “Corporate Capital Structure and Investment Horizons in the United States,
1976-1987.” Business History Review 68, 110-143.
__________. (1993). “R&D Tax Policy During the Eighties: Success or Failure?.” Tax Policy and the
Economy 7, 1-36.
__________. (1992). “Research and Development at the Firm Level: Does the Source of Financing
Matter?.” NBER Working Paper No. 4096, June.
46

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

__________. (1990). “The Impact of Corporate Restructuring on Industrial Research and
Development.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1990(1), 85-136.
___________, Maffioli, A. (2008), “Evaluating the Impact of Technology Development Funds in
Emerging Economies: Evidence from Latin America,” European Journal of Development Research
20 (2): 172–198, 2008.
__________, Mairesse, J., Branstetter, L., Crepon, B. (1999). “Does Cash Flow Cause Investment
and R&D: An Exploration using Panel Data for French, Japanese, and United States Firms
in the Scientific Sector.” In: Audretsch, D., Thurik, A.R. (Eds.), Innovation, Industry Evolution
and Employment. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
__________, Griliches, Z., Hausman, J.A. (1986). “Patents and R&D: Is There a Lag?.” International
Economic Review 27, 265-83.
__________, Van Reenen, J. (2000). “How Effective are Fiscal Incentives for R&D? A New Review
of the Evidence.” Research Policy 29, 449-469.
Harhoff, D. (1998). “Are There Financing Constraints for R&D and Investment in German
Manufacturing Firms?.” Annales d'Economie et de Statistique 49/50, 421-56.
Hellmann, T. (1998). “The allocation of control rights in venture capital contracts.” RAND Journal of
Economics 29, 57–76.
__________, Puri, M. (2000). “The interaction between product market and financing strategy: the
role of venture capital.” Review of Financial Studies 13, 959–84.
Himmelberg, C.P., Petersen, B.C. (1994). “R&D and Internal Finance: A Panel Study of Small Firms
in High-Tech Industries.” Review of Economics and Statistics 76, 38-51.
Hochberg, Y. (2005). Venture capital and corporate governance in the newly public firm.
Unpublished working paper, Northwestern University.

47

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Hsu, D. (2004). “What do entrepreneurs pay for venture capital affiliation?.” Journal of Finance 59,
1805–44.
Irwin, D., Klenow, P. (1996). “High tech R&D subsidies: estimating the effects of Sematech.”
Journal of International Economics 40, 323–44.
Jeng, L., Wells, P. (2000). “The determinants of venture funding: evidence across countries.” Journal
of Corporate Finance 6, 241–89.
Jensen, M.C., Meckling, W. (1976). “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs, and
Ownership Structure.” Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-60.
Johnson, M.S., Rao, R.P. (1997). “The Impact of Antitakeover Amendments on Corporate Financial
Performance.” Financial Review 32(4), 659-89.
Jones, C., Rhodes-Kropf, M. (2003). “The price of diversifiable risk in VC and private equity.”
Working paper, Columbia University.
Kaplan, S., Schoar, A. (2005). “Private equity performance: returns, persistence, and capital.” Journal
of Finance 60, 1791–823.
__________, Strömberg, P. (2003). “Financial contract theory meets the real world: an empirical
analysis of venture capital contracts.” Review of Economic Studies 70, 281–315.
__________, Zingales, L. (1997). “Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Provide Useful Measures
of Financing Constraints?’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 169-215.
Karaomerliolu, D.C., Jacobsson, S. (1999). “The Swedish Venture Capital Industry – An Infant,
Adolescent, or Grown-up?.” Chalmers Institute of Technology, Goteborg, Sweden.
Kortum, S., Lerner, J. (2000). “Assessing the contribution of venture capital to innovation.” RAND
Journal of Economics 31, 674–92.
Kraus, T. (2002). “Underpricing of IPOs and the certification role of venture capitalists: evidence
from Germany’s Neuer Markt. Working paper, University of Munich.
48

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Lach, S., Schankerman, M. (1988). “Dynamics of R&D and Investment in the Scientific Sector.”
Journal of Political Economy 97(4), 880-904.
Landier, A. (2006). Entrepreneurship and the Stigma of Failure. Unpublished working paper, New
York University.
Leland, H.E., Pyle, D.H. (1977). “Informational Asymmetries, Financial Structure, and Financial
Intermediation.” Journal of Finance 32, 371-87.
Lee, P., Wahal, S. (2004). “Grandstanding, certification and the underpricing of venture capital
backed IPOs.” Journal of Financial Economics 73, 375–407.
Lerner, J. (2009). The Boulevard of Broken Dreams: Why Public Efforts to Boost Entrepreneurship and Venture
Capital Have Failed—and What to Do About It. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
__________. (1999). “The Government as Venture Capitalist: The Long-run effects of the SBIR
Program.” Journal of Business 72, 285-318.
__________. (1998a). “’Angel’ Financing and Public Policy: An Overview.” Journal of Banking and
Finance 22, 773-783.
__________. (1995). “Venture capitalists and the oversight of private firms.” Journal of Finance 50,
301–18.
__________. (1994b). “Venture capitalists and the decision to go public.” Journal of Financial
Economics 35, 293–316.
__________. (1994a). “The syndication of venture capital investments.” Financial Management 23,
16–27.
__________, Sorensen, M., Stromberg, P. (2008). “Private equity and long-run investment: The case
of innovation.” Working paper no. 14623, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Levin, R.C., Klevorick, A.K., Nelson, R.R., Winter, S.G. (1987). “Appropriating the Returns from
Industrial Research and Development.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1987(3), 783-832.
49

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Majumdar, S.K., Nagarajan, A. (1997). “The Impact of Changing Stock Ownership Patterns in the
United States: Theoretical Implications and Some Evidence.” Revue d'Economie Industrielle 82,
39-54.
Mansfield, E., Schwartz, M., Wagner, S. (1981). “Imitation Costs and Patents: An Empirical Study.”
Economic Journal 91, 907-918.
Marx, L. (1994). “Negotiation and renegotiation of venture capital contracts.” Working paper,
University of Rochester.
Megginson, W., Weiss, K. (1991). “Venture capital certification in initial public offerings.” Journal of
Finance 46, 879–93.
Miller, M.H., Modigliani, F. (1961). “Dividend Policy, Growth, and the Valuation of Shares.” Journal
of Business 34, 411-33.
Modigliani, F., Miller, M.H. (1958). “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the Theory of
Investment.” American Economic Review 48, 261-97.
Mollica, M., Zingales, L. (2007). “The impact of venture capital on innovation and the creation of
new business.” Unpublished working paper, Univeristy of Chicago.
Mulkay, B., Hall, B.H., Mairesse, J. (2001). “Investment and R&D in France and in the United
States.” In: Deutsche Bundesbank (Ed.), Investing Today for the World of Tomorrow. Springer
Verlag.
Nelson, R.R. (1959). “The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research.” Journal of Political Economy
49, 297-306.
OECD. (1995). Venture Capital in OECD Countries. Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Devlopement, Paris.
Opler, T.C., Titman, S. (1994). “Financial Distress and Corporate Performance.” Journal of Finance
49(3), 1015-40.
50

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

__________. (1993). “The Determinants of Leveraged Buyout Activity: Free Cash Flow vs.
Financial Distress Costs.” Journal of Finance 48(5), 1985-99.
Poterba, J. (1989). “Venture capital and capital gains taxation.” In: Summer, L. (Ed.), Tax Policy and
the Economy. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Poterba, J. (1987). “How burdensome are capital gains taxes? Evidence from the United States.”
Journal of Public Economics 33, 157–72.
Pugh, W.N., Jahera, Jr., J.S., Oswald, S. (1999). “ESOPs, Takeover Protection, and Corporate
Decision Making.” Journal of Economics and Finance 23(2), 170-83.
Romer, P.M. (1986). “Increasing Returns and Long Run Growth.” Journal of Political Economy 94(5),
1002-1037.
Sahlman, W. (1990). “The structure and governance of venture capital organizations.” Journal of
Financial Economics 27, 473–524.
Sand Hill Econometrics (2009). “Benchmarking the Returns to Venture,” available at
http://www.sandhillecon.com/pdf/SandHillWhitePaper.pdf
Scherer, F.M. (1998). “The Size Distribution of Profits from Innovation.” Annales d'Economie et de
Statistique 49/50, 495-516.
Schumpeter, J. (1942). Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. Harper and Row (reprinted 1960), New
York.
Szewczyk, S.H., Tsetsekos, G.P., Zantout, Z.Z. (1996). “The Valuation of Corporate R&D
Expenditures: Evidence from Investment Opportunities and Free Cash Flow.” Financial
Management 25(1), 105-10.
Wallsten. S. (2000). “The effects of government-industry R&D programs on private R&D: the case
of the Small Business Innovation Research program“. RAND Journal of Economics 31, 82–100.

51

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Williamson, O.E. (1988). “Corporate Finance and Corporate Governance.” Journal of Finance 43, 56791.
Zantout, Z.Z. (1997). “A Test of the Debt Monitoring Hypothesis: The Case of Corporate R&D
Expenditures.” Financial Review 32(1), 21-48.

52

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Figure 1
Unconstrained Firm

Rate of return/Cost of funds

1.2

Demand for funds

Supply of funds

cost of
internal
funds

Supply of funds shifted out
A, B

0
0

10

R&D Investment

Figure 2
Constrained Firm

Rate of return/Cost of funds

1.2

Supply of funds

A

Supply of funds shifted out

cost of
internal
funds

B

Demand for funds
0
0

10

R&D Investment

53

Financing R&D and Innovation

B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Figure 3
2500

14.00
12.00

2000
10.00
1500

8.00
6.00

1000

4.00
500
2.00
0

0.00

Jan-89

Jan-91

Jan-93

Jan-95

Jan-97

Sand Hill Index (left hand scale)

Jan-99

Jan-01

Jan-03

Jan-05

Jan-07

Venture Money In (billions) (right hand scale)

Source: Sand Hill Econometrics website (2009)

Figure 4
Percentage of Venture Investment over GDP
Various Countries & Regions
0.45%
0.35%
0.30%
0.25%
0.20%
0.15%
0.10%
0.05%
0.00%
Israel
US
Canada
NZ
Australia
Thailand
Sweden
Singapore
Norway
Taiwan
Switzerland
Denmark
Finland
India
Belgium
UK
Vietnam
Hong Kong
Portugal
Netherland
China
Germany
Ireland
France
Japan
South
Spain
Indonesia
Austria
Philippines
Hungary
Malaysia
Italy
Poland
Greece
Czech
Romania

Percentage

0.40%

Country

54

Israel
US
Canada
NZ
Australia
Thailand
Sweden
Singapore
Norway
Taiwan
Switzerland
Denmark
Finland
India
Belgium
UK
Vietnam
Hong Kong
Portugal
Netherland
China
Germany
Ireland
France
Japan
South
Spain
Indonesia
Austria
Philippines
Hungary
Malaysia
Italy
Poland
Greece
Czech
Romania

Percentage

Financing R&D and Innovation
B. H. Hall and J. Lerner – August 2009

Figure 5

Country Share of Worldwide Seed and Startup
Venture Capital Funding in 2007

35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%

Country

55

