                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS AND TAX POLICY

                                        William Congdon
                                         Jeffrey R. Kling
                                       Sendhil Mullainathan

                                       Working Paper 15328
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15328


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2009




We thank the Smith Richardson Foundation, Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, and Russell Sage Foundation
for financial support. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as those of the Congressional Budget Office or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by William Congdon, Jeffrey R. Kling, and Sendhil Mullainathan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Behavioral Economics and Tax Policy
William Congdon, Jeffrey R. Kling, and Sendhil Mullainathan
NBER Working Paper No. 15328
September 2009
JEL No. D03,H2

                                            ABSTRACT

Behavioral economics is changing our understanding of how economic policy operates, including
tax policy. In this paper, we consider some implications of behavioral economics for tax policy, such
as how it changes our understanding of the welfare consequences of taxation, the relative desirability
of using the tax system as a platform for policy implementation, and the role of taxes as an element
of policy design. We do so by reviewing the logic of specific features of tax policy in light of recent
findings in areas such as tax salience, program take-up, and fiscal stimulus.


William Congdon                                    Sendhil Mullainathan
The Brookings Institution                          Department of Economics
1775 Massachusetts Ave NW                          Littauer 208
Washington, DC 20036                               Harvard University
wcongdon@brookings.edu                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                   and NBER
Jeffrey R. Kling                                   mullain@fas.harvard.edu
Congressional Budget Office
3403 Ordway St NW
Washington, DC 20016
and NBER
jeffrey.r.kling@gmail.com
         Rahm Emmanuel, the current White House Chief of Staff, has famously been quoted as

saying that: “You don’t ever want a crisis to go to waste; it’s an opportunity to do important

things that you would otherwise avoid” (Zeleny and Calmes, 2008). The recent crisis—the

recession and the associated financial emergency—represents such an opportunity for a wide

range of economic policies, including tax policy. This is true not just in some political or

operational sense: as an opportunity to accomplish policies we would otherwise avoid. But also

from a scientific perspective: as an opportunity to reconsider the intellectual foundations of

economic policy in ways we might otherwise not be motivated or encouraged to do.

         In this paper, we link this opportunity to rethink aspects of the standard economic

approach to tax policy with a compelling cause for doing so. We argue that the implications of

behavioral economics—the integration of economics and the psychology of preference formation

and choice—for public policy, including tax policy, have yet to be systematically explored, and

that this oversight leads to both mistaken policy and missed opportunity. Behavioral economists

have now accumulated several decades of findings indicating that the standard economic

assumptions about individual behavior are not accurate, that people do not act rationally, that

they are not perfectly self-interested, and that they hold inconsistent preferences. Moreover, and

especially in recent years, policy economists have increasingly come to see that these deviations

from the standard assumptions about behavior matter for economic policy. The most celebrated

example is the use of defaults in retirement savings: policies encouraging firms to automatically

enroll their workers in 401(k) plans, rather than waiting for individuals to sign up on their own,

seem to encourage participation and savings in those plans to an extent that is extremely difficult

to rationalize under standard assumptions about preference and choice (Madrian and Shea,

2001).




                                                  1
       Here we take up the question of how to think about incorporating results from behavioral

economics into tax policy. Because a complete reconceptualization of tax policy from the ground

up is beyond the scope of a single review paper, we take the approach of working through the

implications of behavioral economics in a series of extended examples, from three distinct levels

of analysis for tax policy: (1) understanding the welfare consequences of taxation; (2) using the

tax system as a platform for policy implementation; and (3) employing taxes as an element of

policy design.

       Welfare consequences. Perhaps the central concern of tax policy, from the perspective of

economics, is understanding how taxes matter for welfare in order to better design taxes that are

maximally efficient and equitable. To do this, economists have developed models of deadweight

loss and incidence. And based on these models, derived results for what optimal taxes look

like—results along the lines of Mirlees (1971) for taxes on labor, and along the lines of Ramsey

(1927) for commodity taxes. In applying these models to the practical matter of policy design,

these results are often incorporated by way of rules of thumb for what “good” taxes look like:

they are simple, they impose low rates on wide tax bases, they are imposed on relatively inelastic

goods, and so on. Crucially, however, the underlying models that generate these results depend

centrally on how individuals respond to taxation. In the standard model, the key factors for

understanding both tax efficiency and tax incidence are elasticities. But elasticities are simply a

parameterization of a behavioral response. And behavioral economics shows that how people

respond to taxes is less straightforward than the standard model supposes. Imperfectly rational

people will respond to taxes in a way that is mediated by psychology. In this paper, we review

the case for rethinking tax simplicity.




                                                  2
       Platform for policy implementation. For a number of reasons, both economic and

practical, a wide variety of public policies operate through the tax system. So, for example, some

transfer policies, like the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), are a part of the tax system. But

other platforms are available. Transfers, for example, can be done as standalone programs such

as the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program. Determining whether or

when it is desirable to implement policy through the tax code depends in part on how individuals

behave. That is, it depends not on how individuals respond to the taxes themselves, but how they

interact with the features of the system in place for tax collection. The issue we discuss here is

the attractive automaticity of the tax system.

       Element of policy design. Taxes are one tool among many in the policymaker toolbox. So

for example, in discussions of policy options for curbing carbon emissions, one tool

policymakers can reach for is a carbon tax. In some sense, the core idea of using taxes as an

element of policy design is that tax policy can be used to change behavior. And as behavioral

economics has informed how economists understand individual behavior, it also informs how

economists understand what levers are more or less effective for changing behavior. As a result,

behavioral economics changes standard conclusions about the usefulness and effectiveness of

taxes as elements of policy. We discuss this in the context of the problem of understanding how

best to use taxes for fiscal stimulus.



Behavioral economics

       Before discussing the implications of behavioral economics for tax policy, though, a brief

review of the relevant dimensions of behavioral economics is in order. The general contention of

behavioral economics is that the usual assumptions made in economics about how individuals




                                                  3
form and express preferences—that they are perfectly rational, that they are perfectly self-

interested, and so on—are not accurate representations of how individuals in fact think and

choose. This is, in one respect, not especially revelatory. These are simplifying assumptions,

used primarily for tractability in modeling and not intended as a real description of the world.

They survive within economics not because they are necessarily true, but because they are

useful.

          But behavioral economics goes further than merely observing that these assumptions

sometimes fail, in two respects. First, behavioral economics argues that the standard assumptions

are so consistently violated as to be neither literally true nor useful as modeling assumptions.

Second, that people violate those assumptions in identifiable and predictable ways. Psychologists

and behavioral economists have collected a lot of evidence about the specific behavioral

tendencies individuals exhibit, such as mental accounting, loss aversion, and hyperbolic

discounting. For the purposes of thinking about tax policy, it is sufficient to understand these

psychological insights aggregated at a relatively broad level, primarily in terms of the violations

from the standard assumptions that they represent. At this level, there are two basic classes of

deviations: individuals are imperfectly rational, and they hold non-standard preferences.

          Imperfect rationality. Imperfect rationality captures the general finding that individuals

are not especially good at choosing optimally. On the one hand, this is because individuals seem

to find it hard to know what is optimal. They have only limited attention to devote to choice,

leading them to be more like local than global optimizers. And they possess only limited

computational capacity, meaning that they have trouble even optimizing at all. Mental

accounting is an example of individuals failing to choose optimally in this way (Thaler, 1980).

On the other hand, individuals are not effective optimizers because they seem to find it hard to




                                                    4
do what is optimal. They possess only bounded self-control, and can have difficulty realizing

their intentions. Hyperbolic discounting is an example of individuals failing to behave optimally

in this way (Laibson, 1997).

       Non-standard preferences. The category of non-standard preferences captures the finding

that individuals seem to have preferences that are inconsistent with even the weak assumptions

standard economic models place on the form of preferences. That is, what individuals want is not

what economists typically assume. One such result is the finding of other-regarding preferences.

People are not always perfectly self-interested—they care about the welfare of others, and they

care about fairness (Andreoni and Miller, 2002; Kahnemen, Knetsch, and Thaler, 1986). Another

such result is reference dependence. People appear to form preferences around reference points.

Loss aversion is an example of such preferences (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979).



Rethinking tax simplicity

       The core of the economics of taxation is understanding the welfare effects of taxation.

This dimension of the economics of taxation is concerned with generating results about how to

raise revenue efficiently and fairly. This is done theoretically, in the optimal taxation literature,

and from there leads to practical rules for tax policy design. With behavioral agents, these rules

become somewhat less certain. Welfare results—both for efficiency and equity—depend on how

individuals respond to taxes. Because the way in which imperfectly rational people respond to

taxes will be mediated by psychology, results from behavioral economics will possibly change

conclusions about optimal taxation in a wide variety of ways. Here we focus on the evidence and

logic of one aspect of this, which is that behavioral economics leads to a rethinking of tax

simplicity.




                                                   5
       One of the practical design rules that comes out of standard welfare analysis of taxation is

that, other things being equal and in very general terms, simplicity is a goal of tax policy. Partly

this is because simplicity is associated with efficiency. Low tax rates on large bases, which are

relatively efficient, are simple relative to taxes with lots of exceptions to the definition of

income, which lead to smaller bases and higher rates. This conclusion also follows in part from

the effects of complexity on the costs of tax compliance and administration. Complex tax codes

are harder for people to comply with and more costly for authorities to administer. While there

are often real benefits to many complicating features of the tax code that can be weighed against

these costs, in general there is a tendency to view measures that complicate the tax code as more

often the result of political motivations than economic ones.

       Behavioral economics allows for behavioral responses to complexity that add nuance to,

and may even in some cases overturn, this conclusion. While the traditional case for tax

simplicity is indirect, related to achieving broad tax bases, or administrative, the behavioral

approach suggests that the degree of simplicity directly enters the optimal tax calculation. There

are at least three elements of this added nuance. First, complexity can affect behavioral responses

to otherwise economically equivalent taxes. Second, complexity can be used as a screening

mechanism to promote efficiency. Third, complexity may aid attainment of social goals.

       Complexity, behavioral response, and welfare. Perhaps the major implication of

behavioral economics for the welfare consequences of tax complexity comes from the fact that

imperfectly rational individuals can no longer be assumed to perceive taxes correctly. Individuals

will respond not to the tax rate as it is set, but as they construe it. The welfare consequences of

this are not clear-cut. Moreover, it raises questions about whether policymakers could be

improving welfare outcomes by deliberately manipulating tax salience, and how. Consider two




                                                   6
cases: salience effects, where consumers may fail to perceive complex or obscure taxes

accurately or at all, and benefit taxes, where the welfare implications of taxation depend on

consumers making the connection between taxes and the benefits they fund.

        Evidence suggests that salience effects are present with respect to both commodity and

labor taxes. In the case of commodity taxes, research has shown that some taxes are all but

ignored by consumers. In one widely cited study, Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (forthcoming) show

that individuals largely ignore sales taxes—taxes that are not ordinarily included in marked

prices—on taxed items in a supermarket. A related piece of evidence comes from the work of

Finkelstein (2009) who studies the effects of automated toll collection, finding that individuals

pay less attention to tolls collected in this less salient manner. In the case of taxes on labor,

emerging evidence finds that the behavioral response to income taxes is also muted by their

complexity. Saez (2009) finds little evidence that taxpayers bunch at kink points in the income

tax schedule, a result consistent with imperfectly rational taxpayers failing to accurately perceive

a complex and opaque tax code. Additional evidence comes from Chetty and Saez (2009), who

find a behavioral response to an intervention providing information about the EITC schedule,

suggesting an imperfect understanding of the relevant tax schedule in the absence of the

intervention.

        Results such as these raise questions as to what optimal tax policy is or should be with

respect to tax salience. To some extent, the degree to which taxes are salient is a choice variable

for policymakers. For example, policymakers can set commodity taxes as sales taxes, which are

typically not posted in the price the consumer sees, or they can set commodity taxes as excise

taxes, which typically are. There is work that bears on this question, for example Slemrod and

Kopczuk (2002) develop a model in which the government can affect the relevant elasticity. But




                                                   7
the theoretical literature has yet to yield the type of rules of thumb with respect to optimal tax

salience that translate into practical policy recommendations. When policymakers can choose to

keep some taxes hidden from consumers, this will keep the elasticity low, which, other things

equal, is desirable for efficiency purpose. But with a binding budget constraint, spending too

much on the good with a hidden tax will leave less income for subsequent purchases—distorting

individual consumption and decreasing welfare. Resolving the net welfare consequences of tax

salience is thus an important future line of research.

       Complexity may possibly lead to positive welfare gains in the case of benefit taxes—such

as the Social Security payroll tax or unemployment taxes—where the tax funds an identifiable

benefit. The standard way of modeling the incidence and efficiency of taxes with this property is

usually analogous to the welfare consequences of mandated benefits (Summers, 1989). In a

behavioral world, however, it can no longer be assumed that merely implementing a benefit tax

leads to a tax being perceived as such by those on whom it falls. So, for example, Liebman and

Zeckhauser (2004) raise the possibility that imperfectly rational individuals may ignore the claim

to Social Security benefits they accrue by paying the Social Security payroll tax, a behavior they

memorably label as “ostriching.” In this case, complexity, at least a particular variety of tightly

controlled complexity, can improve outcomes. Having a separate tax schedule and system does

introduce inefficiencies. It doubles up on some administrative functions, and it leads to different

definitions of income and tax bases. But this same complexity is also likely to be useful in

getting individuals to connect, for example, Social Security taxes with Social Security benefits.

Certainly, it seems that individuals in the current system are more likely to make that connection

than under an alternative in which payroll taxes are folded in to the income tax. And by




                                                  8
promoting this connection to individuals, it likely makes them more apt to treat the tax as a

mandated benefit.

       Complexity, screening and welfare. A related but separate consideration appears in

allowing for varying degrees of sophistication about tax complexity. Take the following

example: social returns to education are high, and as a result a tax credit for education is

desirable. Assume, however, that variation in the social return to education across individuals is

correlated with their being savvy about tax complexity. To make the example simple, assume

two types: one type has social return and is savvy, and the other type has only private return and

is not savvy. With a simple tax credit, then everyone participates and the government subsidizes

the type that only generates private return as well as the social return type. With a complicated

credit, only the savvy respond, and the subsidy is provided only to those who generate a social

return, improving the targeting efficiency of the subsidy.

       Complexity, social goals, and welfare. Finally, complexity and imperfectly rational

behavior can combine to create new opportunities for tax policy to achieve social goals. One

situation where complexity can create such an opportunity is when the complexity of a tax leads

individuals to respond to a tax in error, but that error leads individuals to respond in a way that

fits with policymakers’—and possibly society’s—preferences. For example, the result that the

EITC strongly encourages work may be due in part to the fact that the EITC follows a

complicated schedule, to which recipients can bring only limited attention and limited

computational resources. What evidence is available does suggest that EITC eligible individuals

do possess only imperfect knowledge of how the credit operates (Smeeding, Ross Phillips and

O'Connor, 2000; Ross Phillips, 2001; Chetty and Saez, 2009). The evidence of the impact of the

EITC on labor force participation and hours worked is consistent with a model in which




                                                  9
individuals only understand the work incentives of the EITC in some approximate sense. For

instance, an increase in labor force participation with little effect on hours worked could be a

result of workers understanding the average effects of the EITC on earnings but not the marginal

effects—a variant of “schmeduling,” in the terminology of Liebman and Zeckhauser (2004). The

key is to note that, while this is an error on the individual level, from society’s perspective, this

may be thought of as desirable. It may even be possible to combine schmeduling with hidden

taxes so that individuals respond in ways that incorporate income effects (from schmeduling)

while reducing distortions from substitution effects (from hidden taxes).

       Another opportunity created by behavioral economics for attaining social goals with

complex tax policy comes about due to the ambiguous relationship of tax complexity to tax

fairness. That is, from recognizing that there is a welfare component to taxation that is about

preferences, rather than behavioral response. Behavioral economics stresses that individuals are

not, in practice, perfectly self-interested. They care about the welfare of others and they care

about the fairness of the process that generates outcomes. There are several implications for the

relationship between complexity and welfare. The first is simply that the fairest tax code may not

be the simplest. In that case, preferences for an equitable or fair tax system that may require

some degree of complexity will compete with the costs of complexity. Another is that it likely

matters for welfare results, more than is typically supposed, what people believe their taxes are

being used for. Behavioral economics, in other words, may make the consideration of balanced

budget incidence more crucial in judging the true incidence of taxes. In general, since the usual

assumptions about preferences are difficult to justify, models and calculations of efficiency and

incidence should be more careful about considering welfare effects of this nature.




                                                  10
       Of course, many of the standard drawbacks of tax complexity still remain even in the

presence of behavioral agents. And, in fact, there are some reasons to believe that tax complexity

along some dimensions is even more costly with behavioral agents than with perfectly rational

agents. The costs, for example, of compliance with a complex tax code are possibly much larger

with imperfectly rational individuals. And complexity probably dooms the effectiveness of some

desirable aspects of the tax code. For example, complex subsidies to retirement savings may not

be effective, as in the case of the Savers’ Credit (Duflo et al., 2006). Taken all together,

behavioral economics does not so much suggest that tax simplicity is less or more desirable than

in the standard model, so much as it changes and complicates the relationship between simplicity

and welfare.



The attractive automaticity of the tax system

       Another dimension to tax policy is that the administrative apparatus that has been built to

levy and collect taxes is often used in order to implement policies that sometimes have very little

to do with taxes per se. Perhaps the clearest example of this is with transfer policies such as the

EITC. Policies like the EITC are a near substitute for standalone transfer policies, such as TANF

or food stamps. But the one is implemented through the tax system, and the others are not. The

tax system is used for a variety of such purposes, from subsidizing higher education to

encouraging particular forms of saving. On the one hand, such programs impose administrative

challenges and monitoring costs on tax agencies, and add to compliance costs by further

complicating an already burdensome tax problem. On the other hand, the marginal burdens—for

tax administrators and benefit claimants alike—may be smaller when they are added to the tax

system in this way rather than implemented as a separate program requiring its own




                                                  11
administrative devices and application and take up processes. This is the primary tradeoff in

judging when implementing policies through the tax system is likely to be worthwhile relative to

available alternatives. Behavioral economics changes the terms of this tradeoff, so that different

conclusions might be reached about when it is appropriate to implement policy through the tax

code and when it is not when the targets of such policies are imperfectly rational. One way in

which the tax code becomes an even more attractive apparatus for implementing policy in a

behavioral world is that it features an attractive automaticity.

       The automaticity of implementing programs through the tax code comes from the

structure of the existing tax system, especially the income tax system. Paying income taxes is

nearly automatic, from the perspective of many individuals, due to features like tax withholding.

And even settling taxes, as painful as that can be, is relatively automatic compared with other

government programs: filing taxes is difficult, but not necessarily more difficult than is, say,

applying for food stamps. In fact, filing taxes is in some respects easier and more automatic. For

example, while the government requires that individuals are sent the documentation they need—

W-2s, 1099s, and so forth— in order to file their taxes, an application for food stamps can

require a paperwork burden that can be equally daunting, but individuals are largely left to

collect their own documentation and records. Finally, while there are notable exceptions, the tax

system is relatively distinct in that a robust and widespread network of third parties has arisen

that make settlement even more automatic—either by selling filers simplifying software, or the

service of preparing taxes outright.

       The attractiveness of the automaticity of the tax system comes from the fact that

accumulating evidence suggests that barriers to taking up programs, even minor barriers such as

application costs or waiting times, can discourage program participation out of proportion to the




                                                  12
magnitude of the costs they impose (Bertrand, Mullainathan, and Shafir, 2006). That human

frailties—procrastinating filing a form, or being put off by the tediousness or hassle of

completing it, or failing to understand program rules—can lead qualifying individuals to forgo

benefits. Moreover, there is a concern in such an environment that program non-participants are

then not those who value the program the least but instead those who understood the rules the

least or faced the biggest procrastination problem. Such barriers to take up may induce an

unattractive selection in program participants. In some cases, such as transfer programs, those

most put off by complex or burdensome program application requirements might be the very

target population. As a result, this feature of the tax system, as it happens to exist, intersects with

an element of policy design emphasized by behavioral findings. There are several examples of

how policy can or might exploit that intersection.

       Transfers. To continue with the example given above, policies that seek to redistribute or

alleviate hardship can be operated either as standalone policies or as part of the tax code. At the

broadest level, such policies can be thought of as part of the parameterization of redistribution in

either case. However, in this paper, we only consider the administrative and implementation

issues. To qualify for food stamps, in most cases individuals have to complete a cumbersome

application process. To qualify for the EITC requires a marginal set of steps on a tax return that

many qualifying individuals would file in any event. The take up rates reflect this difference:

Estimates suggest that only about 67 percent of eligible individuals receive food stamps, while

the EITC may reach as many as 94 percent of eligible households (Wolkwitz, 2008; Blumenthal,

Erard, and Ho, 2005). This discrepancy and the causes for it should ideally inform discussions

of how to administer such programs. Finally, note that while the main existing choices are

between operating policies as part of the tax code or as standalone programs, an innovative third




                                                  13
option is being tested in a number of contexts that attempts to operate enrollment into such

programs alongside the tax system. These promising experiments start from the observation that

much of the information needed for determining eligibility for such programs is already

contained on the tax return. Noting this, these experiments take the approach of taking

information off of individual tax returns at the time of filing and using it to assist them in

applying for existing programs, such as financial aid for college (Bettinger, Long, and

Oreopoulos, 2009). There are ways that policy could further promote these efforts, such as by

synchronizing the timing of the financial aid cycle in college admissions with the tax season.

       Savings. Automatic features of the tax code can also be used to improve the

implementation of policies that aim to encourage personal savings, including retirement savings.

Many tax filers receive refunds, and a large and growing fraction elect to receive those refunds

through direct deposit. When an individual files taxes, it is a relatively trivial portion of the

process to specify where that refund will go. Policy can encourage directing all or a portion of

refunds into accounts where they are likely to be saved rather than spent—Tufano, Schneider,

and Beverly (2005) have called this a “savable moment.” One recent policy innovation to

encourage this behavior has been the advent of split refunds. Since 2007, individuals have been

able to split their refunds across multiple accounts, including savings accounts and IRAs.

Evidence suggests that this policy might work to encourage saving (Beverly, Scheider, and

Tufano, 2006).

       Health insurance. Finally, consider the policy problem of expanding health insurance

coverage. This is a clear example of a policy goal that, in itself, has little if anything to do with

taxes. But looking at both recent and proposed reforms, it seems clear that efforts to expand

health insurance coverage will consider seriously the possibility of interacting with the tax




                                                  14
system. Here, too, such policies can potentially make use of the automatic features of the tax

system. Where increased coverage is pursued through the expansion of public programs, such as

Medicaid, this could take the form of aligning in some ways the enrollment process with the tax

filing process. For example, while approximately 21 percent of children eligible for Medicaid or

SCHIP are estimated to be uninsured, roughly 90 percent of those children live in families that

file a federal income tax return. Based on this, and the fact that the tax return already contains

much of the information necessary to determine Medicaid eligibility, Stan Dorn and others have

proposed methods for using the tax system to promote enrollment in these programs (2009).

       Even where health insurance expansions are proposed to take the form of some kind of

individual mandate, there are automatic features of the tax system that could be an integral part

of making enrollment as easy as possible. The Massachusetts plan, for example, verifies its

health insurance mandate through the state income tax return. A national plan could be modeled

after the Massachusetts plan along these lines, yet go even further by modifying the tax form to

collect health insurance status and then using this information to do automatic enrollment for free

insurance (if determination can be made based on the previous year’s income) and to proactively

reach out to those eligible for subsidized insurance. And if tax returns were to shift to a return-

free filing system in the future, data from insurers on who is covered could be matched with tax

returns to calculate eligibility for free or subsidized insurance as the first step in automatic

enrollment.

       A national plan for health insurance coverage expansion could also leverage the tax

system’s collections infrastructure and facilitate enrollment by deducting estimated premiums

through paycheck withholding, transferring those amounts to a health insurance connector to be

applied to a policy of the individuals’ choice. For instance, contributions could be collected




                                                  15
through withholding with the IRS sending pre-filled W4 forms to individuals allowing voluntary

collection of their share of premiums. Our estimates, based on tabulations of the Current

Population Survey, indicate that of the 45 million uninsured, as many as 29 million live in a

family with someone who, at some point in the year, worked at a firm with 10 or more people. A

tax-withholding based system that applied to such workers could thus conceivably facilitate

enrollment of two-thirds of the uninsured in any given year.



Taxes and fiscal policy

           Finally, the use of taxes to achieve fiscal policy ends is a good, and timely, example of

using taxes as a tool of policy. A goal of fiscal policy is to achieve macroeconomic

stabilization—in the current crisis the task has been to stimulate the economy in the face of slack

aggregate demand. Alternative forms of tax cuts for this purpose are judged against each other

and against spending proposals according to the “bang for the buck” each is believed to deliver.

And for this purpose, there exist a standard set of design rules of thumb for what a fiscal stimulus

should look like—for example, that the timing of the stimulus should match the moment of slack

demand. What behavioral economics adds to this analysis is to suggest that design rules at this

level are, by themselves, insufficient for ensuring tax cuts are an effective stimulus. Because

individuals are imperfectly rational, small changes in the way tax cuts are presented or delivered

can affect how individuals respond. A literature evaluating these effects has generated some

results.

           Framing tax cuts. One lesson is that the framing of tax cuts can affect whether and when

they are spent, and thus their stimulative impact. The results of experimental work by Epley,

Mak, and Idson (2006) provide the primary piece of evidence that this is the case. The authors




                                                    16
find that tax cuts presented as a “bonus” might be more likely to be spent than tax cuts presented

as a “rebate”. The authors interpret this as a result of reference dependence—that when

individuals perceive the tax cut as a gain (a “bonus”) rather than as a foregone loss (a “rebate”),

they are more likely to spend the tax cut.

        Delivering tax cuts. Another lesson is that how tax cuts are delivered can affect whether

and how they are spent. The most recent stimulus bill, for example, the American Recovery and

Reinvestment Act of 2009, rather than providing a lump sum tax cut (either as a rebate or a

bonus), delivered its primary tax cut in the form of reduced withholding. The idea being that tax

cuts that reduce withholding might be more effective than lump sum rebates. This was based in

part on past experiences that suggest a greater willingness to spend out of reduced withholding,

such as shown in Shapiro and Slemrod (1995), which found a propensity to spend out of a

reduction in withholding rates even in the absence of a change in the tax rate. Additionally, a

recent laboratory experiment done by Chambers and Spencer (2008) found subjects were more

likely to plan to spend a hypothetical tax cut delivered as many small payments rather than one

delivered as a lump sum.

        Finally, while not the focus here, note that deviations from the standard model of

behavior have obvious implications for understanding the macroeconomics of policies such as

these. Akerlof and Shiller (2009) provide an overview of the potential role of behavioral

economics in macroeconomics and macroeconomic policy.



Conclusion

        While behavioral economics does not yet provide firm and detailed answers for how tax

policy should best reflect the fact that individuals are not perfectly rational, it clearly raises




                                                   17
relevant and important questions. The available evidence, from economics and from psychology,

both provokes doubt about some of the standard conclusions in tax policy and points the way to

some tentative new conclusions. But the process of reconsidering those results in full, and the

theoretical and empirical research that it ultimately requires, is just now beginning.



References

Akerlof, George A., and Robert J. Shiller. Animal Spirits: How Human Psychology Drives the

       Economy, and Why It Matters for Global Capitalism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University

       Press, 2009.

Andreoni, James and John H. Miller. “Giving According to GARP: An Experimental Test of the

       Consistency of Preferences for Altruism.” Econometrica 70 No. 2 (March, 2002): 737–

       53.

Bertrand, Marianne, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Eldar Shafir, “Behavioral Economics and

       Marketing in Aid of Decision Making Among the Poor.” Journal of Public Policy and

       Marketing 25 No. 1 (Spring, 2006): 8–23.

Bettinger, Eric, Bridget Terry Long, and Philip Oreopoulos. “Increasing Postsecondary

       Enrollment among Low-Income Families: A Project to Improve Access to College

       Information and Financial Aid: The FAFSA H&R Block Experiment.” Harvard

       University. Mimeo, 2009.

Beverly, Sondra, Daniel Scheider, and Peter Tufano. “Splitting Tax Refunds and Building

       Savings: An Empirical Test.” In Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 20, edited by

       James M. Poterba, 111–162. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research,

       2006.




                                                 18
Blumenthal, Marsha, Brian Erard, and Chih-Chin Ho. “Participation and Compliance with the

       Earned Income Tax Credit.” National Tax Journal 58 No. 2 (June, 2005): 189–213.

Chambers, Valrie, and Marilyn Spencer. “Does Changing the Timing of a Yearly Individual Tax

       Refund Change the Amount Spent vs. Saved?” Journal of Economic Psychology 29 No. 6

       (December, 2008):856–62.

Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence.”

       American Economic Review (forthcoming).

Chetty, Raj, and Emmanuel Saez. “Teaching the Tax Code: Earnings Responses to an

       Experiment with EITC Recipients.” NBER Working Paper No. 14836. Cambridge, MA:

       National Bureau of Economic Research, April, 2009.

Dorn, Stan, Bowen Garrett, Cynthia Perry, Lisa Clemans-Cope, and Aaron Luca. “Nine in Ten:

       Using the Tax System to Enroll Eligible, Uninsured Children into Medicaid and SCHIP.”

       Urban Institute Working Paper. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute, January, 2009.

Duflo, Esther, William G. Gale, Jeffrey B. Liebman, Peter Orszag, and Emmanuel Saez. “Saving

       Incentives for Low and Middle Income Families: Evidence from a Field Experiment with

       H&R Block.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 No. 4 (November, 2006): 1311–

       46.

Epley, Nicholas, Dennis Mak, and Lorraine Chen Idson. “Bonus or Rebate?: The Impact of

       Income Framing on Spending and Saving.” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 19

       No. 3 (July, 2006): 213–27.

Finkelstein, Amy. “E-Z Tax: Tax Salience and Tax Rates.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics

       (forthcoming).




                                             19
Kahnemen, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard Thaler. “Fairness as a Constraint on Profit

       Seeking: Entitlements in the Market.” American Economic Review 76 No. 4 (September,

       1986): 728–41.

Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk.”

       Econometrica 47 No. 2 (March, 1979): 263–91.

Laibson, David. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” The Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 112 No. 2 (May, 1997): 443–77.

Liebman, Jeffrey B., and Richard J. Zeckhauser. “Schmeduling.” Harvard University. Mimeo,

       2004.

Madrian, Brigitte C., and Dennis F. Shea. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)

       Participation and Savings Behavior.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 No. 4

       (November, 2001):1149–87.

Mirlees, James A. “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation.” Review of

       Economic Studies 38 No. 114 (April, 1971): 175 –208.

Ramsey, Frank. “A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation.” Economic Journal 37 No. 145

       (March, 1927): 47–61.

Ross Phillips, Katherin, “The Earned Income Tax Credit: Knowledge Is Money.” Political

       Science Quarterly 116 No. 3 (Fall, 2001): 413–24.

Saez, Emmanuel. “Do Tax Filers Bunch at Kink Points? Evidence, Elasticity Estimation, and

       Salience Effects.” University of California at Berkeley. Mimeo, 2009.

Shapiro, Matthew D. and Joel Slemrod. “Consumer Response to the Timing of Income: Evidence

       from a Change in Tax Withholding.” American Economic Review 85 No. 1 (March,

       1995): 274–83.




                                              20
Slemrod, Joel, and Wojciech Kopczuk. "The Optimal Elasticity of Taxable Income." Journal of

       Public Economics 84 No. 1 (April, 2002): 91–112.

Smeeding, Timothy M., Katherin Ross Phillips, and Michael O'Connor. “The EITC: Expectation,

       Knowledge, Use, and Economic and Social Mobility.” National Tax Journal 53 No. 4

       (December, 2000): 1187–210.

Summers, Lawrence H. "Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits." American Economic

       Review, 79 No. 2 (May, 1989): 177–83.

Thaler, Richard H. “Toward a Positive Theory of Consumer Choice.” Journal of Economic

       Behavior and Organization 1 No. 1 (March, 1980): 39–60.

Tufano, Peter, Daniel Schneider, and Sondra Beverly. “Leveraging Tax Refunds to Encourage

       Saving.” Retirement Security Project policy brief 2005-8. Washington, D.C.: Retirement

       Security Project, August, 2005.

Wolkwitz, Kari. Trends in Food Stamp Program Participation Rates: 2000–2006. Washington,

       D.C.: Mathematica Policy Research, Inc., June 2008.

Zeleny, Jeff, and Jackie Calmes. “Obama, Assembling Team, Turns to Economy.” The New York

       Times (November 7, 2008): A1.




                                               21
