                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    HOW LARGE ARE RETURNS TO SCHOOLING? HINT:
                            MONEY ISN'T EVERYTHING

                                          Philip Oreopoulos
                                          Kjell G. Salvanes

                                        Working Paper 15339
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15339


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2009




We thank Florian Hoffman for his very helpful research assistance. We also thank Kevin Milligan,
Enrico Moretti, Stacey Chen, Costas Meghir, Pedro Carneiro, Matthias Perry, and Dean Lillard for
providing data and code, and David Autor, Judith Scott-Clayton, Brian Jacob, Sue Dynarski, Aloysius
Siow, David Figlio, Kevin Milligan, and John Helliwell for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Philip Oreopoulos and Kjell G. Salvanes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
How large are returns to schooling? Hint: Money isn't everything
Philip Oreopoulos and Kjell G. Salvanes
NBER Working Paper No. 15339
September 2009
JEL No. I20,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper explores the many avenues by which schooling affects lifetime well-being. Experiences
and skills acquired in school reverberate throughout life, not just through higher earnings. Schooling
also affects the degree one enjoys work and the likelihood of being unemployed. It leads individuals
to make better decisions about health, marriage, and parenting. It also improves patience, making
individuals more goal-oriented and less likely to engage in risky behavior. Schooling improves trust
and social interaction, and may offer substantial consumption value to some students. We discuss
various mechanisms to explain how these relationships may occur independent of wealth effects, and
present evidence that non-pecuniary returns to schooling are at least as large as pecuniary ones. Ironically,
one explanation why some early school leavers miss out on these high returns is that they lack the
very same decision making skills that more schooling would help improve.


Philip Oreopoulos
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. george Street
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
philip.oreopoulos@utoronto.ca

Kjell G. Salvanes
Department of Economics
Norwegian School of Economics & Business
Hellev. 30, N-5035 Bergen, NORWAY
IZA and CEP
kjell.salvanes@nhh.no
I. Introduction



         This paper explores the many avenues by which schooling affects lifetime

well‐being. Economists’ traditional views about schooling have been substantially

influenced by Gary Becker’s (e.g. 1964) approach to modeling long term decision‐

making. Usually under this approach schooling is viewed as purely a financial

investment: Individuals spend money and time to acquire (or signal) human capital,

in hopes of greater lifetime wealth in return. With more wealth comes more

opportunity for consumption, and with more consumption comes more well‐being.

Differences in costs and benefits, which may themselves depend on social‐economic

backgrounds, may help explain why some obtain more schooling than others (e.g.

see Card 2001).

         Treating schooling as a financial investment has been hugely successful in

explaining labor market behavior. It also has helped simplify macro and micro

models involving attainment choices, with parameters that can be estimated using

readily available data and computing power (even from the 1950s). Better data and

innovative empirical techniques have led to, we think, general consensus that in the

United States and other developed countries: 1) the monetary returns to annual

adult income from spending one year in high school or college are about 7 to 12

percent, on average; 2) returns are generally higher among individuals from more

disadvantaged backgrounds; and 3) returns have generally increased since the

1980s.




                                          1
       With basic theoretical and empirical findings on the financial returns to

schooling well‐established, or at least well‐debated, researchers are now paying

more attention to what schooling actually does. In the traditional investment model,

schooling itself is often treated as a black box. Increased human capital comes in the

form of increased ‘productivity’ or one‐dimensional ‘skill’.       Alternative views

consider more realistic cases in which schooling generates many experiences and

affects many dimensions of skill that, in turn, affect many central aspects of

individuals’ lives both in and outside the labor market. Schooling may not only

affect income but also the degree one enjoys working, or the likelihood of not being

able to find work. Schooling could also lead individuals to making better decisions

about health, marriage, and parenting style. Some suggest schooling improves

patience, making individuals more goal‐oriented and less likely to engage in risky

behavior. Occasionally, social scientists also recognize student‐life has consumption

value too.

       These other views imply potentially very important non‐pecuniary returns.

One way to think about this is to consider how much someone’s future well‐being

might change from additional schooling without a change in wealth (suppose, for

example, after two years of college an individual graduates in an unexpected

recession that leads to lower future wages that are enough to perfectly offset

earnings increases from schooling). We attempt to depict this type of scenario in

Figure 1 by estimating differences in self‐reported adult happiness across school

attainment levels, with and without holding family income constant. The black bars

graph the fraction of 25 to 45 year‐old Americans born in the 1972 to 2000 General



                                          2
Social Surveys (GSSs) who self‐report being overall happy or very happy with life,

after conditioning for a large set of family background controls and using the overall

fraction happy among high school graduates (89 percent) as the baseline.1 While

obviously an imperfect measure of the causal effect of schooling on well‐being, a

relationship between self‐reported happiness and school attainment levels clearly

exists.2 High school graduates with no additional schooling report being happy 8

percentage points more often than high school dropouts. College graduates report

being happy 5 percentage points more often than high school graduates. What we

want to emphasize is what happens when we graph this relationship when also

conditioning on a proxy for wealth. The white bars in Figure 1 show the same

relationship between schooling and happiness, but after conditioning on the family

income bracket an individual reports in a given survey year, again using the overall

1 The sample includes all 25‐45 year‐olds from the 1972‐2000 General Social
Surveys, born in the United States in 1970 or later. The graph reports relative
differences in average self‐reported happiness by whether an individual’s highest
level of schooling is less than high school (displayed as 0‐11 years of schooling),
high school (12 years), some college but no bachelors degree (13‐15 years), or at
least a bachelors degree (16+ years). Before conditioning for income, the variable,
whether an individual self‐reports being happy or very happy about life overall, is
regressed on age, year, gender, race, state of birth, and year of birth fixed effects, as
well as family composition at age 16, mother and father’s education, mother’s
working status, father’s occupational prestige score, family’s relative income at age
16, and the schooling attainment categories (less than high school (0‐11), high
school (12), some college but no bachelor’s degree (13‐15), and at least a bachelor’s
degree (16+), with those reporting high school as their highest level of schooling
omitted. The coefficients are presented relative to the overall high school graduate
mean. The results after conditioning for income include fixed effects for self‐
reported income categories in each dataset year. The data appendix provides more
details.
2 Subjective measures of well‐being cannot accurately capture true levels of well‐

being. But even with measurement error, the evidence is clear that these questions
correlate well with more objective signals of well‐being. Schwarz and Strack (1999)
provide a useful survey and summary of these results. See also Castriota (2006) for
a review on the literature linking schooling and happiness.


                                            3
fraction happy among high school graduates as the baseline. The relationship

weakens, but only by about half. That is, after reporting having roughly the same

annual household income, high school graduates still report being happy about 4

percentage points more often than high school dropouts, and college graduates

report being happy slightly more than 2 percentage points more often than high

school graduates. The graph is at least suggestive of the possibility that schooling

affects individual well‐being through many additional channels other than through

income.

        This article explores this possibility further by presenting recent research on

the theoretical and empirical links between schooling and non‐pecuniary outcomes.

The next section documents many relationships between schooling and measures of

social‐economic success, which seem to exist while holding income constant. We

include a discussion on the various mechanisms researchers have proposed to

explain how these relationships might occur. We also emphasize the importance of

not underestimating the consumption value of schooling for some individuals when

considering non‐pecuniary returns. The third section addresses issues in how to

interpret these relationships. We discuss earlier work, and attempt to provide more

convincing evidence that these relationships are causal by using within sibling and

twin variation in schooling for a large sample of Norwegian adults, and by using

schooling differences induced by changes in US compulsory schooling laws over

time.   Section four concludes with a discussion on the implications from the

possibility that the combined pecuniary and non‐pecuniary benefits from additional

schooling are very large.



                                          4
       Note that we deliberately restrict our discussion to private returns.

Additional effects of higher aggregate schooling on outcomes such as economic

growth, innovation, city crime, tax revenue, and other externalities are beyond the

scope of this paper. Interested readers may consult review articles by Moretti

(2004) and Hanuchek (2002).




II. What does schooling do?




Non­pecuniary returns to schooling in the Labor Market



       An easy starting place to look for non‐pecuniary returns to schooling is fringe

benefits, paid by employers on top of earnings. We are defining pecuniary returns

here as strictly monetary because returns to schooling on earnings only captures

monetary gains. Fringe benefits are not included. These include medical insurance,

pension contributions, paid vacations, stock options, and so on. They tend to flow

disproportionately more to workers with more schooling. Haveman and Wolfe

(1984) cite studies that suggest monetary equivalent returns to schooling are 10 to

40 percent higher when factoring in these indirect gains.

       Possibilities for non‐pecuniary returns grow quickly when realizing just how

much of daily life involves work. Schooling affects not only how much we earn, but

how we do it. Some jobs offer more rewarding challenges and experiences. Some



                                          5
offer more opportunities for more enjoyable social interactions. The Occupational

Information Network (O*NET) measures these kinds characteristics for each

occupation in the United States. In particular, the O*NET defines a set of ‘worker

value’ variables that measure aspects of work “important to a person’s

satisfaction”.3 Figure 2 graphs the relationships between schooling and three of

these variables: Achievement (a measure of accomplishment that employees may

feel while on the job), Independence (a measure of an occupation’s autonomy and

opportunity for creativity), and Relationships (a measure of how much social

interaction occurs on the job). Each variable is on a 7 point scale, with 7 being the

highest level. We match these descriptors and their corresponding occupations to

workers aged 25 to 45 year‐old in the General Social Survey. The black bars graph

the mean O*NET values after conditioning on a large set of family background

controls and using the mean value among high school graduates as the baseline. The

white bars show the same relationship but after conditioning on family income

bracket reported in the same survey year (the GSS’s only measure of respondent

income), and again using the high school mean as a reference point. The patterns are

clear: workers from similar observable family backgrounds but with more schooling

are in jobs that offer more sense of accomplishment, more autonomy, and more

opportunity for social interaction.    Even among workers with roughly similar

incomes, the more educated have more rewarding jobs. The pictures look the same

when looking at the three other ‘work value’ variables in the O*NET: recognition




3   The O*NET’s web site is www.onetcenter.org.


                                          6
(inside and outside the firm), support (from managers and co‐workers), and

working conditions (including job security).4

       Non‐pecuniary returns arise from how work affects individuals on and off the

job. Work provides a reference by which individuals define themselves relative to

others. As Robert Solow puts it:



“We live in a society in which social status and self‐esteem are strongly tied both to

occupation and income. Of course occupation and income are correlated, but not

perfectly correlated. It seems undeniable to me that both occupation and income

are significant variables. The way others look at us, and the way we look at

ourselves, are both income related, and both are job related at given income.”

(Solow 1990, p. 9)



       The first two panels of Figure 3 show the relationship between schooling and

overall measures of job satisfaction using the same data and definitions above (and

using the same data and definitions for other outcome variables below).                5


Occupational Prestige Scores reported in the GSS are calculated by compiling


4 Workers in jobs with less desirable traits may implicitly be compensated with
higher wages compared to similarly skilled workers in more enjoyable jobs. If
compensating wage differentials explained all of the observed schooling‐
occupational‐quality relationship, the corresponding income relationship should be
negative. Clearly this is not the case. Pecuniary and non‐pecuniary effects for
individuals with more schooling and more skills are additive rather than offsetting.

5Our measure of occupational prestige compiles a nationally representative sample
of people’s subjective rankings of occupations and matches the overall ranking back
to workers’ jobs in the sample. Cecas and Seff (1989) suggest that occupational
prestige and self‐esteem are related.


                                          7
subjective prestige rankings of occupations by a representative sample and

matching overall scores to workers’ jobs. The first panel shows that workers with

one to three years of college with similar family background are in jobs that

measure, on average, 4.5 points higher in occupational prestige than high school

graduates without college (the overall standard error is 10.5). Workers with 4 or

more years of college have jobs that rank almost 10 points higher. These differences

remain about the same after adding additional controls for family income. The same

pattern arises when looking at self‐reported job satisfaction. While few workers say

they are a little or very dissatisfied with their job, about 4 percent more of high

school graduates without college do so compared to college graduates, and 4

percent more of high school dropouts do so compared to high school graduates. The

gradient of this overall relationship falls by only 30 percent when adding family

income controls.

      Any effects from schooling on the probability of being unemployed or on

welfare are in addition to effects on workers’ earnings. Long‐term unemployment

and welfare receipt are linked to depression and low self‐esteem (e.g. Sheeran,

Abrams, and Orbell 1995,). Time series data show that unemployment shocks

precede worsening mental health (Bjorklund and Eriksson 2007), and that the non‐

pecuniary effects appear to be much larger than the effect that stems from the

associated loss of income (Winkelmann and Winkelmann 1997). Schooling strongly

relates to unemployment. The third panel of Figure 3 shows this with our data from

the GSS.   The same holds true when looking at welfare receipt (not shown).




                                         8
Schooling also relates to how quickly the unemployed find work (Riddell and Xueda

2008), suggesting from it improves adaptability.




Non­pecuniary returns outside the labor market



       One of the key purposes of schooling is to develop skills. Skills taught in

medical school, for example, improve doctors’ abilities to treat the sick.         John

McPeck (1994) calls these “knowledge‐based” because their “general range of

applicability is limited by the form of thought being called upon,” like performing

well at “Trivial Pursuit”. Critical thinking and social skills, while less tangible, are

likely overall more important for getting by in life.          Critical‐thinking helps

individuals “select pertinent information for the solution of a problem [and]

formulate relevant and promising hypotheses.” In other words, it helps individuals

process new situations or problems and make better decisions.              Social skills

facilitate interaction and communication with others.          They help individuals

distinguish between acceptable and unacceptable behavior in different public

settings.

       The education literature is remarkably unclear about how critical‐thinking

and social skills are acquired. The two are strongly and positively correlated with

schooling (Cascio and Lewis 2006, Soskice 1993, Heckman 2006, Glaeser et al.

2005). Perhaps students learn them over time while writing essays or interacting

with schoolmates outside of class. Or perhaps individuals with these traits excel at



                                           9
school and thus find it easier to obtain more. In either case, they come in handy in

many situations, not just those on the job.

         Economists have two general models in mind to describe how better skills

generate non‐pecuniary returns outside the labor market.6            The productive

efficiency model suggests improved skills act as a technology shock; individuals are

able to get more done in the same amount of time for the same amount of money.

Perhaps this occurs from improved multi‐tasking or time management skills. The

allocative efficiency model pertains to situations in which the more skilled choose a

different mix of inputs in trying to maximize the household production function. In

other words, individuals with better skills make better decisions when faced with

similar circumstances.

         Good health, shown in Panel A of Figure 4, is often singled out as a key non‐

pecuniary benefit from additional schooling. Many studies find a strong positive

correlation between schooling and multiple measures of health outcomes, healthy

habits, and healthy activities, with this correlation remaining large after

conditioning on income (see Grossman 2006). Evidence is mixed, but appears to

lean more toward the allocative efficiency hypothesis. Wagstaff (1986), for example,

concludes that schooling improves health while simultaneously reducing the

number of physician visits, supporting the productive efficiency hypothesis.

However, Glied and Lleras‐Muney (2008), Chen and Lang (2008), Kenkel (1991),

and de Walque (2004a, 2004b) provide strong evidence that new information on




6   Grossman (2006) formulates these models more explicitly.


                                          10
health induces faster and more pronounced responses for those with more

schooling.7

       Some economists believe that more schooling not only makes individuals

more attractive to employers, but more attractive period. Men and women with

more earnings potential or with more prestigious jobs become more appealing in a

competitive marriage market (Becker 1973, Chiappori et al. forthcoming). Indeed,

Goldin (1992) concludes that the main purpose of going to college for women in the

mid‐twentieth century was to attract a college‐educated husband. Numerous

empirical studies document a tendency for persons to choose partners of similar

schooling attainment (Rockwell 1976), and this tendency appears to be increasing

(Mare 1991).

       Improved allocative efficiency from schooling may also translate to more

stable marriages. Critical thinking and social skills that help one succeed in the labor

market also probably help in the marriage market. Panel two of Figure 4 shows

substantially lower ever‐divorced rates among those with more completed years of

schooling of similar age and family background.

       Overwhelming empirical evidence shows that women with more schooling

have fewer children (e.g. Jones and Tertile 2008). The dominant explanation for this

is a trade‐off between number of children and parental investment per child.8 The

idea is that, since more educated tend to work more, they also try to avoid spreading

their time too thin by parenting fewer children. Recent evidence is mixed.9 The flip


7 Kenkel (2000) and Grossman (2000) provide good reviews.
8 The theory originates to Becker and Lewis (1973) and Becker and Tomes (1976).
9 See, for example, Angrist, Lavy, and Schlosser (2006) and Qian (2009).



                                          11
side of the coin is that individuals who prefer fewer children may enjoy more

schooling and career opportunities (Jones et al. 2008).        Others suggest more

educated simply use contraceptives more effectively, in line with the allocative

efficiency hypothesis.

       For couples with children, parental schooling strongly relates to children’s

development and social‐economic success throughout life.              Health, social

integration, test scores, and labor market outcomes all correlate positively with both

mother and father’s attainment. Differences in income may explain some of these

relationships.   For example, limited resources and an aversion to or lack of

knowledge about financial aid may limit a child’s access to college.10 Differences in

birth weight could arise from poor mothers not being able to afford good nutrition

or time to exercise.11 On the other hand, conditioning on income does not eliminate

these kinds of intergenerational relationships (see the example below for grade

repetition). Just as schooling may improve skills to help with marriage, it may do

the same for parenting. Recent research on the determinants of human development

underscores parenting as the most important determinant for children’s cognitive

and non‐cognitive development, even among families with similar incomes (Cunha

and Heckman 2009). Panel three of Figure 4 provides at least some evidence that

parenting styles differ by school attainment. The fraction of parents in our GSS

sample who strongly agree that “it is sometimes necessary to discipline a child with



10 See Belley and Lochner (2007) for evidence that family income affects college
access.
11 See Currie and Moretti (2007) for evidence that maternal schooling affects infant

mortality and birth weight.


                                         12
a good hard spanking” is substantially lower for respondents with college

experience, with and without additional controls for family income.12



Effects on Preferences



       Schooling may also change people’s preferences by providing information

about new opportunities for consumption or by developing patience. As Becker and

Mulligan (1997) put it:



“Schooling focuses students’ attention on the future. Schooling can communicate

images of the situations and difficulties of adult life, which are the future of

childhood and adolescence. In addition, through repeated practice at problem

solving, schooling helps children learn the art of scenario simulation. Thus educated

people should be more productive at reducing the remoteness of future pleasures.”

(pp. 735‐736).



       The GSS variable, “Live only for today” may serve as a proxy for time

preference.   Respondents were asked whether they agree to the statement,

“Nowadays, a person has to live pretty much for today and let tomorrow take care of

itself”. Panel 1 of Figure 5 shows a distinct declining relationship with schooling,


12We use this variable to demonstrate differences in parenting styles by school
attainment. The effectiveness of corporal punishment on children, and under what
conditions, remains unclear. Many countries legally prohibit it. The American
Academy of Pediatrics states that “Corporal punishment is of limited effectiveness
and has potentially deleterious side effects” (Stein and Perrin 1998).


                                         13
holding various observable family background variables constant. More than half of

high school dropouts agree with this statement while less than 30 percent of college

graduates do. Similar to the previous patterns above, conditioning on reporting the

same family income bracket in the same survey year reduces the gradient of this

relationship, but not by much.

       The second and third panels of Figure 5 show outcomes that may arise as a

consequence from “living only for today”.13 Teen fertility and criminal activity (as

well as unhealthy lifestyles) are risky behaviors often considered driven by

“affective” thinking (a focus on immediate feelings) rather than “cognitive” thinking

(a focus on long‐term benefits and costs). Efforts to reduce them aim to improve

conditions later on in life. Like several other studies (e.g. Black, Devereau and

Salvanes (2008), Lochner and Moretti (2004), Figure 5 shows both outcomes

negatively correlate with years of completed schooling.14 15

       Several studies suggest schooling fosters trust. Social scientists place great

emphasis on the importance of trust in improving social interaction and fostering

community involvement. A more trusting and engaged society is often used to

justify public subsidies to schooling (e.g. Hanushek 2002), but these traits offer

private returns too. Arrow (1974) notes that in the face of transaction costs, trust

13 Black, Devereau and Salvanes (2008) suggest two additional non‐pecuniary
reasons how schooling could affect teen fertility and crime. First, staying in school
could reduce the amount of time and opportunity for engaging in risky behavior.
Second, schooling may increase both current and expected future earnings and thus
increase the opportunity cost of engaging in risky behavior. Also, as mentioned
above, schooling could lead to more efficient contraceptive use.
14 The view that young offenders are myopic lines up with evidence from Lee and

McCrary (2005).
15 See also Ross and Mirowsky (1999) for a discussion on how schooling, by

developing patience and control, may help encourage healthier lifestyles.


                                         14
underlies almost every economic transaction. Its individual importance arises in

situations when trust promotes reciprocity. Lab experiments and ethnographic

studies suggest that a willingness to engage and work or help others often leads to

others being nicer and more cooperative in return (Fehr and Gachter 2000, Uslaner

2000). Schooling is one of the most important predictors of trust. Helliwell and

Putnam (1999) point out that a causal relationship could occur for relative reasons

(it raises social status for some individuals while propping down status of others),

additive reasons (it teaches people how to interact successfully with others), or

super additive reasons (raising overall attainment levels makes everyone more

trusting). Figure 6 shows outcomes of trust and social participation and their

relationship with schooling. Individuals with similar family backgrounds but more

schooling are more likely to agree that, generally speaking most people can be

trusted. They also are much more likely to vote, and to volunteer for a community

or organization. Conditioning on reported family income bracket, as we have seen

earlier, does not alter these relationships substantially.



Negative non­pecuniary returns



         We do not rule out the possibility that with schooling comes negative

returns, especially in regards to added stress and constraints on time.16 The costs of

losing one’s job when making more are obviously higher. Jobs that pay more may

also come with more responsibility, more travel, and more effort, all of which may


16   We are well aware of these possibilities after writing this paper.


                                             15
add stress and pressures to work more. Surprisingly, Cohen et al. (2006) finds that

stress hormones are negatively associated with income and schooling. The authors

suggest that any additional pressures from working in higher paid occupations are

offset by better health and social support. Figure 7 shows other time use outcomes

from our GSS sample. These questions were asked only is a subset of years, so

sample sizes are smaller and the patterns are less precise than the ones presented

above. Fewer individuals with more schooling report always feeling rushed for time

than those with less. College graduates are almost 6 percentage points less likely to

feel rushed than high school graduates with no college. Conditioning on family

income generally strengthens this relationship. Perhaps lower income households

feel more rushed because they are not able to afford commodities that would help

save time. We do at least find a tendency for college graduates to report wanting to

spend more time with friends and in leisure activities.




Schooling as consumption



       The satirical newspaper, The Onion (2000), published a story about an

accountant manager at a meeting who became distracted during his presentation

looking out the window. The paper quoted the manager remarking to his co‐

workers that the weather reminded him of “this great day when me and a bunch of

my buddies climbed up onto the roof and spent the whole day just drinking beer and

cranking U2 and soaking up the sun. Man, that was awesome”. The human capital



                                         16
model usually treats time spent in school as an opportunity cost in terms of forgone

earnings. Some researchers add ‘psychic costs’ to account for the mental effort

required to perform on exams and complete the necessary requirements to

graduate. Except for the more intellectually curious, most people would rather be

doing something else than studying or sitting in class.      Fortunately, schooling

provides many additional opportunities for more pleasurable experiences,

especially for those attending full time. These include viewing and participating in

sports, socializing with others the same age, dating, attending nearby entertainment

events, living among other youth away from parents, and enjoying campus

scenery.17

       Quantitative evidence for the consumption value of schooling comes from

showing that some students make enrollment decisions based in part on factors not

likely help after completion. Several researchers estimate low or even negative

pecuniary returns from majoring in some college majors or enrolling in graduate

school (even after conditioning on academic potential) and attribute this behavior to

school consumption (Alstadsaeter 2004, Arcidiacono 2004, Lazear (1977)). Another

excellent example is by Pope and Pope (2008), who show an increase in the quantity

and quality of students applying to colleges that performed well in basketball and

football the previous year.18


17 On the other hand, students with children or working significant hours are much
less likely to partake in these activities.
18 Along these lines, we collected data from Princeton Review’s college rankings and

estimated whether top “party” or “sports” colleges were harder to get into
compared to other colleges with similar academic ranking in the same region.
Specifically, for the sample of 324 colleges with ACT composite data in the 2010
edition of the Princeton Review rankings, we regressed the mean Freshman ACT


                                         17
III. Measurement Issues



       A host of measurement issues crop up when trying to understand true

impacts from schooling. The fact that individuals usually choose how long they wish

to stay in school and that researchers usually collect data only on the length of time

people spent in school makes estimation and interpretation challenging. Below we

touch on these concerns and present more convincing approaches to generate

evidence of large non‐pecuniary returns.19



Heterogeneity



       The schooling relationships mentioned last section are averaged over some

individuals who benefit more and some less. This makes assessing potential returns

to schooling for sub‐groups complicated.        Clearly, individuals differ by their

tolerance for taking tests and their degree of parental support. Access to job

networks and a little luck also leads to different outcomes. So not all schooling


score (used for admissions) on a linear or quadratic variable for academic ranking,
fixed effects for state or first three digits in the college’s ZIP code, and dummy
variables for whether the college was included among the top 20 “Party Schools”,
“Most Beautiful Campuses”, or sports schools (“Students Pack the Stadiums”).
Admissions requirements were significantly higher for party and sports schools.
The estimated effects weakened and become only marginally significant after
further conditioning on for the log of college size. The results generally support the
conclusion that which college students attend depends, at least in part, on sports
and social opportunities. Results are available on request from the authors.
19 Card (2001) discusses empirical estimation issues with respect to pecuniary

returns in more detail.


                                          18
investments pay off. With sufficient sample size, results can be separated by group

(e.g. by gender), which partly offsets these problems. Econometric techniques

sometimes also help in identifying individuals we are often most interested in, like

those on the verge of leaving school without college or a high school degree (see

below).   Still, it must be recognized that the effects are averaged and do not

necessarily reflect real impacts for every individual.



Schooling versus education



       Years of schooling and degree attainment are not particularly good measures

of education. They provide limited information on what it is about schooling that

produces pecuniary and non‐pecuniary returns. A better understanding about

which particular skills generate returns and how skills are actually acquired would

lead to better measures of school quality. Despite much interest, we know very little

about the impact of different curricula or about different pedagogical methods and

ways of organizing and running schools. An over‐reliance on quantitative‐ and

qualification based measures has neglected qualitative evidence and theoretical

perspectives. It may well be argued that the effects of schooling depend just as much

on the nature and quality of learning as on the number of years spent in school. The

reasons of course for why most of the research so far has focused on years of

schooling or grades completed is that these data are readily available while

collecting information on curricula and teaching methods are much more expensive.

To extend our knowledge, we need to look more carefully at what happens during



                                          19
learning experiences and expand the range of measures to include the more

qualitative dimensions of learning environments.




Signaling skill through schooling



         Schooling may help develop skills or it may help signal skills that individuals

already have.      If those with more schooling also have more inherent abilities

(perhaps because schooling for them is easier or more enjoyable), employers can

use schooling to predict better candidates. This is especially helpful when desirable

worker attributes, like perseverance, discipline, and time management are, not

easily observed.      Schooling may affect pecuniary and non‐pecuniary outcomes

regardless of whether it develops or signals skills; the returns appear the same.

However, individuals are more likely to view schooling under a signaling story as a

necessary waste of time for indicating to employers they already possesses a

desired set of skills. It is very difficult to disentangle the extent to which returns to

schooling are driven more by signaling or skill development mechanisms because

both theories generate very similar empirical predictions. Our view of the literature

is that there is evidence of both.20

         Causal evidence of non‐pecuniary returns to schooling supports the skill

development theory more than it does signaling. Exogenous increases to schooling

affect a person’s relative ranking in terms of overall attainment, but this matters


20   For example, see Arcidiacono et al. (2008).


                                            20
only to employers or possibly potential spouses that statistically discriminate.

Relative school rank should not affect individual decisions such as whether to

smoke, vote, spank, or “live for today”. If schooling affects these decisions, it likely

plays more than just a signaling role.




Causality



       Schooling is often used as the prototypical example for demonstrating

challenges in trying to estimate causal effects. Usually people choose how much

schooling to take.     Skills that individuals already possess may therefore be

correlated with it. Estimated returns are upward biased if those who would have

attained more social‐economic success regardless tend to take more schooling

anyway (e.g. perhaps for consumption reasons).

       One approach involves using siblings or twins with different levels of

schooling.   By comparing outcomes between brothers or sisters with different

attainment we hold constant all common family factors. Similar genetic and family

environment influences are completely eliminated. The question, then, is why

would siblings (especially twins) end up with different levels of schooling? Perhaps

one sibling became more inspired by friends or teachers to go to continue. On the

other hand, even small genetic differences between siblings can lead to differences

in mental development and academic achievement (Fletcher and Lehrer 2009). If

the reasons why some siblings obtain different schooling amounts are mostly



                                          21
unrelated to later social‐economic success, then the approach provides a useful

estimation strategy.21

       Table 1 presents sibling and twin returns to schooling estimates for several

outcomes with and without conditioning on income. We take advantage of

Norwegian administrative data, which contain extremely large samples of siblings

and twins.22 Our sample includes individuals 28 to 60 years old in 2005. A more

detailed data description is given in the appendix. Column 1 displays the mean for

each outcome. Column 2 shows the estimated returns for siblings. For comparison,

the first row in Column 2 shows that working siblings with one more year of

schooling have, on average 5.2 percent more annual income than their less educated

siblings. As has been found previously for Norway and indeed the other Nordic

countries the return is on the lower spectrum than for the most other OECD

countries. Turning to non‐pecuniary outcomes, siblings with more schooling are

less likely to be unemployed and on welfare.        As a measure for health, we also

estimate effects on the likelihood of receiving health disability payments.23 Siblings

near retirement with more schooling are significantly less likely to be receiving

these benefits, and therefore healthier.        Consistent with the earlier patterns

presented last section, siblings are also less likely to be divorced with more

schooling. They are less likely to give birth as teenagers and more likely to be


21 See Neumark (1999) for more discussion about this approach.
22 Behrman & Rosenzweig (2002) use a small sample of identical twins to compute
within‐twin estimates of the effect of mother’s schooling on children’s schooling.
23 The Norwegian government provides disability benefits is to ensure sufficient

income for subsistence for people whose earning ability is permanently impaired by
at least 50 per cent due to illness, injury or defect. Disability pensions are granted if
it is quite clear that there are no prospects of an improvement in earning ability.


                                           22
married to spouses who have higher earnings themselves. The results in Column 4

just for twins are basically the same as those for the full sibling sample.

       The added challenge in trying to estimate non‐pecuniary returns is trying to

separate them from pecuniary ones, since more money may be used to improve the

very same outcomes we are interested in. Most researchers estimate non‐pecuniary

returns without worrying whether they occur through wealth effects or not. Some

outcomes, like unemployment, voting, and teen fertility are mechanically or unlikely

related to income. For others, however, we would ideally like to use two separate

sources of exogenous variation – one that affects schooling and another that affects

income. For example, comparing siblings with different levels of schooling and in

different firms where some unexpectedly get let go because of downsizing.

Conditioning on observable income may still help if income variation uncorrelated

with schooling is also uncorrelated with the outcomes of interest.24 Columns 3 and

5 show non‐pecuniary returns to schooling estimates after conditioning on sibling

and twin’s incomes.25 The estimated schooling effect on divorce rates falls by less

than half.   The estimated effect on teen fertility falls by very little, similar to the

patterns presented in the previous section.




24 Schooling effects after conditioning on income are probably downward biased
because individuals with above average schooling but below average income likely
have inherently poor skills relative to their attainment level that affect both why
they earn less and why they fare poorly on other outcomes. On the other hand,
income only approximates lifetime wealth. Results could be upward biased if the
schooling effect still comes from increases in wealth that are not adequately
controlled for by conditioning on income.
25 The results in column 3 are presented after including quartic polynomial controls

for annual income.


                                           23
       Another approach to estimating causal returns involves taking advantage of

policies that affect schooling costs without affecting benefits. For example, whether

individuals can commute to school impacts their likelihood of going. If a new college

opens up in a remote neighborhood, it allows a follow‐up analysis with local youth

who become, on average, more educated than youth from other remote

neighborhoods without nearby colleges.26 Sometimes policies differ across region

and over time.     Researchers can compare relative schooling differences and

corresponding outcomes between groups of individuals from different regions

before and after policy changes that affect schooling attainment for younger birth

cohorts from one region but not the other. The caveat with this approach is that the

reasons behind the policy changes or other policies introduced at the same time

need to be unrelated to the later outcomes of interest.27

       By far the most common policy instrument used to examine pecuniary and

non‐pecuniary returns is compulsory schooling. Minimum schooling legislation

changed over time in many countries. The changes made some youth stay in school

that would have otherwise left earlier in absence of the more restrictive laws.

Angrist and Krueger (1991) were the first to use compulsory schooling to estimate




26 David Card (1995) uses this policy change to look estimate pecuniary returns to
schooling.
27 Kane and Rouse (1993) use tuition changes over time to estimate large pecuniary

returns to schooling. Currie and Moretti (2007) use college openings in the mid‐
twentieth century and find significant impacts of maternal schooling on children’s
health, and Kenkel, Lillard, and Mathios (2006) use differences in high school
graduation requirements and local spending on education to find schooling effects
on smoking and obesity.


                                          24
pecuniary returns to schooling, and many have done so since.28 More recently, other

researchers have used these laws to estimate non‐pecuniary effects on just about

everything from trust (Milligan, Moretti, and Oreopoulos 2004) to eyesight

problems (Soloveichik 2007).

       Table 2 shows several estimates of pecuniary and non‐pecuniary returns to

compulsory schooling.29 Most of the results come from a large sample of native‐

born Americans aged 25 to 64 from the 1950 to 2000 U.S. Censuses and 2001 to

2007 American Community Surveys. The first row of column 2 shows the estimated

pecuniary returns. One year of compulsory schooling increases weekly earnings by

13.1 percent, on average. It also impacts other labor market outcomes including

occupational prestige, the likelihood of being unemployed, and the likelihood of

being on welfare.30 Outside the labor market, compulsory schooling decreases the

chances of ending up in jail (among black youth), being divorced, pregnant before

age 20, and even being in a mental institute.31 It also affects mortality and voting

behavior.32 We find additional intergenerational effects on the likelihood that a



28 For example, Meghir and Palme (2005), Oreopoulos (2006), and Aakvik, Salvanes,
and Vaage (2009).
29 The estimates use the minimum school leaving age faced when aged 16 as an

instrumental variable. The appendix provides more details.
30 Machin, Pelkonen and Salvanes (2009), Li (2006), and Oreopoulos (2007) also

find effects on unemployment.
31 These crime results are also consistent with Lochner and Moretti (2004) and

Anderson (2009), and the teen fertility results are consistent with Black, Devereux,
and Salvanes (2008) and Fort (2007).
32 The effects on mortality are taken from Lleras‐Muney (2005). De Walque (2005)

also estimates causal effects of schooling on mortality. Data for the estimates on
voting are from the November Current Population Surveys. See appendix for more
details. Milligan, Moretti, and Oreopoulos (2004), and Dee (2004) present results
for additional civic participation outcomes.


                                         25
child repeated a grade.33 And finally, using changes to compulsory schooling laws in

the United Kingdom and data on self‐reported well‐being, we also estimate that

compulsory schooling affects overall life satisfaction.34 All of these estimates fall by

less than half when conditioning on individual income.




IV. Conclusion




       Time distinguishes schooling from other financial investments. Time in

school helps shape students’ identity and perspectives on life. Students interact

with others, learn alternative points of view, and discover new ideas. Along the way,

they acquire skills, some which help earn them more money in the labor market.

Increasing wealth clearly provides a central motivator for why students forgo

earnings and suffer through exams and writing assignments. But, as we argue in

this paper, the experience and skills acquired generate many other non‐pecuniary

returns. Gains from school occur from being in a job that not only pays more but


33 The results are similar to those presented in Oreopoulos, Page, and Stevens
(2006). Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2008) us a different set of compulsory
schooling laws in Norway to find intergenerational effects on education. Caneiro,
Meghir, and Parey (2007) also estimate intergenerational effects using differences
in economic conditions at the time individuals make schooling attainment decisions
to estimate parental schooling effects on children’s academic achievement around
age 10. Plug (2004) uses a different approach to also estimate intergenerational
effects by comparing children with the same biological parents but who have been
adopted.
34 Also see Oreopoulos (2007) for additional estimates on returns to schooling on

life satisfaction.


                                          26
also offers more opportunities for self‐accomplishment, social interaction, and

independence. Schooling generates occupational prestige. It reduces the chances of

ending up on welfare or unemployed. It improves success in the labor market and

the marriage market. Better decision‐making skills learned in school also leads to

better health, happier marriages, and more successful children. Schooling also

encourages patience and long‐term thinking. Teen fertility, criminal activity, and

other risky behaviors decrease with it.      Schooling promotes trust and civic

participation. It teaches students how to enjoy a good book and manage money.

And for many, schooling has consumption value too.

      All of these gains hold after conditioning on income, suggesting that

pecuniary returns cannot explain non‐pecuniary returns. To get a rough back‐of‐

the‐envelope measure of the relative importance between the two, we can compare

our estimated schooling effects on happiness in Table 2 before and after controlling

for income. The effect before conditioning on income falls by only one‐quarter after

conditioning, suggesting that about three quarters of the schooling effect on self‐

reported life satisfaction is due to non‐pecuniary factors. A 12 percent increase in

annual earnings would then imply that the total non‐pecuniary gains are

equivalently worth another 16 percent increase in earnings (for a total of 28

percent).

      If returns to schooling are so high, why do some students not stay on longer?

One reason is that these returns are averaged over some individuals who benefit

more and some less. Since children begin school with different capabilities and face




                                        27
different obstacles, not everyone faces the same costs and benefits.35 The results

still imply at least some students should expect large returns. Under the basic

investment model of schooling, the upfront costs for these students would have to

be extremely large or the benefits extremely uncertain to rationalize early exit

decisions (e.g. see Oreopoulos (2007). In our opinion, the estimated returns are too

large to support these theories. If so, it means that some people are missing out on

significant welfare‐increasing opportunities.        We suggest two alternative

explanations worth further research, each carrying quite different implications

about education policy. First, low‐income families may face financial obstacles in

trying to afford school. They may be averse to accepting thousands of dollars in

debt for an indefinite amount of time, or they may be unaware about how to obtain

financial aid. Recent work by Bettinger, et al. (2009), for example, show that helping

individuals from disadvantaged families complete college financial aid application

forms dramatically increases enrollment.36 Second, other students may simply be

shortsighted.   Parents with teenagers can attest that youth are particularly

predisposed to downplaying or ignoring future consequences from current behavior

(see also Laibson 1997, O’Donoghue and Rabin 1999, Spear 2000 for more academic

evaluation). Exploring these issues more thoroughly would shed further light on the

overall education attainment decision‐making process and help identify ways to


35 We also note that years of schooling and degree attainment are not particularly
good measures of education. A better understanding about which particular skills
generate these returns and how skills are actually acquired would lead to better
measures of school quality. Despite much interest, surprisingly little progress has
been made.
36 See also Belley and Lochner (2009) and Field (2009) for more evidence and

further reading on the importance of financial constraints.


                                         28
make individuals realize large returns from schooling. Large amounts of money

appear to be lying on the sidewalk, as well as opportunities for more satisfying and

secure jobs, better health, happier marriages, etc…




                                         29
Data appendix




For Figures 1 to 7



       The figures were created by first constructing a subsample of the combined

1972‐2000 General Social Surveys. We restricted our data to non‐immigrants who

were 14 years old since 1970 and at least 25 years old in the survey year. Dropping

those born before 1956 cuts the sample substantially (from 34,173 to 6,811) and

ends up limiting the upper age range to 45, but this allows us to focus the analysis

on more recent cohorts. We did not find this to affect the overall results (if anything

the results were schooling relationships were stronger for older cohorts). For some

graphs, where the outcome variable was collected only over a subset of years, the

sample is smaller.

       The education variable is grouped by highest years of completed schooling:

0‐11, 12, 13‐15, and 16 or more, which we refer generally to as high school

dropouts, high school graduates without college, come college, and college

graduates respectively. To graph the black bars in the figures, the outcome variable

of interest is regressed on fixed effects for state of birth, age, year of birth, and

survey year fixed effects (multiple survey years allow us to estimate these relative

fixed effects simultaneously), plus dummy variables for gender and race, as well as

father’s occupational prestige score (interacted with a missing value indicator),

father and mother’s education attainment (and indicators if these values were



                                          30
missing), indicators for household composition at age 16 (living with both parents,

mother only, etc.), whether mother worked (or if this value was missing), and

whether family’s income when 16 years old was far below average, below average,

average, above average, far above average, or missing, as well as the education

categories. The indicator for having 12 years of completed schooling was omitted.

The remaining relative education coefficient estimates (the estimated outcome

differences by school attainment relative to high school graduates) were added to

the overall high school graduate sample mean and presented in the graphs. The

white bars show the same coefficients, but after adding fixed effects for family

income bracket for each survey year. In earlier years the number of bracket options

were 13, but expanded to 24, with options ranging from “under $1,000” to

“$110,000 or more” after 1997.




For Table 1



       The data used in Table 1 is derived from administrative registers and

prepared for research by Statistics Norway. The cohorts include all 28 ‐ 60 year‐olds

in 2005. The data set is a longitudinal population data set consisting of all people

living in Norway born from the 1920s. Different registers for own family, parental

family, educational outcomes, marriage, divorce, and other outcomes are merged

using the same personal identifier. Persons are also matched to plants/firms as well

as other labor market outcomes including on unemployment, on welfare,



                                         31
 retirement, or disability pension. The month and year of birth is given in the data

 set and hence twins can be identified. Schooling is measured as the normalized

 number of completed years. An individual is classified as employed if he has a plant

 identification number at that time, and as unemployed if he does not and is

 registered with some months of unemployment during the year. Earnings or annual

 income is measured as annual income that provides pension points in the national

 security system. The included components are regular labor income, income as self‐

 employed, and benefits received while on sick leave, being unemployed and on

 parental leave. Married is registered as married in 2005. Divorced is registered as

 divorced in 2005. Teen fertility is whether women had a child as a teenager. Welfare

 is if received welfare in 2005. Assortative mating is measured in years of education

 for spouse in 2005. Disability pension is measured as disabled at the age of 58 or

 older from 1993‐2005.




 For Table 2



     Table 2 uses an extract of native‐born individuals aged 25 to 64 from the combined six

decennial census microdata samples between 1950 and 2000 and the seven American

Community Surveys between 2001 and 2007.37 Hawaiian‐ and Alaskan‐born respondents



37 The specific Census files used were the 1950 General 1/330 sample (limited to
those with long‐form responses), the 1960 General 1 percent sample, the 1970 Form
2 State 1 percent sample, the 1980 Metro 1 percent sample, the 1990 1 percent
unweighted sample, and the 2000 1 percent unweighted random sample. The data
was downloaded from the IPUMS web site http://usa.ipums.org/usa/index.shtml.


                                           32
were excluded. We coded the schooling variable for individuals in the 1950 to 1980 data as

highest grade completed. Average years of schooling were assigned to categorical values in

the 1990 and 2000 Censuses and the American Community Surveys using an imputation

method discussed in Oreopoulos (2006b). The earnings variable, log weekly wage, was

calculated by dividing annual wage and salary income by weeks worked, then taking logs. We

used an indicator for welfare receipt from 1970 data and onwards. The 1950 to 1980

Censuses provided information on whether a respondent resided in a correctional or mental

institution, which we used to create our outcome variables “in jail” and “in mental institution”

respectively. Whether a mother gave birth as a teenager is calculated by determining whether

the difference between a mother’s age and the age of her eldest own child in household is 19

years or less, for children 30 years old or less. We also used the Occupational prestige score

measured using the methodology by Nakao and Treas (the variable “PRENT” from the IPUMS

web site). Among children in the household aged 8 to 16, an indicator for ever repeated a

grade was calculated as whether a child was below the median grade level of other children

the same age and quarter of birth, state, and census year. The indicator was matched to the

child’s mother and/or father. The voting indicator variable comes from the 1978 to 2000

November Current Population Surveys, the same data used by Milligan, Moretti, and

Oreopoulos (2004). We restrict the sample to those of voting age (18 years old and older).

      We restricted our data to individuals aged 16 between 1915 and 2000, aged 25 to 64 in

the survey year.    We also removed individuals with more than 12 years of completed

schooling since these college educated were not substantially influenced by the minimum

school leaving age (see Oreopoulos 2007). The results are generally the same, but less precise

if we keep the larger sample. Similar to Oreopoulos (2006b), we measured each school‐

leaving age as the minimum between a state’s legislated dropout age and the minimum age

required to obtain a working permit. We also record the dropout age under exceptions – for



                                              33
example if students could leave with permission from parents or if working full time. We

grouped the small percent of the sample that faced school‐leaving ages lower than 14 into one

category (school‐leaving age < 14). All others faced dropout ages of 14, 15, 16, 17, or 18. The

dropout age is matched to individuals according to the year in which they were 16 years old

and their state of birth (which is likely their state of residence when 16 as well).

      The results reported in Table 2 are from regressing the outcome variables on fixed

effects for birth cohort, state of birth, data year, gender and race (for the full sample), a

quartic polynomial for age, and years of completed schooling, with schooling instrumented by

the dropout age under no exceptions and the dropout age under exceptions. The sample is

weighted by the person weight variable from the IPUMS. Standard errors are clustered by

state and year of birth.




                                                34
References


Aakvik, Arild, Kjell G. Salvanes, and Kjell Vaage (2009). “Measuring Heterogeneity in
the Returns to Education in Norway Using Educational Reforms”.

Alstadsaeter, Annette (2004). “Measuring the consumption value of higher
education,” NHH Discussion Paper SAM 2004.

Anderson, Mark D. (2009). “In School and Out of Trouble? Compulsory Schooling
and Juvenile Crime,” Mimeo.

Angrist, Joshua D., Victor Lavy, and Analia Schlosser (2006). “New evidence on the
causal link between the quantity and quality of children,” IZA discussion paper No.
2075.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan B. Krueger (1991). “Does compulsory schooling
attendance affect schooling and earnings,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 106,
pp. 979‐1014.

Arcidiacono, Peter (2004). “Ability sorting and the returns to college major,” Journal
of Econometrics, Vol. 121, pp. 343‐375.

Arcidiacono, Peter, Patrick J. Bayer, and Aurel Hizmo (2008). “Beyond signaling and
human capital: Education and the revelation of ability,” NBER working paper
#13951.

Arrow, Kenneth J. (1974). “The Limits of Organization,” WW Norton press, New
York.

Becker, Gary S. (1964). Human capital: A theoretical and empirical analysis with
special references to education (Editions revised in 1975 and 1993), Chicago,
University of Chicago Press.

Becker, Gary S. (1973). “A theory of marriage: Part I,” Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 81, No. 4, pp. 813‐846.

Becker, G. and H. G. Lewis, “On the Interaction between the Quantity and Quality of
Children,” Journal of Political Economy 81(2) part 2, 1973, pp. S279‐S288.

Becker, Gary S., and Casey B. Mulligan (1997). “The endogenous determination of
time preference,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 112, No. 3, pp. 729‐758.

Becker, G. and N. Tomes, “Child Endowments and the Quantity and Quality of
Children,” Journal of Political Economy 84(4) part 2, 1976, pp. S143‐S162.



                                          35
Belley, Philippe, and Lance Lochner (2007). “The changing role of family income and
ability in determining educational achievement,” Journal of Human Capital, Vol. 1(1),
pp. 37‐89.

Behrman, Jere R. and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 2002. “Does Increasing Women’s
Schooling Raise the Schooling of the Next Generation?” American Economic Review,
91(1), pp 323‐334.

Bettinger, Eric, Bridget Terry Long, Philip Oreopoulos, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu (2009).
“The role of information and simplification in college decisions: Results from the H&R Block
FAFSA experiment,” mimeo

Black, Sandra, Paul Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes (2008). “Why the Apple Doesn't
Fall Far: Understanding Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 95, No. 1 (Mar., 2005), pp. 437‐449.

Black, Sandra, Paul Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes (2008). “Staying in the classroom
and out of the maternity ward? The effect of compulsory schooling laws on teenage
births,” Economic Journal, Vol. 118 (530), pp. 1025‐1054.

Bjorklund, Anders, and T. Eriksson (2007) “Unemployment and mental health:
Evidence from research in the Nordic countries,” International journal of social
welfare, Vol. 7, Issue 3, pp. 219‐235.

Card, David (1995). “Using geographic variation in college proximity to estimate the
return to schooling,” in Aspects of labour market behaviour: Essays in honour of
John Vanderkamp, ed. By Louis N. Christofides, E. Kenneth Grant, and Robert
Swidinsky. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, pp. 201‐222.

Card, David (2001). “Estimating the return to schooling: Progress on some
persistent econometric problems,” Econometrica, Vol. 69, No. 5 (September), pp.
1127‐1160.

Carneiro, Pedtro Manuel, Costas Meghir, and Matthias Parey (2007). “Maternal
Education, Home Environments and the Development of Children and Adolescents,”
IZA working paper #3072

Cascio, Elizabeth U., and Ethan Lewis (2006). “Schooling and the Armed Forces
Qualifying Test: Evidence from school‐entry laws,” Journal of Human Resources, Vol
41(2), Spring, pp. 294‐318.

Castriota, Stefano (2006). “Education and happiness: A further explanation to the
Easterlin Paradox?” Mimeo.

Chen, Keith and Fabian Lange (2008). “Education, information, and improved health:
evidence from breast cancer screening,” Yale Economics mimeo.


                                            36
Chiappori, Pierre‐Andre, Murat Iyigun, and Yoram Weiss (forthcoming). “Investment
in schooling and the marriage market,” American Economic Review.

Cecas V., M. A. Seff (1989). “Social class, occupational conditions, and self‐esteem,”
Socialogical persptives, Vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 353‐364.

Cohen, Sheldon, William J. Doyle, and Andrew Baum (2006). “Socioeconomic status
is associated with stress hormones,” Psychosomatic Medicine, Vol. 68, pp. 414‐420.
Cunha, Flavio, and James J. Heckman (2009). “The economics of psychology of
inequality and human development,” Journal of the European Economic Association,
Vol. 7, No. 2‐3, pp. 320‐364.

Currie, Janet, and Enrico Moretti (2007). “Biology as destiny? Short‐ and long‐run
determinants of intergenerational transmission of birth weight,” Journal of Labor
economics, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp. 231‐263.

DeWalque, D. (2004a). “Education, information, and smoking decisions: evidence
from smoking histories, 1940‐2000,” Policy Research Working Paper Series 3362,
The World Bank.

De Walque, D. (2004b). “How Does the Impact of an HIV/AIDS Information
Campaign Vary with Educational Attainment? Evidence from Rural Uganda,” Policy
Research Working Paper Series 3289, The World Bank.

de Walque, D. (2005), “How does the impact of an HIV/AIDS information campaign
vary with educational attainment? Evidence from rural Uganda”, Working paper no.
3289 (World Bank, Washington, DC).

Dee, Thomas S. (2004). “Are there civic returns to education?” Journal of Public
Economics, Vol. 88, Issues 9‐10, August 2004, pp. 1697‐1720.

Desjardins, Richard. “Researching the links between education and well‐being,”
European Journal of Education, Vol. 43, No. 1, 2008, pp 23‐35

Duncan, Greg J. (1976). “Earnings functions and nonpecuniary benefits,” Journal of
Human Resources, Vol. 11, No. 4 (Autumn), pp. 462‐483.

Fehr, Ernst, and Simon Gachter (2000). “Fairness and retaliation: The economics of
Reciprocity,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 14(3), Summer, pp. 159‐181.

Field, Erica (2009). “Educational Debt Burden and Career Choice: Evidence from a
Financial Aid Experiment at NYU Law School,” American Economic Review: Applied,
Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 1‐21.




                                           37
Fletcher, Jason M., and Steven F. Lehrer (2009). “Using Genetic Lotteries within
Families to Examine the Causal Impact of Poor Health on Academic Achievement,”
NBER working paper #15148

Fort, Margherita (2007). “Just a matter of time: Empirical evidence on the causal
effect of education on Fertility in Italy,” European University Institute working
paper #MWP 2007/22.

Heckman, James J. (2006). “Lessons from the technology of skill formation,” Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences Vol. 1038, Issue Understanding and
optimizing human development: From cells to patients to populations, pp. 179‐200.

Helliwell, John F., and Robert D. Putnam (1999). “Education and Social Capital,”
NBER Working paper 7121.

Glaeser, Edward L., Giacomo Ponzetto, and Andrei Shleifer (2005) “Why does
democracy need education?” Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp. 1381‐
4338.

Glied, Sherry, and Adrianna Lleras‐Muney (2008), “Health inequality, education and
medical innovation,” Demography, Vol. 45, No. 3, August, pp. 741‐761.

Goldin, Claudia (1992). “The meaning of college in the lives of maerican women The
past one‐hundred years,” NBER Working paper 4099.
Grossman, Michael (2006). “Education and nonmarket outcomes,” Capter 10 in
Handbook of the Economics of Education, Volume I, Eric Hanushek and Finis Welch
(eds.), Elsevier B.V., pp. 578‐635

Hanushek, Eric (2002). “Publicly provided education,” Chapter 30 in Handbook of
Public Economics, Alan Auerbach and Martin Fedstein (eds.) Vol. 4, pp. 2045‐2141,
Elsevier Press.

Haveman, Robert H., and Barbara L. Wolfe. (1984). “Schooling and Economic Well
Being: The role of nonmarket effects,” Journal of Human Resources, vol. 19(3), pp.
377‐407.

Jones, Larry E., and Michelle Tertilt (2008). “An economic history of fertility in the
United States: 1926‐1960,” Chapter 5 in Frontiers of Family Economics, Vol. 1, pp.
165‐230.

Jones, Larry E., Larry Jones, Alice Schoonbroodt, and Michele Tertilt (2008).
“Fertility theories: Can they explain the negative fertility‐income relationship?”
NBER Working Paper No. 14266.

Kane, Thomas. and Cecilia. Rouse (1993). "The Labor Market Returns To Two and
Four Year College: Is A Credit A Credit and Do Degrees Matter?" NBER working paper


                                           38
#4268.

Kenkel, Donald S. (1991). “Health behavior, health knowledge, and schooling,
Journal of Political Economy 99(2): 287‐305.

Kenkel, Donald S. (2000). “Prevention.” In Anthony J. Culyer and Joseph P. Newhouse
(eds.), Handbook of Health Economics, Vol. 1B. Ambserdam: North‐Holland, Elsevier
Science, pp. 1675‐1720.

Kenkel, D., Lillard, D., and Mathios A. (2006) "The Role of High School Completion
and GED Receipt in Smoking and Obesity," Journal of Labor Economics, 24 (3), 635‐
660.

Laibson, David (1997). “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, Vol. 112(2), pp. 443‐77.

Lazear, Edward (1977). “Education: consumption or production?” Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 85(3), pp. 569‐598.

Lee, David S., and Justin McCrary (2005). “Crime, punishment, and myopia,” NBEr
working paper 11491.

Li, Mingliang (2006). High School Completion and Future Youth Unemployment:
New Evidence from High School and Beyond. Journal of Applied Econometrics,
21(1), 23‐53, 2006.

Lleras‐Muney, Adriana. “The Relationship Between Education and Adult Mortality in
the United States,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 72, No. 1, 2005, pp. 189‐221.

Lochner, Lance, and Enrico Moretti (2004). “The effect of education on criminal
activity: Evidence from prison inmates, arrests, and self‐reports,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 94(1).

Education and Mobility

Machin, Stephen J., Panu Pelkonen, and Kjell G. Salvanes (2009). “Education and
mobility,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 3845

Mare, Robert D. (1991). “Five decades of educational assortative mating,” American
Sociological Review, Vol. 56, No. 1, pp. 15‐32.

Meghir, Costas, and Marten Palme (2005). “Educational Reform, Ability, and Family
Background,” American Economic Review, Vol. 95, No. 1 (Mar., 2005), pp. 414‐424

Michael, R.T. (1973), “Education in nonmarket production”, Journal of Political
Economy 81:306‐327.


                                         39
Milligan, Keving, Enrico Moretti, and Philip Oreopoulos, “Does Education Improve
Citizenship? Evidence from the U.S. and the U.K.,”, Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 88,
No. 9‐10, 2004, pp. 1667 – 1695.

Moretti, Enrico (2004). “Human capital externalities in cities,” Handbook of Regional
and Urban Economics, North Holland Elsevier.

McPeck, John E. (1994). “Critical thinking and the “Trivial Pursuit” theory of
knowledge,” in Re‐thinking reason: New Perspectives in critical thinking, Kerry S.
Walters (ed.), Suny Press, New York.

Neumark, D. (1999), ‘Biases in Twin Estimates of the Return to Schooling’,
Economics of Education Review, 18, pp. 143‐148.

O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin (1999). “Doing It Now or Later,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 89(1), pp. 103‐24.

The Onion (June 7, 2000). “Account manager fondly remembers day in college when
everyone hung out one roof,” Issue 36, No. 21.

Oreopoulos, Philip (2006a). “The Compelling Effects of Compulsory Schooling: Evidence
from Canada,” Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 39 (1), February, 2006, pp. 22‐52.

Oreopoulos, Philip (2006b). “Estimating Average and Local Average Treatment Effects
of Education when Compulsory School Laws Really Matter,” American Economic Review,
Volume 96, Number 1, March 2006, pp. 152‐175(24)

Oreopoulos, Philip (2007). “Do dropouts drop out too soon? Wealth, health, and
happiness from compulsory schooling,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 91, Issues
11‐12, pp. 2213‐2229.

Oreopoulos, Philip, Marianne Page, and Ann Stevens, “The Intergenerational Effects
of Compulsory Schooling”, Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 24, No. 4, October 2006,
pp. 729‐760.

Plug, Erik (2004). “Estimating the Effect of Mother's Schooling on Children's Schooling
Using a Sample of Adoptees,” American Economic Review, Vol. 94, No. 1 (Mar., 2004), pp.
358‐368.

Pope, Devin G., and Jaren C. Pope (2007). “The impact of college sports success on
the quantity and quality of student applications,” Southern Economic Journal, 2007.

Qian, Nancy (2009). “Quantity‐quality and the one child policy: The only‐child
disadvantage in school enrollment in rural china,” NBER working paper 14973.



                                            40
Rockwell, Richard (1976). “Historical trends and variations in educational
homogamy,” Journal of marriage and the family, Vol. 38. Pp. 83‐96.

Ross, C.E. and J. Mirowsky (1999). “Refining the association between education and
health: The effects of quantity, credential, and selectivity,” Deomography, Vo. 36, pp.
445‐460.

Ridell, Craig W., and Xueda Song (2008). “The causal effects of education on
adaptability to employment shocks: Evidence from the Canadian Labour market”

Schwarz, Norbert, and Fritz Strack. “Reports of Subjective Well‐Being: Judgemental
Processes and Their Methodological Implications,” Chapter 4 in Well Being: The
Foundations of Hedonic Psychology, Daniel Kahneman, Ed Deiner, and Norbert
Schwarz (Eds), Russell Sage Foundation, New York, 1999.

Sheeran, Paschal, Dominic Abrams, and Sheina Orbell (1995). “Unemployment, Self‐
Esteem, and Depression: A social Comparison theory approach,” Basic and applied
social psychology, Vol. 17, no. 1 & 2, pp. 65‐82.

Spear, L. P. (2000). “The Adolescent Brain and Age‐Related Behavioral
Manifestations,” Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 24(4): 417–63.

Soloveichik, Rachel (2007). “Does Education Cause Vision Problems? An
Instrumental Variables Estimate,” Mimeo

Solow, Robert M. (1990). “The labor market as a social institution,” Basil Blackwell,
Inc., Cambridge, MA.

Soskice, David W. (1993). “Social skills from mass higher education: Rethinking the
company‐based initial training program,” Oxford review of economic policy, Vol. 9,
No. 3, pp. 101‐113.

Stein M. T., and E.L. Perrin (1998). “Guidance for effective discipline. American
academy of pediatrics. Committee on Psychosocial aspects of child and family
health,” Pediatrics, Vol. 101 No. 4 Pt. 1, pp. 723‐728.

Uslaner, Eric M. (2000). “Producing and consuming trust,” Political Science
Quarterly, Vol. 115, No. 4, pp. 569‐590.

Wagstaff, A. (1993). “The demand for health: An empirical reformulation of the
Grossman model,” Health Economics Vol. 2: pp 189‐198.

Winkelmann, Liliana, and Rainer Winkelmann (1997). “Why are the unemployed so
unhappy? Evidence from Panel Data), Economica, Vol. 65, No. 257. pp. 1‐15.




                                          41
                                                                     !"#$%&'('
                                            )*++",&--'*,.'/&*%-'01'203+4&5&.'678004",#'
                                             9&10%&'*,.':15&%'20,."5"0,",#'0,';,703&'
                                              .8
                                              .85
                                              .9
                                              .95
                                              0-11
                                              12
                                              13-15
                                              16+
                                              before
                                              after conditioning
                                                     conditioningononincome'
                                                                       income
                                                                                            .95
                                                      before conditioning on income
                                                      after conditioning on income




                                                                                            .9




                                                                                            .85




                                                                                            .8
                                                    0-11         12        13-15      16+
                                                                                                   '
                                                                           '
<05&-='$%&!'()*+&!,-.+/0&'!(++!123"2!4&(536+0'!756)!8%&!#9:131;;;!<&-&5(+!=6.,(+!=/5>&4'?!@65-!,-!8%&!A-,8&0!=8(8&'!,-!#9:;!
65!+(8&5B!!$%&!C5(*%!5&*658'!5&+(8,>&!0,77&5&-.&'!,-!(>&5(C&!'&+735&*658&0!%(**,-&''!@4!D%&8%&5!(-!,-0,>,0/(+E'!%,C%&'8!+&>&+!67!
'.%66+,-C!,'!+&''!8%(-!%,C%!'.%66+!F0,'*+(4&0!('!;3##!4&(5'!67!'.%66+,-CG?!%,C%!'.%66+!F#1!4&(5'G?!'6)&!.6++&C&!@/8!-6!@(.%&+65'!
0&C5&&! F#H3#2! 4&(5'G?! 65! (8! +&('8! (! @(.%&+65'! 0&C5&&! F#IJ! 4&(5'GB! ! K&765&! .6-0,8,6-,-C! 765! ,-.6)&?! 8%&! >(5,(@+&?! D%&8%&5! (-!
,-0,>,0/(+!'&+735&*658'!@&,-C!%(**4!65!>&54!%(**4!(@6/8!+,7&!6>&5(++?!,'!5&C5&''&0!6-!(C&?!4&(5?!C&-0&5?!5(.&?!'8(8&!67!@,58%?!(-0!
4&(5! 67! @,58%! 7,L&0! &77&.8'?! ('! D&++! ('! 7(),+4! .6)*6',8,6-! (8! (C&! #I?! )68%&5! (-0! 7(8%&5E'! &0/.(8,6-?! )68%&5E'! D65M,-C! '8(8/'?!
7(),+4E'! 5&+(8,>&! ,-.6)&! (8! (C&! #I?! (-0! 8%&! '.%66+,-C! (88(,-)&-8! .(8&C65,&'! F+&''! 8%(-! %,C%! '.%66+! F;3##G?! %,C%! '.%66+! F#1G?!
'6)&!.6++&C&!@/8!-6!@(.%&+65E'!0&C5&&!F#H3#2G?!(-0!(8!+&('8!(!@(.%&+65E'!0&C5&&!F#IJG?!D,8%!8%6'&!5&*658,-C!%,C%!'.%66+!('!8%&,5!
%,C%&'8! +&>&+! 67! '.%66+,-C! 6),88&0B! ! $%&! .6&77,.,&-8'! (5&! *5&'&-8&0! 5&+(8,>&! 86! 8%&! 6>&5(++! %,C%! '.%66+! C5(0/(8&! )&(-B! ! $%&!
5&'/+8'!(78&5!.6-0,8,6-,-C!765!,-.6)&!,-.+/0&!7,L&0!&77&.8'!765!'&+735&*658&0!,-.6)&!.(8&C65,&'!,-!&(.%!0(8('&8!4&(5>!




!                                                                       42!
                                                                           !"#$%&'?'
                                           @,'58&'A0B'@++0%5$,"5"&-'*,.'/&*%-'01'203+4&5&.'678004",#'
                                                    9&10%&'*,.':15&%'20,."5"0,",#'0,';,703&'
        O*NET
        3.5
        4
        4.5
        0
        5
        0-11
        12
        13-15
        16+
        Before
        After     achievement
          .5 conditioning
          -11  conditioning
                          on    income score
                            onincome                   O*NET     independence     '
                                                                               income score
                                                       12
                                                       13-15
                                                       16+
                                                       4-11
                                                       4.2
                                                       4.4
                                                       4.6
                                                       4.8
                                                       0
                                                       5
                                                       0-11
                                                       Before
                                                       After
                                                         .2 conditioning
                                                              conidtioning
                                                                         ononincome         O*NET
                                                                                            12
                                                                                            4.4
                                                                                            4.6
                                                                                            4.8
                                                                                            5
                                                                                            16+
                                                                                            4.2
                                                                                            0
                                                                                            0-11
                                                                                            13-15
                                                                                            Before
                                                                                            After      relationships
                                                                                              -11 conditioning
                                                                                                   conditioningon   income score
                                                                                                                onincome

          O*NET achievement score                           O*NET independence score                         O*NET relationships score
                                                  5
            Before conditioning on income                    Before conidtioning on income                                                          5
                                                                                                   5          Before conditioning on income
            After conditioning on income                     After conditioning on income                     After conditioning on income

                                                                                                   4.8
                                                                                                                                                    4.8
                                                  4.5

                                                                                                   4.6
                                                                                                                                                    4.6

                                                  4                                                4.4

                                                                                                                                                    4.4
                                                                                                   4.2

                                                  3.5
                                                                                                   4                                                4.2
           0-11        12        13-15      16+              0-11        12       13-15      16+              0-11        12        13-15     16+
    !                                                   !                                                !                                  !
                                                                           '
<05&-='$%&!'()*+&!,-.+/0&'!123"2!4&(536+0!D65M&5'!756)!8%&!#9:131;;;!<&-&5(+!=6.,(+!=/5>&4'?!@65-!,-!8%&!A-,8&0!=8(8&'!,-!
#9:;! 65! +(8&5B! N/8.6)&'! (5&! OP65M3Q(+/&! R&'.5,*865'S! 756)! 8%&! N../*(8,6-(+! T&8D65M! FNUTV$G! R(8(@('&B! ! W.%,&>&)&-8?!
,-0&*&-0&-.&?! (-0! 5&+(8,6-'%,*! '.65&'! (5&! 0&',C-&0! 86! )&('/5&?! 6-! (! '&>&-! *6,-8! '.(+&?! 8%&! 0&C5&&! 86! D%,.%! (! D65M&5E'!
6../*(8,6-! *56>,0&'! 6**658/-,8,&'! 86! 7&&+! (! '&-'&! 67! (! (..6)*+,'%)&-8?! 86! 7&&+! ,-0&*&-0&-8?! (-0! 86! '6.,(+,X&! D,8%! 68%&5'!
5&'*&.8,>&+4B!K&765&!.6-0,8,6-,-C!765!,-.6)&?!8%&!6/8.6)&!>(5,(@+&?!,'!5&C5&''&0!6-!(C&?!4&(5?!C&-0&5?!5(.&?!'8(8&!67!@,58%?!(-0!
4&(5! 67! @,58%! 7,L&0! &77&.8'?! ('! D&++! ('! 7(),+4! .6)*6',8,6-! (8! (C&! #I?! )68%&5! (-0! 7(8%&5E'! &0/.(8,6-?! )68%&5E'! D65M,-C! '8(8/'?!
7(),+4E'! 5&+(8,>&! ,-.6)&! (8! (C&! #I?! (-0! 8%&! '.%66+,-C! (88(,-)&-8! .(8&C65,&'! F+&''! 8%(-! %,C%! '.%66+! F;3##G?! %,C%! '.%66+! F#1G?!
'6)&!.6++&C&!@/8!-6!@(.%&+65E'!0&C5&&!F#H3#2G?!(-0!(8!+&('8!(!@(.%&+65E'!0&C5&&!F#IJG?!D,8%!8%6'&!5&*658,-C!%,C%!'.%66+!('!8%&,5!
%,C%&'8! +&>&+! 67! '.%66+,-C! 6),88&0B! ! $%&! .6&77,.,&-8'! (5&! *5&'&-8&0! 5&+(8,>&! 86! 8%&! 6>&5(++! %,C%! '.%66+! C5(0/(8&! )&(-B! ! $%&!
5&'/+8'!(78&5!.6-0,8,6-,-C!765!,-.6)&!,-.+/0&!7,L&0!&77&.8'!765!'&+735&*658&0!,-.6)&!.(8&C65,&'!,-!&(.%!0(8('&8!4&(5>!!




!                                                                             43!
                                                                         !"#$%&'C'
                                   D&*-$%&-'01'E*B0%FD*%G&5'H&44FB&",#'*,.'/&*%-'01'203+4&5&.'678004",#'
    Occupational
    16+
    40
    45
    50
    55
    12
    13-15
    35
    0-11
    Before
    After conditioning
           conditioningonPrestige
                        onincome
                            income                9&10%&'*,.':15&%'20,."5"0,",#'0,';,703&'
                                                    Satisfied
                                                    .8
                                                    .82
                                                    .84
                                                    .86
                                                    .88
                                                    0-11
                                                    12
                                                    13-15
                                                    16+
                                                    Before
                                                    After         with
                                                          conditioning
                                                           conditioning onjob
                                                                       on income
                                                                            income       Unemployed
                                                                                         13-15
                                                                                         16+
                                                                                         .02
                                                                                         0
                                                                                         .02
                                                                                         .04
                                                                                         .06
                                                                                         .08
                                                                                         0-11
                                                                                         12

      Occupational Prestige                            Satisfied with job                                Unemployed
                                              55                                               .88                                         .08
        Before conditioning on income                    Before conditioning on income
        After conditioning on income                     After conditioning on income

                                              50                                               .86                                         .06



                                              45                                               .84                                         .04



                                              40                                               .82                                         .02




                                              35                                               .8                                          0
       0-11         12       13-15      16+             0-11        12        13-15      16+             0-11    12      13-15       16+
                                                   !                                                 !                                          '
                                                                        '
<05&-='$%&!'()*+&!,-.+/0&'!123"2!4&(536+0'!756)!8%&!#9:131;;;!<&-&5(+!=6.,(+!=/5>&4'?!@65-!,-!8%&!A-,8&0!=8(8&'!,-!#9:;!65!
+(8&5B!N../*(8,6-(+!*5&'8,C&!F5&'*6-0&-8E'!6../*(8,6-(+!*5&'8,C&!'.65&?!#9Y;G!5(-C&'!756)!#:!F+6D&'8!*5&'8,C&G!86!YI!F%,C%&'8!
*5&'8,C&G?!D,8%!(!'8(-0(50!0&>,(8,6-!67!#HBIB!!!=(8,'7,&0!D,8%!Z6@!,'!(-!,-0,.(865!>(5,(@+&!765!D%&8%&5!(-!,-0,>,0/(+!5&'*6-0'!86!
@&! 7(,5+4?! >&54?! 65! .6)*+&8&+4! '(8,'7,&0! (@6/8! 8%&! Z6@! 8%&4E5&! ,-B! ! $%&! '()*+&! 765! 8%&'&! 8D6! >(5,(@+&'! ,-.+/0&'! 6-+4! 8%6'&!
D65M,-CB!!$%&!/-&)*+64&0!'()*+&!,-.+/0&'!6-+4!8%6'&!&,8%&5!D65M,-C!65!+66M,-C!765!D65MB!K&765&!.6-0,8,6-,-C!765!,-.6)&?!8%&!
6/8.6)&! >(5,(@+&?! ,'! 5&C5&''&0! 6-! (C&?! 4&(5?! C&-0&5?! 5(.&?! '8(8&! 67! @,58%?! (-0! 4&(5! 67! @,58%! 7,L&0! &77&.8'?! ('! D&++! ('! 7(),+4!
.6)*6',8,6-! (8! (C&! #I?! )68%&5! (-0! 7(8%&5E'! &0/.(8,6-?! )68%&5E'! D65M,-C! '8(8/'?! 7(),+4E'! 5&+(8,>&! ,-.6)&! (8! (C&! #I?! (-0! 8%&!
'.%66+,-C!(88(,-)&-8!.(8&C65,&'!F+&''!8%(-!%,C%!'.%66+!F;3##G?!%,C%!'.%66+!F#1G?!'6)&!.6++&C&!@/8!-6!@(.%&+65E'!0&C5&&!F#H3#2G?!
(-0! (8! +&('8! (! @(.%&+65E'! 0&C5&&! F#IJG?! D,8%! 8%6'&! 5&*658,-C! %,C%! '.%66+! ('! 8%&,5! %,C%&'8! +&>&+! 67! '.%66+,-C! 6),88&0B! ! $%&!
.6&77,.,&-8'!(5&!*5&'&-8&0!5&+(8,>&!86!8%&!6>&5(++!%,C%!'.%66+!C5(0/(8&!)&(-B!!$%&!5&'/+8'!(78&5!.6-0,8,6-,-C!765!,-.6)&!,-.+/0&!
7,L&0!&77&.8'!765!'&+735&*658&0!,-.6)&!.(8&C65,&'!,-!&(.%!0(8('&8!4&(5>!!




!                                                                          44!
                                                                                  !!
                                                                           !"#$%&'I'
                                       D&*-$%&-'01'<0,3*%G&5'H&44FB&",#'*,.'/&*%-'01'203+4&5&.'678004",#'
                                                    9&10%&'*,.':15&%'20,."5"0,",#'0,';,703&'
        Very
        12
        16+
        .2
        .3
        .4
        .5
        0-11
        13-15
        Before
        After   Good Health
              conditioning
               conditioningon
                            onincome
                                income                .Ever
                                                       0
                                                       .05
                                                       .1
                                                       .15
                                                       0-11
                                                       12
                                                       13-15
                                                       16+
                                                       Before
                                                       After  divorced/separated
                                                        05 conditioning
                                                              conditioning
                                                                         on       '
                                                                           onincome
                                                                               income     Favor
                                                                                          16+
                                                                                          .2
                                                                                          .25
                                                                                          .3
                                                                                          0-11
                                                                                          12
                                                                                          13-15 spanking to discipline child
          Very Good Health                                 Ever divorced/separated                       Favor spanking to discipline child
                                                  .5               Before conditioning on income
            Before conditioning on income
                                                                                                   .15
            After conditioning on income                           After conditioning on income
                                                                                                                                        .3



                                                  .4
                                                                                                   .1


                                                                                                                                        .25
                                                  .3
                                                                                                   .05




                                                  .2                                               0                                    .2
           0-11         12        13-15     16+             0-11    12       13-15        16+             0-11     12    13-15    16+
    !                                                  !                               !                                       '
                                                                  '
<05&-='$%&!'()*+&!,-.+/0&'!(++!123"2!4&(536+0'!756)!8%&!#9:131;;;!<&-&5(+!=6.,(+!=/5>&4'?!@65-!,-!8%&!A-,8&0!=8(8&'!,-!#9:;!
65!+(8&5B!Q&54!C660!%&(+8%!,'!(-!,-0,.(865!>(5,(@+&!765!D%&8%&5!(-!,-0,>,0/(+!5&'*6-0'!86!@&!,-!>&54!C660!%&(+8%!6>&5(++!(8!8%&!
8,)&!67!8%&!,-8&5>,&DB!K&765&!.6-0,8,6-,-C!765!,-.6)&?!8%&!6/8.6)&!>(5,(@+&?!,'!5&C5&''&0!6-!(C&?!4&(5?!C&-0&5?!5(.&?!'8(8&!67!
@,58%?!(-0!4&(5!67!@,58%!7,L&0!&77&.8'?!('!D&++!('!7(),+4!.6)*6',8,6-!(8!(C&!#I?!)68%&5!(-0!7(8%&5E'!&0/.(8,6-?!)68%&5E'!D65M,-C!
'8(8/'?!7(),+4E'!5&+(8,>&!,-.6)&!(8!(C&!#I?!(-0!8%&!'.%66+,-C!(88(,-)&-8!.(8&C65,&'!F+&''!8%(-!%,C%!'.%66+!F;3##G?!%,C%!'.%66+!
F#1G?!'6)&!.6++&C&!@/8!-6!@(.%&+65E'!0&C5&&!F#H3#2G?!(-0!(8!+&('8!(!@(.%&+65E'!0&C5&&!F#IJG?!D,8%!8%6'&!5&*658,-C!%,C%!'.%66+!('!
8%&,5!%,C%&'8!+&>&+!67!'.%66+,-C!6),88&0B!!$%&!.6&77,.,&-8'!(5&!*5&'&-8&0!5&+(8,>&!86!8%&!6>&5(++!%,C%!'.%66+!C5(0/(8&!)&(-B!!$%&!
5&'/+8'!(78&5!.6-0,8,6-,-C!765!,-.6)&!,-.+/0&!7,L&0!&77&.8'!765!'&+735&*658&0!,-.6)&!.(8&C65,&'!,-!&(.%!0(8('&8!4&(5>!!




!                                                                        45!
                                                                               !"#$%&'J'
                                                 D&*-$%&-'01'K%&1&%&,7&-'*,.'/&*%-'01'203+4&5&.'678004",#'
                                                        9&10%&'*,.':15&%'20,."5"0,",#'0,';,703&'
             Live   for   today                                                        '            Ever   arrested
             .3
             .35
             .4
             .45
             .5
             .55
             0-11
             12
             13-15
             16+
             Before
             After conditioning
                    conditioningon
                                 onincome
                                     income                  Firstconditioning
                                                             .1
                                                             .2
                                                             .3
                                                             .4
                                                             .5
                                                             0-11
                                                             12
                                                             13-15
                                                             16+
                                                             Before
                                                             After  child born
                                                                    conditioning
                                                                               on     when teenager
                                                                                 onincome
                                                                                     income         .06 conditioning
                                                                                                    .08
                                                                                                    .1
                                                                                                    .12
                                                                                                    .14
                                                                                                    0-11
                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                    13-15
                                                                                                    16+
                                                                                                    Before
                                                                                                    After  conditioning
                                                                                                                      ononincome
                                                                                                                            income

                Live for today                                      First child born when teenager                Ever arrested
                               Before conditioning on income .55                                                           Before conditioning on income   .14
                               After conditioning on income                                                  .5
                                                                             Before conditioning on income                 After conditioning on income
                                                              .5             After conditioning on income
                                                                                                                                                           .12
                                                                                                             .4
                                                              .45
                                                                                                                                                           .1
                                                                                                             .3
                                                              .4

                                                                                                                                                           .08
                                                              .35                                            .2


                                                              .3                                                                                           .06
                                                                                                             .1
                 0-11          12        13-15        16+            0-11     12         13-15        16+          0-11     12       13-15         16+
    !!!!!!                                                                                                                      '
                                                                  '
<05&-='$%&!'()*+&!,-.+/0&'!(++!123"2!4&(536+0'!756)!8%&!#9:131;;;!<&-&5(+!=6.,(+!=/5>&4'?!@65-!,-!8%&!A-,8&0!=8(8&'!,-!#9:;!
65!+(8&5B!Q&54!C660!%&(+8%!,'!(-!,-0,.(865!>(5,(@+&!765!D%&8%&5!(-!,-0,>,0/(+!5&'*6-0'!86!@&!,-!>&54!C660!%&(+8%!6>&5(++!(8!8%&!
8,)&!67!8%&!,-8&5>,&DB!K&765&!.6-0,8,6-,-C!765!,-.6)&?!8%&!6/8.6)&!>(5,(@+&?!,'!5&C5&''&0!6-!(C&?!4&(5?!C&-0&5?!5(.&?!'8(8&!67!
@,58%?!(-0!4&(5!67!@,58%!7,L&0!&77&.8'?!('!D&++!('!7(),+4!.6)*6',8,6-!(8!(C&!#I?!)68%&5!(-0!7(8%&5E'!&0/.(8,6-?!)68%&5E'!D65M,-C!
'8(8/'?!7(),+4E'!5&+(8,>&!,-.6)&!(8!(C&!#I?!(-0!8%&!'.%66+,-C!(88(,-)&-8!.(8&C65,&'!F+&''!8%(-!%,C%!'.%66+!F;3##G?!%,C%!'.%66+!
F#1G?!'6)&!.6++&C&!@/8!-6!@(.%&+65E'!0&C5&&!F#H3#2G?!(-0!(8!+&('8!(!@(.%&+65E'!0&C5&&!F#IJG?!D,8%!8%6'&!5&*658,-C!%,C%!'.%66+!('!
8%&,5!%,C%&'8!+&>&+!67!'.%66+,-C!6),88&0B!!$%&!.6&77,.,&-8'!(5&!*5&'&-8&0!5&+(8,>&!86!8%&!6>&5(++!%,C%!'.%66+!C5(0/(8&!)&(-B!!$%&!
5&'/+8'!(78&5!.6-0,8,6-,-C!765!,-.6)&!,-.+/0&!7,L&0!&77&.8'!765!'&+735&*658&0!,-.6)&!.(8&C65,&'!,-!&(.%!0(8('&8!4&(5>!!
!
!




!                                                                                  46!
                                                                    !"#$%&'L'
                                         D&*-$%&-'01'607"*4'K*%5"7"+*5"0,'*,.'/&*%-'01'678004",#'
                                               9&10%&'*,.':15&%'20,."5"0,",#'0,';,703&'
    People
    16+
    12
    .3
    .4
    .5
    .6
    0-11
    13-15
    Before
    After      can be
          conditioning
           conditioningon  trusted
                        onincome
                            income              Everconditioning
                                                .4
                                                .5
                                                .6
                                                .7
                                                .8
                                                0-11
                                                12
                                                13-15
                                                16+
                                                Before
                                                After  voted ononincome
                                                       conditioning      '
                                                                     income              Volunteer
                                                                                         .4
                                                                                         .5
                                                                                         .6
                                                                                         .7
                                                                                         .3
                                                                                         0-11
                                                                                         12
                                                                                         13-15
                                                                                         16+
                                                                                         Before
                                                                                         After conditioning
                                                                                                conditioningon
                                                                                                             onincome
                                                                                                                 income

      People can be trusted                             Ever voted                                  Volunteer
                                               .6        Before conditioning on income         .8                                          .7
         Before conditioning on income                                                               Before conditioning on income
                                                         After conditioning on income
         After conditioning on income                                                                After conditioning on income

                                                                                               .7                                          .6
                                               .5

                                                                                               .6
                                                                                                                                           .5

                                               .4
                                                                                               .5
                                                                                                                                           .4


                                               .3                                              .4
                                                                                                                                           .3
        0-11         12        13-15     16+             0-11        12        13-15     16+         0-11         12        13-15    16+
                                                    !                                  !                                       !!!!'
                                                                  '
<05&-='$%&!'()*+&!,-.+/0&'!(++!123"2!4&(536+0'!756)!8%&!#9:131;;;!<&-&5(+!=6.,(+!=/5>&4'?!@65-!,-!8%&!A-,8&0!=8(8&'!,-!#9:;!
65!+(8&5B!Q&54!C660!%&(+8%!,'!(-!,-0,.(865!>(5,(@+&!765!D%&8%&5!(-!,-0,>,0/(+!5&'*6-0'!86!@&!,-!>&54!C660!%&(+8%!6>&5(++!(8!8%&!
8,)&!67!8%&!,-8&5>,&DB!K&765&!.6-0,8,6-,-C!765!,-.6)&?!8%&!6/8.6)&!>(5,(@+&?!,'!5&C5&''&0!6-!(C&?!4&(5?!C&-0&5?!5(.&?!'8(8&!67!
@,58%?!(-0!4&(5!67!@,58%!7,L&0!&77&.8'?!('!D&++!('!7(),+4!.6)*6',8,6-!(8!(C&!#I?!)68%&5!(-0!7(8%&5E'!&0/.(8,6-?!)68%&5E'!D65M,-C!
'8(8/'?!7(),+4E'!5&+(8,>&!,-.6)&!(8!(C&!#I?!(-0!8%&!'.%66+,-C!(88(,-)&-8!.(8&C65,&'!F+&''!8%(-!%,C%!'.%66+!F;3##G?!%,C%!'.%66+!
F#1G?!'6)&!.6++&C&!@/8!-6!@(.%&+65E'!0&C5&&!F#H3#2G?!(-0!(8!+&('8!(!@(.%&+65E'!0&C5&&!F#IJG?!D,8%!8%6'&!5&*658,-C!%,C%!'.%66+!('!
8%&,5!%,C%&'8!+&>&+!67!'.%66+,-C!6),88&0B!!$%&!.6&77,.,&-8'!(5&!*5&'&-8&0!5&+(8,>&!86!8%&!6>&5(++!%,C%!'.%66+!C5(0/(8&!)&(-B!!$%&!
5&'/+8'!(78&5!.6-0,8,6-,-C!765!,-.6)&!,-.+/0&!7,L&0!&77&.8'!765!'&+735&*658&0!,-.6)&!.(8&C65,&'!,-!&(.%!0(8('&8!4&(5>!!
!
                                                                  !!




!                                                                           47!
                                                                                 !"#$%&'M'
                                                         D&*-$%&-'01'N"3&'O-&'*,.'/&*%-'01'678004",#'
                                                          9&10%&'*,.':15&%'20,."5"0,",#'0,';,703&'
         Always     feel rushed
                                                                                         '      Want
                                                                                                16+
                                                                                                .14
                                                                                                .16
                                                                                                .18
                                                                                                .2
                                                                                                .22
                                                                                                0-11
                                                                                                12
                                                                                                13-15
                                                                                                Before
                                                                                                After    more time
                                                                                                      conditioning
                                                                                                       conditioningon      with friends
                                                                                                                    onincome
                                                                                                                        income
         12
         16+
         .26 conditioning
         .28
         .3
         .32
         .34
         .36
         0-11
         13-15
         Before
         After  conditioning
                           ononincome
                                 income                      Want     more leisure
                                                             .24 conditioning
                                                             .26
                                                             .28
                                                             .3
                                                             .32
                                                             0-11
                                                             12
                                                             13-15
                                                             16+
                                                             Before
                                                             After  conditioning
                                                                               ononincome
                                                                                     incometime
            Always feel rushed                                   Want more leisure time                       Want more time with friends
                                Before conditioning on income
                                After conditioning on income                                                    Before conditioning on income
                                                           .36    Before conditioning on income
                                                                                                        .32     After conditioning on income          .22
                                                                  After conditioning on income

                                                           .34
                                                                                                        .3                                            .2

                                                           .32

                                                                                                        .28                                           .18
                                                           .3

                                                                                                        .26                                           .16
                                                           .28


                                                           .26                                          .24                                           .14
             0-11          12         13-15        16+            0-11        12       13-15      16+          0-11        12        13-15      16+
    !!                                                                                                                       !!!!'
                                                                  '
<05&-='$%&!'()*+&!,-.+/0&'!(++!123"2!4&(536+0'!756)!8%&!#9:131;;;!<&-&5(+!=6.,(+!=/5>&4'?!@65-!,-!8%&!A-,8&0!=8(8&'!,-!#9:;!
65!+(8&5B!Q&54!C660!%&(+8%!,'!(-!,-0,.(865!>(5,(@+&!765!D%&8%&5!(-!,-0,>,0/(+!5&'*6-0'!86!@&!,-!>&54!C660!%&(+8%!6>&5(++!(8!8%&!
8,)&!67!8%&!,-8&5>,&DB!K&765&!.6-0,8,6-,-C!765!,-.6)&?!8%&!6/8.6)&!>(5,(@+&?!,'!5&C5&''&0!6-!(C&?!4&(5?!C&-0&5?!5(.&?!'8(8&!67!
@,58%?!(-0!4&(5!67!@,58%!7,L&0!&77&.8'?!('!D&++!('!7(),+4!.6)*6',8,6-!(8!(C&!#I?!)68%&5!(-0!7(8%&5E'!&0/.(8,6-?!)68%&5E'!D65M,-C!
'8(8/'?!7(),+4E'!5&+(8,>&!,-.6)&!(8!(C&!#I?!(-0!8%&!'.%66+,-C!(88(,-)&-8!.(8&C65,&'!F+&''!8%(-!%,C%!'.%66+!F;3##G?!%,C%!'.%66+!
F#1G?!'6)&!.6++&C&!@/8!-6!@(.%&+65E'!0&C5&&!F#H3#2G?!(-0!(8!+&('8!(!@(.%&+65E'!0&C5&&!F#IJG?!D,8%!8%6'&!5&*658,-C!%,C%!'.%66+!('!
8%&,5!%,C%&'8!+&>&+!67!'.%66+,-C!6),88&0B!!$%&!.6&77,.,&-8'!(5&!*5&'&-8&0!5&+(8,>&!86!8%&!6>&5(++!%,C%!'.%66+!C5(0/(8&!)&(-B!!$%&!
5&'/+8'!(78&5!.6-0,8,6-,-C!765!,-.6)&!,-.+/0&!7,L&0!&77&.8'!765!'&+735&*658&0!,-.6)&!.(8&C65,&'!,-!&(.%!0(8('&8!4&(5>!!
!
!




!                                                                                   48!
!




!
!


!   !
