NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES FROM NESTED STATE & FEDERAL REGULATIONS:
THE CASE OF THE PAVLEY GREENHOUSE-GAS-PER-MILE LIMITS
Lawrence H. Goulder
Mark R. Jacobsen
Arthur A. van Benthem
Working Paper 15337
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15337

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2009

We are grateful for helpful comments from Steven Albu, Soren Anderson, Kenneth Gillingham, Paul
Hughes, James Sallee, Eileen Tutt, Catherine Wolfram, and participants at seminars and workshops
at Harvard University, MIT, the University of British Columbia, the University of California at Riverside,
Stanford University, the Summer Workshop of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists,
and the NBER Summer Institute. We also thank the Precourt Energy Efficiency Center at Stanford
University for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Lawrence H. Goulder, Mark R. Jacobsen, and Arthur A. van Benthem. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Unintended Consequences from Nested State & Federal Regulations: The Case of the Pavley
Greenhouse-Gas-per-Mile Limits
Lawrence H. Goulder, Mark R. Jacobsen, and Arthur A. van Benthem
NBER Working Paper No. 15337
September 2009
JEL No. H23,H77,Q52,Q58
ABSTRACT
Fourteen U.S. states recently pledged to adopt limits on greenhouse gases (GHGs) per mile of light-duty
automobiles. Previous analyses predicted this action would significantly reduce emissions from new
cars in these states, but ignored possible offsetting emissions increases from policy-induced adjustments
in new car markets in other (non-adopting) states and in the used car market.
Such offsets (or “leakage”) reflect the fact that the state-level effort interacts with the national corporate
average fuel economy (CAFE) standard: the state-level initiative effectively loosens the national standard
and gives automakers scope to profitably increase sales of high-emissions automobiles in non-adopting
states. In addition, although the state-level effort may well spur the invention of fuel- and emissions-saving
technologies, interactions with the federal CAFE standard limit the nationwide emissions reductions
from such advances. Using a multi-period numerical simulation model, we find that 70-80 percent
of the emissions reductions from new cars in adopting states are offset by emissions leakage.
This research examines a particular instance of a general issue of policy significance – namely, problems
from “nested” federal and state environmental regulations. Such nesting implies that similar leakage
difficulties are likely to arise under several newly proposed state-level initiatives.

Lawrence H. Goulder
Department of Economics
Landau Economics Building 328
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
goulder@stanford.edu
Mark R. Jacobsen
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
m3jacobs@ucsd.edu

Arthur A. van Benthem
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
arthurvb@stanford.edu

I. Introduction
In response to the prospect of climate change, many U.S. states have adopted or
proposed policies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the transport sector. One
especially noteworthy initiative has been the recent effort, undertaken by 14 U.S. states, to
establish limits on greenhouse gases (GHGs) per mile from light-duty automobiles. These
“Pavley” limits (named after California Assemblywoman Fran Pavley, who sponsored the
California bill that launched this multi-state effort) required manufacturers to reduce per-mile
GHG emissions starting in 2009. Manufacturers would need to reduce emissions by about 30
percent by 2016 and 45 percent by 2020 (California Air Resources Board (2008a)).
Since CO2 emissions and gasoline use are nearly proportional, 1 the Pavley limits
effectively raise the fuel economy requirements for manufacturers in the states adopting such
limits. The 14 states claimed that the Pavley restrictions would significantly reduce gasoline
consumption and GHG emissions. For example, the California Air Resources Board
estimated that the limits would account for over 18 percent of the reductions needed to meet
the state’s GHG emissions target for 2020.
The analyses offering these projections ignored some very important factors,
however. Accounting for these factors can produce a very different picture of the impact of
the Pavley effort on GHG emissions. One overlooked factor is the potential for significant
interactions between the state initiatives and existing federal corporate average fuel economy
(CAFE) standards. Consider an auto manufacturer that, prior to the imposition of the Pavley
limits, was just meeting the U.S. CAFE standard. Now it must meet the (tougher) Pavley
requirement through its sales of cars registered in the adopting states. In meeting the tougher
Pavley requirements, its overall U.S. average fuel economy now exceeds the national
requirement: the national constraint no longer binds. This means that the manufacturer is
now able to change the composition of its sales outside of the Pavley states; specifically, it
can shift its sales toward larger cars with lower fuel-economy. Indeed, if all manufacturers
were initially constrained by the national CAFE standard, and there were no offsetting
beneficial technological spillovers, the introduction of the Pavley requirements would lead to
“emissions leakage” of 100 percent at the margin: the reductions within the Pavley states
would be completely offset by emissions increases outside of those states! 2
A second important factor is the potential for leakage from the new car to the used car
market. A more stringent GHG regulation not only leads to substitution of used cars for new
cars: to the extent that the regulation raises the prices of new cars relative to used cars, some
households will decide to hold on to their used cars longer (scrap rates will decline). This
1

For a given mix of gasoline and other fuels (e.g., ethanol) in retail motor fuel, the CO2 released per gallon is
largely determined, since fuel combustion by cars is nearly complete. The fuel mix might change over time, but
such changes can be regarded as independent of the Pavley initiative.

2

To our knowledge, this study is the first to focus on such leakage from nested regulation in the context of
automobile emissions or MPG standards. However, recent work by McGuinness and Ellerman (2008) discusses
qualitatively the potential for such leakage in connection with interactions between cap-and-trade climate
policies at the state and federal levels.

1

increases the size of the used car market. Since used cars tend to be less fuel efficient than
new cars, this also contributes to leakage.
Technological spillovers represent a third potential interaction. Tighter mileage
requirements in the adopting states can stimulate advances in technological know-how. In
particular, they can hasten the discovery of low-cost fuel-saving options and thereby lead to
improved fuel economy not only in adopting states but in other states as well. This would
constitute a negative leakage effect that counters the two forms of leakage just described.
This paper develops a numerical simulation model to assess the impact of the new
Pavley standards on gasoline consumption and GHG emissions. The model accounts for
each of the forms of leakage indicated above: interactions between the state-level
requirements and the federal CAFE standards, the interplay between new car and used car
markets, and the potential for technological spillovers. It considers how the Pavley rules
affect production, pricing, and fleet composition decisions of automobile producers engaging
in imperfect competition. It also accounts for the demand side of automobile markets,
examining the influence of the Pavley rules on consumers’ automobile purchase decisions.
We apply the model to assess the impacts of the planned GHGs-per-mile limits, as
well as to compare the impacts of the Pavley initiative with those from tighter federal CAFE
standards. We find that, under a wide range of scenarios, overall leakage (the net impact of
all three types) is very serious. In plausible cases, overall leakage is nearly 80 percent in the
short run and remains over 70 percent throughout the period 2009-2020. Most of the leakage
reflects the interaction between the Pavley effort and the existing CAFE standard.
Substitutions from new to used cars and reduced used vehicle scrap rates also contribute
significantly to the leakage. In nearly all scenarios considered, technological spillovers offset
only a small fraction of the leakage. The potential emissions-reduction benefits of
technological spillovers are nearly fully eliminated because of interactions with the national
fuel-economy constraint. Specifically, technological improvements reduce the shadow value
of the federal constraint and induce automobile manufacturers to sell even more fuelinefficient automobiles in the non-adopting states. This phenomenon has been overlooked by
analysts that justify regional policies on the basis of potential technological spillovers.
Thus, this paper shows that emissions leakage, traditionally analyzed in the context of
producer relocation 3 and more recently in the context of incomplete regulation 4 , is also an
important consequence from nested state and federal regulation.

3

Leakage from producer relocation occurs when a regulation, by raising costs of production to manufacturers in
a given region, causes producers to move to another region. In this case, policy-induced reductions in emissions
in the former region will be offset by increases in the latter region stemming from the newly located production.
Felder and Rutherford (1993) and Barker, Junankar, Pollitt and Summerton (2007) have analyzed this form of
leakage in connection with international climate change policy. The Pavley regulations, however, do not give
automakers any incentive to relocate production facilities. Auto manufacturers cannot escape the tighter limits
that pertain to the adopting states by moving to another location. This is the case because the limits are imposed
based on the location of an auto’s registration (demand), not its production.

2

In May 2009 the Obama administration reached an agreement with the 14 “Pavley
states” according to which the U.S. would tighten the federal fuel economy requirements in
such a way as to achieve effective reductions in GHGs per mile consistent with the goals of
the Pavley initiative. In return, the 14 states agreed to halt the Pavley effort. 5
By introducing the tighter mileage requirements nationwide, across-state leakage is
largely avoided. However, the issues raised by the Pavley effort remain live and indeed may
become increasingly important. Several initiatives currently underway raise the same
potential issues – problems arising from “nested” state and federal environmental constraints.
Currently the California Air Resources Board is seriously considering going beyond the
GHG-per-mile limits implied by the promised federal changes by introducing a state-level
“feebate” system. This would tax automobile manufactures with average GHGs per mile
exceeding some specified level, and use the tax revenues to rebate manufacturers with
average GHGs per mile below that level. The policy has the prospect of triggering the same
adjustments by manufacturers, and thus the same type of leakage, as the Pavley effort. In
addition, similar issues would arise with the nesting of state-level cap-and-trade policies
within a federal cap-and-trade system, and with the nesting of states’ renewable fuel
standards within the proposed Federal Renewable Fuels Standard.
As state and federal environmental activities expand, the potential for serious leakage
associated with nested state and federal regulation grows as well. By focusing on the Pavley
initiative, this paper aims to reveal the mechanisms that lead to unintended consequences
from nested regulation and thereby provide information that can promote a better integration
of state- and federal-level environmental policy.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the planned Pavley
limits and the declared profile of CAFE standards up to the year 2020. Section III identifies
the various factors that influence the potential for leakage and explains how these factors
operate. Section IV presents the structure of the simulation model, while Section V describes
the model’s data and parameters. Section VI displays and interprets the results from policy
simulations. The final section offers conclusions.

4

Fowlie (2008) shows that when pollution regulation applies to only a subset of factories, substantial leakage
may occur since production at regulated firms can be substituted for unregulated production. Bushnell,
Peterman, and Wolfram (2008) show that when a state’s emissions regulations do not control the assignments of
supplies by out-of-state emitters, substantial leakage can occur through “contract reshuffling.”

5

Discontinuing the effort included dropping some related lawsuits. California had been taking legal action to
obtain a waiver from the federal government enabling it to exceed federal fuel economy limits. In the statefederal agreement, the Obama administration pledged to grant the waiver, thus rendering moot the legal issue.

3

II. Limits Imposed by the Pavley and CAFE Regulations
Here we describe the key requirements and their time profiles under the Pavley and
federal CAFE rules. In presenting the federal CAFE standards, we project the existing rules
forward based on requirements laid out in prior legislation and subsequent rulemaking. 6 As
part of Section VI’s policy analysis, we will examine the implications of the tighter CAFE
standards implied by the recent pledges of the Obama administration.

A. The Federal CAFE standards
The federal CAFE standards apply at the manufacturer level and place a lower bound
on the miles per gallon (MPG) achieved by the fleet of vehicles each firm produces. The
limits are set separately for passenger cars (currently a 27.5 MPG average) and light duty
trucks (currently a 23.1 MPG average). 7 The average is calculated as the harmonic mean of
miles per gallon, weighted by the quantity of each model sold in a particular model year. 8
The standards are expected to increase to 38.6 MPG for cars and 33.0 MPG for light
trucks by the year 2020 along the time path shown in Figure 2.1. In addition to the increase
in stringency, two other significant changes may occur: (1) the limits for individual
producers could become dependent on characteristics of their vehicles, as opposed to the
current uniform requirements; and (2) some form of trading may be permitted across
manufacturers and vehicle fleets. These changes would mainly affect the distribution of the
burden across producers. (Our analysis mainly focuses on more aggregate impacts.) It is
also possible that the changes would improve the efficiency of CAFE by making the
constraint bind on a larger fraction of manufacturers. 9 As discussed in Section III below, the
6

Specifically, the rules are based on the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 and subsequent
rulemaking by the National Highway Transportation Safety Administration.

7

For firms that make passenger cars both in the U.S. and abroad, there is a further requirement that the 27.5
MPG average be met separately for the domestically- and foreign-produced cars. Light trucks are counted
together. Some foreign manufacturers do not currently meet the standard and choose to pay a fine. They
account for a small fraction of the U.S. automobile market and we abstract from the issue in the remainder of
the analysis by assuming they comply with new regulations. To the extent that some firms choose not to
comply with the Pavley standard, its effectiveness will be further reduced.

8

Following the California Air Resources Board, we assume that each constrained manufacturer will continue to
exploit a loophole in the CAFE regulation stemming from its treatment of credits for flex-fuel vehicles. When
fully exploited this loophole reduces the effective standard for passenger cars to 26.3 MPG.
9

If the federal CAFE policy were altered to allow trading of fuel economy credits, producers that are not
directly affected by the current CAFE would now be able to trade their surplus with other firms. Permit trading
creates a shadow price for fuel economy for producers that previously had none. This in turn creates the
potential for further leakage, since the Pavley standard will increase the shadow price in adopting regions and
decrease the shadow price for nationwide CAFE. The same argument holds for firms that were previously
constrained in only one fleet: if trading is made possible between their car and light truck fleets, a positive
shadow price (that can be eroded by the introduction of a Pavley-type standard) will appear for both fleets rather
than just one.

4

interactions between the Pavley and federal CAFE requirements become more pronounced,
and leakage increases, the larger is the share of new car sales associated with producers
facing a binding CAFE constraint. Our analysis incorporates the current requirements only;
hence it does not include this additional potential source of leakage.

B. The Pavley Standards
Like the CAFE standards, the Pavley GHG-per-mile limits bind at the manufacturer
level. Since greenhouse gas emissions from vehicles occur mainly from the combustion of
gasoline, the Pavley limits can be very closely approximated by a limit on average gasoline
consumption per mile. 10
The time path of the Pavley standards (after making the transformation to miles per
gallon) is also shown on Figure 2.1. Importantly, the Pavley standards do not apply
separately to cars and trucks as under CAFE. Instead, a single standard applies for the entire
new vehicle fleet of each firm. 11 The efficiency required of each manufacturer under the
Pavley rules increases very quickly from 24.4 MPG to 32.4 MPG in the first four years of the
policy. 12
To facilitate comparisons of the CAFE and Pavley standards, we include in Figure 2.1
a “combined CAFE” measure that averages the car and truck limits weighted by the current
composition of the fleet. This weighted average appears as the dashed line in the figure. The
Pavley standards start out only 0.5 MPG more stringent than those of CAFE, but the gap
widens over time: in the final year shown, the Pavley rule requires a fleet that is 7.5 MPG
more efficient than that required by CAFE. 13
While the “combined CAFE” measure gives a rough sense of the stringency of the
CAFE standard relative to the standard implied by Pavley, it should be noted that this
10

We employ the same conversion factor used in the CARB (2008a) analysis of the Pavley standards: each
gallon of gasoline is assumed to release 8887 grams of CO2 when burned. The primary non-combustion-related
greenhouse gas is refrigerant that leaks out of automobile air conditioners. We follow the methodology used in
a CARB (2008b) analysis and employ a small adjustment for this, and for reduced emissions from CH4 and N2O
that are expected via tailpipe controls. The adjustment ranges from one to two percent depending on model
year.
11

The effective single MPG requirement for cars and trucks under the Pavley rules is the result of a provision
allowing a manufacturer to trade across vehicle classes. If a manufacturer’s passenger cars exceed the standard
it can under comply by a comparable amount with its light trucks. The effect is a single standard for all vehicles
produced by a given manufacturer.
12

The rationale for the rapid increase lies in engineering studies that indicate improvement to 32.4 MPG can be
achieved relatively easily using existing technologies. After the fourth year, the standard continues to increase
in stringency, although more slowly, reaching 35.7 MPG in the eighth year. In the final four years (referred to
as “Pavley II”, for which no definitive agreement has been reached yet) the profile again increases more steeply,
requiring an average fuel economy of 42.5 MPG in the final year shown.
13

These comparisons assume no changes in the ratio of passenger cars to trucks.

5

measure is an average across the entire fleet of new cars projected to be sold in the U.S. For
a given manufacturer, the overall requirement implied by CAFE will differ depending on the
composition of its own fleet between cars and trucks.

C. Adopting and Non-Adopting States
The number of states (or, more precisely, the fraction of the automobile market)
adopting the Pavley rule is central to our analysis. Wider adoption reduces the significance
of the non-adopting region and thus mitigates leakage. Fourteen states approved legislation
to incorporate the Pavley rule: Arizona, Connecticut, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New
Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont, and
Washington. These 14 states make up 37 percent of the automobile market. Illinois and
Delaware also planned to adopt the Pavley rules; this would have raised the fraction to 41.5
percent. We use the latter figure as our central case, and examine possibilities ranging from
California alone (11.1% of the market) to a case where 100 percent of the market is included.

III. Factors Determining Overall Impacts on Gasoline Consumption and
GHG Emissions
A. Impacts on Emissions from New Cars in the Adopting States
In several ways, the Pavley standards give manufacturers incentives to reduce
emissions from new cars in the adopting states. First, they encourage automakers to improve
the fuel economy (and lower GHG emissions) of the various models they sell. They can
improve fuel economy of a given model either by making “static” substitutions of car
features involving known technologies (e.g., substituting smaller engines for larger ones) or
through “dynamic” technological progress (which improves the fuel economy associated
with a given set of car features). Second, they give automakers incentives to change the
composition of their new car sales – in particular, to promote more sales of the relatively
fuel-efficient models of passenger cars and light trucks. Third, by leading to higher prices of
new cars in these states, they promote lower total sales of new cars in these states, thus
reducing aggregate emissions from these cars.

B. Impacts on Emissions in Other Markets
But the Pavley effort affects other markets as well: namely, the new car market in
non-adopting states, and the used car market. The responses in other markets, and their
implications for gasoline consumption and GHG emissions, include the following:
1. Impacts in the New Car Market in Non-Adopting States:

6

a. Increased Emissions Reflecting Interactions with the Federal CAFE Standard
As sketched out in the introduction, if a manufacturer is initially constrained by the
federal CAFE standard, then by meeting the tighter Pavley standard it will have overcomplied with the federal requirement. This frees up the manufacturer to reduce the fuel
economy of its fleet outside of the adopting states. For an incremental tightening of the fuelefficiency requirement, this leakage is 100 percent: the improvement in fuel economy in the
adopting states is entirely offset by a worsening of fuel economy elsewhere.
b. Reduced Emissions Reflecting Technological Spillovers
The tighter mileage requirements in the Pavley states give firms incentives to expand
research into fuel-saving technologies. This can accelerate the discovery of lower-cost ways
to improve fuel economy. Such knowledge is likely to reduce the costs of improving fuel
economy, and thus it works toward enhancements in fuel economy in the non-adopting states
as well as the adopting states. Such technological spillovers could promote the goals of the
Pavley effort and counteract other, adverse forms of leakage.

2. Impacts in the Used Car Market: Substitutions of Relatively Fuel-Inefficient Used Cars
for Relatively Fuel-Efficient New Cars.
The Pavley standards raise the effective price of new cars, particularly of larger and
inefficient vehicles, stimulating demands for substitutes. Hence the demand for used cars –
and in particular for large used passenger cars and light trucks (SUVs and minivans) – shifts
out, and the equilibrium prices and quantities of these used vehicles rises. The increase in
quantity reflects both scale and composition effects. The equilibrium quantity of used cars in
the market rises (scale) since vehicles are less likely to be scrapped when they become more
valuable 14 ; higher prices of used vehicles raise retention rates. The quantity rises especially
for larger passenger cars and trucks (composition). The scale and composition effects each
contribute to leakage: gasoline consumption and GHG emissions in the used car market are
above what would be the case had there been no policy-induced increase in new car prices.
The numerical model applied in this paper accounts for each of these leakage
channels. It addresses the two forms of leakage in the new car market – one from
interactions between the Pavley rules and the federal CAFE standard, and the other from
technological spillovers. It also accounts for leakage from the new car market to the used car
market.

C. Factors Controlling the Strength of the Leakage Channels

14

Some scrapped vehicles may in fact be exported to lower income countries, such as Mexico. This analysis
abstracts from the emissions implications of the international used car trade. On this issue see Davis and Kahn
(2009).

7

The strength of the first (adopting state to non-adopting state) channel depends on
several factors:
•

The share of new-car production that derives from producers constrained by the federal
CAFE standard. Producers that are not initially constrained by the federal standard have
no incentive to sell additional, fuel-inefficient cars in the non-adopting states when the
Pavley limits are imposed.

•

The elasticity of demand for new cars in the non-adopting states. If this elasticity is
large, auto manufacturers will be able to increase sales of fuel-inefficient cars in response
to the Pavley initiative without having to reduce auto prices significantly. The greater the
elasticity, the greater the amount of leakage in the new car market of the non-adopting
states, other things equal.

•

The relative emphasis on static (substituting car components) versus dynamic (investing
in research) approaches to improving the fuel economy of given models. Only the
dynamic approaches yield spillovers to the non-adopting states. Thus, spillovers are
enhanced to the extent that automakers emphasize dynamic approaches.

The numerical model applied in this study (and described in sections IV and V)
considers this first channel and the factors that control its strength. Specifically, it accounts
for the fact that several producers of automobiles sold in the U.S. are not initially constrained
by the federal CAFE standard. And it recognizes that producers need to adjust car prices in
order to sell additional vehicles in the non-Pavley states, a phenomenon that can attenuate
leakage. The model also distinguishes between the static and dynamic channels for
improving fuel economy of given models, and derives the relative emphasis on these two
channels from profit-maximizing behavior.
The force of the second (new car to used car) channel depends on:
•

The nature of consumer preferences – including the ease with which consumers can
substitute used for new cars in utility.

•

The extent to which the Pavley regulations would drive up new car prices, which in turn
depends on the costs to producers of increasing the fuel economy of given models.

The numerical model addresses these factors by incorporating utility-maximizing
choices among used and new cars, and considering how interactions between new and used
car markets jointly determine the prices in those markets.

IV. Model Structure
A.

Overview

8

The economic agents in the model are producers of new cars, suppliers of used cars,
and households. The model distinguishes two “regions”: the group of states adopting the
Pavley limits, and the group that does not. In the adopting region, new car producers need to
comply with both the federal CAFE standard and the Pavley standard.
Vehicles are distinguished by manufacturer, age, size (large and small), type (truck
and car), and region (adopting and non-adopting). As indicated in Table 4.1, there are seven
manufacturer categories and 18 age categories, along with the two categories of size, type,
and region. This yields 1,064 different vehicles (532 for each region).
There are two representative households, one in each region. Each household
maximizes a nested CES utility function subject to a budget constraint. The choices made by
the representative households are meant to mimic the aggregate behavior of consumers in the
adopting and non-adopting regions in terms of demands for the various vehicles. 15 The
utility-based demands for vehicles are functions of purchase prices and expected operating
costs, where operating costs (as well as purchase prices) depend on fuel economy. Aggregate
income (to be spent on vehicle ownership and other goods) is exogenous.
The specification on the production side accounts for the oligopolistic nature of the
new car market. The seven producers engage in Bertrand competition, setting prices of each
manufactured automobile to maximize profits subject to the CAFE and Pavley constraints
and accounting for the influence of their prices on consumer demand. Producers also
determine the level of fuel-economy of individual models, taking into account the cost of
static and dynamic fuel-economy improvements and the impact of improved fuel-economy
on consumer demand.
In the used car market, the supply of used cars in a given period consists of the used
cars and new cars from the previous period net of scrapping at the end of the previous period.
The scrap probability for each vehicle type and vintage is endogenous, depending on the
price of the car: it is assumed that one is more likely to make repairs (rather than scrap the
car) the greater is the value of the vehicle when it is in working condition. We model a
national used car market, consistent with various state-level regulations allowing the
importing of out-of-state vehicles once they have been driven several thousand miles. In a
sensitivity analysis we examine the alternative, where the importing of used vehicles is
restricted.
The model solves for supply-demand equilibrium in the new and used car markets.
These equilibria are calculated at one-year intervals.

15

It would also be possible to model the choice in a discrete way, using a multinomial logit model. CES was
adopted here in order to provide more flexibility in modeling cross-price elasticities, without the restrictions
embedded in the logit demand framework.

9

B.

Household Behavior and Automobile Demand

The representative consumer in each of the two regions derives utility from the
various vehicles and a composite consumption good. We model each consumer’s demand
for vehicles and other goods using a CES utility function with the following nested structure:
utility
vehicle ownership

other goods

car

truck

small

large
(etc.)

small

large

(etc.)

(etc.)

age 0 age 1 … age 18
(new)
(etc.)
manu. 1 manu. 2 … manu. 7

At each level, the consumer chooses the shares of vehicle characteristics that achieve
the relevant composite at the lowest unit cost. For example, at the lowest nest, the consumer
chooses (for a small or large car or truck of a given age) the mix of manufacturers that yields
the composite for that aged vehicle at the lowest cost. At the highest nest, the consumer
chooses not only the mix between vehicle ownership (v) and other goods (x) but also the
levels that satisfy its budget constraint. Thus, at the highest nest, the consumer in each
region solves the following problem:

(

max U ( v, x ) = α v v + α x x
v, x

ρu

ρu

)

1

ρu

(4.1)

subject to
pv v + px x ≤ M

(4.2)

and non-negativity constraints, where M is total income, pv is the implicit rental price of the
vehicle ownership composite, px is the price of other goods, M is total income, ρu is the
elasticity of substitution between vehicles and other goods, and αv and αx are distribution
parameters. The appendix describes the optimal solution to the consumer problem in detail
and indicates how the distribution parameters are calibrated to the data.

10

C.

Supply of New Cars

The seven manufacturers sell four classes of cars in each of the two regions. Car
classes (combinations of types t = 1,2 and sizes s = 1,2) represent small cars, large cars, small
trucks and large trucks, respectively, sold in regions r = 1,2. Producers set prices pt,s,r and
fuel economy et,s,r for the two regions, given competitors’ prices and fuel economies and
subject to fleet fuel economy constraints. 16
Producers can change the fuel economy of individual models two ways: through
technological substitution (altering the mix of currently available car components or features
such as engine or transmission types) and through technological change (discovering new,
fuel-saving power processes or components). We refer to these as the “static” and
“dynamic” channels for improving fuel economy. 17
The CAFE standard is a constraint on each manufacturer’s nationwide fleet fuel
economy for two types of vehicles, passenger cars and light trucks. These categories
correspond to the labels “cars” and “trucks” used in this paper. In contrast with the federal
CAFE standard, the Pavley standard is a constraint on each manufacturer’s fleet-wide
average for all new vehicles – cars and trucks together.
Each manufacturer m maximizes profits by choosing eight prices pt,s,r (four in each
region), eight fuel economies et,s,r, and four choices for investment in dynamic technology
improvement, zt,s.

max

{ pt ,s ,1, pt ,s ,2 , et ,s,1, et ,s,2 , zt ,s }

∑ [( p

t , s =1,2

+

t , s ,1

(p

t , s ,2

− ct ,s (et ,s ,1 − zt ,s ) ) ⋅ qt ,s ,1 ( p, e )
− ct ,s ( et ,s ,2 − zt ,s ) ) ⋅ qt ,s ,2 ( p, e ) − ht ,s ( zt ,s )]

(4.3)

subject to the CAFE standards for cars and trucks:

∑ q1,s ,r

s , r =1,2

⎛ q1,s ,r
∑ ⎜⎜
s , r =1,2 e1, s , r
⎝

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

(4.4)

≥ eC

16

The model assumes that producers can separately control the characteristics and prices of new cars sold in the
adopting and non-adopting states. This is consistent with current regulations in California barring the import of
new and lightly used (less than 7,500 miles) vehicles not certified for the state’s pollution standards. To the
extent that consumers or producers circumvented these regulations with “gray market” imports, additional
leakage would result.
17

The basic structure of the new and used car supply models is similar to that in Bento et al. (2009), although
that model involved a much simpler treatment of fuel economy and technological change. The effect of the
CAFE constraints on manufacturers with differing baseline production builds on results in Jacobsen (2007).

11

∑ q2,s ,r

s , r =1,2

⎛ q2,s ,r
∑ ⎜⎜
s , r =1,2 e2, s , r
⎝

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

≥ eT

(4.5)

and the Pavley standard for all new vehicles sold in the adopting region:
∑ qt , s ,1

t , s =1,2

⎛ qt , s ,1 ⎞
∑ ⎜⎜
⎟
t , s =1,2 et , s ,1 ⎟
⎝
⎠

≥ eP

(4.6)

where pt,s,r and ct,s refer to the purchase price and marginal production cost, respectively, of a
particular car. eC and eT refer to the CAFE requirements for cars and trucks; eP refers to the
Pavley requirement 18 .
For a given car or truck, marginal production cost is a function of both the fuel
economy et,s,r (r = 1,2) chosen for that vehicle and zt,s , the expenditure on research toward
invention of new fuel-saving technologies. By prompting technological change, an increase
in zt,s lowers costs; this is captured through the function ht,s(zt,s) in equation (4.3). 19 This cost
saving is enjoyed in both regions: z and h are not region-specific. Thus, to the extent that
new regulations in the Pavley states prompt an increase in zt,s, there are spillover benefits in
the non-adopting states as well, realized through a reduction in the technological-changerelated cost component, ht,s.
The cost functions c and h(zt,s) are quadratic and calibrated as described in Section V.
The lower are the costs in h(zt,s) relative to c, the greater is the potential spillover across
regions. The only variables not specific to a particular producer m are p and e, which denote
all prices and fuel economies in the market and determine demand qt,s,r for each model. (For
notational simplicity, the subscript identifying the manufacturer (m) has been suppressed.)
Producers are specified as knowing the demand functions of consumers. They can
alter vehicle prices and fuel economy but cannot introduce new vehicle classes or alter
attributes that determine class. The constrained optimization problem needs to be solved
simultaneously for all firms, since the residual demand curve faced by any particular firm
depends on its competitors’ choices. For each firm, there are between 20 and 23 first-order
conditions, depending on which constraints bind (8 on prices, 12 for fuel economy, and up to
three fuel economy constraints). Section E provides details on the solution method.

18

Note that while the producer problem is static within each time period, the CAFE and Pavley requirements
change through time.
19

The costs in ht,s(zt,s) are paid on an annual basis in keeping with the static nature of the maximization problem.

12

D.

Used Car and Scrap Markets

1. The Used (or “Retained”) Car Market
By “used cars” we mean vehicles (passenger cars and light trucks) that are not new
and remain in operation (are not scrapped). The stock of used cars in a given period is the
previous period’s stock plus the previous period’s new car stock minus scrapped vehicles.
Thus:

qt , s ,a +1,m,r (τ + 1) = (1 − θt , s ,a +1,m,r (τ + 1) ) qt ,s ,a ,m,r (τ )

a = 0,1,…,18

(4.7)

where τ indexes time, a indicates age and a = 0 refers to new cars and θt,s,a,m,r is the
probability that the car will be scrapped at the end of the period, to be specified in the next
section. All 18-year-old cars are scrapped at the end of the period.
Each used car indexed by t,s,a,m has the same model, age and manufacturer, but its
fuel economy depends on the region in which it was initially sold. We assume a national
used car market where the representative consumer is indifferent between buying a particular
type and vintage of used car produced in either of the regions. To achieve this, the prices of
the two versions need to be linked so that the sum of the rental price rt,s,a,m,r and operating
fuel cost ft,s,a,m,r are equated across the two regions. As part of the sensitivity analysis below,
we assume a region-specific used car market.
The used car purchase price pt,s,a,m,r is the sum of scrap-adjusted, discounted future
rental prices. This assumes that used car owners are myopic in the sense that they expect the
rental price of their used car next year to be the same as that of a one-year-older used car this
year. Used car purchase prices can be solved for recursively according to
pt , s ,18,m,r = rt ,s ,18,m ,r
pt ,s ,a ,m,r = rt ,s ,a ,m,r +

(4.8)
(1 − θt ,s ,a ,m ,r ) pt ,s ,a +1,m ,r
1+ δ

where δ is the annual discount rate.
The demand for used vehicles (conditional on a solution for the new car producer
problem) is given by the solution of the consumers’ utility maximization problem. All used
car rental prices need to be solved simultaneously, since demands are interdependent.
2. The Scrap Market

A car will be scrapped when its resale value falls below a certain point. We calibrate
this process as follows: since vehicles of model t,s,a,m,r actually represent an aggregate
category of similar cars with different quality, condition, and value, we assume a fraction of

13

these vehicles will fall under the scrapping threshold value in each period. This fraction is
inversely related to the resale value of that type of vehicle. We model the relationship as:

θ t , s ,a ,m,r = bt , s ,a ,m,r ( pt , s ,a ,m ,r )η

(4.9)

where bt,s,a,m,r is a scale parameter determined in the calibration to actual scrap rates and η is
the price elasticity of the scrap rate.

E.

Solution Method

The solution to the model is a set of rental prices for all vehicles that equates supply
and demand in the new and used car markets. Solving the model also requires determining
which constraints actually bind for given producers. The model obtains the solution using a
three-level iterative procedure. At the “innermost” level, the model solves for the set of used
car prices that clear the used vehicle market, conditional on a posited set of new car prices
and on assumptions as to which of the regulatory constraints actually bind for each
manufacturer. At the “middle” level, the model solves for the equilibrium new car prices,
conditional on assumptions as to which regulatory constraints bind. At the “outermost”
level, it determines which regulatory constraints actually bind for each manufacturer in each
region. Through this procedure, we obtain a solution in which demands equal supplies for
both new and used vehicles, and in which all producers meet the regulatory constraints that
bind (and more than meet the constraints that do not) 20 . This procedure is repeated every
year, yielding a sequence of equilibria over the simulation period (2009-2020).

V. Data and Parameters
The simulation model employs automobile market data from a variety of sources.

A. Aggregate Data

A set of aggregate statistics describes the size of the car market, GDP, interest rates
and gasoline prices and usage. 21 Table 5.1 lists the aggregate values used and their sources.
We have taken estimates for 2009 where available to generate a realistic scale. Vehicle sales
20

The oligopolistic structure of the new car market involves both multiple products and multiple producers.
Under these conditions, theory leaves open the possibility of non-uniqueness. In our simulations, however, the
model has always converged to one solution.

21

Usage measured as vehicle miles traveled is assumed constant. Relaxing this assumption in the presence of
fuel economy standards is likely to increase leakage via a “rebound” effect. Small and Van Dender (2007)
estimate the magnitude of this effect.

14

and income are then divided into two regions, which in our central case are identical except
for size. 22 41.5 percent of the income and vehicles are assigned to the group of adopting
states (Arizona, California, Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Maine, Maryland,
Massachusetts, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island,
Vermont, and Washington) on the basis of November 2008 vehicle registrations available
from the Department of Transportation (DOT).

B. Vehicle Fleet

A more detailed data set describes the automobiles in the economy, including the
composition of the fleet, fuel economies and prices. The composition and characteristics of
the vehicle fleet make up the core of our model. The data are assembled from several
sources: new car fleet composition and prices are taken from Automotive News for model
year 2006 and aggregated according to manufacturer and vehicle type. The distinction
between passenger cars and light duty trucks follows the EPA classification for the purposes
of the fuel economy rating. The distinction between “small” and “large” vehicle sizes is
made based on an average of normalized volume, weight, and engine size, with 2006 modellevel characteristics data coming from Ward’s Automotive. Fuel economies are the 2006
certified values from the EPA. 23

C. Demand Elasticities

The nested CES demand system described in the previous section includes 84
elasticity parameters at 5 levels of nesting. We have selected central case utility parameters
that reflect vehicle demand elasticities from the literature. In particular, Kleit (2004) presents
a set of new car demand elasticities taken from an internal demand model used by GM.
Aggregated up to our four vehicle types, the own price elasticities average -2.4 and range
between -1.7 and -3.3. Cross-price elasticities are higher among sizes of cars or trucks
(averaging 0.76) than across vehicle types (where they average 0.18). We calibrate the
elasticity parameters in the lower four nests of the utility function to match the average ownprice elasticity of -2.4 and approximate the substitution patterns seen in the GM data. 24 The
highest-level utility parameter determines the substitution between vehicles and other goods.
Our central case value for this parameter implies an aggregate elasticity of demand for cars
(including gasoline cost) of 0.75. 25

22

Fleet composition and average fuel economy are actually quite similar in the two regions (with fuel economy
differing by only one tenth of a mile per gallon). We allow for differences in preferences and fleet composition
in the sensitivity analysis.

23

Data available at http://www.fueleconomy.gov.

The calibrated values are: ρt,s,a = 0.65 for all manufacturer nests, ρt,s = 0.575 for all age nests, ρt = 0.55 for
both size nests, and ρv = 0.575 for the car/truck nest.
24

25

The corresponding value used for ρu is -0.33.

15

D. Used Vehicle Scrap Parameters

To calibrate the scrap probability function (4.9), we need to determine the constants
bt,s,a,m,r and the scrap elasticity η. In the central case, a one percent increase in the value of a
particular used model decreases the number of vehicles scrapped (or otherwise removed from
the market) by one percent (η = -1). This reflects the lower (less elastic) range of response to
“bounties” for scrapped vehicles described in Alberini et al. (1998) and in Hahn (1995). We
chose a lower part of the range for our central case to provide a conservative estimate of
leakage in the used market. We also consider a value of -3 in a sensitivity analysis, closer to
the center of the range of available estimates. The bt,s,a,m,r are obtained by fitting the baseline
scrap rates to the roughly linear trend in the number of cars of each vintage in the consumer
fleet (as observed in the 2001 National Household Transportation Survey). Taking the
percentage of vehicles scrapped to be equal for each vintage, the baseline scrap rate is
calibrated to

θa =

1
19 − a

a = 0,1,…,18

(5.1)

Given used car purchase prices and the scrap elasticity η, this determines the constants
bt,s,a,m,r. Baseline used car quantities and scrap rates are given in Table 5.2.

E. Fuel Economy Cost Functions

The cost to manufacturers of improving fuel economy (via technological changes to
particular models) is of central importance to understanding the effects of increasingly
stringent regulation. In its study of CAFE standards, the National Research Council (NRC,
(2002)) estimates the costs of fuel economy using engineering data. Their results can be
approximated very closely with function quadratic in fuel economy. We further divide that
function into the “dynamic” and “static” components. Dynamic innovations include, for
example, improved aerodynamics and certain improvements in engine design. Once
“purchased,” these technologies may be applied freely across all vehicles a firm makes in a
particular category. Static technologies, in contrast, are represented in our model as
movements along a fixed cost curve; they add to marginal cost. Many of these technologies
are already available as optional features, and include better tires, oils, and advanced
electronic transmissions. 26
Because the fraction of technology in the dynamic category is central to our
consideration of spillovers we simulate a large range of possibilities, varying it between 10
and 95 percent in sensitivity analysis. For our central case we examine the list of efficiency
26

Although we classify many developments in engine technology as dynamic (to give considerable weight to
the potential for spillovers), Klier and Linn (2008) emphasize that in the short and medium run firms may be
restricted to a fixed engine platform and thus may face static tradeoffs between horsepower, weight, and fueleconomy.

16

enhancing technologies in NRC (2002) and categorize each as primarily static, dynamic, or
mixed. The categorization is intentionally generous in terms of dynamic technology and
spillovers in order to err on the conservative side in our measure of total leakage. Weighted
by contribution to fuel savings, we classify the technologies as about 40 percent dynamic for
the central case. 27 In equation (4.3) this implies that the quadratic parameters of c and h are
calibrated such that a cost-minimizing firm achieves an improvement of 1 mile per gallon by
setting zt,s to 0.4, with the remaining 0.6 resulting from movement along the cost curve
ct,s(et,s). The quadratic cost functions and associated first order conditions used in calibration
are included in Part II of the appendix.
The slope of the aggregate cost function, or the optimal combination of the c and h
functions, around the profit-maximizing point depends on two factors: the demand for fuel
economy from consumers and the shadow value of fuel economy due to pre-existing CAFE
standards. For the first of these we assume forward-looking consumers, such that willingness
to pay for a marginal improvement in fuel economy reflects the discounted stream of savings
on gasoline. The shadow value due to CAFE is taken from Jacobsen (2007) and combined
with consumer willingness to pay to determine the baseline slope of the quadratic cost
function. 28 To model the curvature of the aggregate cost function as producers move away
from the baseline, we incorporate the parameters estimated from fitting a quadratic to the
results of the NRC study. 29

VI. Policy Simulations and Results
Here we first focus on the impacts of the Pavley initiative in the presence of the
federal CAFE standard. Subsequently we examine the extent to which adopting Pavley-like
regulations at the federal level overcomes leakage problems arising from a sub-national
effort.

A. Two Economic Environments

To bring out most clearly the key channels at work, we begin with some simulations
in a simplified setting where the baseline exhibits unchanging fleet composition through time
and where the stringency of the Pavley limits remains constant through time. We then
27

Static: tires, low friction oil and parts, transmissions. Mixed (50-50): hybrid engines, other engine
component improvements. Dynamic: aerodynamics, electrical system efficiency, electric power steering.
Among NRC’s “Path 2” technologies, 37 percent were classified as dynamic. Among “Path 3” technologies, 43
percent were so classified.
28

The value of an extra mile per gallon to the consumer ranges from $150 to $530 across models, while the preexisting CAFE standards add between $50 and $600 in shadow value in the central case.
29

The coefficients on improvement in fuel economy squared vary between $18 and $41 and are taken from a
least squares fit of the NRC data performed by vehicle class.

17

perform simulations in a more realistic setting, in which the composition of the automobile
fleet changes in the baseline and where both the Pavley and CAFE limits become more
stringent over time.
1. The Simplified Environment

For the simplified baseline, we calibrate the simulation model so that the economic
path under business as usual is in a steady state. In particular, the composition of the U.S.
automobile fleet remains unchanged through time: the shares of cars of each age,
manufacturer, and model remain constant. For this baseline we assume no income growth.
Our steady state assumptions assume that (absent regulation) fuel economy remains
constant through time. 30 The differences in vintages along quality dimensions (like
horsepower, weight, electronic equipment, etc.) are assumed to reflect a constant rate of
improvement. Furthermore, the relative value of cars and the outside good in utility is also
assumed to stay constant. Combined, these assumptions lead to equilibrium quantities in the
used market that remain constant through time. Table 6.1 summarizes the statistics of the
simplified baseline.
The representation of the existing CAFE standard and the Pavley rules is also simple
in this environment. Here we assume, counter to fact, that the stringency of both regulations
is constant through time. The CAFE standard is held fixed at 27.5 and 23.1 MPG for
passenger cars and light trucks, respectively. For the Pavley requirements, we consider two
constant limits on CO2 emissions: 360 and 299 grams of CO2 per mile. The former
represents the requirement in the first year of the initiative and corresponds to a fuel
economy requirement of 24.4 miles per gallon 31 . The second represents the requirement
approximately four years into the program’s implementation, and corresponds to a
requirement of 30.0 MPG. To simplify comparisons with the federal CAFE standard, in the
discussion below we will usually express the Pavley requirements in terms of their fuel
economy equivalents.
2. The More Realistic Environment

The more realistic baseline incorporates the following assumptions, which differ from
those of the simplified baseline:
•
•

per-capita income growth of two percent annually
autonomous improvements in fuel economy at a rate of 1.8 percent per year 32

30

This has been approximately true over the past ten years, as efficiency improvements have generally gone to
horsepower and weight rather than fuel economy.
31

See Section II for a discussion of the relation between fuel economy and CO2 per mile in the context of the
Pavley requirements.
32

These improvements supplement the endogenous fuel economy improvements chosen by automobile
producers.

18

•

continual tightening of the federal CAFE standards, as described in Section III

The income growth equals the average GDP growth rate for the United States in the
period 2001 – 2008. The rate of autonomous improvements in fuel economy is based on
Knittel (2009). Different assumptions are considered in a sensitivity analysis.
In contrast with the simplified baseline, this baseline involves changes in fleet
composition, which is primarily a reflection of the increasing stringency of federal CAFE
standards. Smaller vehicles and the foreign firms that specialize in them become a larger
share of the fleet while large vehicles and domestic firms decline significantly.
The representation of the Pavley effort is now more realistic as well, incorporating the
steady tightening of its requirements. We impose the requirements depicted in Section III:
in the first year (2009), the Pavley law requires manufacturers to limit carbon dioxide
emissions to 360 grams per mile in the adopting states, which translates to 24.4 MPG. The
emissions limits are reduced gradually, and the limit is 203 grams per mile in 2020,
translating to 42.5 MPG.

B. Impacts of the Pavley Initiative – Central Simulations
1. Constant 24.4 and 30.0 MPG Standards (Imposed in an Economy with a Simplified
Baseline)

First consider the impacts of two constant Pavley requirements: 24.4 and 30.0 MPG.
These two requirements lead to reductions of about 9 and 29 percent in gasoline consumption
from new cars sold in the adopting states, respectively. Within these states, several factors
contribute to this reduction: the number of new cars sold falls, smaller cars account for a
larger share of new car sales, and the fuel economy of individual models increases.
However, as indicated in Table 6.2, the gasoline savings in the adopting states’ new
car market are offset by increasing gasoline consumption in the non-adopting states. This
reflects the fact that in meeting the tighter standards in the adopting states, manufacturers are
now less constrained in terms of the overall fuel economy they must achieve to meet the
national standard. They respond to this relaxation of the CAFE constraint by shifting sales in
non-adopting states toward larger cars (which tend to be less fuel efficient) and by
introducing fewer static fuel economy improvements in individual models of the new cars
sold in these states. The 24.4 and 30.0 MPG requirements also stimulate technological
progress to improve fuel economy. This amounts to about three tenths of an MPG in the 30.0
MPG case. Importantly, however, these technological improvements contribute to a further
relaxing of the federal CAFE constraint, which causes manufacturers to shift further toward
large cars in the non-adopting states.
As indicated in the table, the increase in gasoline consumption for the 24.4 MPG
target in the non-adopting states offsets about 71 percent of the reduction associated with
new cars in the adopting states. The 30.0 MPG standard is sufficiently tight and creates

19

enough technological spillovers that, for some manufacturers, the existing federal CAFE
standard no longer binds. This mitigates the leakage effect among new cars. Compared with
the 24.4 MPG case, the offset is larger in absolute terms, but smaller relative to the reduction
associated with adopting state new car sales. About 40 percent of the reduction in gasoline
consumption from adopting states’ new cars is offset in this case.
The used car market also contributes to leakage. The Pavley initiative raises costs of
production, which implies higher prices for new cars sold in the Pavley states. 33 This
induces consumers to shift toward used cars. There is also a compositional effect within the
used market as the decline in supply of large new vehicles raises the value of large used
vehicles. This means large used vehicles are less likely to be scrapped and more likely to be
imported from other states. The effects in the used market offset about nine percent of the
reduction linked to the adopting states’ new cars for the 24.4 MPG target, and 16 percent for
the 30.0 MPG target. The larger relative contribution in the latter case squares with the fact
that leakage to the non-adopting state new car market is less pronounced.
Together, these adjustments imply leakage of about 80 and 55 percent in the first year
under the 24.4 and 30.0 MPG requirements, respectively.
Figures 6.1(a) and 6.1(b) indicate how leakage changes over time. The black dashed
line indicates the reduction in gasoline consumption attributable only to the changes in sales
of new cars in the adopting states. Thus, this line ignores potential leakage. However, it
does account for how changes in new car sales in the adopting regions translate, as new cars
age, to changes in the used car market. 34 Over time, increased sales of more efficient new
cars imply (other things equal) improvements in average fuel economy of used cars, relative
to the fuel economy in the corresponding year in the baseline. The downward slope of the
dashed line reflects the fact that these effects cumulate as successive vintages of more fuelefficient new cars move into the used car market.
The black dashed line ignores the impact of the Pavley rules on sales in the nonadopting states, as well as the impacts in the used car market associated with regulationinduced substitutions from (more expensive) new cars to used cars. The solid line accounts
for these effects. This line shows much smaller reductions in gasoline consumption.
Leakage in any year corresponds to the difference between the two lines. In figures 6.1(a)
and 6.1(b), the absolute amount of leakage increases through time, while the leakage remains
fairly constant as a percentage of the reduction in gasoline consumption in the adopting
states.
The Pavley impacts on gasoline consumption can be decomposed into those due to
changes in fleet composition, changes in fuel economy of individual models, and changes in
total fleet size. The first two panels of Table 6.3 display this decomposition. In the first
33

After imposing the Pavley restrictions, the price of new cars in the new equilibrium (on average) increases
about 1.5 percent relative to used cars.

34

This calculation is made holding scrap rates at their baseline levels and then projecting the penetration of the
more efficient new cars into the used market.

20

panel, changes in fleet composition account for slightly more of the overall reduction in
consumption than do changes in fuel economy. In the second panel, fuel economy
improvements account for a much larger share of the reduction. This reflects the fact that the
fleet-composition margin becomes saturated at a less stringent level of the Pavley standard
than does the fuel-economy margin.
2. Dynamic Pavley Limits (Imposed in an Economy with a Realistic Baseline)

The third panel of Table 6.2 displays the impact of the realistically specified Pavley
initiative relative to the realistic baseline. In the first year, where the Pavley requirement
translates to 24.4 MPG, the effects are quite similar to those in the case above where the 24.4
MPG requirement was held constant through time (and the baseline path was simpler). The
levels of leakage and the relative contributions from the used car market and the nonadopting states’ new car market are close to those observed earlier. Increased gasoline
consumption from new cars in the non-adopting states contributes the lion’s share of the
leakage effect. The overall leakage percentage is again about 80 percent.
Figure 6.1(c) displays the results over time. The solid black, dashed black, and
dashed gray lines have the same function as in figures 6.1(a) and 6.1(b). In this more
realistic simulation, the relative contributions of leakage to the non-adopting state new car
market and the used car market are fairly similar to those observed in the simpler cases. This
simulation imposes an MPG requirement in year 2020 of 42.5. Total leakage in 2020 is
somewhat lower than in the first year, but remains above 70 percent.
Importantly, these high rates of leakage persist despite the presence of technological
spillovers. The Pavley standard induces the most additional technological change in compact
cars. By 2020, the additional technological change corresponds to an additional 1.2 MPG in
these cars (in both regions). However, this improvement in underlying technology reduces
pressure on the federal CAFE constraint. Thus it enables firms to sell more large vehicles
while still complying with CAFE. We find that in our central case (and even in cases
involving more substantial spillovers, as discussed below in our sensitivity analysis) CAFE
standards remain binding through 2020, and thus the leakage continues. 35
The third panel of Table 6.3 provides a further decomposition, showing the first-year
changes in gasoline consumption attributable to changes in fleet composition, improved fuel
economy of individual models, and changes in fleet size. The results are very similar to the
simpler 24.4 MPG case in the first panel. As indicated by the far-right column, the overall
contributions of changes in fuel economy and fleet composition to reductions in consumption
are similar in magnitude and somewhat larger than the contribution of reductions in fleet
size. Leakage to the non-adopting state new car market derives in large part from reductions
in fuel economy (relative to the baseline increases spurred by the increasingly stringent

35

The model assumes that all of the technological advances are devoted to fuel economy improvements. This
could bias the results toward an underestimation of leakage. As suggested by Knittel (2009), if some
technological change were focused elsewhere – for example, toward increased horsepower – leakage could be
greater.

21

CAFE requirements). Leakage to the used car market comes mainly from lower scrap rates
and associated increases in the stock of used cars.

C. Alternative Scenarios

Here we consider the impact of the Pavley regulations under some alternative
scenarios. These scenarios involve dynamic specifications of the Pavley limits, imposed on a
realistic baseline.
1. Increased Technological Change from Research on Fuel-Economy

As discussed earlier, our analysis distinguishes between static and dynamic
improvements in fuel economy, corresponding to (a) improvements due to substitution
among existing technological options and (b) those arising from the invention of hitherto
unknown technologies. The relative importance of these two channels for fuel economy
improvements is controlled by the parameter θ1, which defines the fraction of fuel economy
improvement at the margin that stems from new advances in technology. This parameter is
defined explicitly in Appendix B. Our central case value of θ1 is 0.4, based on considerations
described in Section V.
Figure 6.2 displays leakage for four scenarios that differ according to the value of θ1.
Leakage to new cars declines only slightly as θ1 varies between 10 and 75 percent (panels (a)
through (c) in the figure). This result may at first defy one’s intuition – but recall from above
that in order for leakage to diminish it must be the case that the CAFE standard stops
binding. 36 Since CAFE is quite stringent in the later years of the simulation, it takes very
large technological spillovers to cause this to happen: only when θ1 exceeds 90 percent (far
above the plausible range in the engineering studies discussed in section V) does CAFE
begin to stop binding for the majority of firms. Leakage to new cars then drops off sharply
and, as shown in panel (d) of figure 6.2, it nearly disappears as the fraction exceeds 95
percent.
2. Broader and Narrower Initiatives

We now consider how the Pavley impacts differ depending on the breadth of the
initiative. Greater breadth increases absolute leakage but reduces the leakage percentage. If
more states sign on to the initiative, it becomes more difficult for manufacturers to shift sales
in the non-adopting states toward less fuel efficient cars. With a broader initiative, more fuel
inefficient cars must be “unloaded” in the non-adopting states relative to the overall size of
the new car market in those states. To increase sales of such cars, manufacturers must reduce

36

As discussed in subsection VI.B above, as long as the CAFE standard continues to bind, increased
technological spillovers only push the leakage further into the fleet composition and static technology channels.

22

prices more than cases involving a narrower Pavley effort, since the new car market
represented by the non-adopting states is smaller 37 .
Figure 6.3 displays the cumulative amount and composition of leakage as of year
2020 for four possible sizes of the adopting region: California alone (about 11 percent of the
car market), our central case (41.5 percent of the market covered by Pavley), and two
hypothetical cases where 70 percent and 100 percent of the market is included in the Pavley
region. The bars indicate the leakage percentages for each of these cases, subdivided into
that which is due to changes in the used car market (light gray) and new car market (dark
gray). The numbers underneath the bars show the total reduction in gasoline consumption, as
well as absolute leakage.
As shown in the figure, the leakage percentage declines as the size of the adopting
region increases. The implications for new-car-market and used-car-market leakage are quite
different, however. The capacity of other states to absorb large vehicles in the new car
market becomes more limited the larger is the adopting region. Hence as more states adopt
the Pavley limits, the fraction of gasoline savings offset by new cars in the other states falls.
Effects in the used car market go in the opposite direction: when few states adopt the Pavley
rule there is a large pool of outside states that can absorb small used cars coming from the
adopting states (large cars enter the adopting states and small cars exit, leading to a relatively
small change in the used market as a whole). In contrast, when many states adopt there are
only few states to absorb small used cars, creating pressure for changes in the used market as
a whole. Note that even with a nationwide Pavley rule leakage to used cars remains
significant, ranging between 24 and 39 percent, depending on the elasticity of the scrap
vehicle market (described in section IV above). Figures 6.4(a) through (6.4(d) display the
differences between the narrow and broad adoption cases through time.
Table 6.4 displays the welfare cost, gasoline saved, and average cost per gallon under
alternative assumptions as to the breadth of the initiative. The cost is measured as the
equivalent variation relative to the baseline case without the Pavley rule. The costs in each
of the 12 simulated years are combined and discounted to the present. Gasoline savings are
total gallons saved over the 12 years, and future gallons are not discounted.
Broader participation reduces leakage significantly and, correspondingly, reduces
substantially the costs per gallon saved. The costs per gallon saved range from $2.99 under
the broadest (nationwide) case, to $9.67 in the narrowest (California only) case.
3. Comparison with Equivalent Increments to the Federal CAFE Standard

Here we consider the impacts of potential increments to the federal CAFE standard as
an alternative to the state-level Pavley initiative. The possible changes at the federal level are
relevant to current policy initiatives, given the recent pledges of the Obama administration
referred to in the introduction. Various potential increments to the federal CAFE standard

37

Put differently, profit maximization in the other states limits the number of large vehicles that they will
absorb. When enough states sign on to Pavley this limit is reached and further leakage is limited.

23

(beyond the requirements in the baseline path) are displayed in the bottom three rows of
Table 6.4.
The rows labeled “Equivalent to Actual Pavley” and “Equivalent to Pavley with 100
Percent Adoption” present results from experiments in which the CAFE standards are raised
enough to achieve the same nationwide gasoline savings as in the 14-state adoption (i.e.,
actual) and all-state adoption Pavley cases, respectively. Under the “Equivalent to Actual
Pavley” policy, the costs per gallon ($4.52) are considerably lower than under the actual
Pavley initiative ($7.77). The lower costs reflect the federal policy’s avoided cross-state
leakage in the new car market. (Leakage still occurs in the used car market, however.)
In contrast, the “Equivalent to Pavley with 100 Percent Adoption” policy (second row
from bottom), which was constructed to achieve the same reductions as a national-level
Pavley program, is less cost-effective than a national-level Pavley program would be. This is
the case for two reasons. First, the Pavley standard is more broadly based, affecting a
manufacturer’s car and truck fleets simultaneously, while for some manufacturers the CAFE
standard could bind for just one. Thus, the Pavley standard engages more channels for
achieving the overall target for improved fuel economy. Second, the Pavley standard
rewards a manufacturer for achieving improved fuel-economy by switching from an average
truck to an average car; the CAFE standard does not.
The last row of Table 6.4 shows results from a simulation in the miles-per-gallon
requirements of the federal CAFE standard are incremented by the same amount as is implied
by the Pavley regulations. 38 This adjustment to CAFE yields considerably larger reductions
in gasoline consumption and emissions than the actual Pavley initiative: the policy would
reduce cumulative consumption of gasoline by 9.8 billion gallons, compared with 4.0 billion
gallons under Pavley. However, the cost per avoided gallon is lower, reflecting the reduced
leakage under a nationwide policy.

D. Further Sensitivity Analysis

Table 6.5 lists results from further sensitivity analysis. It reports cumulative gasoline
savings by 2020 for new and used cars, as well as total leakage in the year 2020. These
numbers can be compared with leakage in 2020 indicated by figures 6.1, 6.2 and 6.4.
More stringent Pavley standard: This is a case in which the Pavley target is 30 MPG
in 2009 and increases linearly to 50 MPG by 2020. This reduces leakage to 52.7 percent, and
increases gasoline savings to 4,943 million gallons in the adopting region. Leakage is
reduced because the more stringent Pavley standard causes CAFE to stop binding sooner and
for more firms.
38

We increment the car and truck MPG requirements by the same amounts, so as to yield the same average
MPG increment as that implied by Pavley. This change (represented in the last row of the table) is consistent
with the new federal targets identified in President Obama’s May 2009 remarks. However, there appears to be a
reasonable chance that the new CAFE standards will eventually include trading among fleets. In this event the
federal program would be most similar to the case considered in line 4 of the table.

24

Separate used car markets: In the central case, we assumed a nationwide used car
market. In this experiment we assume instead that used cars now cannot move between the
adopting and non-adopting states. Two main competing effects underlie the results from this
experiment. The first is that when the used car market split, the adopting region can no
longer import large used cars from the non-adopting region. This tends to reduce leakage.
The second and opposing effect is that the small and efficient cars produced in the adopting
region can no longer be resold to the non-adopting region when they become used. Instead,
these smaller efficient cars fall in value and become scrapped quite quickly since
manufacturers keep supplying more of them to the new market in order to meet the Pavley
standard. The two effects almost exactly offset each other; the second effect seems to
dominate by a small margin.
Lower autonomous fuel economy improvements: Instead of a 1.8 percent annual
growth rate for the exogenous component of fuel economy, we now assume a one percent
growth rate. This applies to both the baseline and the policy case. It has little impact on
leakage or changes in gasoline consumption.
Lower cost of fuel-economy improvements: Here we reduce by 25 percent the
curvature parameter of the fuel-economy-improvement cost function. This causes more of
the adopting region gasoline savings to come from technology changes and less from mixes
in the fleet. Leakage correspondingly increases on the static technology margin and
decreases on the vehicle mix margin, with little overall impact on leakage and gasoline
consumption.
Higher scrap elasticity: Here the scrap elasticity η in (4.9) is set to -3 instead of -1.
This increases the tendency of consumers to hold their used cars longer in response to the
Pavley initiative. Hence there is more leakage to the used car market in both the scale and
composition dimensions. Overall leakage is 75.2 percent, as compared with 70.1 percent in
the central case.
Lower elasticities of substitution across car vintages: Here we reduce this elasticity
from 2.35 to 0.75. This reduces the extent to which the Pavley initiative causes substitutions
from new to used cars, and associated leakage. In fact, leakage to used cars disappears (it is
negative but close to zero). Correspondingly, overall leakage falls to 65.7 percent.
Higher gasoline price: In the central case the gasoline price is $1.83 per gallon.
Here we assume a gasoline price of $3.00 per gallon. Higher gas prices make switching to
less efficient used cars somewhat less attractive and increases the value of efficient new cars
to consumers, thereby (slightly) reducing leakage.

25

CAFE initially just binding: Here we consider a case where, in the first year of the
baseline, the shadow value of the CAFE constraint is exactly zero 39 . In this case, firms
would have no incentive to reduce fuel economy if the standard were removed. This scenario
involves less leakage because the CAFE constraint does not bind in the first year that the
Pavley limits are imposed. However, there remains considerable leakage after the first few
years. The reason is that CAFE ramps up considerably over time: this constraint begins to
bind by year two and very strongly by 2020. Because the CAFE constraint binds through
most of the simulation interval, there is considerable leakage to the new car market in the
non-adopting states. Cumulative leakage over the whole simulation period is 68.9 percent,
only slightly lower than leakage in the central case (70.1 percent).
Heterogeneous demand: In a final sensitivity case we calibrate demand to approximate
baseline differences in the composition of the automobile fleets between the two regions.
Lower overall demand for new vehicles in the non-adopting region reduces the scope for
leakage, slightly lowering the overall measure (to 66.3 percent).

VII. Conclusions
This paper reveals some significant unintended consequences from the Pavley
initiative to limit GHGs per mile from new cars sold in 14 U.S. states – substantial offsetting
impacts (or leakage) in the states that do not impose the Pavley limits. Much of this leakage
derives from interactions between the Pavley limits and the federal CAFE standard. We
estimate that over the period 2009-2020, adjustments in new car markets in non-adopting
states would offset about 65 percent of the reduction in emissions or gasoline consumption
from new cars in the adopting states.
We also estimate leakage occurring through changes in the used car market. This
stems from households substituting used cars for new cars – that is, postponing purchases of
new cars and retaining for a longer period used cars that tend to be less fuel-efficient than
new cars. The adjustments in the used car market offset about five percent of the central case
reductions from new cars in the adopting states. Under nationwide adoption of the Pavley
standard, leakage to the used car market offsets 24 to 39 percent of the reductions from new
cars in the adopting states.
The Pavley initiative stimulates additional investments in research toward new, fuelsaving technologies. The resulting discoveries produce beneficial spillovers, as they lend
toward improvements in fuel economy not only in the adopting states but in other states as
well. However, interactions with the federal CAFE standard neutralize most of the emissions
benefits from technology spillovers. So long as the CAFE constraint continues to bind, auto
39

We use a value of zero to demonstrate the robustness of our result at the lower bound. Anderson and Sallee
(2009) apply the observable marginal cost of using a loophole in CAFE standards for flex-fuel vehicles (see
footnote 8) to estimate the shadow costs of the CAFE standard. Their central estimate is $8 - $18 per mile per
gallon, much lower than that used in our central case and suggesting that CAFE standards may bind to only a
small degree.

26

manufacturers have incentives to offset the fuel-economy improvements attributable to new
knowledge by making fewer fuel-saving changes to car components and by promoting
offsetting changes in fleet composition. Only at extreme values for the relative contribution
of technological progress (where the portion that can spill over is set larger than 95 percent)
does the CAFE standard cease to bind; only in this case do technological spillovers yield
significant reductions in nationwide gasoline consumption or GHG emissions. Many
advocates of the Pavley initiative have invoked beneficial technological spillovers as a way
of justifying such efforts. This analysis indicates that the benefits from such spillovers are
quite limited in the presence of a federal constraint.
The recent agreement between the 14 “Pavley states” and the Obama administration –
to replace the Pavley initiative with increments to the federal CAFE standard that achieve
comparable reductions in GHGs – largely eliminates the across-state leakage problem for the
new car market (though leakage to the used car market remains). Thus, one case of nested
state-federal regulation has been avoided. However, several other initiatives currently
underway raise the same potential issues. The same issues arise with the potential
implementation in California of a “feebate” program to tax or reward automobile
manufacturers depending on whether the cars they sell in the state exceed or fall short of
prescribed limits on GHGs per mile. They also arise with the overlap of state-level
renewable fuels standards with the proposed Federal Renewable Fuels Standard, and with the
overlap of state-level cap-and-trade policies and a potential federal cap-and-trade system. In
all of these cases, the co-existence of the federal and state efforts can make state-level efforts
ineffective. For example, a state that introduces a more stringent cap-and-trade system than
the federal system will not thereby cause further reductions in GHG emissions (absent
supplementary provisions). Whatever reductions are achieved in the more aggressive state
will reduce pressure on the federal cap and thereby allow facilities in other states to increase
their emissions.
This paper has revealed some important disadvantages of state regulations nested
within federal constraints. Are such state-level efforts misguided? Proponents of such
efforts argue that they make sense, despite the potential for serious leakage, on the grounds
that they serve as a test-bed for innovative environmental policies and that, by providing
useful information, they hasten the arrival of (more cost-effective) federal legislation. Thus,
many of the initial supporters of the Pavley effort insist that it was a wise policy move even
while acknowledging the leakage problem. On the other hand, critics maintain that the
Pavley effort and other state-level initiatives are costly measures that yield little
environmental benefit and distract attention from appropriate action at the federal level. In
coming years we may well witness ever more frequent debates along these lines as the
phenomenon of nested state and federal environmental regulation becomes increasingly
prevalent.

27

References

Alberini, A., W. Harrington, and V. McConnell, 1998. "Fleet Turnover and Old Car Scrap Policies."
RFF Discussion Paper 98-23, March.
Anderson, Soren T. and James M. Sallee, 2009. "Using Loopholes to Reveal the Marginal Cost of
Regulation: The Case of Fuel-Economy Standards." Working paper, University of Chicago and
Michigan State University. Available at https://www.msu.edu/~sta/AndersonSallee_ffvcafe.pdf.
Barker, T. S., S. Junankar, H. Pollitt, and P. Summerton, 2007. "Carbon Leakage from Unilateral
Environmental Tax Reforms in Europe, 1995-2005." Energy Policy 35:6281-97.
Bento, Antonio M., Lawrence H. Goulder, Marc R. Jacobsen, and Roger von Haefen, 2009.
"Distributional and Efficiency Impacts of Increased U.S. Gasoline Taxes." American Economic
Review 99(3).
Bushnell, James, Carla Peterman, and Catherine Wolfram, 2008. "Local Solutions to Global
Problems: Climate Change Policy Choice and Regulatory Jurisdictiion." Review of Environmental
Economics and Policy 2:175-93.
California Air Resources Board, 2008a. Comparison of Greenhouse Gas Reductions for the United
States and Canada under U.S. CAFE Standards and California Air Resources Board Regulations:
An Enhanced Technical Assessment. Available at
http://www.climatechange.ca.gov/publications/arb.html.
California Air Resources Board, 2008b. Addendum to February 25 Technical Assessment. Available
at http://www.climatechange.ca.gov/publications/arb.html.
Davis, L. W. and M. E. Kahn, 2009. "International Trade in Used Vehicles: The Environmental
Consequences of NAFTA." Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy Discussion Paper No. 584.
Felder, S. and T. F. Rutherford, 1993. "Unilateral CO2 Reductions and Carbon Leakage: The
Consequences of International Trade in Oil and Basic Materials." Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 25:162-76.
Fowlie, Meredith, 2008. "Incomplete Environmental Regulation, Imperfect Competition, and
Emissions Leakage." NBER Working Paper No. W14421. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1288420.
Hahn, Robert W., 1995. "An Economic Analysis of Scrappage." The RAND Journal of Economics
26(2):22-242.
Jacobsen, Marc R., 2007. "Impacts of Changes in CAFE Standards in an Econometrically Based
Simulation Model." Working paper.
Kleit, Andrew N., 2004. "Impacts of Long-Range Increases in the Corporate Average Fuel Economy
(CAFE) Standard." Economic Inquiry 42:279-94.

28

Klier, T. and J. Linn, 2008. "New Vehicle Characteristics and the Cost of the Corporate Average Fuel
Economy Standard." Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper No. 2008-13.
Knittel, Christopher R., 2009. "Automobiles on Steroids: Product Attribute Trade-offs and
Technological Progress in the Automobile Sector." Working paper. University of California at Davis.
McGuinness, Meghan and A. Denny Ellerman, 2008. "The Effects of Interactions between Federal
and State Climate Policies," in Cap-and-Trade: Contributions to the Design of a U.S. Greenhouse
Gas Program. A. D. Ellerman, M. D. Webster, J. Parsons, H. D. Jacoby and M. McGuinness eds.,
Cambridge, Mass.
National Research Council, 2002. "Effectiveness and Impact of Corporate Average Fuel Economy
Standards." National Academy Press.
Small, Kenneth A. and Kurt Van Dender, 2007. "Fuel Efficiency and Motor Vehicle Travel: The
Declining Rebound Effect." The Energy Journal 28(1):25-51.

29

Appendix

I. The CES Demand System

A. Solving the Representative Consumer Problem

The model employs a nested CES utility structure. In each region, the representative
consumer’s optimization problem is:

(

max U ( v, x ) = α v v ρu + α x x ρu
v, x

)

1

ρu

(A.1)

subject to
pv v + px x ≤ M

(A.2)

This yields the following expressions for the demand for (composite) vehicles and
other goods
1

⎛ α ⎞1− ρu
v ( pv , px , M ) = ⎜ v ⎟
⎝ pv ⎠
⎛α ⎞
x ( pv , px , M ) = ⎜ x ⎟
⎝ px ⎠

M

αv

1
1− ρu

pv

ρu
ρu −1

1
1− ρu

+αx

1
1− ρu

px

ρu
ρu −1

(A.3)

M

αv

1
1− ρu

pv

ρu
ρu −1

+ αx

1
1− ρu

px

ρu
ρu −1

Define the composite overall (or “ideal”) price index as
ρu
1
⎛ 1−1ρ ρρu−1
⎞
ρu −1
1− ρu
u
u
p* = ⎜ α v
pv
px
+αx
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎝
⎠

ρu −1
ρu

(A.4)

That means the consumer buys an amount M/p* of the composite good. Hence, the
ratio of the demand for composite vehicles to total demand for the composite good equals
1

v( pv , px , M )
M p*

⎛ α ⎞1− ρu
=⎜ v ⎟
⎝ pv ⎠

M

αv

1
1− ρu

pv

ρu
ρu −1

+αx

30

1
1− ρu

px

ρu
ρu −1

.

p*
M

⎛α ⎞
=⎜ v ⎟
⎝ pv ⎠

1
1− ρu

⎛
⎜αv
⎜
⎝

1
1− ρu

pv

ρu
ρu −1

+ αx

1
1− ρu

px

ρu
ρu −1

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

−

1

ρu

1

⎛ α p * ⎞1− ρu
=⎜ v ⎟
⎝ pv ⎠

(A.5)

Similarly, the ratio of the demand for other goods to total demand for the composite
good equals
x( pv , px , M ) ⎛ α x p * ⎞
=⎜
⎟
M p*
⎝ px ⎠

1
1− ρu

(A.6)

These ratios are functions of the price of the composite vehicle pv, the price of other
goods px and the overall composite price index p*. At each level, it is optimal to buy the
given amount of the composite good at minimum cost. Thus, the consumer solves the
following optimization problem
n

min ∑ pi ci
ci

i =1

(A.7)

subject to
1

⎛ n
⎞ρ
C = ⎜ ∑ α i ciρ ⎟
⎝ i =1
⎠

(A.8)

for i = 1,…,n and non-negativity constraints and where C is the (given) amount of the
composite good demanded.
Solving this problem for the various nests yields the following solution for nest 1 (and
analogous solutions for nests 2, 3 and 4):
vt , s ,a , m
vt , s ,a

⎛α
p
= ⎜ t , s ,a ,m t , s ,a
⎜ p
t , s ,a ,m
⎝

1

⎞1− ρt ,s ,a
⎟⎟
⎠

m = 1,…,7

where

31

(A.9)

⎛ 7
1− ρ
pt , s ,a = ⎜ ∑ α t , s ,a , m t ,s ,a pt , s ,a , m
⎜ m =1
⎝
1

ρ t , s ,a
ρt ,s ,a −1

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

ρt ,s ,a −1
ρt , s , a

(A.10)

The solution to the problem in nest 5 is described above.
Given prices pt,s,a,m (and normalizing px = 1), elasticity of substitution parameters

ρt,s,a, ρt,s, ρt, ρv and ρu, distribution parameters αt,s,a,m, αt,s,a, αt,s, αt and (αv, αx) and total

income M, we can now use the equations derived above to solve for the demands at all
nesting levels. First, solve for the demand ratios and pt,s,a at nesting level 1, then for nest 2,
etc. Using the pv, px obtained for nest 5 above and total income M, one can now solve for the
level of nest 5 demand v and x. Finally, the solutions for the levels of demand at lower
nesting levels can be calculated using the earlier obtained demand ratios.

B. Calibration of the CES Parameters

The distribution parameters will be calibrated to the actual fleet composition data
described in Section V. Starting from the lowest nest and using observed vehicle demands
vt,s,a,m, the calibration proceeds in three steps.
•
•

Step 0: set pt,s,a = 1 for all t, s, a 40 .
Step 1: determine vt,s,a given pt,s,a and using the relationship
7

∑ pt ,s,a,mvt ,s,a,m = pt ,s,a vt ,s,a
m =1

•

(A.11)

Step 2: calculate αt,s,a,m by rearranging
vt , s ,a , m
vt , s ,a

⎛α
p
= ⎜ t , s ,a ,m t , s ,a
⎜ p
t , s ,a ,m
⎝

1

⎞1− ρt ,s ,a
⎟⎟
⎠

m = 1,…,7

(A.12)

This gives the distribution parameters as a function of prices, quantities and the
elasticity of substitution parameters.

40

The total expenditure on the composite good vt,s,a is uniquely determined by the demands and prices of the
specific goods, but the choice of units for vt,s,a is arbitrary. Hence we can define units such that pt,s,a = 1.

32

II. Fuel Economy Cost Functions

The functional forms used for static costs, ct,s, and dynamic costs, ht,s, are:
ct ,s ( et ,s ,r − zt ,s ) = kt ,s + at ,s ⋅ ( et ,s ,r − zt ,s − et ,s ) + bt ,s ⋅ ( et ,s ,r − zt ,s − et ,s )

2

ht , s (zt ,s ) = atz, s ⋅ zt ,s + btz, s ⋅ (zt , s )

2

(A.13)
(A.14)

where et , s is baseline fuel economy and kt,s is baseline marginal cost. zt,s is normalized to
zero in the baseline, which leaves four parameters (at,s, bt,s, atz,s , and btz, s ) to be calibrated.
Solving the first order condition of the unit cost minimization problem for zt,s yields:

zt , s =

at ,s qt ,s − atz,s + 2bt ,s ⋅ ( et ,s ,r − et ,s ) ⋅ qt ,s

(A.15)

2(btz,s + bt ,s qt ,s )

The definition of et , s implies et ,s ,r − et ,s = zt ,s = 0 in the baseline, so for a marginal
change in fuel economy we have:

atz,s = at ,s ⋅ qt ,s

(A.16)

This reduces the system to three parameters and three data points, which can be solved
simultaneously. The three pieces of data used are:
Dynamic fraction of fuel economy improvement =

zt , s
≡ θ1
et ,s ,r − et ,s

atz, s bt , s + at , sbtz, s
First derivative of the aggregate cost function = z
≡ θ2
bt , s + bt ,s qt ,s
Second derivative of the aggregate cost function = 2

bt , s btz, s
≡ θ3
btz, s + bt , s qt , s

(A.17)
(A.18)
(A.19)

Where the expressions for θ 2 and θ 3 can be derived by substituting (A.15) into
aggregate costs (defined as ct , s (et , s,r − zt ,s ) + ht , s ( zt , s ) / qt ,s ) and differentiating. The data
sources are described in more detail in the main text, but briefly the central case value of θ1
is 0.40, θ 2 is calculated directly from the first order conditions of (4.3) in the text, and θ 3 is
the curvature of quadratic functions fit to the NRC (2002) data.
Substituting (A.16) into (A.15) and dividing gives the following expression for θ1 at
the margin:
33

θ1 =

bt , s qt , s
b + bt , s qt , s

(A.20)

z
t,s

The first order parameters are available directly by substituting (A.16) into (A.18):

at , s = θ 2

(A.21)

atz, s = qt , sθ 2

The solution to (A.19) and (A.20) provides expressions for the remaining two
parameters in terms of the data:

bt , s =

θ3

2(1 − θ1 )

(A.22)

θ
b = qt , s 3
2θ1
z
t ,s

34

Table 4.1: Vehicle Categories.

Manufacturer

Age

Size

Type

Region

Ford
Chrysler
General Motors
Honda
Toyota
Other Asian
European

new
1 year old
2 years old
.
.
.
18 years old

small
large

car
truck/SUV

adopting states
other states

Table 5.1: Parameter Values.

Parameter

Value

Source

New car sales

12 million

Industry estimates for 2009 (central value from
Ford, upper end of range from GM)

GDP

$14.2 trillion

Energy Information Administration (EIA)
estimate for 2009, expressed in 2008 dollars

GDP growth rate

2.0%

Average GDP growth rate for the United States,
2001 - 2008 (WDI, World Bank)

Gasoline price

$1.83

Average daily price of regular unleaded
November 2008-January 2009 (EIA)

Average miles
traveled per car

10,524

January 2009 seasonally adjusted annual rate
(DOT)

Interest rate

3.0%

The real daily rate on long term T-bills ranged
from 1.6 to 3.4 percent in 2008

35

Table 5.2: Baseline Age Composition and Scrap Rates.

Age

Fraction of
Total Fleet

Scrap Rate
(End of Year)

new car
1 year
2 years
3 years
4 years
5 years
6 years
7 years
8 years
9 years
10 years
11 years
12 years
13 years
14 years
15 years
16 years
17 years
18 years

10.0%
9.5%
8.9%
8.4%
7.9%
7.4%
6.8%
6.3%
5.8%
5.3%
4.7%
4.2%
3.7%
3.2%
2.6%
2.1%
1.6%
1.1%
0.5%

5.3%
5.6%
5.9%
6.3%
6.7%
7.1%
7.7%
8.3%
9.1%
10.0%
11.1%
12.5%
14.3%
16.7%
20.0%
25.0%
33.3%
50.0%
100.0%

36

Table 6.1: Baseline Statistics.
Year 1, Realistic Baseline
Every Year, Simplified Baseline

Year 12, Realistic Baseline

Fleet Composition
(%)

Fuel Economy
(mpg)

Fleet Composition Fuel Economy
(%)
(mpg)

Small car
Large car
Small truck/SUV
Large truck/SUV
avg.

2.7
3.3
2.8
8.2

28.7
23.3
24.4
17.6
20.8

2.8
3.1
3.1
7.9

44.2
34.8
36.3
26.5
31.5

Small car
Large car
Small truck/SUV
Large truck/SUV
avg.
General Motors
Small car
Large car
Small truck/SUV
Large truck/SUV
avg.
Honda
Small car
Large car
Small truck/SUV
Large truck/SUV
avg.
Toyota
Small car
Large car
Small truck/SUV
Large truck/SUV
avg.
Other Asian
Small car
Large car
Small truck/SUV
Large truck/SUV
avg.
European
Small car
Large car
Small truck/SUV
Large truck/SUV
avg.

1.8
2.5
4.9
4.4

25.5
24.4
21.5
17.7
20.9

1.8
2.3
5.1
4.3

40.4
36.6
32.0
26.6
31.6

5.2
9.0
4.3
7.1

28.9
25.7
22.3
18.0
22.9

5.6
7.9
4.6
6.9

44.7
37.4
33.3
27.0
34.2

4.7
0.6
2.3
1.8

33.0
25.0
23.8
22.7
27.5

4.8
0.6
2.3
1.8

41.0
30.9
32.4
30.8
35.7

7.4
1.3
5.1
1.2

33.4
26.2
25.6
18.1
28.0

7.6
1.3
5.2
1.1

41.2
32.3
33.9
24.6
35.9

8.3
1.4
3.4
2.1

28.8
23.2
22.3
19.6
25.0

8.4
1.4
3.5
2.0

41.0
32.5
33.2
29.5
36.3

2.2
1.5
0.2
0.6

32.5
25.4
20.6
17.9
26.6

2.2
1.5
0.2
0.6

44.1
34.3
34.8
30.8
38.0

Class
Ford

Chrysler

37

Table 6.2: Impacts of Pavley Requirements on Gasoline Consumption in Year 1.

New Cars

Used Cars

Total

Adopting
States

Other
States

1,490

2,235

33,526

37,251

-127.0
-8.52%

90.4
4.04%

10.9
0.03%

-25.7
-0.07%

71.17%

8.61%

79.78%

172.4
7.71%

67.7
0.20%

-192.9
-0.52%

39.82%

15.64%

55.46%

1,484

2,227

33,526

37,237

-126.9
-8.55%

90.5
4.07%

10.9
0.03%

-25.5
-0.07%

71.31%

8.60%

79.91%

Simplified Baseline

Constant 24.4 MPG Standard,
Simplified Baseline
Change

Leakage

Constant 30.0 MPG Standard,
Simplified Baseline
Change

-433.0
-29.06%

Leakage

Realistic Baseline

Realistic Pavley MPG Standards,
Realistic Baseline
Change

Leakage

Note : Gasoline consumption in millions of gallons.

38

Table 6.3: Sources of Changes in Gasoline Consumption in Year 1.

New Cars

Used Cars

Total

Adopting
States

Other
States

-127.0

90.4

10.9

-25.7

-13.5
-86.0
-27.4

1.8
76.5
12.0

0.5
0.0
10.4

-11.2
-9.4
-5.0

Overall gasoline use change

-433.0

172.4

67.7

-192.9

Change due to:
change in fleet composition
change in individual models' fuel economy
change in total fleet size

-41.2
-260.3
-131.5

-1.2
140.6
33.0

1.9
0.0
65.8

-40.5
-119.7
-32.7

-126.9

90.5

10.9

-25.5

-13.7
-85.9
-27.3

1.9
76.7
12.0

0.5
0.0
10.4

-11.3
-9.2
-5.0

Constant 24.4 MPG Standard,
Simplified Baseline
Overall gasoline use change
Change due to:
change in fleet composition
change in individual models' fuel economy
change in total fleet size

Constant 30.0 MPG Standard,
Simplified Baseline

Realistic Pavley MPG Standards,
Realistic Baseline
Overall gasoline use change
Change due to:
change in fleet composition
change in individual models' fuel economy
change in total fleet size
Note : Gasoline consumption in millions of gallons.

39

Table 6.4: Cost and Cost per Gallon under Different Pavley Region Sizes and under
Equivalent Increments to the Federal CAFE Standarda.

Adopting
States

Cost
Other
States

11.1 Percent (California Only)

4.8

3.4

8.2

-2.6

1.8

-0.8

9.67

41.5 Percent (Actual Pavley)

27.8

3.5

31.3

-9.6

5.5

-4.0

7.77

70 Percent

61.5

-4.9

56.6

-17.4

5.8

-11.7

4.86

100 Percent

81.9

81.9

-27.4

-27.4

2.99

Total

Gallons Saved
Adopting Other
Total
States
States

Cost per Gallon Saved
(All States)

Pavley Regulation:
Percent of National Market:

Equivalent Federal CAFE Standard:
b

Equivalent to Actual Pavley

7.2

10.8

18.1

-1.6

-2.4

-4.0

4.52

Equivalent to Pavley
with 100 Percent Adoptionb

56.8

85.3

142.1

-11.0

-16.5

-27.4

5.18

CAFE Increments =
Pavley Increments

47.1

70.6

117.6

-7.9

-11.9

-19.8

5.95

a

Costs in billions of discounted dollars; gallons in billions of gallons saved over the period 2009-2020.

b

The equivalent CAFE standard increases in proportion to the increases in the Pavley standard.

40

Table 6.5: Further Sensitivity Analysis
(Cumulative Changes from the Baseline by 2020, in Millions of Gallons)

Accumulated Gasoline Savings by 2020
New Cars

Used Cars

Total

Cumulative
Leakage in 2020

Adopting
States

Other
States

Central Case

-2,577

1,671

136

-770

70.1%

More Stringent Pavley
Standard

-4,943

2,311

294

-2,338

52.7%

Separate Used Car Markets

-2,379

1,491

272

-616

74.1%

Lower Autonomous FuelEconomy Improvement

-2,574

1,726

152

-695

73.0%

Lower Cost of Fuel-Economy
Improvements

-2,566

1,641

168

-756

70.5%

Higher Scrap Elasticity

-2,704

1,676

358

-670

75.2%

Lower Elasticity of Substitution Between Vintages

-2,232

1,561

-94

-766

65.7%

Higher Gasoline Price

-2,311

1,371

138

-802

65.3%

CAFE Initially Just Binding

-2,451

1,592

98

-762

68.9%

41

Figure 2.1: Pavley and CAFE Targets for the Period 2009 – 2020.

45

Pavley

Fuel efficiency (MPG)

40

CAFE - Cars
35

Combined CAFE
30

CAFE - Light Trucks

25

20
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

42

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

Figure 6.1: Impacts on Gasoline Consumption over Time: (a) 24.4 MPG Pavley Target, Simplified Baseline, (b) 30.0 MPG Pavley Target,
Simplified Baseline, (c) Realistic Pavley Target, Realistic Baseline.
24.4 MPG Standard

(a)
0

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

30.0 MPG Standard

(b)
2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

0

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

-500

-500

Millions of gallons

Millions of gallons

-1,500
-2,000
-2,500

-3,500

-4,000

-4,000

Actual

No Leakage

Realistic Pavley Standard
0

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

Leakage to used cars
-500

Millions of gallons

-1,000

Leakage to new cars,
non-adopting states

-1,500
-2,000
-2,500
-3,000
-3,500
-4,000

Actual

2019

Leakage to new cars,
non-adopting states

-2,500

-3,500

2010

2018

-2,000

-3,000

2009

2017

-1,500

-3,000

(c)

2016

-1,000

Leakage to new cars,
non-adopting states

Actual

2015

Leakage to used cars

Leakage to used cars
-1,000

2014

No Leakage

43

No Leakage

2020

Figure 6.2: Implications of Alternative Technology Spillover Assumptions: (a) θ1 = 0.1 , (b) θ1 = 0.4 (Central Case),
(c) θ1 = 0.75, (d) θ1 = 0.95.
(a)
(a)

θ 1 = 0.1
0

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

θ 1 = 0.4 (Central Case)

(b)
(b)
2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

0

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Leakage to used cars

Leakage to new cars,
non-adopting states

-1,500

-2,000

Millions of gallons

-1,000

-1,000
Leakage to new cars,
non-adopting states
-1,500

-2,000

-2,500

-2,500

-3,000

-3,000

(c)
(c)

Actual

No Leakage

θ 1 = 0.75
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2016

2017

-500

2018

2019

2020

0

Leakage to new cars,
non-adopting states

-1,500

-2,000

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

-1,000
Leakage to used cars
-1,500

-2,000

-2,500

-2,500

-3,000

-3,000

Actual

2009

-500

Leakage to used cars

-1,000

No Leakage

θ 1 = 0.95

(d)
(d)

2015

Millions of gallons

Millions of gallons

2020

-500

Actual

Millions of gallons

2019

Leakage to used cars

-500

0

2018

No Leakage

Leakage to new cars,
non-adopting states

Actual

44

No Leakage

Figure 6.3: Cumulative Contributions to Leakage under Different Adopting Region
Sizes.

100%

Leakage percentage

90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
California only
(11.1% of car
sales)

Millions of gallons:
Reduction in
162
gasoline use
521
Total leakage

Actual
(41.5% of car
sales)

Broad participation Nationwide Pavley
(70% of car sales)
(100% of car
sales)

Nationwide Pavley
(high scrap
elasticity)

770

2104

4587

3915

1806

2471

1421

2543

leakage to used cars

leakage to new cars in non-adopting states

45

Figure 6.4: Implications of Policy Scope for Gasoline Consumption: (a) 11.1% of National Car Sales (California Only), (b) 41.5% of
National Car Sales (Actual Pavley Case), (c) 70% of National Car Sales, (d) 100% of National Car Sales.
(a)

(b)

11.1% (California Only)
0

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

0

-500

Millions of gallons

Millions of gallons

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

Leakage to used cars

-1,000

Leakage to new cars,
non-adopting states

-1,500
-2,000
-2,500
-3,000
-3,500

-2,000
-2,500
-3,000
-3,500
-4,000

-4,500

-4,500

-5,000

-5,000

Actual

(c)

No Leakage

Actual

(d)

70%
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

Leakage to new cars,
non-adopting states

-1,500

-4,000

0

2010

-500
Leakage to used cars

-1,000

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

No Leakage

100%
0

-500

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

-500
Leakage to used cars

-1,500
-2,000
Leakage to new cars,
non-adopting states

-2,500
-3,000
-3,500

-1,000

Millions of gallons

-1,000

Millions of gallons

41.5% (Actual Pavley)
2009

-1,500
-2,000
-2,500
-3,000
-3,500

-4,000

-4,000

-4,500

-4,500

-5,000

-5,000

Actual

No Leakage

Leakage to used cars

Actual

46

No Leakage

2018

2019

2020

