NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RISK AVERSION AND CLIENTELE EFFECTS
Douglas W. Blackburn
William N. Goetzmann
Andrey D. Ukhov
Working Paper 15333
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15333

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2009

We thank George Constantinides, Ravi Jagannathan, Mike Long, Pascal Maenhout, Robert Shiller,
Richard Shockley, Matthew Spiegel, Vijay Yerramilli, and seminar participants at Harvard Business
School, Indiana University, INSEAD, London School of Economics, Michigan State University, University
of Massachusetts – Amherst, University of Vienna, and participants of Frontiers of Finance 2007,
The Seventh Maryland Finance Symposium – Behavioral Finance, 2007 Triple Crown Conference
in New York, Washington Area Finance Association 2007 conferences for helpful comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Douglas W. Blackburn, William N. Goetzmann, and Andrey D. Ukhov. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Risk Aversion and Clientele Effects
Douglas W. Blackburn, William N. Goetzmann, and Andrey D. Ukhov
NBER Working Paper No. 15333
September 2009
JEL No. D01,G01,G11,G12
ABSTRACT
We use traded options on growth and value indices to test for clientele differences in risk preferences.
Value investors appear to have exhibited a higher average level of risk aversion than growth investors
for two different time periods in the late 1990’s and early 2000’s. We construct a model of time-varying
clientele preferences that allows investors with different levels of risk-aversion to switch between
investment styles conditional upon the evolution of returns and risk. The model makes predictions
about the autocorrelations structure of measured risk parameters and also about the autocorrelation
and cross-autocorrelation of fund flows by style. Empirical tests of the model provide evidence consistent
with the existence of style switchers—investors who move funds between growth and value securities.
We construct trading strategies in the value and growth index options markets that effectively buy
risk from one clientele and sell it to another. These strategies generated modest positive returns over
the period of study.

Douglas W. Blackburn
Graduate School of Business Administration
Fordham University
113 West 60th Street 6th floor
New York, NY 10023
blackburn@fordham.edu
William N. Goetzmann
School of Management
Yale University
Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
william.goetzmann@yale.edu

Andrey D. Ukhov
Kelley School of Business
Indiana University
1309 East Tenth St.
Bloomington, IN 47405
aukhov@indiana.edu

I. Introduction
Modern asset pricing theory is predicated on an integrated market for risk, however, clientele
effects represent an interesting and important challenge to this neo-classical framework. In
certain circumstances, investment clienteles appear to segment the market, creating apparent
opportunities for arbitrage in expectations. The widely-documented S&P 500 listing return is a
clientele effect. Buying in advance of a previously announced listing generates positive returns
on average and selling in advance of a previously announced delisting avoids negative returns on
average. This is apparently the result of a sudden and predictable shift in the clientele for a
specific security.
Clientele effects are of great interest to research in behavioral finance. Barberis, Shleifer
and Wurgler (2005), for example, attribute the S&P 500 listing effect to a combination of
frictions and sentiment. Grinblatt and Han (2005) and Goetzmann and Massa (2004) show that
the prevalence of disposition-prone investors holding a certain stock can have price effects.
Lamont and Thaler (2003), examining “tech-bubble stubs,” explain deviations from the law of
one price by a segmented market for equity claims: one segment being investors irrationally
eager to hold “hot” stocks. Kumar and Lee (2005) identify clienteles for growth vs. value stocks
using a large database of individual accounts and find evidence suggesting that differing clientele
sentiment is a potential determinant of returns. In a theoretical framework, Barberis and Shleifer
(2003) show how partly segmented markets can be sustained by communities of investors
focused on sub-sets of the investment universe. In their model, sub-sets of investors co-ordinate
purchases and sales of style portfolios based upon past returns as a common signal. These
dynamic decisions sustain excess co-movement among sub-sets of securities. While the asset
return dynamics in their model are an interesting consequence of clientele effects, the
implications for investor sub-set characteristics is also interesting from the perspective of
behavioral finance. Their model, in effect, implies slightly differing representative investors.
In all of these examples, the price of an asset – and hence the implicit price of the risk
characteristics of that asset – is affected by differing investor characteristics. This is both a
necessary feature of behavioral studies and a significant empirical problem. The problem is that
it is hard to distinguish among groups based upon measurable psychological features and
tendencies. For example, it would be useful to characterize investor clienteles according to their

3

risk attitudes. One could thus test the proposition that clientele risk preferences could affect
prices for sub-sets of stocks – in effect segmenting the market. In this paper we use traded
derivatives on equity indices to explore this approach.
Evidence on risk preferences is of particular interest because risk represents the
foundation of asset pricing theory and the definition of capital market integration – i.e. that a unit
of risk exposure in one market commands the same compensation as a unit of risk exposure in
another. While investor preferences are an important bridge that joins risk exposure and returns,
only limited empirical evidence exists on the risk preferences of investors in different assets.
In this paper, we use the prices of options on five major value and growth indices to study
the risk preferences of investors in value and growth indices and their derivatives. The indices
we use are widely followed benchmarks for value and growth investment styles, and include The
Standard & Poor's Barra Growth and Value Indices; Russell Midcap Growth and Value Indices;
Russell 1000 Growth and Value Indices; Russell 2000 Growth and Value Indices; and Russell
3000 Growth and Value Indices.
First, we extract latent risk aversion coefficients from the prices of derivative securities
traded on these indices over two windows in time: 1996 through 1998 and 2002 through 2005.
These windows are limited by the availability of options data on the indices, but never-the-less
provide evidence over differing market environments. We adopt a flexible methodology for
estimating the clientele risk aversion coefficient that does not assume a specific form for the
utility function. We then test whether investors in different styles differ with respect to their risk
preferences. We find some evidence that they do. Investors in value indices (and their
derivatives) over the periods of study displayed higher implicit risk aversion than investors in
growth indices (and their derivatives). We thus identify risk preferences as a potentially
important attribute that categorizes differences across the two investor clienteles. The difference
in average risk posture across the representative investors in these different sets of assets is, in
itself, an interesting result. While other work on style and clientele effects has shown that
sentiment may play an important role in defining clienteles, (e.g. Kumar and Lee, 2005) we find
that risk is also potentially salient. Our findings thus not only support previous empirical
evidence on style-based clienteles, but add to the understanding about what differentiates them.
We also find that estimated preferences exhibit different time series patterns. The risk
preferences of value investors exhibit stronger persistence in the time series. This suggests that

4

investors in value funds may be a more stable clientele than investors in the growth funds. The
time series patterns in estimated measures of risk preferences also suggest the presence of
switchers—investors who move between the two styles. We find evidence consistent with the
hypothesis that high past style returns attract switchers to that style. We also find evidence that
past returns and risk on a competing style may attract switchers away from a given style. For
example, high recent returns on a growth index may cause some investors to sell shares in value
funds and buy shares in growth funds. Recent changes in the volatility of index returns are also
associated with evidence of style switching. This is consistent with findings in the mutual fund
flows literature, where evidence suggests that some investors enter (and exit) the market when
volatility changes.1
We also examine the behavior of investors using data on purchases and sales of mutual
funds that are explicitly identified with growth and value styles. We use data on aggregate flows
to the value and growth mutual funds in the U.S. to study the contemporaneous and lagged
response of investor flows in the growth and value styles. The data is from TrimTabs for the
period from February 1999 through November 2006. The data covers flows to a representative
selection of mutual funds in Growth and Value Morningstar categories.2
We find that time series patterns in fund flows match those of estimated risk preferences.
Aggregate flows to value funds display a pattern of stronger persistence than aggregate flows to
the growth funds. Autocorrelation in flows to value funds is higher in magnitude than in the case
of growth investors and it remains positive at a longer horizon. This pattern is the same in the
time series of estimated risk aversion.
We also find evidence of switching behavior in the fund flows. High past returns on a
style attract flows to that style. For example, flows to the growth style increase with returns on
the growth style and decrease with returns on value. Examination of fund flows reveals patterns
consistent with the presence of switchers who follow returns. Overall, results obtained from
mutual fund flows support the conclusions made from estimated risk aversion coefficients.

1

Goetzmann and Massa (2002).

2

To study the behavior of investors we also use data on flows at the level of individual mutual funds. Our data set
includes a panel of individual mutual fund accounts for Kemper mutual funds for five years, 1995 through 1999.
The particular advantage of the Kemper data set is that the disaggregate account-level information allows us to
identify fund clienteles. The results from this dataset support those found in the aggregate flow data.

5

Finally, we test whether the market for risk across growth and value funds is integrated
by constructing a trading strategy that, in effect, buys risk in one market (where it is cheap) and
sells it in another (where it is dear). If the market for risk is segmented between growth and value
index investors, this has the potential to be a profitable strategy. Despite data limitations, we find
some evidence that this arbitrage in expectations reflects a segmented market.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II we lay out the analytical framework for
the analysis and the testable restrictions. Section III describes the data and methodology. In
Section IV we report empirical results. Section V describes evidence from mutual fund flows.
Section VI studies trading strategies. Section VII discusses the implication of the results. A brief
conclusion follows.

II. Analytical Framework

In this section we discuss a framework similar to that of Barberis and Shleifer (2003). We
do not develop a full theoretical model to explain the existence of style investing, but rather we
use growth vs. value styles in the U.S. equity market as a basic structure for identifying investor
clienteles. Following Barberis and Shleifer (2003), the common feature of style investing is that
investors aim to hold securities that have a common pre-defined characteristic, such as a high
book-to-market ratio for value investing, or high expected growth for the growth style. In this
section we explore the implications of this kind of style investing for an empirical study of risk
preferences.
We consider investors who trade in value (growth) funds and their derivatives, and refer
to them as value (growth) investors. In addition to these two clienteles, we also consider
switchers—a clientele of investors who trade in both types of funds and, in effect, move between
the two styles depending on the recent relative risk and return characteristics of the two styles.
The framework allows for individuals who invest in both funds simultaneously, but, under
reasonable assumptions about their preferences, this has the empirical effect of lowering test
power, rather than changing the implications of the framework. We assume that all investors
have CARA preferences, and all investors have identical wealth.3 In the case of negative

3

The qualitative results in this section do not depend on these assumptions. The assumptions are made merely for
tractability.

6

exponential utility, the risk aversion of the representative investor is the wealth-weighted
harmonic mean of the risk aversions of the individual investors.4 We now characterize a
representative investor in each style.
Let there be K investor types that invest in a value fund (not including the switchers).
These K types have different levels of risk aversion, aV ,1 ≤ aV , 2 ≤ K ≤ aV , K , and there are nV , j
investors with risk aversion aV , j . There is a total of nV investors,
K

nV = ∑ nV , j .
j =1

When these are the only investors in a value fund, the representative investor has risk aversion

aV defined as,
1
1 K nV , j
=
⋅∑
.
aV nV j =1 aV , j
The risk aversion of the representative investor in a growth fund can be similarly defined from,

1
1 L nG , j
=
⋅∑
,
aG nG j =1 aG , j

L

nG = ∑ nG , j ,
j =1

where there are L types that invest in a growth fund (not including the switchers), with risk
aversion coefficients, aG ,1 ≤ aG , 2 ≤ K ≤ aG , L ; there are nG , j investors with risk aversion aG , j .
Let i ∈ {V , G} represent value and growth styles. We now consider a case in which, in
addition to the types of investors described above, switchers are also present in the style clientele

i . All switchers have risk aversion a S , and the number of switchers who are invested in style i is
n S ,i . Then, risk aversion of the representative agent in style i , denoted a R ,i , is given by,
n S ,i + ni
a R ,i

=

n S ,i
aS

+

ni , j
ni n S ,i
=
+∑
.
ai
aS
j ai , j

(1)

Equation (1) shows that the risk aversion of the representative agent in a style, a R ,i , depends on
the composition and the relative number of investors who focus on that style, ni , and the number
of switchers present n S ,i . If the composition changes because the number of an investor type
changes, there will be a change in risk aversion of the representative agent within that style
4

See Ingersoll (1987), Chapter 9, for a discussion of utility aggregation.

7

clientele. For example, if an increase in the risk of a style causes some investors with high risk
aversion values ai , j to leave that style, then the number ni will decrease and the relative number
of switchers in the style will be higher.
We maintain, and later test empirically, the assumption that different clienteles differ in
their average5 risk aversion, a S ≤ aG < aV . Note that results that follow do not require that
switchers have a lower risk aversion than a growth investor with the smallest risk aversion. In
other words, we do not require a S ≤ aG ,1 . The requirement is weaker, a S ≤ aG . Also, we do not
require the growth investor with the highest risk aversion to have risk aversion lower than the
value investor with the lowest risk aversion. We do not require aG , L ≤ aV ,1 . The requirement is
weaker, that, on average, aG < aV .
Put differently, we do not require that growth investors only invest in the growth style, or
that value investors only invest in the value style. In this setting, the sets of growth and value
investors are not disjoint, and a growth investor can invest in both growth and value styles, just
as a value investor can hold both value and growth securities. The growth investors own
predominantly growth securities, and the value investors invest mostly in value index. This
means that in our analysis we do not imply or require that growth style is owned only by the
growth investors, or that the value style is owned only by the value investors. Testable
hypotheses developed in this section are based on a setting where the requirement is weaker. On
average, the investors in a growth index are growth investors. And on average the investors in
the value index are value investors.
Having defined the risk aversion of the representative agent, we now turn to a discussion
how switching between styles will impact the risk aversion of the representative agent. First, we
study the case in which switchers react to returns. Then, we study the case in which switchers
react to risk (volatility).

Switchers React to Returns
We begin with the case in which switchers allocate funds to a style depending on that
style’s past performance relative to the other style. This is the case of the positive feedback style
switchers in the Barberis and Shleifer (2003). When deciding on their allocation, switchers
5

Where average is defined explicitly as a wealth-weighted harmonic mean.

8

compare style X’s and style Y’s past returns. They then move into the style with the better recent
performance, and move out of the other style. When this takes place, it affects the composition of
investors in both styles and the risk aversion of the representative investor in that style clientele.
High returns on a style attract switchers with low risk aversion to the style and therefore lowers
the risk aversion of the representative investor. A high return on a competing style attracts
switchers away from a given style and results in an increase in the risk aversion of the
representative investor. For example, a high return on the value index attracts switchers away
from growth and results in an increase in the risk aversion of the representative investor for
growth.6
This is a testable hypothesis. A change in the risk aversion of the representative investor
in a style should be negatively related to the past return on that style, and positively related to the
past return on the alternative style. For example, in a regression of a change in the risk aversion
of the representative investor in a growth index on past returns of growth and value indices, we
would expect the coefficient on the growth index return (return on the same style) to be negative
and the coefficient on the value index return (return on the alternative style) to be positive.
Support for this hypothesis would thus provide support for the existence of switchers.

Reaction to Volatility
In addition to taking past returns into account when making decisions to invest in a style,
investors may also take risk into account. Goetzmann and Massa (2002) study investors in S&P
500 Index mutual funds and their response to changes in the volatility of the S&P 500. The
results suggest that individual investor behavior may be conditioned upon risk. They identify a
group of “volatility chasers”—investors that enter the fund when volatility increases. They also
show that there is a different group that exits the fund when volatility increases. In this section
we study the implications of such reactions to volatility for a study of risk preferences.
We maintain our main assumptions in this section. We characterize a change in the risk
aversion of the representative agent in a style caused by a change in volatility sufficiently large
6

The result is related to the fact that harmonic means are never larger than arithmetic means and are lower unless

every component in the average is the same. Therefore, the risk aversion of the aggregate, or representative, investor
is less than the average of risk aversions, and, other things being equal, investors with a lower risk aversion have a
greater influence on the risk aversion of the representative investor.

9

to cause some investors to enter the style, and some to leave. The change in risk aversion of the
representative investor in style i ∈ {V , G} is given by the total differential of (1),
da R ,i =

∂a R ,i
∂ni

dni +

∂a R ,i
∂n S ,i

dn S ,i .

In the case of switchers who are chasing the volatility, following an increase in volatility, there is
an inflow of switchers, so that dn S ,i > 0 . If, at the same time, an increase in volatility leads some
investors in the style to leave, then dni < 0 . The expression for the total differential is,

da R ,i =

ai ⋅ a S ⋅ (ai − a S )

(a

S ni + a i n S ,i )

2

[n

S ,i

⋅ dni − ni ⋅ dn S ,i ] .

(2)

The last expression leads to several observations. The first observation is that if the risk

aversion of investors in the given style is equal to the risk aversion of the switchers, ai = a S then
there will be no change in the risk aversion a m,i ; ai = a S implies zero change da R ,i = 0 . This

result is intuitive. The risk aversion of the representative investor is the harmonic mean. When
switchers are the same as other investors, switchers who leave the index (or enter) do not affect
the average. A related observation is that if the difference in risk aversions for the given style
clientele and for the switchers is small— i.e. if the two numbers are very close in value, ai ≈ a S ,
then we will observe a small change in the risk aversion of the representative investor in the
style.
The second observation is that when ai ≠ a S , an increase in volatility will lead to a
decrease in risk aversion—the change is negative, da R ,i < 0 . To show this, observe that the first

term on the right-hand-side of (2) is positive. The second term in (2), in square brackets, is
negative

because

n S ⋅ dni < 0 (investors

leave

upon

increased

volatility),

and

− ni ⋅ dn S ,i < 0 (switchers enter). Hence, da R ,i < 0 . This is a testable hypothesis.
The third observation relates to the relative magnitude of the effect for different styles.
Under a few simplifying assumptions, we show that when the risk aversion coefficients of
switchers, growth investors, and value investors are ranked as a S ≤ aG < aV , the change in risk
aversion of the representative investor in the growth index is smaller in absolute value than the

10

change in risk aversion of the representative investor in the value index.7 In other words, the

impact on the risk aversion in the value index will be larger in magnitude, holding all else equal.
Using our notation, da R ,G < da R ,V . This also is a testable hypothesis.

Impact of Style Switching on Risk Aversion

In the previous section we showed that investors who react to volatility will have an
impact on the risk aversion of the representative investor in each of the two styles. The impact
will be larger in magnitude for the value index. The focus is on the asymmetry of the effect. The
same number of switchers entering a style will cause a larger change in the case of value index.
The analysis does not require that volatility switchers leave one index and enter the other
simultaneously, each style can be analyzed separately.
We now consider the impact of style switching where the switchers leave one of the two
styles (for example, growth) and enter the other style (value). Only the switchers change between
styles, so that dni = 0 , dn S ,G = −dn S ,V , and the change in risk aversion is
da R ,i = −

ai ⋅ a S ⋅ (ai − a S )

(a

S ni + a i n S ,i )

2

ni ⋅ dn S ,i .

The first result is that, because switchers change between styles ( dn S ,G = − dn S ,V ), there is
a negative relation between changes in risk aversion for the two styles, da R ,G = −da R ,V .
The second result is that changes in risk aversion in the two styles will be different in
magnitude. When the risk aversion coefficients of switchers, growth investors, and value
investors are ranked as a S ≤ aG < aV , the change in risk aversion of the representative investor
in the growth index is smaller in magnitude (in absolute value) than the change in risk aversion
of the representative investor in the value index,8 da R ,G < da R ,V . When switchers switch

between the two styles, we expect that, on average, there will be a larger impact on risk aversion
for value than on risk aversion for growth.

7

We discuss the assumptions and provide a proof in Appendix A. In essence, for tractability we require that two

styles are equal in size and that when volatility increases, the changes in the number of investors in the two styles
are equal, too. The result is stated in absolute value terms because the change is negative for both styles.
8

The proof is in Appendix A.

11

In this section we developed several implications that style investing has for a study of
risk preferences. In order to test the above predictions, we proceed as follows. First we estimate
the risk preferences of investors in value and growth funds. Next, we identify differences among
value and growth investors. Then, we study how changes in the estimates of risk preferences
relate to past risks and returns on the two styles.

III. Methodology and Data

Our study is based on a well-known relation between investor preferences, risk-neutral
probabilities, and actual probability densities. In particular,
U t′ (S i , T ) ⋅ Qt (S i , T ) ∝ Pt (S i , T ),

where Pt (S i , T ) and Qt (S i , T ) are the time-t risk neutral and subjective (true, or actual)
probability distributions of return on S i at time T , respectively, and U t′ (S i , T ) is the time
T marginal utility. Differentiating the above with respect to S i , and dividing by the same

equation yields:
Qt′ (S i , T ) U t′′(S i , T ) Pt′(S i , T )
+
=
Qt (S i , T ) U t′ (S i , T ) Pt (S i , T )

Rearranging yields the following expression for the risk aversion coefficient,
Risk Aversion = −

U ′′( S i , T ) Q ′( S i , T ) P ′( S i , T )
=
−
,
U ′( S i , T ) Q( S i , T ) P( S i , T )

(3)

Note that risk aversion is locally identified from the shapes of the risk-neutral and actual PDFs.9
To determine the two distributions, we combine the methodologies of Bliss and
Panigirtzoglou (2002, 2004) and Jackwerth (2000). Using option prices for a particular
underlying index, we estimate the risk-neutral probability density function (PDF) according to
Bliss and Panigirtzoglou (2002, 2004). We then use five years of past monthly index returns to
determine a risk-adjusted (or, subjective) PDF using a nonparametric kernel density estimator
similar to the one used in Jackwerth (2000). Risk aversion is the adjustment required to
9

Methods for extracting risk preferences from option prices are studied by Jackwerth (2000), Jackwerth and

Rubinstein (1996), Aït-Sahalia and Lo (1998, 2000), Kliger and Levy (2002), Bliss and Panigirtzoglou (2002, 2004),
Rosenberg and Engle (2002).

12

transform the risk-neutral PDF into the risk-adjusted PDF. Using this method, the risk aversion
coefficient can be estimated for every trading day for any asset for which option prices are
available.
We perform numerous robustness checks to study sensitivity of our results to the choice
of five years of past returns for the construction of subjective PDFs. In the first robustness check
the true distribution is estimated using returns that are lagged by 6 months relative to the date
when risk aversion is estimated, compared to the one month lag used in the standard procedure.
In the second robustness check the entire previous history of growth and value returns, going
back to 1926, is used to form the subjective distribution. This is the case when investors form
their assessment of the return distribution based on the entire previous history of growth and
value returns. In another robustness check we investigate the effect of the recent technology
bubble and the subsequent crash. We exclude the bubble period and use the entire history of
prior growth and value returns for the periods 1926 – 1996 to construct subjective distribution.
These experiments provide an empirical basis for evaluating the robustness of the risk-preference
extraction methodology. We find that the results are virtually unchanged by these adjustments.

A. Risk-neutral Probability Distribution

One method for finding the monthly risk-neutral distribution is proposed in Jackwerth
and Rubinstein (1996). The method is based on a search for the smoothest risk-neutral
distribution, which at the same time explains option prices. The trade-off between the two
contradicting goals is exogenously specified. Three main issues arise with this approach
(Jackwerth 2000). First, matching the option prices by minimizing squared errors puts more
weight on in-the-money options compared to out-of-the-money options. Second, the JackwerthRubinstein method does not account for microstructure effects. At-the-money option prices vary
less throughout the day than away-from-the-money options. Third, the Jackwerth-Rubinstein
method uses the integral of squared curvature of the probability distribution as a measure of
smoothness.
We use a different approach that addresses some of these technical issues. We know from
option pricing theory that the risk-neutral PDF is embedded in option prices. Let T be the
expiration date of an option. The PDF, f(Si,T), for the underlying asset i at time T has been shown

13

to be related to the price of the European call option, C(Si,t, K, t).10 Here, K is the option strike
price and Si,t is the price of underlying i at time t where t<T. This relationship is:
f ( S i ,T ) = e

r (T − t )

∂ 2C ( S i ,T , K , t )
∂K 2

K = Si ,T

.

For each underlying asset, i , and for each expiration date, however, the function C (S i ,t , K , t ) is
unknown and only a limited set of call options with different strike prices exist. Therefore, in
order to calculate the second derivative we estimate a smoothing function using option prices
with different strike prices but with the same expiration dates.
Instead of estimating such a smoothing function in option price/strike price space, we
follow Bliss and Panigirtzoglou (2002, 2004) by first mapping each option price/strike price pair
to the corresponding implied volatility/delta. We fit a curve connecting the implied
volatility/delta pairs using a weighted cubic spline where the option’s vega is used as the weight.
We take 300 points along the curve and transform them back to the option price/strike price
space. We thus obtain a smoothed price function, which we numerically differentiate to produce
the estimated PDF. Bliss and Panigirtzoglou (2002) find that this method of estimating the
implied volatility smile and the implied PDF is quite robust.11
A weighted natural spline is used to fit a smoothing function to the transformed raw data.
The natural spline minimizes the following function:
min ∑ w j (IV j − IV (∆ j ,θ )) + λ ∫ g ' ' ( x;θ ) dx,
N

θ

2

∞

2

−∞

j =1

where we omit the security-identifying index, i , for brevity; IV j is the implied volatility of the
j th option on security i in the cross section; IV (∆ I , θ ) is the fitted implied volatility which is a

function of the j th option delta, ∆ j , and the parameters, θ , that define the smoothing spline,
g ( x;θ ) ; and w j is the weight applied to the j th option’s squared fitted implied volatility error.

Following Bliss and Panigirtzoglou (2004), in this paper we use the option vegas, ν ≡ ∂C ∂σ , to
weight the observations. The parameter λ is a smoothing parameter that controls the tradeoff

10
11

Breeden and Litzenberger (1978).
This procedure does not require that Black-Scholes option pricing model hold (Bliss and Panigirtzoglou 2004).

14

between goodness-of-fit of the fitted spline and its smoothness measured by the integrated
squared second derivative of the implied volatility function.
From the estimated cubic spline curve, we take 300 equally spaced deltas and their
corresponding implied volatilities and transform them back to option price/strike price space
using the Black-Scholes option pricing formula that accounts for dividend payments and using
the dividend yield for the index. However, although the deltas are equally spaced, the strike
prices that are obtained after the conversion are not. We use a cubic spline for a second time to
fit a curve connecting the 300 unequally spaced call price/strike price pairs. This allows us to
choose 300 equally spaced strike prices with their corresponding call prices.12 Finally, we use
finite differences to estimate the second derivative of the call price with respect to the strike
price. This yields the risk-neutral PDF. This procedure does not depend on a specific option
pricing model (Bliss and Panigirtzoglou 2004).

B. Subjective Probability Distributions

We use a kernel density estimator to estimate the subjective (risk-adjusted) probability
density functions. A similar procedure is used in Jackwerth (2000).13 We use the most recent 60
months of return data to estimate the risk-adjusted distribution. For example, to find estimates for
January 1996, we use monthly return data from January 1991 to December 1995. All information
used in the calculation is part of the investors’ information set. Other windows were considered
but results were highly correlated. For example, we tried a window of past returns with a lag of
one year or six months, and we tried using 72 months of returns instead of 60. Varying our initial
choices does not change the results.
We calculate monthly non-overlapping returns from our 5-year sample and compute the
kernel density with a Gaussian kernel. The bandwidth
h = σˆ [4 /(3n)] ,
1/ 5

12

1. This problem is similar to all problems with missing prices, and the approach taken is similar to matrix pricing
used for fixed income securities. The procedure we use is similar to Bliss and Panigirtzoglou (2004).
13
This is different from Bliss and Panigirtzoglou (2004) who first hypothesize a utility function (power and
exponential utility) for the investor and then use this function to convert the risk-neutral PDF to the subjective PDF.
We do not follow this approach because we do not hypothesize a utility function.

15

where h is the kernel bandwidth, σˆ is the standard deviation of the sample returns, and n is the
number of observations, is selected according to the recommendation in Jones, Marron and
Sheather (1996).

C. Data: Estimation of Risk Preferences

We identify five value-growth index pairs for which call options are traded. Table 1 lists
the index pairs and the dates when daily option prices are available. Our study covers major
value and growth indices: The Standard & Poor's Barra Growth and Value Indices; Russell
Midcap Growth and Value Indices; Russell 1000 Growth and Value Indices; Russell 2000
Growth and Value Indices; and Russell 3000 Growth and Value Indices. In addition to the daily

closing option prices, we use monthly index returns and daily index closing prices. Summary
statistics for the indices in the sample is given in Table 2. The table provides risk and return
characteristics of the indices: annualized average return, standard deviation, Sharpe ratio, and
total value of $1 invested in the index (total dollar return).
To estimate risk aversion we need prices of options with different strike prices written on
the indices in the sample. Similarly to Jackwerth (2000), we estimate risk aversion with a
constraint on the money-ness. Jackwerth only considers options such that the ratio of the strike
price to the underlying index value is between 0.84 and 1.12. This procedure eliminates faraway-from-the-money observations. This may cause a problem of missing observations, but only
when there are large movements in the underlying index value.
Options on equity indices generally exist with expiration dates at the nearest months, and
at three-month intervals.14 For example in the month of December there are options on the
Russell Midcap Growth and Value indices that expire in December, January, February, and June.

For our estimation we consider options that expire between one and four months from day t. We
use this approach to maintain a relatively constant horizon for our analysis, and at the same time
to have a sufficient number of option contracts to obtain reliable risk aversion estimates.
For each trading day we estimate the risk aversion for five value indices and five growth
indices. We also use options on the S&P 500 Index (symbol: SPX) and on S&P 100 Index
(OEX) to estimate risk aversion for the market. On each date we calculate estimates of Arrow14

See Battalio, Hatch, and Jennings (2004), and Mayhew and Mihov (2004) for the description of the equity options

markets including institutional background.

16

Pratt risk aversion functions across wealth using (3), a computationally intensive process. We
compute the average of daily estimates within a month to obtain monthly estimates of risk
aversion. We also compute the standard deviation of the daily estimates.

D. Data: Mutual Fund Flows

We use data on mutual fund flows to value and growth funds to study investor behavior.
Our data set is obtained from TrimTabs and consists of daily mutual fund flow data for mutual
funds in the following nine categories: Value funds (small, medium and large market
capitalization); Blend (small, medium and large capitalization); and Growth funds (small,
medium and large capitalization). We add daily flow data within a month to construct monthly
flows to growth and value funds from February 1999 through November 2006. TrimTabs data
represents aggregate flows to these fund categories.
We also use two data sets on flows to individual growth and value mutual funds. The first
data set includes a panel of all individual mutual fund accounts for Kemper mutual funds for five
years, 1995 through 1999. We use the individual account data to compute aggregate flows every
month. We compute flows for two Kemper funds. The first fund invests in large capitalization
growth stocks and the second in large capitalization value stocks. For each of the two funds we
aggregate flows into all share classes. There are six different share classes for the growth fund
and four share classes for the value fund.
The second data set is retrieved from TrimTabs and includes aggregate (across all
accounts) daily fund flows for three Oppenheimer mutual funds. Two funds are growth funds
that invest in large capitalization stocks: Oppenheimer Enterprise and Oppenheimer Growth
funds. The third fund invests in large capitalization value stocks: Oppenheimer Quest Value. We
use daily fund flows from February 1998 through February 2001 to compute monthly flows.

IV. Risk Preferences of Growth and Value Investors

A. Do Investors in Value and Growth Indices Have Different Preferences Toward Risk?

The first hypothesis we test is whether investors in the two styles—value and growth—
exhibit different preferences toward risk. For five value-growth index pairs we use prices of
options on the indices to estimate the daily risk aversion (as a function of wealth) of the

17

representative investor in the index. For each index we obtain a panel of estimates containing a
time series of estimated risk aversion coefficients for each level of wealth.
Figure 1 is a plot of the estimated risk aversion as a function of expected future wealth

for investors in the Russell Midcap Growth (RDG) and Value (RMV) indices. For each future
wealth level in the range 0.96 through 1.00 we compute the average daily risk aversion estimates
and the standard deviation.15 The wealth level of 1.00 corresponds to the current wealth, and the
wealth level of 0.98 corresponds to a 2% monthly (24% annual) loss. The plot shows the average
value and the standard error band. Estimates for the value index are substantially higher than the
estimates for the growth index. Over the period of study, investors in the value index are more
averse to risk than the growth investors.
Figure 2 shows risk aversion as a function of wealth for investors in a different value-

growth index pair: Standard & Poor's Barra Growth (SGX) and Value (SVX) indices. The figure
covers the range of wealth levels from 0.98 through 1.02. The plot shows the average and the
standard error band computed from daily risk aversion estimates for each level of wealth. For
virtually all wealth levels risk aversion for the value index is substantially higher. Only in the
small region that corresponds to losses (near w = 0.98) is the risk aversion for the growth index
higher.
The results for the other three index pairs are shown in Figure 3 through Figure 5. Risk
aversion as a function of wealth for Russell 1000 Growth (RLG) and Value (RLV) indices is
shown on Figure 3. Risk aversion for the value index, RLV, is higher for virtually all wealth
levels. The only exception is a small region above w = 1.005 where growth investors are more
averse to risk. Figure 4 and Figure 5 display the results for Russell 2000 Growth (RUO) and
Value (RUJ) indices and for Russell 3000 Growth (RAG) and Value (RAV) indices, respectively.

Investors in the value index have higher risk aversion than investors in the growth index for both
index pairs. This holds for all wealth levels.
The figures suggest that value and growth investors have different preferences toward
risk, and for the overwhelming majority of wealth levels, value investors display higher aversion
to risk than the growth investors. Since for each wealth level we have a time series of estimates,
we can conduct a formal statistical test for the difference in risk aversion. Table III shows the test
results. Each panel in the table presents results for one pair of indices. For several wealth levels
15

Wealth level is the future value of one plus the expected return.

18

the table shows the mean value of risk aversion for value index and for growth index. The table
shows the results of the Satterthwaite difference in means test, which accounts for unequal
variances, and the Brown-Mood non-parametric difference in medians test.
The tests reported in Table III, Panel A for the Russell Midcap Value-Growth index pair
show that risk aversion for the value index is higher than that for the growth index for all wealth
levels. The results hold for both the mean and the median. The results for S&P Barra ValueGrowth index pair are reported in Panel B. The results support the conclusions from the Figure
2: Risk aversion for the value index is substantially higher for all wealth levels except for a small

region in the neighborhood of w = 0.98, where risk aversion for the growth index is higher.
Table III, Panel C corresponds to Figure 3 and reports the results for Russell 1000
Growth (RLG) and Value (RLV) indices. Value investors display higher risk aversion for all

wealth levels except w = 1.01, and the statistical evidence for the difference is strong. Finally,
panels D and E of the table confirm the results for Russell 2000 and Russell 3000 indices
displayed in Figure 4 and Figure 5: Risk aversion estimates for the value indices are higher at
all wealth levels.
We conclude that over the periods of study investors in the value indices are more risk
averse than investors in the growth indices.16

16

We perform numerous robustness checks and report two of the robustness checks in Appendix B. The robustness

checks are based upon altering the procedure for computing risk aversion estimates. The results of the first
robustness check are reported on Figure B1 and in Table B1. The true distribution under this alternation is now
estimated using returns that are lagged by 6 months relative to the date when risk aversion is estimated. The results
are virtually unchanged. The figures reported in the Appendix B are similar to Figure 1 through Figure 5. The
results in Table B1 are the same as those in Table III. As another robustness check (not reported) we modify the true
distribution to investigate whether the shape of the tails affects the estimates. We determine that the procedure is
robust to the shape of the tails – changing the tails does not affect risk aversion estimates. The results of the second
robustness check are reported in Table B2. True distribution is estimated using returns on the Fama-French portfolio
similar to the corresponding growth or value index. The full history of returns of the Fama-French portfolio is used,
from 1926 until one month before the date when risk aversion is estimated. This is the case when investors form
their assessment of the return distribution based on a long history of returns. The results are the same. Estimated risk
aversion for the value index in a pair is higher than for the growth index. We also investigate the impact of the
recent bubble period. We exclude the bubble period and use full history of returns for the period 1926 – 1996. The
results (not reported for brevity) are unchanged.

19

Another pattern emerges from the examination of the figures and mean risk aversion
values reported in Table III. There is apparent risk-seeking behavior, which is more pronounced
in the case of investors in the growth indices. For Russell Midcap indices (Figure 1) risk
aversion for growth index is below zero for all wealth levels, indicating risk seeking. Risk
aversion is negative only for approximately 30% of the wealth interval for the value index in this
pair. Mean values reported in Table III, Panel A confirm this.
Risk seeking is much less pronounced in the case of S&P Barra indices (Figure 2) than
for any of the other index pairs. Negative risk aversion is present for the value index in
approximately 3% of the wealth interval, and in approximately 29% of the interval for the
growth investors (Table III, Panel B). Even in this case when both groups are largely displaying
risk aversion we observe more regions of risk seeking for the growth index.
Growth investors exhibit risk seeking for all wealth levels for the remaining three index
pairs (Figure 3 through Figure 5). For Russell 1000 indices there is also evidence of risk seeking
for value investors. Approximately for 65% of wealth risk aversion estimates are below zero for
the value index. For the Russell 2000 pair risk aversion for the value index is positive for all
levels of wealth. Finally, for Russell 3000 risk seeking for the value index is present in
approximately 50% of the interval. Overall, risk seeking has a stronger presence among growth
indices.
Although risk-seeing behavior might appear unusual, there are a number of other assetpricing studies that document it. We explore our results in relation to these previous findings in
the “Discussion” section below. There is no previous evidence in the literature, however,
showing that risk seeking is more of an attribute of a certain investment style and is more
pronounced in the growth investment style than in value.

B. Time Series Evidence

For several indices in our sample, options are not available over a long period of time.
This limits the time series of the estimated risk aversion. For example, for the Russell Midcap
Growth (RDG) and Value (RMV) indices option data is available over the 13 months from

December 2003 through December 2004. With only 13 monthly observations in the estimated
risk aversion time series we do not perform time series tests using the data for these indices.
More data is available for S&P Barra Growth (SGX) and Value (SVX) indices. For these indices

20

we obtain monthly estimates of risk aversion for January 1996 through August 1998. For this
pair of indices we study autocorrelation in the risk aversion time series.
Table IV, Panel A, reports autocorrelation in risk aversion for growth and value investors.
autocorrelation for the growth index is positive at monthly horizons up to eight months (and is
strongly significant for the horizon of up to five months). Autocorrelation becomes negative at
the horizon of nine months, and is strongly statistically significant beginning with month ten.
The pattern of short-term positive autocorrelation followed by negative autocorrelation is
consistent with the existence of “return chasers.”
Value investor risk aversion displays stronger persistence. Autocorrelation is higher in
magnitude than in the case of growth investors and it is statistically significant at a longer
horizon. Autocorrelation is positive and significant at the horizon of seven month and remains
positive through month eleven. Autocorrelation becomes negative for the lag of twelve months.
Table IV Panel B and Panel C report results for market-adjusted risk aversion. Every
month, we take the estimate of growth index risk aversion, AG ,t , and subtract the estimate of
market risk aversion for that month, AS & P ,t This gives market-adjusted growth index risk
aversion estimate,
X G ,t = AG ,t − AS & P 500,t .

We use S&P 500 risk aversion for two wealth levels, w = 0.98 and w = 1.00, as a measure of
market risk aversion. The same adjustment is performed for the value index to obtain marketadjusted value index risk aversion estimate,
X V ,t = AV ,t − AS & P 500,t .

Panel C is the same as Panel B, except in Panel B we use S&P 500 and in Panel C we use S&P
100 as the measure of market risk aversion. For both panels we use growth (value) index
estimate for wealth level w = 0.98.

B.1. Growth Investors

In Table IV, Panel B the first column shows autocorrelation in growth index investor risk
aversion when S&P 500 risk aversion (w = 0.98) is used for the market adjustment. Risk
aversion autocorrelation tends to be positive up to lag 7, and then turns negative from lag 7
through lag 12. First-order autocorrelation is positive, 0.45, and statistically significant with the

21

p-value of 0.01. Autocorrelation is positive for lags 4, 5, and 6 and is statistically significant for

lag 5 (autocorrelation coefficient equals 0.37 and p-value is 0.06). Autocorrelation becomes
negative for lag 7, and is negative and significant for lags 11 and 12.
This pattern is even stronger when the S&P 500 risk aversion for w = 1.00 is used as a
market adjustment (Table IV, Panel B, column 2). Autocorrelation is positive and statistically
significant for the first four lags. It remains positive for lags 5 and 6 and turns negative at lag 7.
Autocorrelation is negative and significant for lags 9 through 12.
The pattern in Table IV, Panel B, column 1 is (broadly) confirmed when we use S&P 100
as a market index (Table IV, Panel C, first column). Panel C, column 2 also (broadly) confirms
the pattern in Panel B. The results are stronger when we use S&P 500 rather than S&P 100 risk
aversion as the market adjustment.

B.2. Value Investors

The general pattern in autocorrelation in risk aversion for value index investors is
different from the pattern for growth index investors. Autocorrelations for the value index are
very persistent and tend to be positive for all lags. Table IV, Panel B, Column 5 shows
autocorrelation for value index risk aversion when S&P 500 (w = 0.98) risk aversion is used for
market adjustment. First order autocorrelation equals 0.88 and is highly significant. The pattern
of positive and statistically significant autocorrelation persists for the first 8 lags. Autocorrelation
remains positive for lags 9 through 12. This pattern is confirmed when S&P 500 (w = 1.00) is
used as market risk aversion (column six of the table).
A similar pattern emerges when the risk aversion of S&P 100 investors is used as a
market adjustment (Table IV, Panel C, columns 5 and 6). The value of autocorrelation is similar
in magnitude. For lag 1, it equals 0.88 when the S&P 500 is used, and equals 0.81 when the S&P
100 index is the market proxy. For lag 4 these values are 0.74 and 9.68, respectively.
Our results to this point may be summarized as follows. For investors in the growth index
autocorrelation in market-adjusted risk aversion exhibits the following pattern: It is positive for
the first six month at monthly lags and becomes negative for the lags seven through twelve. One
feature that characterizes autocorrelation in the risk aversion of value investors is persistence.
The pattern in positive autocorrelation is stronger in the case of value investors than in the case
of growth investors. At the same time, we do not observe negative autocorrelation at lags up to

22

one year. This is consistent with investors in value funds being a more stable clientele, and with
less “return chasing” on the part of the value investors. Apparently these are two features that we
find to be associated with the “value” approach to investing. Time series results indicate that
investors in the growth index exhibit a different pattern of behavior than investors in the value
index. It appears that investors in the growth index show patterns consistent with “return
chasing,” while investors in the value index display more persistence.

C. Time Series Evidence of Switching

If there are investors that switch between the two investment styles, then there will be a
contemporaneous negative correlation between changes in risk aversion. It will be induced by the
switchers who leave one style and enter the other style, thus simultaneously impacting the risk
aversion of investors in the two styles. Correlation between contemporaneous changes in risk
aversion

for

SGX

and

SVG

is

negative, corr (∆RAG ,t , ∆RAV ,t ) = −0.16 ,

where

∆RAi ,t = RAi ,t − RAi ,t −1 . Negative contemporaneous correlation in changes of risk aversion

confirms the pattern in cross-autocorrelations for the levels of risk aversion.

D. Regressions: Changes in Preferences and Returns

If investors take past returns into account while allocating funds to different styles, then
changes in risk aversion of a given style will be related to the past returns on that style and to the
past returns on the competing investment style. To test this hypothesis we perform several
regressions of the change in risk aversion on past returns.
Table V, Panel A shows regression results for changes in risk aversion in the growth
index, S&P Barra Growth (SGX). The dependent variable is a change in risk aversion. The
independent variables include lagged returns on the growth and value indices. The results
indicate that relative past performance of growth and value styles is important in explaining
changes in risk aversion of the representative investor in the growth style. The past returns on the
growth and value indices are both statistically significant. The signs of the coefficients are
consistent with the presence of investors who switch between styles based on relative past
performance. A negative regression coefficient on the past growth return variable is consistent
with a scenario where high past returns on the growth style attract switchers—who have
relatively low risk aversion—and the inflow of switchers lowers the risk aversion of investors in
23

the growth style. The regression coefficient on the value returns—which represent a style
competing with growth—is positive. This also is consistent with the behavior of switchers. When
value returns are high, switchers who have relatively low risk aversion leave the growth style (to
switch to value) and the risk aversion in the growth index increases.
Table V, Panel B shows results for changes in risk aversion in the value index, S&P
Barra Value (SVX). Only in one specification are the past growth and value returns statistically
significant in explaining changes in risk aversion in the value index. This result is different from
the result for changes in the growth index. Apart from the fact that relatively short time series
present a challenge to our analysis, this finding is consistent with the behavior of growth and
value investors. If the majority of investors in the value index are “value investors,” then the
representative investor will be less sensitive to past returns. At the same time, the signs of the
coefficients are consistent with style switching. Negative regression coefficient on the past value
return variable is consistent with the scenario when high past returns attract switchers. The
regression coefficient on the growth returns—which represent a style competing with value—is
positive. When growth returns are high, the switchers leave the value style and the risk aversion
in the value index increases.
Generally, the switching hypothesis implies that high past returns on the style itself have
a negative impact on risk aversion of the representative (the aggregate) investor in the index,
because high returns attract switchers with a relatively low risk aversion. High past returns on a
competing style have a positive impact on risk aversion, because switchers with a relatively low

risk aversion leave for the competing style. The evidence in Table V is consistent with such
behavior. It is also consistent with the view that there are differences in preferences among value
and growth investors.17

17

We also estimate the regressions using changes in excess risk aversion as the dependent variable. Excess risk

aversion is defined as risk aversion in a growth or value style minus risk aversion of investor in the market,

ERAG / V ,t = RAG / V ,t − RAM ,t . We use both S&P 500 and S&P 100 as proxies for the market. The change in
excess risk aversion equals the change in risk aversion for the style minus the change in risk aversion for the overall
market,

∆ERAG / V ,t = ∆RAG / V ,t − ∆RAM ,t . The results are the same (not reported for brevity and available from

the authors on request).

24

E. Regressions: Risk and Changes in Preferences

In addition to taking past returns into account when making decisions to invest in a style,
investors may also take risk into account. Goetzmann and Massa (2002) study investors into
S&P 500 Index mutual fund and their response to changes in volatility of the S&P 500. The
results suggest that individual investor behavior may be conditioned upon risk. In Section II we
discuss the implications of investor reaction to volatility with respect to risk aversion. We
consider the case when there are two channels that impact risk aversion of the representative
investor. First, there is the inflow of investors with relatively low aversion to risk, the “volatility
chasers.” Second, there may be another effect at work. Increased volatility could cause investors
with high risk aversion to leave, causing a decline in risk aversion. The two channels are not
mutually exclusive. We obtain three theoretical results. First, we show that if the risk aversion of
investors in a given style is equal (or nearly equal) to the risk aversion of volatility chasers
(switchers), then there will be no change in the risk aversion of the representative investor in a
style. Second, when the risk aversion parameters of the switchers and investors in a style are not

equal, then an increase in volatility will lead to a decrease in risk aversion of the representative
investor in a style. Because value investors are more risk averse than the growth investors, we

should expect a greater sensitivity to volatility in the case of value index. Our third result
formalizes this intuition. When average risk aversion coefficients of volatility chasers, growth
investors, and value investors are ranked as a S ≤ aG < aV , the change in risk aversion of the
representative investor in the growth index is smaller than the change in risk aversion of the
representative investor in the value index. In empirical tests, therefore, we expect stronger effect

for the value index regressions.
To investigate its role, we include several measures of risk in the regressions. Table VI
presents the results of the regressions of changes in the risk aversion for the growth index (Panel
A) and the value index (Panel B). Two measures of risk are used. The first measure is the
implied volatility of call options on the index. The second measure is realized volatility,
measured as the annualized standard deviation of daily returns. For the growth index, risk is
statistically significant at conventional levels only in one specification. If investors in the growth
index have low risk aversion, then we may expect relatively low sensitivity to volatility. The
negative sign of the coefficient, however, is consistent across specifications. This is consistent
with our second hypothesis. The negative sign of the coefficient also suggests the presence of

25

“volatility chasing,” where higher volatility attracts investors with low risk aversion and leads to
a decrease in risk aversion.18 The results are unchanged when we use implied volatility from puts
instead of calls, or when we use squared returns as the measure of risk. For example, the
estimated regression equation with put implied volatility IVPG ,t −1 , is
∆RAG ,t = 7.97 − 95.1⋅ RG ,t −1 + 134.5⋅ RV ,t −1 − 32.8⋅ IVPG ,t −1 − 0.259⋅ ∆RAG ,t −1 ,
(1.66 )

( −2.32 )

( −1.57 )

( 2.75 )

( −1.51)

where t-statistics are reported below coefficient estimates.
As predicted, the results are stronger for the value index (Panel B). We find that implied
volatility is statistically significant in two specifications. Realized volatility is strongly
significant in all specifications. Regression coefficients for volatility are negative in all
specifications. An increase in risk leads to a decrease in risk aversion. This is consistent with the
previously postulated hypothesis. The economic intuition behind this effect is that an increase in
risk leads to inflow of investors with low risk aversion and thus to a decrease in risk aversion.
This is consistent with “volatility chasing,” where there are investors that enter an investment
style when volatility of the style increases. The second channel may also be at work: Increased
volatility could cause investors with high risk aversion to leave, causing a decline in risk
aversion.
The regressions for growth and value indices are consistent with the presence of
“volatility chasing” and show that risk plays a role in explaining changes in risk preferences of
investors in growth and value styles.19 A measure of risk based on past returns (standard
deviation of past returns) performs much better in the regressions than a forward-looking
measure of volatility (implied volatility). This is consistent with a scenario where “volatility
chasers” use variability of past returns to form an assessment of risk. Overall, the results are
consistent with the three hypotheses.

F. Regression Evidence of Style Switching

If there is a group of switchers who move funds between two styles, then changes in risk
aversion in the growth and value indices will be related. Consider, for example, a case in which

18

Goetzmann and Massa (2002) report the presence of volatility chasers in their sample of mutual fund investors.

19

We also observe that past returns of growth and value indices remain significant when a measure of risk is

included in the regressions.

26

investors with a relatively high risk aversion leave one style and enter the other style. This will
simultaneously cause a decline in a measure of risk aversion of investors in the first style and an
increase in a measure of risk aversion of investors in the second style. We study the relationship
between risk aversion of the representative investors in the growth and value indices by
estimating the regression model,
RAV ,t = 0.98+ 0.83⋅ RAV ,t −1 − 0.77⋅ RAG ,t + 0.49⋅ RAG ,t −1 + 0.69⋅ RAS & P 500,t − 0.73⋅ RAS & P 500,t −1
( 0.18 )

( −2.56 )

( 7.54 )

(1.29 )

( −2.59 )

( 2.41)

Lagged values are included to control for serial correlation. The regression confirms strong
persistence in the risk aversion of the value fund clientele. Consistent with theoretical
predictions, there is a negative relation between risk aversion of value fund investors and growth
fund investors (coefficient equals -0.77 with t-statistic of -2.56). This is consistent with an
investment strategy in which less risk-averse investors move funds between the two styles. The
corresponding regression for the growth index is,
RAG ,t = 2.24+ 0.78⋅ RAG ,t −1 − 0.28⋅ RAV ,t + 0.30⋅ RAV ,t −1 + 0.59⋅ RAS & P 500,t − 0.50⋅ RAS & P 500,t −1
( 0.70 )

( −2.56 )

( 4.39 )

( 2.85 )

( −3.09 )

( 3.89 )

For this regression, there is a negative relation between the risk aversion of growth and value
investors. Comparing the two regressions, note that a change in growth risk aversion has a larger
impact on the risk aversion of the investor in the value index (coefficient of -0.77) than a change
in value risk aversion had on risk aversion in the growth index (coefficient of -0.28). This result,
too, is consistent with the theoretical predictions.20,21
A change in excess risk aversion of investors in growth index has a larger impact on risk
aversion of the representative investor in the value index (the coefficient is -0.25) than a change
20

Note two other results. First, for both the value and growth regression, the coefficient for the contemporaneous

market risk aversion is positive and significant (the values are 0.69 and 0.59, respectively). The risk aversion of both
value and growth representative investors are positively related to the risk aversion of the representative investor in
the market. Second, the regression results support the hypothesis of higher persistence of value investors, since
coefficient on
coefficient
21

RAV ,t −1 in the first regression is larger in magnitude (and highly significant, t=7.54), while

RAG ,t −1 in the second regression is smaller in magnitude (it is significant with t=3.89).

The regression model is also estimated for excess risk aversion, which is defined as risk aversion in a growth or

value style minus risk aversion of investor in S&P 500,

ERAG / V ,t = RAG / V ,t − RAS & P 500,t

ERAV ,t = 11.7 + 0.86⋅ ERAV ,t −1 − 0.25⋅ ERAG ,t − 0.42⋅ ERAG ,t −1
( 2.06 )

( −0.79 )

( 9.65 )

( −1.37 )

and,

for

the

. The results are
excess value risk

aversion, ERAG ,t = 10.3+ 0.36⋅ ERAG ,t −1 − 0.10⋅ ERAV ,t + 0.10⋅ ERAV ,t −1 . Again, we observe a stronger
( 3.17 )

(1.98 )

( −0.79 )

( 0.87 )

persistence in the case value investors than in the case of growth investors.

27

in risk aversion of the value investor has on risk aversion of the growth index representative
investor (the coefficient is -0.10). The first coefficient is two-and-a-half times as large as the
second. In the previous regressions with RAV ,t and RAG ,t as dependent variables we also observe
this asymmetry (the corresponding coefficient values are -0.77 and -0.28; the first coefficient is
2-and-¾ times as large as the second).
The observed asymmetry is consistent with a well-known aggregation property. Suppose
there are three types of investors: growth, value, and switchers each with a negative exponential
utility function, identical wealth, and with coefficients of risk aversion aG = 0.7 , aV = 1.4 , and
a S = 0.3 , respectively. In the case of negative exponential utility, risk aversion of the

representative investor is the wealth-weighted harmonic mean of risk aversions of individual
investors. Let there be 100 growth investors, 100 value investors, and 30 switchers in the
economy. At the beginning the switchers are evenly distributed among the two styles. There are
100 growth investors and 15 switchers invested in the growth index. There are 100 value
investors and 15 switchers invested in the value index. The risk aversion coefficients of the
representative investor in the growth and value indices in this case are,
115
1
1
= 100 ⋅
+ 15 ⋅
⇒ a R ,G = 0.5963
a R ,G
0 .7
0 .3
115
1
1
= 100 ⋅
+ 15 ⋅
⇒ a R ,V = 0.9471
a R ,V
1 .4
0 .3

Next, consider a scenario where five switchers leave the value style and join the growth style.
Since switchers have low risk aversion, this leads to a decrease in the risk aversion of the
representative investor in the growth index, and an increase in risk aversion of the representative
investor in the value index. This will have a larger impact on value than on growth index risk
aversion. The new values are
120
1
1
= 100 ⋅
+ 20 ⋅
⇒ a R* ,G = 0.5727
*
0 .7
0 .3
a R ,G
110
1
1
= 100 ⋅
+ 10 ⋅
⇒ a R* ,V = 1.05
*
1 .4
0 .3
a R ,V

There is a 3.96% decrease in risk aversion for the growth index, and there is a 10.86% increase
in risk aversion for the value index. The impact of the switching investors changing from value

28

to growth is 2.75 as large for risk aversion on the value of risk aversion of the representative
investor in the value index than in the growth index. This is the effect we observe in the data.

V. Evidence from Mutual Fund Flows

A. Time Series Evidence: The Autocorrelation Structure of Mutual Fund Flows

The purchase and sale of shares to mutual funds that are explicitly identified with a
particular style is another way to examine the behavior of investors. Brown et. al. (2003) for
example, found evidence that net flow into mutual fund styles in the U.S. and Japan captured a
sentiment factor about the market, and that rotations of these factors effectively spread
contemporaneous fund returns. In this section we use data on aggregate flows to value and
growth mutual funds in the U. S. to study the contemporaneous and lagged response of investor
flows in the Growth and Value styles. The data is from TrimTabs for the period from February
1999 through November 2006. It was provided to us as daily flows and we summed these to
calculate monthly flows. The aggregate data covers flows to a representative selection of mutual
funds in Growth and Value Morningstar categories.22 We analyze monthly fund flows to Growth
and Value fund categories in excess of the total fund flows.23 That is, for each monthly flow
number for each growth or value style, we subtract total flows across all categories for this
month (this total is the total market flow).
Table VII, Panel A reports the autocorrelation in aggregate fund flows to growth and
value mutual funds. The patterns in fund flow correlations are very similar to the patterns in
autocorrelations in estimated risk preferences. For the growth fund flows, autocorrelation is
positive at monthly horizons up to six months. This is the same horizon found for positive
autocorrelation in estimated growth risk aversion in excess of the market reported in Panel B of
Table IV. Autocorrelation becomes negative at the horizon of seven months, and is statistically
significant beginning with month thirteen. The pattern of short-term positive autocorrelation
followed by negative autocorrelation in the aggregate growth mutual fund flows matches the
22

Trimtabs maintains a set of approximately 1,000 U.S. mutual funds from which they obtain daily NAV and NAV
per share information that allows them to estimate daily net fund flows for this sample. In this sample are a number
of Growth and Value funds, as classified by Morningstar. The number of grown and value funds in this set is not
explicitly known to us.
23
In their study of style investing Barberis and Shleifer (2003) argue that it is important to look for patterns in
excess of the market. We also report, in the previous section and in Table IV, Panel B, results for risk aversion in
excess of the market.

29

pattern in the growth index risk aversion. The change from negative to positive autocorrelation
occurs in the same month for both time series.
The autocorrelation for the value fund flows is very similar to the value risk aversion
autocorrelation pattern. Aggregate flows to value funds display a pattern of stronger persistence
than aggregate flows to the growth funds. Autocorrelation is higher in magnitude than in the case
of growth investors and it remains positive at a longer horizon. This pattern is the same in the
time series of estimated value risk aversion.
To study the behavior of investors we also use data on flows at the level of individual
mutual funds. Our data set includes a panel of individual mutual fund accounts for Kemper
mutual funds for five years, 1995 through 1999. We use the individual account data to compute
aggregate flows every month for Kemper large capitalization growth fund, and Kemper large
capitalization value fund. We also use aggregate (across all accounts) daily fund flows for three
Oppenheimer mutual funds: two large capitalization growth funds, and one large capitalization
value fund. We use daily fund flows from February 1998 through February 2001 to compute
monthly flows. The particular advantage of the Kemper dataset is that the disaggregate accountlevel information allows us to identify fund clienteles.
Table VII, Panel B reports the autocorrelation in fund flows for Kemper growth and
value funds. The patterns in fund flow correlations are similar to the patterns in autocorrelations
in estimated risk preferences. For the growth fund flows, autocorrelation is positive at monthly
horizons up to seven months (and is statistically significant for the horizon of up to six months).
Autocorrelation becomes negative at the horizon of eight months, and is statistically significant
beginning with month twelve. The pattern of short-term positive autocorrelation followed by
negative autocorrelation in the growth mutual fund flows matches the pattern in the growth index
risk aversion. The change from negative to positive autocorrelation occurs in approximately the
same month for both time series.
The autocorrelation pattern of the fund flows for the value funds is similar to the value
index risk aversion autocorrelation pattern. Flows to the individual value funds display a pattern
of stronger persistence than flows to the growth funds. Autocorrelation is higher in magnitude
than in the case of growth investors and it remains positive at a longer horizon. Autocorrelation
is positive and significant at the horizon of six month and remains positive through month
eighteen.

30

Panel C contains results for the Oppenheimer funds—two growth funds and a value fund.
Patterns in autocorrelations are the same as in the case of Kemper funds. Also, there is
significant contemporaneous negative correlation between flows to the growth and value funds.
Correlation between flows to the first growth fund and the value fund is -0.30 (p-value is 0.01);
correlation between flows to the second growth fund and the value fund is -0.24 (p-value is
0.04).
Fund flow results provide some direct evidence on behavior. Overall, patterns in mutual
fund flows at the aggregate and disaggregate level show short-term monthly persistence and
longer term reversion. The value fund flows appear to show longer positive persistence than the
Growth fund flows, in general. During the time period of study, these flow patterns are similar
to the patterns in estimated risk preferences. As such they are consistent with the existence of
clientele shifts as the cause of risk aversion changes.

B. Flows to Growth and Value Mutual Funds Conditional on Risk, and Return

In this section we use the excess monthly flows to growth and value funds from
TrimTabs to study patterns in investor behavior conditional on risk and return. The results for
changes in risk aversion indicate that the changes for growth investors are sensitive to past
returns on both growth and value styles, and are not sensitive to risks (Table V, Panel A and
Table VI, Panel A). The results from regressions of changes in risk aversion in the growth index
on lagged risks and returns are consistent with the presence of switchers who follow returns. To
study the response of growth fund flows to risks and returns, we perform regressions of flows in
the growth style on the lagged risks and returns of the growth style, and on those of the
competing style, value. The results for growth fund flows are reported in Table VIII, Panel A.
The dependent variable is the flow to growth funds in month t . The independent variables
include lagged return on the growth/value funds computed for month t − 1 as the average of daily
returns within a month, RETG / V ,t −1 . We use two measures of risk: S G / V ,t is the standard deviation
of daily returns on the growth/value style in a given month, t ; and rG2 / V ,t is the average of squared
daily returns in a given month.
One estimated regression for the excess flows to the growth funds is reproduced below,

31

XFLG ,t = 144.8+ 0.450⋅ XFLG ,t −1 + 65297⋅ RETG ,t −1 + 61363⋅ RETG ,t − 2
(1.58 )

( 4.55 )***

( 2.12 )**

− 166036⋅ RETV ,t −1 + 7073⋅ RETV ,t − 2
( −3.13)***

R

2
Adj

= 0.353,

(1.93)*

( 0.13)

DW = 2.14.

The t-statistics are reported in parentheses below coefficient estimates. The coefficient on lagged
return on the growth style is positive (and significant at 5%). The flow to the growth funds
increases with past returns on the growth funds. The coefficient on lagged return on the
alternative style, value, is negative (and significant at 1% level). The flow to the growth funds
decreases when past returns on the alternative—the value style—are high. The results for other
regression specifications are reported in Table VIII. We find that growth flows are not sensitive
to risks. We also find that flows to the growth funds are sensitive to returns. Flows increase with
returns on growth (there is a positive relation), and flows to growth decrease with returns on
value (there is a negative relation). These results are consistent with the presence of switchers
who follow returns. The pattern in growth fund flows is also consistent with the pattern for
estimated risk aversion coefficients for the growth style.
The results for changes in risk aversion indicate that changes for value investors behave
differently than for growth. For value investors, changes in risk aversion are sensitive to risks
(Table VI, Panel B). To investigate whether a similar pattern hold in fund flows, we regress
flows to value on past risk and returns. The results are reported in Table VIII, Panel B. One
estimated regression for the excess flow to the value funds is reproduced below,
XFLV ,t =

834.4 + 0.670⋅ XFLV ,t −1 − 57200⋅ RETG ,t −1 + 18059⋅ RETG ,t − 2 + 10884⋅ RETV ,t −1
( 2.53)***

( −1.59 )

( 6.53)***

( 0.55 )

( 0.20 )

+ 26665⋅ RETV ,t − 2 − 56451⋅ S G ,t −1 + 30920⋅ S G ,t − 2 − 46609⋅ SV ,t −1 + 20382⋅ SV ,t − 2
( 0.51)

R

2
Adj

= 0.542,

( −2.67 )***

(1.47 )

( −2.07 )**

( 0.94 )

DW = 2.27.

The t-statistics are reported in parentheses below coefficient estimates. The regression suggests
that flows to value funds display higher persistence than flows to the growth funds. The results
also suggest that past returns on the two alternative styles have a smaller impact on flows to the
value funds than they have on flows to the growth funds. The regression coefficients for lagged
measures of risk S G ,t −1 and SV ,t −1 are negative and statistically significant. This suggests that flows
to value funds are sensitive to risks. The negative signs are consistent with risk aversion of value
investors—an increase in risk results in lower flow to the value funds. The results for other

32

regression specifications are reported in Table VIII. Overall, the results for value fund flows are
similar to the results reported in Tables V and VI for the risk aversion coefficient.
Comparing regression results for flows to growth funds to the results for value funds, we
find that regression coefficients for measures of risk are larger in the value regressions than in
the growth regressions. The coefficients for risk measures are significant in the value regressions
and are generally not significant in the growth regressions. Flows to value funds are more
sensitive to risk than flows to growth funds. This pattern is consistent with the value investors
being more risk averse than growth investors.
Next, we investigate whether there is evidence of switching behavior in the fund flows.
Following Goetzmann et. al. (2000) and Brown et. al. (2003) we perform principal component
analysis on excess flows to the style categories. Two factors (principal components) are
extracted. The second factor is such that the excess flows to growth and value funds load with
opposite signs. Excess flow to growth has a positive loading on this factor, while excess flow to
value has a negative loading on this factor. We refer to this factor as switching factor, PC S . We
find that excess flows to both growth and value funds have a positive loading on the second
factor. To assist in the interpretation of the first factor as the switching factor, we regress this
principal component on the risks/returns of growth and value funds. Table VIII, Panel C contains
regression results. One estimated regression is reproduced below:
PC S ,t = − 0.007 + 0.778 ⋅ PC S ,t −1 + 42.26⋅ RETG ,t −1 + 9.51⋅ RETG ,t − 2 − 78.82 ⋅ RETV ,t −1 − 0.26⋅ RETV ,t − 2
( −0.15 )

2
R Adj
= 0.674,

(12.70 )***

( 2.64 )***

( 0.59 )

( −3.02 )***

( −0.01)

DW = 2.30.

The t-statistics are reported in parentheses below coefficient estimates. The coefficient estimate
for return on the growth style is positive and significant at 1% level. The factor responds
positively to an increase in lagged returns on the growth style at the monthly horizon. The
coefficient estimate for return on the value style is negative and significant at 1% level as well.
The factor decreases in response to an increase in lagged return on the value style. The signs of
both coefficients are consistent with the interpretation that this factor is the factor that captures
switching behavior from value to growth.24 The results for other regression specifications are
reported in Table VIII, Panel C. When the switching factor is regressed on risk and returns we
24

We also perform this test using raw flows to growth and value funds (not excess flows) to extract two principal
components. The results are unchanged. We find that there is one factor that excess flows to growth and value funds
load on with opposite sign. When this factor is regressed on lagged growth and value returns, the results are the
same.

33

find that the coefficients on returns remain significant. We also find that the switching factor is
not sensitive to risks—a finding consistent with the hypothesis that switchers have very low risk
aversion. Overall, the results suggest that the patterns in growth and value fund flows are also
consistent with the patterns for estimated risk aversion coefficients for the growth and value
styles. This result sheds some light on the Goetzmann at al. (2000) and the Brown et. al. (2003)
results. The natural interpretation of fund flow factors is as a sentiment variable. The proposed
model and tests on fund flows suggests that that sentiment might be explained more
fundamentally in terms of clienteles differentiated by risk aversion and return-chasing behavior.

VI. The Performance of Trading Strategies

The results thus far suggest that style clienteles may differ significantly in the dimension
of risk aversion. Our analysis suggests that investors in the value index (and its derivative
securities) have a higher aversion to risk, than investors in the growth index (and its derivative
securities). In this section we investigate whether it is possible to construct a trading strategy to
exploit these differences in risk preferences, to, if effect, buy risk in one market and sell it in the
other.
Table IX reports the results of several option trading strategies. For all strategies we use
options on the growth and value index pairs. A portfolio with zero initial investment is formed
every month by selling option contracts on the growth index and investing the proceeds in
options on the corresponding value index. Our method for calculating option returns follows
Coval and Shumway (2001). We take options that are to expire during the following calendar
month, and therefore are roughly between 29 and 37 days to expiration. Similarly to Coval and
Shumway (2001), we take the midpoint of the bid-ask spread and use this to calculate payoffs for
our trading strategies. For each value-growth index pair, we sell a portfolio of options on the
growth index and use the proceeds to buy a portfolio of options on the corresponding value
index. The portfolio is held until maturity, at which time the payoffs are realized. A new
portfolio is formed.
The first trading strategy involves selling two call options on the growth index with strike
prices nearest to the current index level, one strike above and one strike below it. The proceeds
from the sale are invested in two call options on the corresponding value index with strike prices

34

nearest to the index value. The first column in Table IX refers to a portfolio strategy. The column
contains results for an equal-weighted portfolio of four value-growth index pairs for which data
is available for the same time period.25
The second trading strategy consists of trading straddles on value and growth indices. To
determine whether put and call options earn different rates of return when priced by value and
growth investors, we direct our attention toward the returns of straddle positions. By forming
straddle positions by combining puts and calls with the same strike price and maturity, we can
focus on the pricing of higher moments of security returns. As before, we take options that are to
expire during the following calendar month. A straddle consists of a call and a put option with
the same strike price, chosen as the strike closest to the current value of the underlying index.
We sell a straddle on the growth index, and invest the proceeds in a straddle on the
corresponding value index. Similarly to the first strategy, this strategy requires zero initial
investment.
Straddles allow us to focus on the pricing of risk because, while straddles are not
sensitive to the returns on the underlying asset (the deltas of our at-the-money short-term
straddles are near zero), they are sensitive to the volatility of the underlying. When volatility is
higher than expected, a long straddle position has positive returns. Straddles have a large,
positive, exposure to volatility risk. This makes trading strategies involving straddles ideal for
studying the effects of volatility pricing. We now examine the performance of these two
investment strategies.
Table IX records a variety of statistics for the two trading strategies for five index pairs
and for the portfolio strategy. We record the ending dollar value of the strategy,26 the mean
monthly payoff, standard deviation of payoffs, minimum and maximum monthly payoffs. The tstatistic associated with a null hypothesis of zero mean payoff is recorded in the fourth row.
For the first strategy, where we trade call options, the payoffs are positive for all five
pairs and for the portfolio strategy. A zero-investment trading strategy tends to earn an average
payoff of between 4.17 dollars and 7.99 dollars per month. The return is statistically significant
25

These four pairs are (1) Russell Midcap Growth (RDG) and Value (RMV), (2) Russell 1000 Growth (RLG) and

Value (RLV), (3) Russell 2000 Growth (RUO) and Value (RUJ), and (4) Russell 3000 Growth (RAG) and Value
(RAV).
26

All strategies require zero initial investment.

35

for the portfolio of four pairs and for two index pairs, with t-statistic above 2.16. For the
remaining three index pairs we obtain t-statistics of 1.65, 1.61, and 1.53 – marginal and not
significant at traditional confidence levels. Monthly profits and losses for the strategy a plotted in
Figure 6A.
It may be useful to compare our results, and the statistical significance we obtain, to the
numbers reported by other researchers who have studied returns on index options. Coval and
Shumway (2001) study returns of call, put, and straddle positions for options on two market
indices, S&P 500 (SPX) and S&P 100 (OEX). They find that S&P500 call options tend to earn
positive returns in excess of those on the underlying index. An at-the-money call option tends to
earn an average return of between 1.85 percent and 2.00 percent per week. Although high in
magnitude, these returns, however, are not statistically significant because of high variance
(Table I of their paper). S&P 100 call option returns in their sample exhibit similar
characteristics. Here, the t-statistic reported for the call options below and above the current
index value are 1.61 and 1.55. These numbers are comparable to the t-statistic we obtain for call
option trading strategies for three index pairs.
In Table IX we report the performance of the second strategy that entails trading straddles
on each index in a value-growth index pair. As before, we record the ending dollar value of the
strategy, the mean monthly payoff, standard deviation of payoffs, minimum and maximum
monthly payoffs. The t-statistic associated with a null hypothesis of zero mean payoff is recorded
in the fourth row. Average monthly payoffs are positive for all five pairs and for the portfolio,
ranging from 2.15 dollars to 7.02 dollars. Positive payoffs are highly statistically significant for
the portfolio of four index pairs (t-statistic of 3.17) and for three out of five index pairs (t-statistic
of 2.13, 3.88, and 3.08). For the remaining two index pairs the values of t-statistic are 1.75 and
1.20. Figure 6B is a plot of monthly profits and losses for the strategy.
Overall, the evidence suggests that investment strategies based on trading options on
value and growth indices are profitable, however the scale and significance depends upon the
ability to trade within the spread. This holds for the strategy that involves trading call options
and for the strategy based on trading straddles.

36

VII. Discussion

A. Convexity of Preferences: Empirical Findings
The first notable finding in this paper is a simple, but striking one: the existence of
negative risk aversion estimates for investors in growth funds (and derivatives) over the period of
study. We are not the only authors who report negative estimates for risk aversion. Negative risk
aversion, or evidence of risk-seeking, has been reported in several studies that we review in this
section. Jackwerth (2000) uses S&P 500 Index options and index returns to estimate risk
aversion as a function of wealth. He reports that using the data after 1987 crash, there is evidence
of negative risk aversion. He uses many robustness checks and finds that these results do not
change. Rosenberg and Engle (2002) use S&P 500 index option prices and estimated S&P 500
return densities to estimate the empirical pricing kernel and empirical risk aversion each month
from 1991 to 1995. Pricing kernels are estimated using several specifications: a power pricing
kernel, and an orthogonal polynomial pricing kernel. The reported pricing kernels have a region
of increasing marginal utility. The authors report that estimates of the orthogonal polynomial
pricing kernel exhibit risk-aversion characteristics similar to those in Jackwerth (2000). The
authors find that there is a region of negative absolute risk aversion over the range from -4% to
2% (monthly returns) and that absolute risk aversion increases for returns greater than -4%. The
shape of estimated average absolute risk aversion function reported in Rosenberg and Engle
(2002) is similar to Jackwerth’s estimate over a similar time period.
Kliger and Levy (2002) study risk preferences using S&P 500 index options from
December 1987 through December 1995, using monthly observations of option prices (they
report using option prices for 74 months in the sample period). Using estimation methods similar
to those in Jackwerth (2000), they, too, report that risk aversion estimates become “negative at a
(monthly) rate of return of about 3%, suggesting plausibility of models in which preferences
exhibit risk seeking behavior.”
In a recent study Bakshi and Wu (2006) use options on Nasdaq 100 index to study the
price of risk during recent Internet bubble. They report finding positive market price of risk in
1999, which is consistent with risk loving behavior. Evidence of negative risk aversion has also
been reported in studies that do not directly extract asset return distributions from option prices.
In their study of option returns, Coval and Shumway (2001) use the generalized method of

37

moments (GMM) to estimate parameters of the pricing kernel using S&P 500 straddle returns.
They report negative estimates of the risk aversion parameter.
Studies that do not use options market data also report evidence of risk seeking behavior
in a variety of settings. Post and Levy (2005) use stochastic dominance criteria that take into
account (local) risk seeking and analyze the efficiency of the market portfolio relative to several
benchmark portfolios. Their results suggest that reverse S-shaped utility functions with risk
aversion for losses and risk seeking for gains—such as those proposed by Markowitz (1952)—
can help explain stock returns. The authors write: “Our results suggest that no concave utility
function can rationalize the market portfolio. Under our maintained assumptions, this implies
that investors who hold the market portfolio (for example, index funds or exchange traded funds)
are not globally risk averse and utility is not everywhere concave, and we have to account for
(local) risk-seeking behavior.” The authors postulate that “reverse S-shaped utility functions best
capture investor preferences, and that risk aversion over losses and risk seeking over gains helps
explain the cross-sectional pattern of stock returns.”
Whereas Post and Levy (2005) base their conclusions on the behavior of prices, in
another study Coval and Shumway (2005) study behavior of Chicago Board of Trade traders.
The study finds that proprietary traders are highly loss-averse and regularly take on high risk to
recover from prior losses. These risk-seeking trades impact prices in the short run.
A few researchers have studied prices of lottery bonds—securities that have payoffs
similar to those of lottery tickets. A careful reading of these papers reveals evidence of risk
seeking behavior. Green and Rydqvist (1997) use Swedish government lottery bonds to study
pricing of idiosyncratic risk and find that despite its idiosyncratic nature, prices appear to reflect
aversion to this risk. For one of the bonds in the sample, however, the authors report a premium
paid for holding diversifiable risk. When analyzing price behavior of Swedish lottery bonds,
Green and Rydqvist (1997) postulate that violations of concavity of the investors’ utility function
may be in evidence in their sample. They also report evidence that there are cases when the
marginal investor values the lottery risk. Given the pricing in the Swedish lottery bond market,
the authors conclude that “it is possible that investors are averse to the lottery risk associated
with the smaller payoff levels, yet still value the chance at very high payoffs.”
Florentsen and Rydqvist (2002) study Danish lottery bonds which are Danish Treasury
obligations and make coupon payments by lottery. Most bonds receive no payments, while a few

38

winning bonds receive prizes up to 10,000 times the face value.27 A close look at Danish lottery
bond prices reported in the paper reveals a pattern consistent with risk-seeking behavior.
Florentsen and Rydqvist (2002) present a plot of the current yield for lottery bonds from 1976 to
1999 and compare it to the yield on regular Treasury bonds (Figure 3 in their paper). The plot
shows that lottery bond yields are substantially lower than regular Treasury yields, most of the
time. The difference is significant, often above five percentage points and frequently reaching six
percentage points. For example, in the late 1980s the yield on lottery bonds was approximately
3%, while the Treasury yield stood at 9%. They also report that lottery bonds were selling at an
average price of 250% of par. Another plot in the paper shows the time-series of the yield to
maturity for bonds issued in 1977 (Figure 4 in their paper). From it, one can see that a 1977 bond
traded at negative yields to maturity during the time period 1998—1999. Florentsen and
Rydqvist (2002) point out that the model developed by Green and Rydqvist (1999) to explain
negative yields to maturity in the Swedish lottery bond market based on tax arbitrage does not
apply to the Danish market because the marginal tax rate is zero. Florentsen and Rydqvist (2002)
therefore call negative yields to maturity in the Danish lottery bond market “a puzzle which we
leave for future research.” Behavior of Danish lottery bond prices is consistent with investors
exhibiting preference toward the lottery and bidding up the prices until the bonds have negative
yields to maturity.
In the context of this previous research documenting negative risk aversion, our findings
are not as surprising as one might initially think. Risk-seeking behavior evidently appears in
other financial market contexts. What thus notable in the current study is that we have found that
it characterizes the risk attitude of the representative investor of one major investment style in a
particular period in U.S. capital market history. On the other hand, for investors in the value style
we typically find evidence of risk aversion.

Is negative risk-aversion irrational – even

irrationally exuberant? That is a natural question to ask, but certainly beyond the scope and
empirical basis of this paper.

27

Their study is focused on the behavior of ex-day returns. Consistent with the costly arbitrage model of Kalay

(1982) and Boyd and Jagannathan (1994), they find that the marginal valuation of the dividend is one-for-one, but
that prices on average fall by more than the amount of the dividend. They conclude that abnormal ex-day returns
reflect the cost of arbitrage.

39

B. Convexity of Preferences: Theoretical Literature
Concave utility functions that are extensively used in finance correspond to economic
intuition and have convenient mathematical properties. Concave functions, however, cannot
explain gambling and strong evidence that economic agents willingly participate in activities
with negative expected returns. This motivated one of the first modifications to the concave
utility function.
To explain the coexistence of gambling and insurance in human behavior Friedman and
Savage (1948) propose that an individual’s utility of wealth function is composed of two
(strictly) concave segments separated by a (strictly) convex segment. Markowitz (1952) argues
that the Friedman and Savage utility function should be modified so that the inflection point
where the concave region turns into convex region is located exactly as the current wealth level.
Thus, Markowitz (1952) proposes a utility function with a reference point.
The notion of increasing marginal utility (convexity) causes certain discomfort among the
economists. Kwang (1965) suggested a resolution of the problem that is based on the
indivisibility of consumption. Kwang (1965) showed that gambling can be consistent with the
principles of utility maximization when indivisibility of consumption is introduced. Individuals
purchase lottery tickets with payoffs that give them a positive probability of moving to a new
consumption level by being able to afford an indivisible consumption good. If the cost of
purchasing a car, a house, a university education, or a business, appears far beyond the existing
means, it becomes rational for an individual agent to participate in a gambling opportunity that
offers a chance of a sufficiently high payoff. Winning such a lottery would bring the individual
to a qualitatively new “level” of consumption.
Another paper offers a very attractive explanation for the existence of convex regions in
the individual’s utility function. Hakansson (1970) starts with the observation that since money is
only a means to an end (consumption), the derived utility of wealth is dependent on the utility of
consumption and the opportunities for achieving it. Mathematically, the derived utility of wealth
function is defined as
⎡ T −1
⎤
J [W (t ), t ] ≡ Max Et ⎢∑ U (C , s ) + B(WT , T )⎥,
⎣ s =t
⎦
J [W (T ), T ] ≡ B(WT , T ).

40

In this case the terminal date T is assumed known and the utility function is assumed
additively separable. In this formulation U (•) is the utility of consumption and B (•) is the utility
of bequest. Clearly, the utility of present wealth is influenced by preferences over consumption at
each future point in time, utility over bequest, the agent’s labor income, future interest rates, the
risk and return of the future investment opportunities, and borrowing restrictions. Therefore, the
determination of an individual’s utility of current wealth requires a model of his total economic
decision problem, including the description of the investment opportunity set and restrictions,
such as borrowing or short-sale constraints. Hakansson (1970) develops such a model. He begins
with risk averse preferences over consumption. He then imposes a borrowing constraint of a
reasonable form and finds that the constraint gives rise to a Friedman-Savage utility function of
current wealth.
Perhaps the most well-known class of value functions is the prospect theory S-shaped
function suggested by Kahneman and Tversky. Based on their experimental results, Kahneman
and Tversky (1979) and Tversky and Kahneman (1992) suggest that the value function is convex
in the domain of losses (below the current wealth level) and concave in the domain of gains
(above the current wealth). This function has one inflection point located at the current level of
wealth.
Does convexity create havoc with our asset pricing theories that usually start with the
assumption of concave utility? Not necessarily. Jarrow (1988) studies an economy consisting of
an infinite number of assets and shows that the Arbitrage Pricing Theory does not require that
agents possess preferences that can be represented by risk-averse expected utility functions. This
suggests that risk seeking per se does not conflict with the APT.
Blackburn and Ukhov (2005) show that risk-seeking behavior at the individual level can
be consistent with risk-averse behavior at the aggregate level. The authors begin with a model
where all agents have a convex utility implying they are risk seekers. The agents face a
constraint—they cannot infinitely borrow (or sell short). When agents are heterogeneous with
respect to the initial endowment, under perfect competition the economy is risk averse.

41

VIII. Conclusion

We use option prices on five value and five growth indices to examine preferences
toward risk of investors in value and growth indices, two popular investment styles. The selected
five value-growth index pairs are widely followed by investors and are frequently used as
benchmarks for the growth and value investment styles. We adopt a flexible approach and use a
methodology for estimating risk aversion coefficient that does not assume a specific form for the
utility function. We find several effects. First, our findings suggest that different investor
clienteles exist. Second, we identify risk preferences as an important attribute that categorizes
differences across the two clienteles. We find differences in preferences toward risk for investors
in these two styles. Value investors are more risk averse than are the growth investors. The
difference in preferences toward risk is present for all value-growth index pairs.
Third, we find that not only risk preferences of value and growth investors are different in
levels, but also that they have differences in time series patterns. Risk preferences of value
investors exhibit a stronger persistence in the time series. This is consistent with the hypothesis
of a more stable clientele of investors who invest in the value index. Investors in growth indices
display less persistence. This is another attribute that categorizes the two clienteles. When we
study flows in value and growth mutual funds, we find that the time series patterns in flows
match the patterns in risk preferences.
Fourth, we show that estimated risk preferences are consistent with the presence of “style
switchers” who switch between value and growth styles. Investors in value and growth styles
react to past returns, as well as to the risk of the two styles. The existence of investors who
switch between styles has implications not only for asset returns, but also for characteristics of
the representative investor in the two styles. Our evidence on the time series behavior of risk
preferences of value and growth index investors is consistent with the presence of style switching
behavior. This finding is also supported by the funds flow data, both at the aggregate level and at
the level of flows to individual mutual funds.
Fifth, we construct trading strategies in value and growth index options markets. We
show that trading with the two clienteles—by selling options on the growth index and investing
in options on the value indices—generate positive returns. Taken together, the evidence is
consistent with the existence of investor clienteles with differential attitudes toward risk.

42

References

Aït-Sahalia, Y. and Lo, A., “Nonparametric estimation of state-price densities implicit in
financial asset prices,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 53, 1998, pp. 499-548.
Aït-Sahalia, Y. and Lo, A., “Nonparametric risk management and implied risk-aversion,”
Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 94, 2000, pp. 9-51.
Bakshi, Gurdip, and Liuren Wu, 2006, “Investor Irrationality and the Nasdaq Bubble,” Working
paper, University of Maryland.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003, “Style Investing,” Journal of Financial
Economics 68, 161—199.
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2005, “Comovement,” Journal of
Financial Economics 75, 283–317.
Battalio, Robert, Brian Hatch, and Robert Jennings, 2004, “Toward a National Market System
for U.S. Exchange-listed Equity Options,” Journal of Finance 59, 933—962.
Blackburn, Douglas, and Andrey D. Ukhov, 2005, “Equilibrium Risk Premia for Risk Seekers,”
Working paper, Indiana University.
Bliss, Robert R., and Nikolaos Panigirtzoglou, 2002, “Testing the stability of implied probability
density functions,” Journal of Banking and Finance 26, 381—422.
Bliss, Robert R., and Nikolaos Panigirtzoglou, 2004, Option-Implied Risk Aversion Estimates,
Journal of Finance 59, 407—446.
Boyd, J., and Jagannathan, R., 1994, Ex-dividend price behavior of common stocks: Fitting some
pieces of the puzzle, Review of Financial Studies 7, 711—741.
Breeden, Douglas T., and Robert H. Litzenberger, 1978, Prices of state-contingent claims
implicit in options prices, Journal of Business 51, 621—651.
Brown, S.J., W.N. Goetzmann, T Hiraki, N. Shirishi, M. Watanabe, 2003, Investor Sentiment in
Japanese and US Daily Mutual Fund Flows, NBER working paper #9470.
Coval, Joshua D., and Tyler Shumway, 2001, Expected option returns, Journal of Finance 56,
983—1009.
Coval, Joshua D., and Tyler Shumway, 2005, Do Behavioral Biases Affect Prices? Journal of
Finance 60, 983—1009.

43

Florentsen B., Rydqvist K., 2002, Ex-day behavior when investors and professional traders
assume reverse roles: The case of Danish lottery bonds, Journal of Financial Intermediation 11,
152—175.
Friedman, M., and L. Savage, 1948, The Utility Analysis of Choices Involving Risk, Journal of
Political Economy, 56, 279—304.
Goetzmann, William N., and Massimo Massa, 2002, “Daily Momentum and Contrarian Behavior
of Index Fund Investors,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37, 375—389.
Goetzmann, William N., and Massimo Massa, 2003, “Disposition Matters: Volume, Volatility,
and Price Impact of a Behavioral Bias,” NBER Working Paper 9499.
Green, Richard C., Kristian Rydqvist, 1997, The Valuation of Non-Systematic Risks and the
Pricing of Swedish Lottery Bonds, Review of Financial Studies 10, 447—480.
Grinblatt, Mark and Bing Han, 2005, “Prospect Theory, Mental Accounting, and Momentum,”
Journal of Financial Economics 78.
Hakansson, Nils H., 1970, “Friedman-Savage Utility Functions Consistent with Risk Aversion,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84, 472—487.
Jackwerth, Jens, 2000, Recovering risk aversion from option prices and realized returns, Review
of Financial Studies 13, 433—451.
Jackwerth, Jens, and Mark Rubinstein, 1996, Recovering probability distributions from
contemporary security prices, Journal of Finance 51, 1611—1631.
Jarrow, Robert A., 1988, “Preferences, Continuity, and the Arbitrage Pricing Theory,” Review of
Financial Studies, 1, pp. 159—172.
Jones, M.C., Marron, J.S., Sheather, S.J. (1996), “A Brief Survey of Bandwidth Selection for
Density Estimation,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91, 401-407.
Jurek, Jakub W., and Luis M. Viceira, 2006, “Optimal Value and Growth Tilts in Long-Horizon
Portfolios,” Working paper, Harvard University.
Kahneman, D., and A. Tversky, 1979, “Prospect theory of decisions under risk,” Econometrica,
47, 263—291.
Kalay, A., 1982, The ex-dividend day behavior of stock prices: A re-examination of the clientele
effect, Journal of Finance 37, 1059—1070.
Kliger, Doron, and Ori Levy, 2002, Risk Preferences Heterogeneity: Evidence from Asset
Markets, European Finance Review 6, 277—290.

44

Kumar, Alok and Charles M.C. Lee, 2005, “Retail Investor Sentiment and Return
Comovements,” Journal of Finance, 61(5), 2451-2486.
Kwang, Ng Yew, 1965, “Why do People Buy Lottery Tickets? Choices Involving Risk and the
Indivisibility of Expenditure,” Journal of Political Economy, 73, 530—535.
Lamont, Owen A. and Richard H. Thaler, 2003, “Can the Market Add and Subtract? Mispricing
in Tech Stock Carve-Outs.” Journal of Political Economy, 111, pp. 227–68.
Markowitz, Harry, 1952, “The Utility of Wealth,” Journal of Political Economy, 60, 151—158.
Mayhew, Stewart, and Vassil Mihov, 2004, “How Do Exchanges Select Stocks for Option
Listing?” Journal of Finance 59, 447—471.
Post, Thierry, and Haim Levy, 2005, Does Risk Seeking Drive Stock Prices? A Stochastic
Dominance Analysis of Aggregate Investor Preferences and Beliefs, Review of Financial Studies
18, 925—953.
Rosenberg, Joshua V., and Robert F. Engle, 2002, Empirical pricing kernels, Journal of
Financial Economics 64, 341—372.
Tversky, A., and D. Kahneman, 1992, “Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative representation
of uncertainty,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 297—323.

45

Appendix A
Proof (Reaction to volatility). The assumption is maintained that a S ≤ aG < aV . The objective is
to show that the change in risk aversion of the representative investor in the growth index is
smaller than the change in risk aversion of the representative investor in the value index, in
absolute value, da R ,G < da R ,V . Using the expression for the change, we need to show:

aG ⋅ a S ⋅ (aG − a S )

(a

nG + a G n S ,G )

2

S

[n

S ,G

aV ⋅ a S ⋅ (aV − a S )

⋅ dnG − nG ⋅ dn S ,G ] <

(a

nV + aV n S ,V )

2

S

[n

S ,V

⋅ dnV − nV ⋅ dn S ,V ] .

(A1)

We maintain the assumptions that the two styles are equal in size, x ≡ nG = nV ; there is an equal
number of “volatility chasers” originally invested in the two styles, y ≡ n S ,G = n S ,V ; when
volatility increases, the changes in the numbers of investors in the two styles will be equal, too:
dnG = dnV , and dn S ,G = dn S ,V (we analyze relative impact on risk aversion of representative
agent in a style, holding all else equal). Then (A1) becomes,
aG ⋅ a S ⋅ (aG − a S ) aV ⋅ a S ⋅ (aV − a S )
a ⋅ (aG − a S ) aV ⋅ (aV − a S )
⇔ G
<
<
2
2
(a S nG + aG nS ,G ) (a S nV + aV nS ,V )
(a S x + aG y )2 (a S x + aV y )2
aG ⋅ (aG − a S )(a S x + aV y ) < aV ⋅ (aV − a S )(a S x + aG y )
2

Let G ≡ aG ⋅ (aG − a S ) , V = aV ⋅ (aV − a S ) . Simplifying, obtain

[

]

[

(A2)

2

]

G ⋅ a S2 x 2 + aG a S aV 2aG xy − aV y 2 < V ⋅ a S2 x 2 + aG a S aV 2aV xy − aG y 2
(A3)
Since G < V , the sufficient condition for (A3) to hold, and for the main result to obtain, is that
aG a S aV 2a G xy − aV y 2 ≤ aG a S aV 2aV xy − aG y 2
The above always holds for y = 0 . Hence, assume y ≠ 0 and simplify, obtaining,
2aG x − aV y ≤ 2aV x − aG y .
Rearranging,
2aG x + aG y ≤ 2aV x + aV y ⇔ aG (2 x + y ) ≤ aV (2 x + y ) .
The last inequality holds because aG < aV . Q.E.D.

[

]

[

]

Proof (Asymmetric impact on growth and value). The assumption is maintained that
a S ≤ aG < aV . Style switchers leave one style and enter the other, dn S ,G = −dn S ,V , and

dnG = dnV = 0 so that the switchers are the ones driving the changes. The objective is to show
that the change in risk aversion of the representative investor in the growth index is smaller in
magnitude (in absolute value) than the change in risk aversion of the representative investor in
the value index, da R ,G < da R ,V .
To show this, observe that (A2) holds when dn S ,G = −dn S ,V , and dnG = dnV = 0 . The arguments
above apply. Q.E.D.

46

Table I
Description of Growth and Value Indices Used in the Study
Index

Ticker

Data Range

Russell Midcap Growth Index
RDG Index measures the performance of those Russell Midcap companies
with higher price-to-book ratios and higher forecasted growth values.

RDG

December 2003 –
December 2004

Russell Midcap Value Index
RMV Index measures the performance of those Russell Midcap companies
with lower price-to-book ratios and lower forecasted growth values.

RMV

December 2003 –
December 2004

SGX

January 1996 –
December 1998

SVX

January 1996 –
December 1998

RLG

November 2003 –
December 2004

RLV

November 2003 –
December 2004

Russell 2000 Growth Index
RUO Index measures the performance of those Russell 2000 companies with
higher price-to-book ratios and higher forecasted growth values.

RUO

December 2003 –
July 2005

Russell 2000 Value Index
RUJ Index measures the performance of those Russell 2000 companies with
lower price-to-book ratios and lower forecasted growth values.

RUJ

December 2003 –
July 2005

RAG

December 2003 –
July 2005

RAV

December 2003 –
July 2005

The Standard & Poor's Barra Growth Index
SGX Index is a capitalization-weighted index of all the stocks in the
Standard & Poor's 500 that have high price-to-book ratios. The index was
developed with a base value of 35 as of December 31, 1974. The index is
rebalanced semi-annually on January 1 and July 1. It is designed so that
approximately 50% of the SPX market capitalization is in the Growth Index.
The Standard & Poor's Barra Value Index
SVX Index is a capitalization-weighted index of all the stocks in the
Standard & Poor's 500 that have low price-to-book ratios. The index was
developed with a base value of 35 as of December 31, 1974. The index is
rebalanced semi-annually on January 1 and July 1. It is designed so that
approximately 50% of the SPX market capitalization is in the Value Index.
Russell 1000 Growth Index
RLG Index measures the performance of those Russell 1000 companies with
higher price-to-book ratios and higher forecasted growth values. The index
was developed with a base value of 200 as of August 31, 1992.
Russell 1000 Value Index
RLV measures the performance of those Russell 1000 companies with lower
price-to-book ratios and lower forecasted growth values. The index was
developed with a base value of 200 as of August 31, 1992.

Russell 3000 Growth Index
RAG Index measures the performance of those Russell 3000 Index
companies with higher price-to-book ratios and higher forecasted growth
values.
Russell 3000 Value Index
RAV Index measures the performance of those Russell 3000 Index
companies with lower price-to-book ratios and lower forecasted growth
values.

Table II
Performance Summary Statistic
Average Return is annualized average monthly return for the period; Standard Deviation is
annualized standard deviation of monthly returns; Sharpe Ratio is the ratio of excess return on the
portfolio to the portfolio standard deviation,

Sp =

rp − r f

σp

.

The risk-free rate is the average monthly Treasury Bill rate over the corresponding period. The
risk-free rate equals 3.79% for the period 19950228 – 20050305, it equals 4.08% for the period
19900131 – 20050305; it equals 3.708% for the period 19920901 – 20050305. Total Payoff is the
value at the end of the period of one dollar invested in the index at the beginning of the period
(assuming dividend reinvestment).

Dow Jones High Yield 10 (MUT)
19900131 - 20050831
Dow Jones Industrial (DJX)
19900131 – 20050831
S&P 100 (OEX)
19900131 - 20050831
S&P 500 (SPX)
19900131 - 20050831
Russell Midcap Growth (RDG)
19950228 - 20050831
Russell Midcap Value (RMV)
19950228 - 20050831
S&P Barra Growth (SGX)
19900131 - 20050831
S&P Barra Value (SVX)
19900131 – 20050831
S&P Barra Growth (SGX)
19950228 - 20050831
S&P Barra Value (SVX)
19950228 - 20050831
Russell 1000 Growth (RLG)
19920930 - 20050831
Russell 1000 Value (RLV)
19920930 - 20050831
Russell 2000 Growth (RUO)
19950228 - 20050831
Russell 2000 Value (RUJ)
19950228 – 20050831
Russell 3000 Growth (RAG)
19950228 – 20050831
Russell 3000 Value (RAV)
19950228 - 20050831

Average Standard
Return Deviation
10.47% 15.71%

Sharpe
Ratio
0.41

Total
Payoff
4.23

12.02%

14.63%

0.54

5.51

10.53%

15.03%

0.43

4.33

11.13%

14.42%

0.49

4.83

12.50%

24.00%

0.36

2.75

15.35%

14.32%

0.81

4.51

10.39%

15.97%

0.40

4.15

8.33%

14.61%

0.29

3.10

11.59%

16.91%

0.46

2.92

9.62%

15.75%

0.37

2.41

8.89%

17.77%

0.29

2.57

10.77%

13.29%

0.53

3.60

16.32%

26.56%

0.47

3.84

17.23%

15.69%

0.86

5.37

9.68%

19.50%

0.30

2.27

13.88%

14.77%

0.68

3.84

Table III
Difference in Risk Aversion for Five Growth-Value Index Pairs
We use prices of options on five pairs of growth and value indices to estimate risk aversion across
wealth, daily. The five index pairs are: Russell Midcap Growth (RDG) and Value (RMV) for
December 2003—December 2004; The Standard & Poor's Barra Growth (SGX) and Value
(SVX) indices for January 1996—December 1998; Russell 1000 Growth (RLG) and Value
(RLV) indices for November 2003—December 2004; Russell 2000 Growth (RUO) and Value
(RUJ) for December 2003—July 2005; Russell 3000 Growth (RAG) and Value (RAV) for
December 2003—July 2005. A wealth level of one corresponds to zero return on the index. Riskneutral probability distribution is obtained from index options. On each date we obtain risk
aversion estimates for wealth levels ranging from 0.960 to 1.000 with step size of 0.001 (we use
different wealth intervals for different index pairs depending on option data availability, but the
step size is the same throughout). Using the Satterthwaite difference in means test, which
accounts for unequal variances, and the Brown-Mood non-parametric difference in medians test,
we test if the mean and median risk aversions of the two representative agents are equal. We
perform the test for each wealth level.
Wealth

Growth

Value

Mean

Mean

Satterthwaite
Mean Test
t-value
p-value

Brown-Mood
Median Test
Z-value
p-value

Largest
RA

Panel A: Russell Midcap Growth (RDG) and Value (RMV) Indices
0.960
0.965
0.970
0.975
0.980
0.985
0.990
0.995
1.000

-10.09
-10.98
-11.84
-12.59
-12.97
-13.23
-13.4
-12.48
-11.47

9.58
11.15
9.48
6.95
4.31
1.67
-1.42
-0.22
-6.06

-22.51
-25.72
-39.85
-49.55
-24.47
-13.72
-8.63
-7.76
-1.38

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
0.399

12.14
11.13
10.10
8.55
7.29
5.92
5.38
3.07
1.42

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
0.001
0.078

Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value

Panel B: S&P Barra Growth (SGX) and Value (SVX) Indices
0.980
0.985
0.990
0.995
1.000
1.005
1.010
1.015
1.020

6.23
3.03
1.05
1.60
2.46
2.52
1.05
-1.58
-2.95

-2.34
7.36
13.77
16.78
19.82
19.92
16.78
8.67
2.27

13.01
-7.13
-22.22
-26.89
-31.69
-30.84
-27.62
-17.76
-8.37

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001

7.87
3.03
14.57
17.17
17.63
15.91
17.28
12.24
6.87

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001

Growth
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value

Table III—Continued
Wealth

Growth

Value

Mean

Mean

Satterthwaite
Mean Test
t-value
p-value

Brown-Mood
Median Test
Z-value
p-value

Largest
RA

Panel C: Russell 1000 Growth (RLG) and Value (RLV) Indices
0.970
0.975
0.980
0.985
0.990
0.995
1.000
1.005
1.010

-14.48
-16.75
-18.86
-20.49
-21.70
-20.77
-18.03
-13.82
-8.852

3.48
3.32
1.79
-1.35
-5.38
-8.78
-10.62
-12.13
-12.62

-30.99
-37.69
-35.44
-31.36
-27.74
-25.33
-17.31
-4.72
10.98

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001

-19.40
-21.18
-21.12
-21.14
-21.49
20.63
15.29
2.90
-5.11

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
0.0018
<.0001

Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Growth

Panel D: Russell 2000 Growth (RUO) and Value (RUJ) Indices
0.980
0.985
0.990
0.995
1.000
1.005
1.010
1.015
1.020

-9.52
-9.14
-8.27
-7.15
-6.06
-4.82
-3.78
-2.81
-0.76

5.48
2.79
0.80
1.50
3.01
4.58
5.05
6.01
5.24

-19.17
-18.42
-18.71
-23.02
-21.81
-27.21
-29.08
-26.88
-19.34

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001

10.71
10.94
10.78
12.20
12.49
12.37
11.68
10.21
9.11

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001

Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value

Panel E: Russell 3000 Growth (RAG) and Value (RAV) Indices
0.980
0.985
0.990
0.995
1.000
1.005
1.010
1.015
1.020

-14.56
-14.95
-15.67
-15.39
-14.15
-12.25
-10.02
-6.40
-2.60

2.72
5.02
4.09
0.64
-2.55
-3.62
-2.93
-1.87
1.46

-24.75
-25.39
-25.73
-29.76
-20.08
-16.2
-15.97
-7.51
-3.65

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
0.0004

15.10
14.69
13.33
13.12
12.24
10.62
9.83
5.17
1.83

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001

Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value

Table IV
Time Series Evidence: Autocorrelations in Estimated Risk Preference Parameters
The table reports autocorrelations in risk aversion coefficients estimated for investors in the S&P Barra Growth
(SGX) and Value (SVX) Indices. For each index, Arrow-Pratt measure of risk aversion is estimated using options
on the index and index returns. The procedure produces monthly risk aversion estimates. Subscript G denotes
growth index and subscript V denotes value index. p-values are shown below correlation estimates. Panel A:
autocorrelation in risk aversion. Panel B: Autocorrelation in market-adjusted risk aversion, computed as the
difference in value or growth index risk aversion (at w = 0.98) and risk aversion for S&P 500 Index,
X G / V ,t = AG / V ,t − AS & P 500,t .
Two adjustments are reported: using S&P 500 risk aversion estimates for wealth w = 0.98 and for w = 1.00. Panel
C: risk aversion for S&P 100 Index is used for market adjustment.
Panel A: Autocorrelations in Risk Aversion
k=

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

corr ( AG ,t , AG ,t − k )

corr ( AV ,t , AV ,t − k )

0.82
(0.000)
0.69
(0.000)
0.63
(0.000)
0.61
(0.001)
0.49
(0.009)
0.29
(0.151)
0.16
(0.443)
0.02
(0.922)
-0.19
(0.392)
-0.46
(0.030)
-0.64
(0.002)
-0.69
(0.001)

0.82
(0.000)
0.71
(0.000)
0.63
(0.000)
0.63
(0.000)
0.69
(0.000)
0.61
(0.001)
0.54
(0.006)
0.34
(0.118)
0.21
(0.339)
0.17
(0.461)
0.07
(0.783)
-0.02
(0.933)

Table IV—Continued
Panel B: Autocorrelations in Risk Aversion Adjusted with the Market

k=1
k=2
k=3
k=4
k=5
k=6
k=7
k=8
k=9
k = 10
k = 11
k = 12

corr ( X G ,t , X G ,t − k )

corr ( X V ,t , X V ,t − k )

corr ( X G ,t , X G ,t − k )

corr ( X V ,t , X V ,t − k )

S&P 500 (w)
w = 0.98 w = 1.00
(1)
(2)

S&P 500 (w)
w = 0.98 w = 1.00
(3)
(4)

S&P 100 (w)
w = 0.98 w = 1.00
(5)
(6)

S&P 100 (w)
w = 0.98 w = 1.00
(7)
(8)

0.45
(0.012)
-0.05
(0.796)
-0.10
(0.620)
0.20
(0.306)
0.37
(0.059)
0.24
(0.243)
-0.18
(0.402)
-0.08
(0.721)
-0.10
(0.655)
-0.27
(0.218)
-0.37
(0.098)
-0.39
(0.091)

0.88
(0.000)
0.85
(0.000)
0.81
(0.000)
0.74
(0.000)
0.74
(0.000)
0.63
(0.001)
0.55
(0.005)
0.42
(0.044)
0.33
(0.131)
0.32
(0.164)
0.28
(0.229)
0.19
(0.449)

0.30
(0.102)
0.02
(0.905)
0.15
(0.436)
0.20
(0.300)
0.14
(0.486)
0.19
(0.344)
-0.15
(0.472)
-0.38
(0.067)
-0.19
(0.377)
0.25
(0.272)
0.03
(0.888)
-0.051
(0.832)

0.81
(0.000)
0.76
(0.000)
0.71
(0.000)
0.68
(0.000)
0.60
(0.001)
0.53
(0.007)
0.41
(0.045)
0.23
(0.287)
0.20
(0.372)
0.20
(0.385)
0.05
(0.847)
-0.09
(0.707)

0.58
(0.001)
0.42
(0.020)
0.48
(0.008)
0.31
(0.104)
0.14
(0.494)
0.03
(0.890)
-0.09
(0.684)
-0.17
(0.430)
-0.38
(0.073)
-0.54
(0.01)
-0.60
(0.004)
-0.52
(0.018)

0.75
(0.000)
0.60
(0.001)
0.60
(0.001)
0.62
(0.001)
0.66
(0.000)
0.71
(0.000)
0.60
(0.002)
0.47
(0.022)
0.46
(0.033)
0.38
(0.091)
0.30
(0.195)
0.30
(0.217)

0.24
(0.187)
-0.02
(0.931)
0.05
(0.804)
0.17
(0.398)
0.07
(0.730)
-0.22
(0.274)
-0.38
(0.062)
-0.13
(0.542)
0.05
(0.816)
0.00
(0.999)
-0.28
(0.223)
0.04
(0.864)

0.85
(0.000)
0.77
(0.000)
0.70
(0.000)
0.70
(0.000)
0.68
(0.000)
0.70
(0.000)
0.61
(0.001)
0.49
(0.019)
0.36
(0.097)
0.33
(0.147)
0.36
(0.118)
0.34
(0.154)

Table V
Changes in Risk Preferences of Growth and Value Investors

The table reports regression results for the changes in risk aversion of growth (SGX) and value (SVX) investors. Growth index is S&P
Barra Growth Index and the value index is S&P Barra Value Index. The dependent variable is the change in risk aversion (for a given
wealth level) ∆RAG ,t = RAG ,t − RAG ,t −1 . Explanatory variables: RETG ,t −1 is the lag of the return on the growth index (SGX); RETV ,t −1 is the
lag of the return on the value index (SVX); RAG ,t −1 and RAV ,t −1 are the lags of the risk aversion level; t-statistics are reported below coefficient
estimates.

∆RAG ,t

Panel A
= RAG ,t − RAG ,t −1

Panel B

∆RAV ,t = RAV ,t − RAV ,t −1

Intercept

0.331
0.34

1.346
1.19

0.574
0.60

1.687
1.51

Intercept -0.858
-0.58

-0.833
-0.57

-0.961
-0.63

-0.944
-0.62

RETG ,t −1

-99.57**
-2.34

-92.11**
-2.21

-106.55**
-2.57

-94.74**
-2.34

RETG ,t −1 117.60*

98.98
1.52

104.83
1.58

93.79
1.38

RETV ,t −1

136.31***
2.67

127.25**
2.55

146.42***
2.95

133.04***
2.75

RETV ,t −1 -140.26*

-121.93
-1.55

-130.52
-1.63

-119.01
-1.46

-0.175 *
-1.75

RAV ,t −1

-0.134
-1.18

-0.202
-1.18

-0.103
-0.59

∆RAV ,t −1

17.9%
2.05
30

23.9%
2.07
30

AdjR2
D.W.
N Obs.

-0.162
-1.65

RAG ,t −1
∆RAG ,t −1
AdjR2
D.W.
N Obs.

14.5%
2.12
31

19.5%
1.98
31

1.85

-1.81

5.2%
2.27
30

6.5%
2.11
30

-0.117
-0.94
-0.166
-0.84

-0.096
-0.45

3.9%
2.01
29

3.4%
1.99
29

Table VI
Return Variances and Changes in Risk Preferences of Growth and Value Investors

The table reports regression results for the changes in risk aversion of growth (SGX) and value
(SVX) investors. Growth index is S&P Barra Growth Index and the value index is S&P Barra
Value Index. The dependent variable is the change in risk aversion (for a given wealth level)
∆RAG / V ,t = RAG / V ,t − RAG / V ,t −1 . Panel A reports results for growth index and Panel B for the
value index. Explanatory variables: RETG ,t −1 is the lag of the return on the growth index (SGX);
RETV ,t −1 is the lag of the return on the value index (SVX); RAG ,t −1 and RAV ,t −1 are the lags of the risk
aversion level; IVCG / V ,t −1 is implied volatility for call options on the growth (G) or value (V) index;

S G / V ,t is annualized standard deviation of daily returns on the corresponding index for month t. t-statistics
are reported below coefficient estimates.

Panel A: Growth
Intercept

3.762
0.80

4.627
1.45

-0.772
-0.14

3.143
0.89

7.084
1.53

5.695*
1.88

3.478
0.59

4.297
1.18

RETG ,t −1

-90.3**
-2.02

-91.4**
-2.16

-96.9**
-2.20

-90.1**
-2.13

-89.9**
-2.13

-98.6**
-2.46

-91.78**
-2.17

-94.99**
-2.33

RETV ,t −1

126.4**
2.37

113.5**
2.15

132.1**
2.53

118.6**
2.23

129.0**
2.58

121.1**
2.43

130.15**
2.60

123.50**
2.45

IVCG ,t −1

-15.71
-0.74

10.66
0.39
-25.87
-1.42

S G ,t −1

-12.35
-0.54
-0.195
-1.49

RAG ,t −1

-29.57
-1.44

13.2%
2.14
31

17.5%
2.16
31

16.9%
1.95
31

-30.74*
-1.77

-0.121
-0.97

∆RAG ,t −1
AdjR2
D.W.
N Obs.

-9.06
-0.31

17.3%
2.02
31

-18.53
-0.75
-0.143
-0.99

-0.100
-0.71

-0.225
-1.33

-0.246
-1.47

-0.128
-0.66

-0.172
-0.87

21.2%
2.12
30

24.1%
2.13
30

21.1%
2.08
30

22.6%
2.08
30

Table VI – Continued

Panel B: Value
Intercept

1.161
0.22

9.69**
2.25

12.61*
1.78

12.40***
2.98

0.989
0.17

10.24**
2.34

12.800
1.57

12.33***
2.88

RETG ,t −1

120.4
1.85*

132.6**
2.28

86.81
1.40

104.2*
1.89

107.0
1.57

116.0**
1.95

86.70
1.33

98.24*
1.71

RETV ,t −1

-142.71*
-1.81

-197.2***
-2.67

-107.9
-1.44

-179.9***
-2.61

-132.3
-1.62

-186.7**
-2.50

-107.7
-1.37

-176.4**
-2.48

IVCV ,t −1

-10.08
-0.39

-66.93*
-1.94
-74.38**
-2.58

SV ,t −1

-93.2***
-3.33
-0.355**
-2.26

RAV ,t −1

-9.64
-0.35

2.1%
2.29
30

21.5%
2.23
30

15.5%
2.10
30

-78.9***
-2.70

-0.232**
-2.31

∆RAV ,t −1
AdjR2
D.W.
N Obs.

-67.8*
-1.71

32.7%
2.09
30

-93.4***
-3.25
-0.357*
-1.93

-0.210*
-1.92

-0.173
-0.86

-0.231
-1.29

-0.001
-0.01

-0.116
-0.65

0.4%
2.01
29

23.2%
1.85
29

10.6%
2.09
29

30.9%
1.92
29

Table VII
Autocorrelations in Mutual Fund Flows
The table reports autocorrelations in fund flows to growth and value mutual funds. The aggregate monthly data is
from TrimTabs for the period 02-1999 through 11-1006. The aggregate data covers flows to mutual funds in growth
and value Morningstar categories. Panel A reports autocorrelations in aggregate flow data for the whole period and
for two sub-periods. Panel B reports results for Kemper large capitalization growth and value funds, using fundlevel data. Panel B reports autocorrelations in flows to three Oppenheimer mutual funds, using fund-level data for
two growth funds and one value fund. Subscript G denotes growth and subscript V denotes value. p-values are
shown below correlation estimates.
Panel A: Autocorrelations in Aggregate Flows to Growth and Value Mutual Funds
Full Sample: 021999–112006

corr (FG / V ,t , FG / V ,t − k )

Sub-sample: 021999—122002

corr (FG / V ,t , FG / V ,t −k )

Sub-sample: 012003—112006

corr (FG / V ,t , FG / V ,t −k )

k=

Growth

Value

Growth

Value

Growth

Value

1

0.54
(0.000)
0.36
(0.001)
0.27
(0.009)
0.12
(0.263)
0.10
(0.340)
0.06
(0.569)
-0.001
(0.996)
-0.06
(0.573)
-0.13
(0.245)
-0.02
(0.853)
-0.17
(0.114)
-0.17
(0.127)
-0.24
(0.029)
-0.34
(0.002)
-0.33
(0.003)
-0.25
(0.030)
-0.29
(0.009)
-0.25
(0.029)

0.67
(0.000)
0.55
(0.000)
0.54
(0.000)
0.48
(0.000)
0.53
(0.000)
0.47
(0.000)
0.42
(0.000)
0.37
(0.001)
0.38
(0.000)
0.45
(0.000)
0.33
(0.002)
0.27
(0.013)
0.21
(0.057)
0.19
(0.091)
0.17
(0.133)
0.22
(0.054)
0.13
(0.272)
0.05
(0.670)

0.55
(0.000)
0.33
(0.029)
0.19
(0.222)
-0.01
(0.973)
0.03
(0.844)
-0.10
(0.549)
-0.17
(0.287)
-0.17
(0.297)
-0.11
(0.499)
0.008
(0.965)
-0.146
(0.396)
-0.17
(0.326)
-0.27
(0.121)
-0.45
(0.009)
-0.41
(0.018)
-0.36
(0.048)
-0.45
(0.012)
-0.26
(0.167)

0.60
(0.000)
0.44
(0.002)
0.45
(0.002)
0.37
(0.016)
0.49
(0.001)
0.44
(0.004)
0.39
(0.014)
0.31
(0.06)
0.51
(0.001)
0.65
(0.000)
0.44
(0.007)
0.32
(0.059)
0.23
(0.181)
0.23
(0.203)
0.28
(0.127)
0.34
(0.064)
0.10
(0.593)
0.09
(0.657)

0.51
(0.000)
0.43
(0.003)
0.42
(0.005)
0.32
(0.039)
0.20
(0.197)
0.22
(0.175)
0.07
(0.656)
0.04
(0.800)
-0.07
(0.658)
0.12
(0.462)
-0.02
(0.886)
0.06
(0.722)
0.01
(0.971)
-0.03
(0.879)
0.01
(0.977)
0.05
(0.805)
-0.05
(0.780)
-0.06
(0.767)

0.64
(0.000)
0.58
(0.000)
0.50
(0.001)
0.49
(0.001)
0.34
(0.026)
0.30
(0.059)
0.22
(0.167)
0.22
(0.184)
0.11
(0.510)
0.14
(0.393)
0.10
(0.571)
0.26
(0.137)
0.08
(0.635)
0.09
(0.604)
0.01
(0.977)
0.16
(0.378)
0.07
(0.703)
-0.08
(0.664)

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

Table VII – Continued
The panels report autocorrelations in flows in growth and value mutual funds. Panel B: Growth funds are Kemper
large capitalization growth funds (3, 112, 12, 203, 303, 503). Value funds are Kemper large capitalization value
funds (86, 286, 386, 586). For growth and value funds we compute the net value traded (net cash flow) over the
month starting January 1995 and ending December 1999. Panel C: Growth 1 is Oppenheimer Enterprise (a large
capitalization growth fund); Growth 2 is Oppenheimer Growth fund (A & B share classes); Value fund is
Oppenheimer Quest Value fund (share classes A and B); net flows are computed over the period February 1998
through February 2001. Subscript G denotes growth and subscript V denotes value. p-values are shown below
correlation estimates.
Panel B: Kemper Funds
Growth
Value

k
=
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

Growth 1

Panel C: Oppenheimer Funds
Growth 2

corr (FG ,t , FG ,t − k )

corr (FV ,t , FV ,t − k )

0.42
(0.012)
0.56
(0.001)
0.37
(0.034)
0.49
(0.005)
0.34
(0.060)
0.34
(0.067)
0.25
(0.196)
0.24
(0.218)
0.39
(0.044)
0.01
(0.953)
0.04
(0.862)
-0.15
(0.490)
-0.18
(0.412)
-0.24
(0.280)
-0.02
(0.933)
0.02
(0.945)
0.15
(0.545)
-0.06
(0.799)

0.82
(0.000)
0.76
(0.000)
0.68
(0.000)
0.63
(0.000)
0.53
(0.002)
0.51
(0.004)
0.39
(0.037)
0.33
(0.082)
0.21
(0.299)
0.12
(0.558)
0.08
(0.702)
0.20
(0.346)
0.16
(0.472)
0.15
(0.503)
-0.10
(0.663)
-0.27
(0.249)
-0.31
(0.190)
-0.32
(0.190)

corr (FG ,t , FG ,t − k )

corr (FV ,t , FV ,t − k )

corr (FG ,t , FG ,t − k )

0.27
(0.038)
0.44
(0.001)
0.41
(0.002)
0.15
(0.259)
0.34
(0.011)
0.24
(0.075)
0.22
(0.107)
-0.05
(0.704)
-0.01
(0.925)
-0.21
(0.149)
-0.03
(0.819)
-0.25
(0.092)
-0.31
(0.036)
-0.46
(0.001)
-0.28
(0.070)
-0.32
(0.034)
-0.33
(0.032)
-0.13
(0.411)

0.72
(0.000)
0.61
(0.000)
0.46
(0.001)
0.37
(0.009)
0.43
(0.003)
0.27
(0.074)
0.06
(0.713)
0.23
(0.127)
0.36
(0.017)
0.31
(0.048)
0.16
(0.330)
0.04
(0.809)
0.09
(0.586)
0.10
(0.550)
0.14
(0.412)
0.25
(0.147)
0.18
(0.295)
0.20
(0.260)

0.51
(0.002)
0.54
(0.001)
0.33
(0.064)
0.09
(0.607)
0.06
(0.763)
-0.07
(0.711)
-0.07
(0.721)
-0.12
(0.556)
-0.05
(0.786)
-0.21
(0.303)
-0.32
(0.125)
-0.39
(0.059)
-0.68
(0.000)
-0.72
(0.000)
-0.64
(0.002)
-0.50
(0.025)
-0.24
(0.323)
-0.08
(0.750)

Value

Table VIII
Mutual Fund Flows to Growth and Value Funds
The table reports regression results for fund flows to growth and value mutual funds. Fund flow data is
from TrimTabs for the period from February 1999 through November 2006. Panel A reports results for
flows to growth mutual funds. Panel B reports results for flows to value funds. Panel C reports the results
of regressions of the switching factor, PC S , on returns and risks. Lagged values are included to control
for serial correlation, XFLG / V ,t is flow to the growth/value funds in month t . RETG ,t is return on the
growth funds computed for month t as the average of daily returns in the month; We use two measures of
risk: S is the standard deviation of daily returns on the growth or value style in a given month; r 2 is the
average of squared daily returns in a given month. t-statistics are reported below coefficient estimates.

Intercept
XFLG ,t −1
RETG ,t −1
RETG ,t − 2
RETV ,t −1
RETV ,t − 2

144.8
1.58
0.450***
4.55
65297**
2.12
61363**
1.93
-166036***
-3.13
7073
0.13

Panel A: Flow to Growth Funds
499.2*
302.9**
1.96
2.13
0.614***
0.597***
6.63
6.49

-25381
-1.27
24354
1.21
-38967*
-1.79
-5169
-0.24

S G ,t −1
S G ,t − 2
SV ,t −1
S V ,t − 2

-467859
-1.05
291053
0.66
-1448145**
-2.04
-184385
-0.26

rG2,t −1
rG2,t − 2
rV2,t −1
rV2,t − 2

AdjR2
D.W.
N.Obs.

250.7
0.94
0.487***
4.71
56089*
1.63
67332**
1.98
-167395***
-2.98
1867
0.03
-21327
-1.05
37447*
1.87
-20866
-0.96
-16485
-0.76

35.3%
2.14
90

30.9%
2.05
90

30.4%
2.10
90

187.6
1.28
0.480***
4.53
61714*
1.75
61883*
1.76
-161529***
-2.76
13084
0.24

-279059
-0.61
563015
1.27
-675308
-0.92
-475969
-0.66
36.0%
2.11
90

34.5%
2.15
90

Table VIII – Continued

Intercept
XFLG ,t −1
RETG ,t −1
RETG ,t − 2
RETV ,t −1
RETV ,t − 2

224.3**
1.98
0.709***
8.39
5146
0.15
22620
0.69
-9539
-0.17
82493
1.53

Panel B: Flow to Value Funds
807.4***
528.5***
2.98
3.27
0.687***
0.669***
8.51
8.52

-45635**
-2.42
25687
1.27
-47771**
-2.19
14668
0.70

S G ,t −1
S G ,t − 2
SV ,t −1
S V ,t − 2

-959779**
-2.26
390988
0.88
-1759785***
-2.52
380497
0.55

rG2,t −1
rG2,t − 2
rV2,t −1
rV2,t − 2

AdjR2
D.W.
N.Obs.

834.4***
2.53
0.670***
6.53
-57200
-1.59
18059
0.55
10884
0.20
26665
0.51
-56451***
-2.67
30920
1.47
-46609**
-2.07
20382
0.94

46.9%
2.36
90

53.7%
2.21
90

52.4%
2.24
90

536.1***
2.74
0.674***
6.83
-52271
-1.43
9222
0.27
27138
0.48
46515
0.88

-1130066***
-2.40
489668
1.05
-1863858***
-2.54
497910
0.69
54.2%
2.27
90

52.8
2.32
90

Table VIII – Continued

Intercept
PC S ,t −1
RETG ,t −1
RETG ,t − 2
RETV ,t −1
RETV ,t − 2

-0.007
-0.15
0.778***
12.70
42.26***
2.64
9.51
0.59
-78.82***
-3.02
-0.26
-0.01

Panel C: Switching Factor
0.024
0.020
0.17
0.26
0.787***
0.797***
10.82
11.25

1.22
0.11
2.13
0.20
0.84
0.07
-9.89
-0.86

S G ,t −1
S G ,t − 2
SV ,t −1
S V ,t − 2

38.4
0.16
-36.9
-0.16
-29.0
-0.08
-292.2
-0.79

rG2,t −1
rG2,t − 2
rV2,t −1
rV2,t − 2

AdjR2
D.W.
N.Obs.

-0.193
-1.22
0.677***
8.36
66.25***
3.49
23.23
1.25
-96.80***
-3.57
7.51
0.28
12.36
1.07
9.84
0.94
7.67
0.69
-20.54*
-1.84

67.4%
2.30
90

63.3%
2.09
90

63.3%
2.11
90

-0.085
-1.00
0.699***
8.73
64.93***
3.38
20.52
1.07
-97.48***
-3.50
7.91
0.29

289.8
1.12
128.2
0.55
377.5
1.03
-554.0
-1.51
68.2%
2.29
90

67.7%
2.29
90

Table IX
Performance of Trading Strategies

The table reports results for several option trading strategies for each of the five growth and
value index pairs: Russell Midcap Growth (RDG) and Value (RMV); The Standard & Poor's
Barra Growth (SGX) and Value (SVX); Russell 1000 Growth (RLG) and Value (RLV); Russell
2000 Growth (RUO) and Value (RUJ); Russell 3000 Growth (RAG) and Value (RAV).
PORTFOLIO column reports the results for an equal-weighted portfolio of four pairs for which
data is available for the same time period (RDG/RMV, RLG/RLV, RUO/RUJ, RAG/RAV). Data
range is November 2003 through December 2004 for the last four index pairs, and January 1996
through January 1999 for SGX/SVX. Strategy 1 involves selling two call options on the growth
index with strikes nearest to the current index value, and investing the proceeds in two call
options on the corresponding value index with strike prices nearest to the current index value.
Strategy 2 involves selling a straddle on the growth index (a call and a put with the same strike)
with the strike closest to the current index value and buying a straddle on the corresponding
value index. All strategies require zero initial investment. Value is the ending dollar value of the
strategy; Average is the average payoff on the strategy across all periods; St. Dev. is the standard
deviation of payoffs across the period; Min. and Max. are the minimum and the maximum
payoffs, respectively, across the periods. All numbers are in dollars.

PORTFOLIO

SGX/SVX

RDG/RMV

RLG/RLV

RUO/RUJ

RAG/RAV

Strategy 1: Short Calls on Growth and Long Calls on Value
Dollar Value
Average payoff
St. Dev. Payoff
t-Statistic
Min.
Max.

81.68
6.28
10.06
2.25
-14.60
26.13

150.25
4.17
15.12
1.65
-26.43
43.52

70.50
5.42
12.18
1.61
-24.97
25.13

62.09
4.78
11.23
1.53
-22.84
28.33

103.84
7.99
12.67
2.27
-20.60
20.63

90.28
6.94
11.6
2.16
-17.63
30.91

Strategy 2: Short a Straddle on Growth and Long a Straddle on Value
Dollar Value
Average payoff
St. Dev. Payoff
t-Statistic
Min.
Max.

58.02
4.46
5.07
3.17
-2.97
11.92

107.73
2.99
10.27
1.75
-16.03
30.47

45.28
3.48
5.9
2.13
-5.64
11.77

27.99
2.15
6.46
1.20
-13.36
13.64

91.29
7.02
6.52
3.88
-4.12
15.91

67.50
5.19
6.07
3.08
-3.69
15.73

Table X
Performance of Trading Strategies with Transaction Costs

The table reports results for several option trading strategies for each of the five growth and
value index pairs: Russell Midcap Growth (RDG) and Value (RMV); The Standard & Poor's
Barra Growth (SGX) and Value (SVX); Russell 1000 Growth (RLG) and Value (RLV); Russell
2000 Growth (RUO) and Value (RUJ); Russell 3000 Growth (RAG) and Value (RAV).
PORTFOLIO column reports the results for an equal-weighted portfolio of four pairs for which
data is available for the same time period (RDG/RMV, RLG/RLV, RUO/RUJ, RAG/RAV). Data
range is November 2003 through December 2004 for the last four index pairs, and January 1996
through January 1999 for SGX/SVX. Strategy 1 involves selling two call options on the growth
index with strikes nearest to the current index value, and investing the proceeds in two call
options on the corresponding value index with strike prices nearest to the current index value.
Strategy 2 involves selling a straddle on the growth index (a call and a put with the same strike)
with the strike closest to the current index value and buying a straddle on the corresponding
value index. All strategies require zero initial investment. All buying is at ask prices and selling is at
bid. Value is the ending dollar value of the strategy; Average is the average payoff on the strategy
across all periods; St. Dev. is the standard deviation of payoffs across the period; Min. and Max.
are the minimum and the maximum payoffs, respectively, across the periods. All numbers are in
dollars.

PORTFOLIO

SGX/SVX

RDG/RMV

RLG/RLV

RUO/RUJ

RAG/RAV

Strategy 1: Short Calls on Growth and Long Calls on Value
Dollar Value
Average payoff
St. Dev. Payoff
t-Statistic
Min.
Max.

44.86
3.45
10.13
1.23
-19.64
22.57

64.44
1.79
13.74
0.78
-34.12
34.04

18.33
1.41
12.54
0.41
-31.11
21.29

30.39
2.34
10.24
0.82
-22.84
25.48

82.47
6.34
12.84
1.78
-22.19
17.67

48.27
3.71
11.67
1.15
-22.99
25.85

Strategy 2: Short a Straddle on Growth and Long a Straddle on Value
Dollar Value
Average payoff
St. Dev. Payoff
t-Statistic
Min.
Max.

29.80
2.29
5.12
1.61
-5.44
9.96

45.08
1.25
9.87
0.76
-20.60
21.98

4.93
0.38
5.82
0.24
-11.77
9.52

8.74
0.67
6.10
0.40
-13.54
12.11

74.03
5.69
6.67
3.08
-4.35
14.94

31.49
2.42
5.82
1.50
-5.28
12.12

Russell Midcap Growth (RDG) and Value (RMV)
0.84<X/S<1.12
20
15

Risk Aversion

10

RMV
5
Wealth
0
0.955
-5
-10

0.96

0.965

0.97

0.975

0.98

0.985

0.99

0.995

1

1.005

RDG

-15
-20

Figure 1. Risk aversion functions across wealth RDG and RMV indices
For the period from December 2003, through December 2004, we calculate the risk aversion
function across wealth for two indices, Russell Midcap Growth (RDG) and Russell Midcap
Value (RMV). A wealth level of one corresponds to zero return on the index. Risk-neutral
probability distribution is obtained from options on the indices. For each wealth level, the mean
risk aversion of daily estimates across the period is computed. In addition, the empirical standard
deviation is computed. The graph displays the means and the standard deviation bound.

S&P Barra Growth (SGX) and Value (SVX)
0.84<X/S<1.12
30
25
20
Risk Aversion

SVX
15
10
5
Wealth
0
0.975
-5
-10

0.98

0.985

0.99

0.995

1

1.005

1.01

1.015

1.02

1.025

SGX

-15

Figure 2. Risk aversion functions across wealth SGX and SVX indices
For the period from January 1996, through December 1998, we calculate the risk aversion
function across wealth for two indices, The Standard & Poor's Barra Growth Index (SGX) and
The Standard & Poor's Barra Value Index (SVX). A wealth level of one corresponds to zero
return on the index. Risk-neutral probability distribution is obtained from options on the indices.
For each wealth level, the mean risk aversion of daily estimates across the period is computed. In
addition, the empirical standard deviation is computed. The graph displays the means and the
standard deviation bound.

Russell 1000 Growth (RLG) and Value (RLV)
0.84<X/S<1.12
10
5

RLV

Wealth

Risk Aversion

0
0.965
-5

0.97

0.975

0.98

0.985

0.99

0.995

1

1.005

1.01

1.015

-10
-15

RLG

-20
-25
-30

Figure 3. Risk aversion functions across wealth RLG and RLV indices
For the period from November 2003, through December 2004, we calculate the risk aversion
function across wealth for two indices, Russell 1000 Growth Index (RLG) and Russell 1000
Value Index (RLV). A wealth level of one corresponds to zero return on the index. Risk-neutral
probability distribution is obtained from options on the indices. For each wealth level, the mean
risk aversion of daily estimates across the period is computed. In addition, the empirical standard
deviation is computed. The graph displays the means and the standard deviation bound.

Russell 2000 Growth (RUO) and Value (RUJ)
0.84<X/S<1.12
15

10

Risk Aversion

RUJ
5
Wealth
0
0.975

0.98

0.985

0.99

0.995

1

1.005

1.01

1.015

1.02

1.025

-5

-10

RUO

-15

Figure 4. Risk aversion functions across wealth RUO and RUJ indices
For the period from December 2003, through July 2005, we calculate the risk aversion function
across wealth for two indices, Russell 2000 Growth Index (RUO) and Russell 2000 Value Index
(RUJ). A wealth level of one corresponds to zero return on the index. Risk-neutral probability
distribution is obtained from options on the indices. For each wealth level, the mean risk
aversion of daily estimates across the period is computed. In addition, the empirical standard
deviation is computed. The graph displays the means and the standard deviation bound.

Russell 3000 Growth (RAG) and Value (RAV)
0.84<X/S<1.12
15
10

Risk Aversion

5

RAV
Wealth

0
0.975

0.98

0.985

0.99

0.995

1

1.005

1.01

1.015

1.02

1.025

-5
-10
-15

RAG

-20

Figure 5. Risk aversion functions across wealth RAG and RAV indices
For the period from December 2003, through July 2005, we calculate the risk aversion function
across wealth for two indices, Russell 3000 Growth Index (RAG) and Russell 3000 Value Index
(RAV). A wealth level of one corresponds to zero return on the index. Risk-neutral probability
distribution is obtained from options on the indices. For each wealth level, the mean risk
aversion of daily estimates across the period is computed. In addition, the empirical standard
deviation is computed. The graph displays the means and the standard deviation bound.

Figure 6A
Performance of Call Options Trading Strategies
The plots display total value and per period profit (loss) from option trading strategies on five growth and
value index pairs. The strategy requires zero initial investment and involves selling two call options on
the growth index and buying two call options on the value index. Trading is at the mid-point of the bidask spread. Portfolio strategy is an equal-weighted portfolio of four pairs for which data is available for
the same time period (RDG/RMV, RLG/RLV, RUO/RUJ, RAG/RAV).
Call Options Trading: Portfolio
100

Call Options Trading: SGX/SVX
200

80
150

60
100

40

20

50

0
Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- May- Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04 04 04 04
04 04 04
04 04 04 04 04
Total Value

-50

Call Options Trading: RDG/RMV

Period Profit / Loss

Jan-99

Oct-98

Jul-98

Apr-98

Jan-98

Oct-97

Jul-97

Apr-97

Jan-97

Nov-96

May-

Aug-96

Period Profit / Loss

0
Feb-96

-20

Total Value

Call Options Trading: RLG/RLV

100

70
60

80

50
60

40
30

40

20
20

10
0

0
-20

Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- May- Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04 04
04 04
04 04 04
04 04
04 04 04

-10

Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- May- Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04
04 04
04
04 04
04
04
04 04
04
04

-20
-30

-40
Period Profit / Loss

Period Profit / Loss

Total Value

Total Value

Call Options Trading: RAG/RAV

Call Options Trading: RUO/RUJ
120
120

100

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

0
-20
-40

Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- May- Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04 04
04
04
04 04
04
04
04
04 04
04
Period Profit / Loss

Total Value

0
-20
-40

Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- May- Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04
04 04
04
04 04
04
04
04 04
04 04
Period Profit / Loss

Total Value

Figure 6B
Performance of Straddle Trading Strategies
The plots display total value and per period profit (loss) from option trading strategies on five growth and
value index pairs. The strategy requires zero initial investment and involves selling a straddle on the
growth index and buying a straddle on the value index. Trading is at the mid-point of the bid-ask spread.
Portfolio strategy is an equal-weighted portfolio of four pairs for which data is available for the same time
period (RDG/RMV, RLG/RLV, RUO/RUJ, RAG/RAV).
Straddles Trading: SGX/SVX

Straddles Trading: Portfolio
70
140

60

120

50
100

40
80

30

60

20

40

10

20

Period Profit / Loss

Total Value

-40

Straddles Trading: RDG/RMV
60

Period Profit / Loss

Jan-99

Oct-98

Jul-98

Apr-98

Jan-98

Oct-97

Jul-97

Apr-97

Jan-97

Nov-96

Aug-96

-20

May-

-10

Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- May- Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04
04 04
04
04 04 04
04
04 04
04 04

Feb-96

0

0

Total Value

Straddles Trading: RLG/RLV
40

50
30

40
20

30
10

20
0

10
-10

0
-10

Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- May- Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04 04
04 04
04 04 04
04 04
04 04 04

Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- M Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04 04 04 04 ay- 04 04
04 04 04 04 04
04

-20
Period Profit / Loss

Period Profit / Loss

Total Value

Total Value

Straddles Trading: RUO/RUJ

Straddles Trading: RAG/RAV

100

80
70

80

60
60

50
40

40

30
20

20

10
0

0
Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- May- Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04 04
04
04
04 04 04
04
04
04 04
04

-10

Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- May- Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04 04
04 04
04 04 04
04 04
04 04 04

-20
Period Profit / Loss

Total Value

Period Profit / Loss

Total Value

Figure 7A
Performance of Call Options Trading Strategies with Transaction Costs
The plots display total value and per period profit (loss) from option trading strategies on five growth and
value index pairs. The strategy requires zero initial investment and involves selling two call options on
the growth index and buying two call options on the value index. All buying is at ask prices and selling is
at bid. Portfolio strategy is an equal-weighted portfolio of four pairs for which data is available for the
same time period (RDG/RMV, RLG/RLV, RUO/RUJ, RAG/RAV).
Call Options Trading: Portfolio
70

Call Options Trading: SGX/SVX
140

60

120

50

100

40
80
30
60
20
40

10

20

-30

Jan-99

Oct-98

Jul-98

Apr-98

Jan-98

Oct-97

Jul-97

Apr-97

Jan-97

Nov-96

-20

-20

Aug-96

0
May-

-10

Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- May- Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04
04 04
04
04 04 04
04
04 04
04 04

Feb-96

0

-40
Period Profit / Loss

Total Value

Period Profit / Loss

Call Options Trading: RDG/RMV
60

Total Value

-60

Call Options Trading: RLG/RLV
40

50
40

30

30

20

20
10

10
0
-10

0
Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- May- Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04 04 04 04
04 04 04
04 04 04 04 04

-10

Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- May- Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04
04
04
04
04 04 04
04
04
04
04
04

-20
-20

-30
-40

-30
Period Profit / Loss

Total Value

Period Profit / Loss

Call Options Trading: RUO/RUJ

Total Value

Call Options Trading: RAG/RAV

120
80
100
60

80
60

40

40
20
20
0

0
-20
-40

Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- May- Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04 04
04
04
04 04 04
04
04
04 04
04

Period Profit / Loss

Total Value

-20

-40

Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- May- Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04 04
04 04
04 04 04
04 04
04 04 04

Period Profit / Loss

Total Value

Figure 7B
Performance of Straddle Trading Strategies with Transaction Costs
The plots display total value and per period profit (loss) from option trading strategies on five growth and
value index pairs. The strategy requires zero initial investment and involves selling a straddle on the
growth index and buying a straddle on the value index. All buying is at ask prices and selling is at bid.
Portfolio strategy is an equal-weighted portfolio of four pairs for which data is available for the same time
period (RDG/RMV, RLG/RLV, RUO/RUJ, RAG/RAV).
Straddles Trading: Portfolio

Straddles Trading: SGX/SVX

40
35

100

30
80

25
20

60

15

40

10
20

5
0

Jan-99

Oct-98

Jul-98

Apr-98

Jan-98

Oct-97

Jul-97

Apr-97

Jan-97

Nov-96

Aug-96

May-

-20

Feb-96

-5

0
Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- May- Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04
04
04 04
04 04 04
04 04
04
04 04

-10
Period Profit / Loss

Total Value

-40

Straddles Trading: RDG/RMV

Period Profit / Loss

Total Value

Straddles Trading: RLG/RLV

25

30

20

25
20

15
15
10

10
5

5

0

0
-5

Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- May- Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04
04 04
04
04 04 04
04
04 04
04 04

-5

Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- May- Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04 04
04 04
04 04 04
04 04
04 04 04

-10

-10

-15

-15

-20
Period Profit / Loss

Period Profit / Loss

Total Value

Straddles Trading: RUO/RUJ

Total Value

Straddles Trading: RAG/RAV

90
40
80

35

70

30

60

25

50

20

40

15

30

10

20

5

10

0

0

-5

-10

Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- May- Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04 04 04 04
04 04 04
04 04 04 04 04
Period Profit / Loss

Total Value

Dec- Jan- Feb- Mar- Apr- May- Jun- Jul- Aug- Sep- Oct- Nov- Dec03 04
04 04
04
04 04
04
04
04 04
04 04

-10
Period Profit / Loss

Total Value

Figure B1
Risk Aversion for Five Growth-Value Index Pairs
We calculate risk aversion function across wealth for five pairs of indices: Russell Midcap Growth (RDG) and
Value (RMV) for December 2003—December 2004; The Standard & Poor's Barra Growth (SGX) and Value (SVX)
indices for January 1996—December 1998; Russell 1000 Growth (RLG) and Value (RLV) indices for November
2003—December 2004; Russell 2000 Growth (RUO) and Value (RUJ) for December 2003—July 2005; Russell
3000 Growth (RAG) and Value (RAV) for December 2003—July 2005. A wealth level of one corresponds to zero
return on the index. Risk-neutral probability distribution is obtained from index options. True distribution is
estimated using returns that are lagged by 6 months relative to the date when risk aversion is estimated. For each
wealth level, the mean risk aversion of daily estimates across the period is computed. In addition, the empirical
standard deviation is computed. The graph displays the means and the standard deviation bound.
Russell Midcap Grow th (RDG) and Value (RMV)
20
15

RMV
10
5
0
0.96
-5

0.97

0.98

0.99

1

RDG

-10
-15
-20

Russell 1000 Grow th (RLG) and Value (RLV)

S&P Barra Grow th (SGX) and Value (SVX)
30

10
5

25

RLV

20

0
0.97
-5

SVX
0.98

0.99

1

1.01

15
10

-10

RLG

5

-15

0
0.98
-5

-20
-25

-10

-30

-15

0.99

1

1.01

1.02

SGX

Russell 3000 Grow th (RAG) and Value (RAV)

Russell 2000 Grow th (RUO) and Value (RUJ)

15

10

10
5

0
0.98

0.99

1

1.01

-5

-10

1.02

0
0.98
-5

0.99

1

1.01

-10

RUO

-15

RAG
-20

-15

RAV

5

RUJ

-25

1.02

Table B1
Difference in Risk Aversion for Five Growth-Value Index Pairs
We use prices of options on five pairs of growth and value indices to estimate risk aversion across
wealth, daily. The five index pairs are: Russell Midcap Growth (RDG) and Value (RMV) for
December 2003—December 2004; The Standard & Poor's Barra Growth (SGX) and Value
(SVX) indices for January 1996—December 1998; Russell 1000 Growth (RLG) and Value
(RLV) indices for November 2003—December 2004; Russell 2000 Growth (RUO) and Value
(RUJ) for December 2003—July 2005; Russell 3000 Growth (RAG) and Value (RAV) for
December 2003—July 2005. A wealth level of one corresponds to zero return on the index. Riskneutral probability distribution is obtained from index options. True distribution is estimated
using returns that are lagged by 6 months relative to the date when risk aversion is estimated. On
each date we obtain risk aversion estimates for wealth levels ranging from 0.960 to 1.000 with
step size of 0.001. Using the Satterthwaite difference in means test, which accounts for unequal
variances, and the Brown-Mood non-parametric difference in medians test, we test if the mean
and median risk aversions of the two representative agents are equal. We perform the test for each
wealth level.
Wealth

Growth

Value

Mean

Mean

Satterthwaite
Mean Test
t-value
p-value

Brown-Mood
Median Test
Z-value
p-value

Largest
RA

Panel A: Russell Midcap Growth (RDG) and Value (RMV) Indices
0.960
0.965
0.970
0.975
0.980
0.985
0.990
0.995
1.000

-10.69
-11.65
-12.54
-13.31
-13.67
-13.87
-13.93
-12.85
-11.64

10.15
11.36
8.85
5.14
1.35
-2.13
-5.17
-5.16
-11.43

-20.98
-22.56
-30.03
-39.75
-30.34
-14.33
-8.19
-6.79
-0.05

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
0.0001
0.9673

11.98
10.89
10.10
8.55
7.29
5.92
5.38
3.07
0.00

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
0.0011
0.5000

Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value

Panel B: S&P Barra Growth (SGX) and Value (SVX) Indices
0.980
0.985
0.990
0.995
1.000
1.005
1.010
1.015
1.020

5.79
1.70
-1.00
-0.49
0.43
0.96
0.53
-0.75
-1.13

2.58
10.14
14.67
18.85
18.79
17.23
14.84
6.99
1.44

4.87
-13.87
-27.84
-31.95
-28.01
-24.56
-23.26
-13.11
-3.95

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001

-3.10
5.28
17.78
19.07
16.57
14.62
14.96
10.44
4.30

0.0010
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001

Growth
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value

Table B1—Continued
Wealth

Growth

Value

Mean

Mean

Satterthwaite
Mean Test
t-value
p-value

Brown-Mood
Median Test
Z-value
p-value

Largest
RA

Panel C: Russell 1000 Growth (RLG) and Value (RLV) Indices
0.970
0.975
0.980
0.985
0.990
0.995
1.000
1.005
1.010

-16.2
-18.99
-21.2
-22.05
-22.79
-22.89
-21.61
-17.58
-12.65

2.96
2.44
-0.17
-4.59
-10.09
-13.76
-14.98
-14.80
-12.99

-32.74
-39.55
-36.39
-31.31
-28.77
-26.12
-20.47
-8.40
0.82

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
0.4137

-19.47
-21.17
-19.93
-17.73
-16.29
-17.09
-13.20
7.71
-3.87

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001

Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Growth

Panel D: Russell 2000 Growth (RUO) and Value (RUJ) Indices
0.980
0.985
0.990
0.995
1.000
1.005
1.010
1.015
1.020

-9.91
-9.40
-8.41
-7.16
-5.95
-4.55
-3.39
-2.37
-0.24

5.01
1.27
-1.67
-1.77
-0.61
0.98
1.74
3.25
3.30

-20.46
-16.01
-11.87
-11.41
-11.02
-13.94
-15.79
-16.77
-11.56

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001

10.71
10.05
8.88
7.16
8.09
9.20
9.46
9.74
7.57

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001

Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value

Panel E: Russell 3000 Growth (RAG) and Value (RAV) Indices
0.980
0.985
0.990
0.995
1.000
1.005
1.010
1.015
1.020

-16.46
-17.45
-18.25
-18.11
-16.62
-14.20
-11.15
-6.54
-1.80

2.56
4.11
3.09
-0.22
-3.45
-4.76
-4.53
-4.39
-2.73

-25.82
-25.37
-26.23
-34.10
-26.02
-21.29
-18.30
-3.75
0.79

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
0.0003
0.4320

15.17
14.85
13.85
13.91
12.85
11.44
11.56
3.73
-1.31

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
0.0951

Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Growth

Table B2
Full-History Priors
Difference in Risk Aversion for Five Growth-Value Index Pairs
We use prices of options on five pairs of growth and value indices to estimate risk aversion across
wealth, daily. The five index pairs are: Russell Midcap Growth (RDG) and Value (RMV) for
December 2003—December 2004; The Standard & Poor's Barra Growth (SGX) and Value
(SVX) indices for January 1996—December 1998; Russell 1000 Growth (RLG) and Value
(RLV) indices for November 2003—December 2004; Russell 2000 Growth (RUO) and Value
(RUJ) for December 2003—July 2005; Russell 3000 Growth (RAG) and Value (RAV) for
December 2003—July 2005. A wealth level of one corresponds to zero return on the index. Riskneutral probability distribution is obtained from index options. True distribution is estimated
using returns on the Fama-French portfolio similar to the corresponding growth or value index.
Full history of returns on the Fama-French portfolio is used, from 1926 until one month before
the date when risk aversion is estimated. On each date we obtain risk aversion estimates for
wealth levels ranging from 0.960 to 1.000 with step size of 0.001 (we use different wealth
intervals for different index pairs depending on option data availability, but the step size is the
same throughout). Using the Satterthwaite difference in means test, which accounts for unequal
variances, and the Brown-Mood non-parametric difference in medians test, we test if the mean
and median risk aversions of the two representative agents are equal. We perform the test for each
wealth level.
Wealth

Growth

Value

Mean

Mean

Satterthwaite
Mean Test
t-value
p-value

Brown-Mood
Median Test
Z-value
p-value

Largest
RA

Panel A: Russell Midcap Growth (RDG) and Value (RMV) Indices
0.960
0.965
0.970
0.975
0.980
0.985
0.990
0.995
1.000

0.6593

2.0835

-1.84

0.0684

5.1114

<.0001

-0.018

1.8154

-2.02

0.0464

5.3884

<.0001

-1.482

4.2801

-8.83

<.0001

5.7310

<.0001

-3.511

5.3388

-15.07

<.0001

9.3711

<.0001

-5.207

4.5917

-14.38

<.0001

9.0277

<.0001

-5.869

2.9597

-11.83

<.0001

8.0844

<.0001

-5.844

2.5262

-11.82

<.0001

6.5588

<.0001

-4.514

4.184

-12.75

<.0001

5.7911

<.0001

-3.117

6.4229

-11.52

<.0001

4.8200

<.0001

Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value

Panel B: S&P Barra Growth (SGX) and Value (SVX) Indices
0.980
0.985
0.990
0.995
1.000
1.005
1.010
1.015
1.020

2.2228

1.1725

2.25

0.0249

2.5631

0.0052

-3.503

-0.445

-6.18

<.0001

5.0689

<.0001

-7.869

-1.355

-13.16

<.0001

11.7043

<.0001

-8.814

-1.146

-15.52

<.0001

12.9189

<.0001

-7.507

0.5328

-16.62

<.0001

-13.4824

<.0001

-5.216

2.2303

-17.11

<.0001

14.6133

<.0001

-3.708

2.943

-15.95

<.0001

14.3233

<.0001

-3.971

1.5194

-12.25

<.0001

10.6381

<.0001

-4.227

-2.086

-4.01

<.0001

4.4362

<.0001

Growth
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value

Table B2—Continued
Wealth

Growth

Value

Mean

Mean

Satterthwaite
Mean Test
t-value
p-value

Brown-Mood
Median Test
Z-value
p-value

Largest
RA

Panel C: Russell 1000 Growth (RLG) and Value (RLV) Indices
0.970
0.975
0.980
0.985
0.990
0.995
1.000
1.005
1.010

-3.894

6.7913

-16.19

<.0001

-13.3958

<.0001

-8.526

6.5442

-23.63

<.0001

-16.5275

<.0001

-12.86

3.895

-26.83

<.0001

-18.1079

<.0001

-15.43

0.4025

-28.00

<.0001

-18.4810

<.0001

-15.07

-3.341

-24.40

<.0001

-18.0453

<.0001

-10.97

-3.929

-16.59

<.0001

15.0268

<.0001

-5.112

-1.39

-9.51

<.0001

8.6431

<.0001

0.8799

2.5126

-4.16

<.0001

2.5403

0.0055

4.6524

6.0551

-2.65

0.0083

2.3617

0.0091

Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value

Panel D: Russell 2000 Growth (RUO) and Value (RUJ) Indices
0.980
0.985
0.990
0.995
1.000
1.005
1.010
1.015
1.020

1.1932

7.2213

-6.46

<.0001

7.2421

<.0001

0.4374

3.8565

-4.68

<.0001

5.2998

<.0001

0.1591

1.5988

-2.41

0.0183

1.4527

0.0732

0.0153

0.1439

-0.32

0.7473

0.0256

0.4898

-0.027

0.8086

-1.30

0.1993

0.5034

0.3073

-0.009

2.6899

-3.61

0.0010

3.2478

0.0006

-0.316

4.528

-3.79

0.0011

4.3250

<.0001

-0.94

4.3115

-10.35

<.0001

3.5407

0.0002

-1.064

2.0894

-6.30

0.0004

2.6788

0.0037

Value
Value
Value
Val/Gro
Val/Gro
Value
Value
Value
Value

Panel E: Russell 3000 Growth (RAG) and Value (RAV) Indices
0.980
0.985
0.990
0.995
1.000
1.005
1.010
1.015
1.020

-7.743

3.9871

-16.69

<.0001

9.1789

<.0001

-7.864

2.6496

-13.02

<.0001

7.8960

<.0001

-7.884

1.5834

-13.33

<.0001

8.7243

<.0001

-6.885

2.6418

-12.12

<.0001

7.0005

<.0001

-5.356

6.8757

-11.18

<.0001

6.6778

<.0001

-3.455

9.2299

-11.22

<.0001

6.1141

<.0001

-1.987

11.665

-8.81

<.0001

5.3726

<.0001

0.1555

12.937

-7.12

<.0001

5.1573

<.0001

1.7998

13.75

-6.91

<.0001

5.1652

<.0001

Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value

