NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAX AVERSION, DEFICITS AND THE
TAX RATE—TAX REVENUE RELATIONSHIP

Roger N. Waud

Working Paper No. 1533

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1985

This paper has benefitted from detailed comments by A. Benavie, R.
Froyen and D. Jansen on earlier drafts. I would also like to thank
M. Buono, C. Callahan and other members of the UNC macro seminar
for helpful comments. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Taxation and project in Government
Budget. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1533
January 1985

Tax Aversion, Deficits and the

Tax Rate-Tax Revenue Relationship
ABST RACT

This paper offers a possible explanation for the existence of
continual government budget deficits such as experienced in a number of

industrialized countries in recent years. Based on the assumption that
higher tax rates cause more intensive tax-aversion behavior (tax avoidance
and tax evasion), together with the assumption that the time horizon
relevant for political decision makers is shorter than that required
for complete private sector response to tax rate change, our analysis
suggests why there seems to be an inherent bias toward budget deficits.

Because of tax aversion an inverse relationship between tax rates and tax

revenues may exist at low levels of the tax rate. Consequently determined
attempts to eliminate or reduce deficits can become self—defeating, almost

certainly so when there is a structural deficit. Our analysis suggests
that if an economy is on the downward sloping portion of a stylized
Laffer curve political expedience, uncertainty about the shape of the
curve, and a common wisdom that tax rate increases reduce deficits can all

conspire to keep the budget trapped in deficit. Finally, in the presence of
inflation deficit growth may be less if there is indexation of income tax
rates to inflation, contrary to conventional wisdom.
Roger N. Waud
Department of Economics
Gardner Hall
University of North Carolina—Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27514
(919) 966-5332

The existence of continual government budget deficits through periods
of economic expansion as well as recession has been a matter of increasing

concern in a number of industrialized countries in recent years. This
paper offers an explanation of this phenomenon based on the assumption
that higher tax rates encourage economic agents to engage more intensively
in tax evasion and avoidance (a distinction defined below), and on the
assumption that the time horizon relevant for political decision makers is
shorter than that required for complete private sector response to tax
rate change, an assumption recently advanced by Buchanan and Lee (1982).

Given these two assumptions our analysis suggests why there seems to be an

inherent bias toward budget deficits. Since our analysis indicates that
the conditions for the existence of an inverse relationship between tax
rates and tax revenues are considerably less restrictive when tax avoidance
and evasion behavior are explicitly recognized, it suggests that determined
attempts to eliminate or reduce deficits can become self—defeati'ng, and

that when there is a structural deficit this almost certainly will be the

case. Moreover, if an economy is on the downward sloping portion of a
stylized Laffer curve our analysis suggests that political expediency,
uncertainty about the shape of the curve, and a common belief that tax
rate increases reduce deficits can all combine to keep the budget trapped

in deficit. Finally, when ongoing deficits are accompanied by inflation
our analysis suggests that, contrary to conventional wisdom, deficit growth
may be less if there is indexation of income tax rates to inflation.

In section I we examine how optimizing tax aversion behavior, which
encompasses both tax avoidance (the legal use of tax loopholes) and tax
evasion (the illegal underreporting of income), and tax aversion cost

functions combine to define a tax aversion function. It is then shown

2

how the tax aversion function serves to define the relationship between

the legally stipulated tax rate and the effective tax rate. Section II
investigates the characteristics of the tax rate-tax revenue relationship
implied by a rather standard, and quite familiar, supply-side macro model

which explicitly incorporates tax aversion behavior by use of the tax

aversion function. Section III derives the Laffer curve and considers the
relationship implied by tax aversion behavior between tax revenue collected
before and after complete private sector response to tax rate change.

Section IV considers the implications of our analysis for the political

economy of deficits and budget policy. Section V summarizes our
conclusions.

I. The Tax Aversion Function and the Effective Tax Rate
When economic agents engage in tax aversion behavior they incur costs
such as those associated with buying the services of attorneys, accountants,
or the opportunity cost of the agent's own time invested in such matters.

The theoretical analysis of tax evasion originated in the expected utility

analysis of Allingham and Sandmo (1972) and subsequently has been
extended considerably.' Work focusing strictly on tax avoidance within an
expected utility framework can be found in Kane and Valentini (1975)
and in Kane (1976).

It can be argued however that tax evasion and tax avoidance behavior

should be analyzed as joint activities because of the potentially
significant degree of substitutability and possible complementarity

between them. Taking this point of view, Cross and Shaw (1982) argue that
an increase in the penalty for evasion or in the probability of detection

3

of evasion raises the relative rate of return on avoidance activity.
Similarly, tax evasion is likely to be stimulated by any reduction of

avoidance loopholes by the tax authorities. Cross and Shaw also point
out that the costs of avoidance and evasion are likely to be interdependent
because certain avoidance (evasion) activities can affect the marginal

cost of evasion (avoidance) activity. For instance, the cost of investigating and using perfectly legal loopholes in the tax code for tax
avoidance also buys insight into the possibilities for illegal exploitation
of such loopholes for tax evasion.

Cross and Shaw's (1982) analysis of tax aversion recognizes the
potentially significant degree of substitutability and possible
complementarity between tax avoidance and tax evasion, and thus has

expected utility depending on both. They represent the potentially
interdependent costs of the two activities by a joint cost function. Given
a proportional income tax rate T, assuming decreasing absolute risk aversion
and that actual income w

(1-p)U(Y)

E(U)

is

exogenous, expected utility is

+ pU(Z)

where

V

W(l-t)

+

(01W+02W)T-C(01W,02W)

and
Z

W(l-)+e1W+e2W(l-F)-C(e1W,e2W)

with 0 < p,

,

01,02

<

1;

F >

1; C1, C2, C11, C22 > 0 and C12 < 0;

and where p is the probability of detection, 01

and 02 are the portions of

income avoiding and evading tax respectively, F is the fine imposed if
evasion is detected, and C(.,.) is the joint cost function specifying

4

complementarity between avoidance and evasion activity (i.e., C12 < O).2
It can be shown (see Cross and Shaw (1982), P. 42) that

—

30.1

3T

<0.

3T

Hence even in this relatively simple model it is not possible to sign
a priori the effects of a tax rate change on tax avoidance and tax evasion

activity. However if C12 < 0 it can be shown (see Cross and Shaw (1982),
p. 41) that

301

> 0 only if

02

> 0 since in that case a decrease (an

increase) in the tax rate T reduces (increases) tax evasion activity which
in turn raises (lowers) the marginal cost of tax avoidance and causes a

reduction (an increase) in avoidance activity. This result is of particular
interest in view of some recent empirical evidence on the effects of tax

rates on tax evasion. In a study analyzing over 47,000 individual U.S.
tax returns for 1969 Clotfelter (1983) obtains estimates of the elasticity
of tax evasion with respect to marginal tax rates that are significantly
positive, varying between 0.5 and 3.0 across different occupation and

income groups. On the basis of this evidence we will assume in the ensuing

analysis that —

>

0

and, since02—

>

0 implies301—

>

0 in the

above theoretical framework, we will also assume that

—
3T

> 0.

Since

+ 02 is the fraction of income subject to tax averston, the

fraction of income not subject to tax aversion can be defined as
o

that

1_Ol_62. Given that 01 and 02 are functions of T, and the assumption
,

-.?L >

0, then 0 is a function of T, 0(T), and

0'(T) < 0.

We refer to T as the legally stipulated tax rate on income, assumed to be a

5

proportional tax rate, 0 < T < 1. Since the function 8(T) characterizes
tax aversion behavior, we call it the tax aversion function, a decreasing

function of T such that 0 < 0(T) < 1. The product of the legally stipulated
tax rate

and the tax aversion function 0(t) define the effective tax rate

T0(T). It can be thought of as the fraction of income the government
actually realizes in tax revenue when economic agents engage in the
optimal amount of tax aversion associated with a particular level of the
legally stipulated tax rate t.

Two examples of tax aversion functions are shown in Figure 1.
Given any legally stipulated tax rate such as

horizontal axis, and the

corresponding value of the tax aversion function 0(Tm) vertical axis, the
associated effective tax rate TmO(Tm) is represented by the hatched

rectangular area with upper right corner at point m. Point m is the unit
elastic point for this particular tax aversion function so that tmO(Tm) is
the maximum effective tax rate; legally stipulated tax rates either

higher or lower than Tm yield lower effective tax rates. For the tax
aversion function passing through m' the unit elastic point occurs at m'.
Hence the legally stipulated tax rate yielding the maximum effective tax
rate for this particular tax aversion function is considerably higher than

that for the tax aversion function passing through point m. In general,
for tax aversion functions such as those in Figure 1 there is some
legally stipulated tax rate, which we may term the critical tax rate, that

yields a maximum effective tax rate. At that value of t

dtO(t)

=

0(r)

+ tO'(T)

= 0,

while at a lower stipulated tax rate (0(T) + TO'(T)) >

(1)

0,

and at a higher

e(r)
1'

I

0

Fia,e

7,

2'

6

stipulated tax rate (6(t)

+ T6'(T))

<

0; these facts play an important

role in the ensuing analysis. Of course the particular functional form
of e(t) determines the specific value of the legally stipulated tax
rate, the critical tax rate, which gives the maximum effective tax rate.3
We will see in what follows that the tax aversion function 6(T)

plays

a critical role in determining the shape of the tax rate-tax revenue
relationship, the Laffer curve.4

II. Tax Aversion and the Tax Rate-Tax Revenue Relationship
The tax aversion function and the effective tax rate have significant
implications for the characteristics of the tax rate-tax revenue

relationship implied by a macroeconomic model. This is basically due to
the fact that when the stipulated tax rate is raised above the critical
tax rate the sign-switching which occurs (where (1) obtains) can determine
where the negatively sloped region of the tax rate-tax revenue relationship

(the Laffer curve) begins.5 To illustrate more specifically, we will now
incorporate tax aversion behavior (the tax aversion function and the
effective tax rate) into a rather standard, and quite familiar, classicaltype macroeconomic model and examine the implied tax rate-tax revenue

relationship. The supply-side plays a prominent role in this model, a
feature often stressed by those concerned that higher tax rates may

actually generate lower tax revenues. The basic structure of the model
has the virtue, for our purposes, that it is a broadly familiar framework
and, as such, it is intended as an illustrative vehicle; the tax aversion
function and the effective tax rate in principle could be embedded in any
macroeconomic model

7

II.A. The Model
In the ensuing analysis of sections III and IV it will be assumed
that the relevant time horizon of political decision makers is shorter
than that required for complete private sector adjustment of tax aversion

activity to any change in the legally stipulated tax rate. A description
of how this assumption is incorporated into the analysis
is in order before laying out the macroeconomic model.

In particular it will be assumed that the private sector's tax aversion
behavior adjusts with a lag to any change in the tax rate

it takes time

for economic agents to adjust their tax aversion activity to the optimal

level associated with the new tax rate. Specifically, it is assumed that
0(T) adjusts with a one period lag subsequent to any change in r. Hence

the effective tax rate in any per4od t is Tto(Ttl). Consider the adjustment
in the effective tax rate when the legally stipulated tax rate t

by the amount of dT in period t-2 so that dT+Tt_3 =

Tt_2

=

Tt_l

is
=

changed

Tt

=

In period t-2 the effective tax rate is then Te(Tt3), in period t—l it is
T0(Tt2)

=To(T); in

other words the effective tax rate is affected by

the change in T when that change occurs, the first period, but adjustment
of the effective tax rate to the change is not complete until the next
period, the second period.

It should be pphasized that in the subsequent analysis the discrete
two-period adjustment process described here will serve simply as a

stylized way of representing the assumption (advanced by Buchanan and
Lee) that the time horizon relevant for political decision makers is
shorter than that required for complete private sector response to tax

rate change. In reality of course this adjustment process is continuous,

8

but the essence of the time sequence envisioned by the assumption is

preserved in our framework. We will not examine the implications of the
two-period adjustment process for the Laffer curve and budget deficits
until sections III and IV below, but we have described it here and will

now incorporate it in the macroeconomic model in this section for
completeness.

The model is specified by the equations

- C[(y.

I(rt) + Gt —

F(N)

Nt -

f(wt)

Nt -

N[(l

=

T),

(1 -

=0

-

Tte(Ttl))rt]

M[yt, (1 -

-

-

Tto(Tti))rt]}

= 0

(2)

(3)

0

(4)

= 0

(5)

—

1))wt]

=

0

= 0
Tte(Ttl)(wtNt + rtK) - T

(6)

(7)

where y is real output, N is labor hours, w is the real wage, M is the
stock of money, p is the price level, r is the interest rate, G is
government spending, T is the legally stipulated tax rate, and t indexes

the time period. 0(T)

is

the tax aversion function already described

above, and I is the total tax revenue.7 Equation (2) gives flow-of-funds
(or goods market) equilibrium where investment I(.) is a decreasing function
of the interest rate (I,, <

0),

and consumption C(.,) is an increasing

function of disposable income (Cs, > 0) and a decreasing function of the

after-tax interest rate (Cr <

0).

Equation (3) gives money market

9

equilibrium where the demand for real money balances M(.,) is an increasing
function of y (My,> 0) and a decreasing function of the after-tax interest
rate (Mr <

0).

Equation (4) gives the economy's production function

F(.). Equation (5) gives the demand for labor hours (implied by (4)), a

decreasing function f() of the real wage

<

0).

Equation (6) gives

the supply of labor hours, an increasing function N(.) of the after—tax

real wage (N >

0).

Equation (7) stipulates that total tax revenue

equals the sum of the tax revenue from wage income and interest income.
Consumption in (1) and real money demand in (2) are functions of the
effective after-tax interest rate (l_Tte(-rtl))rt, while labor supply

in (6) is a function of the effective after-tax real wage (l-rte(Ttl))wt.
Tax revenues collected depend on the effective tax rate in (7), and thus
disposable income which enters the consumption function in (2) is a function

of the effective tax rate. The supply-side character of the model is
evidenced by the fact that equations (4)-(6) jointly determine the output
level y, the real wage w, and employment N independently of the rest of the
model 8

II.B. Tax Rate-Tax Revenue Relationship
The tax rate-tax revenue relationship can be examined by differentiation
of (7); allowing for complete adjustment of tax aversion behavior, which
requires two periods subsequent to a change in the tax rate di, so that

it2

+ dT =

-_-

=

and time subscripts may be ignored,

10

=

(0(T)

+ Te'(T))(wN + rK) + T0(T) N

+ T0(T) w

+ T0(T) K 0

(8)

where
dTO(T)

=

0

6(T) + T0'(T)

(9)

is the change in the effective tax rate due to a change in the legally
stipulated tax rate T.

If (9) is negative the change in 0(r) more than

offsets the change in T--for example, an increase in the tax rate T would
be more than offset by the resulting decline in the effective tax rate

T0(T). If (9) is positive, the change in T is only partially offset by
the change in 0(T) in the opposite direction.
It can be readily shown (section A of the appendix) that if (9)

is positive then in (8) L >

0, while the sign of
<

ambiguous. However suppose

(5),

0,
0,

is still

and recognize that equations (4),

and (6) determine the equilibrium level of y independently of the

rest of the model. Then, assuming (9) is positive, differentiation of (2)
and evaluation at equilibrium y implies
dr

=

(l_C)

dT

Hence if

.

+

+ (ott) + To'tr))rCr
C,,

>

0

10

'r + (l-T0(T)) Cr

dT

< 0

then it must be true that

dT

<0
>0. (-dT

implies

<0 via (4).) Therefore if a reduction of the tax rate T is to cause an
increase in total revenue I in the case where (9) is positive, such a
result can only be due to the dominance of the term containing

in

11

Consider the case where (9) is negative. In this case it can be
shown (section A of the appendix) that

<0 and

>0, just the

opposite of the case where (0(T) + T0'(T)) is positive. Thus the terms
containing (wN+rK) and

in (8) are negative while the term containing

is positive. The first and third terms in the numerator of (10) aré
now positive (.N.

now possible that

>0

>0 via (4)) so that when

implies

<0; hence the term containing

negative even when 1!i<

We

<0 it is

in (8) can be

see therefore that when (9) is negative a

reduction in the tax rate can lead to an increase in total tax revenue
via the first and second terms in (8), and possibly via the last term.

II.C. The Tax Aversion Function and the Sign-Switching Tax Rate
The tax aversion function 0(T) clearly plays a crucial role in
determining the sign of (8) by virtue of the presence of (0(T) +
the change in the effective tax rate TO(T) resulting from a change in the

legally stipulated tax rate T, from (9). Of particular interest, the
sign of (0(T) + To (1))—-hence the sign of (8)——can switch as the size

of the effective tax rate changes with any change in T.'° Given a
particular

functional form for 0(T), an important question is at what

level of the tax rate T will (0(T) + T0(T)) switch sign and thus cause a
sign switch in

? As the tax rate T is increased, for example, at what

level of T would total tax revenues cease rising and begin to decline--in
other words, at what T do we get onto the negatively sloped portion of
a stylized Laffer curve?

We do not know the specific form of actual real-world tax aversion

functions. Those shown in Figure 1 are nothing more than two possible

12

examples; the sign-switch for the tax aversion function passing through

occurs at a tax rate T = .3 (as demonstrated in footnote 3),

point in

while for the tax aversion function passing through point m' it occurs
when T =

.66.

These observations would seem of more than academic

interest in light of recent estimates of aggregated measures of tax rates.

In a recent study Barro and Sahasakul (1983) report that, when weighted by
adjusted gross income, the arithmetic average of marginal tax rates
from the United States federal individual income tax schedule was 30
percent in 1980. The 0(r) function passing through point in

in

Figure 1

suggests that the Laffer curve could become negatively sloped at
tax rates in this range, bearing in mind of course that this is but a

hypothetical example embedded in a simple model. Tobin (1981) cites
estimates of the federal marginal rate of personal income tax averaged
over all tax brackets which put the average marginal tax rate in the
United States at .22 in 1980.

III. Tax Aversion and the Implied Laffer Curve
In order to consider the consequences of tax aversion for budget

deficits it is useful to examine the nature of the Laffer curve implied

by the two period tax-aversion process. It should be emphasized again
that the discrete two-period adjustment process modeled here is simply a
stylized way of representing the assumption (advanced by Buchanan and
Lee) that the time horizon relevant for political decision makers is
shorter than that required for complete private sector response to tax

rate change. In reality of course this process is continuous, but the
essence of the time sequence envisioned by the assumption is preserved
in our framework.

13

For the purpose of deriving a graphical representation of the
two-period tax aversion process and the tax rate-tax revenue relationship,
or Laffer curve, the discussion is made more manageable if we ignore the

taxation of interest income. Mathematically this simplification sets K

equal to zero in the expression for 1
=

- {o(r)

=

N(N+Wf)[f

+ TO'(T)](-wN)

(given

in Appendix A) so that

0

(11)

where

-

(1-Te(T))NW]Te(T)

and

Oas

—1

where

w
nw -—f
Nw
is the elasticity of the demand for labor with respect to the real wage

w. (11) is the slope of the Laffer curve. The sign of (11) depends on the
sign of [0(T) + TO'(T)], the sign of q, and if c

> 0,

the size of

relative to wN; the sign of depends on whether the equilibrium occurs
along the elastic or inelastic region of the labor demand curve.

Since the concensus estimate of the elasticity of labor demand in the
United States reported by Hammermesh (1976) equals approximately -1/3,

we will assume that -l <

<0

solely on the sign of [0(T) +

so that

T0'(T)].

<

0 and the sign of (11) depends

Given this assumption, the

interpretation of (11) and its sign is facilitated by proceeding
directly to the derivation of a graphical representation of the tax rate—

14

tax revenue relationship implied by the two-period tax adjustment process
and equations (4)-(7), the equations determining y, N, w, and T simultaneously
and independently of the rest of the model (assuming interest income is not
taxed).

Figure 2, part (a), depicts the labor demand and supply curves

specified by equations (5) and (6). The labor demand curve is unit
elastic at point f. Suppose the tax rate T is initially set at zero and

that [0(T) + T0'(T)] >0, which means that the change in T is only
partially offset by the change in 0(T) in the opposite direction. The
relevant labor supply curve is N5(T00) which intersects the labor demand
curve Nd in its inelastic range at point a to determine the equilibrium

real wage and employment level. Tax revenue T is zero, corresponding
to point a in part (b) of Figure 2 where tax revenue is measured on the
horizontal axis and the legally stipulated tax rate T is measured on the
vertical.

Complete adjustment by the private sector to any tax rate change
takes two periods: during the first period labor adjusts its supply to
the new legally stipulated tax rate; during the second pertod labor
adjusts its tax aversion behavior to the new tax rate and labor supply
is then adjusted to the new effective tax rate associated with the new

level of tax aversion activity. Now suppose the tax rate is increased
from T0 = 0 to T1 >

0.

During the first period the labor supply curve in

part (a) of Figure 2 shifts leftward to N5(T1) where it intersects the

labor demand curve at point b. The real wage paid by employers rises to
w1 and the after-tax real wage received by labor is (l—T1)w1, corresponding

to point b in part (b). Since t

initially

equaled zero, 0 equals 1 during

N tO())
,t/('= a)

(a)
7,

LC

70

61

()
2

T

15

the first period. However during the second period, labor increases its
tax aversion activity (from a zero level since the tax rate initially
equaled zero) to the optimal level corresponding to the new higher tax
rate T1.

Hence,

during the second period 0 falls from 1 to 0(T1) < 1

and the effective tax rate equals T10(T1). Since labor now keeps a
larger portion of any real wage, i.e., Ti > r0(i), labor is willing to

supply more labor hours at any real wage and therefore the labor supply

curve shifts rightward from NS(T1) to NS(r1o(T1)) where it intersects
d

N at point c. The second period's rightward shift only partially
offsets the first period's leftward shift because [0(T) + T0'(T)] > 0

and hence the change in T
in the opposite direction.
to w2 and the after-tax

s only partially offset by a change in 0(T)

The real wage paid by employers falls from

real

wage received by labor rises from

(l-t1)w1 to (l-T10(T1))W2 during the second period.

Total tax revenue

collected during the second period is given by the area h'hcc'. Total
tax revenue has fallen (i.e., area h'hcc' is less than area j'jbb'). This
is represented in part (b) by the move from point b to point c.

Suppose the tax rate is raised further, from T1 to T2, say, where
T2

is sufficiently high that during the first period after this increase

the labor supply curve in part (a) of Figure 1 shifts leftward until it
passes through point d, corresponding to an effective tax rate equal

total tax revenue is now represented by the rectangle with
upper right-most corner at point d in part (a) and corresponds to the point

d associated with tax rate T2 in part (b). o equals 0(T1) during
the first period since the tax increase was initiated from a position
corresponding to point c in parts (a) and (b). During the second period
labor increases its tax aversion activity to the optimal level associated

16

with the higher tax rate T2; 0 falls from 0(Tl) to 0(t2) < o(t) and
the effective tax rate now equals T20(T2). As a result, labor now keeps
a larger proportion of any real wage (T20(T2) < T20(T1)) and is therefore

willing to supply more labor hours at any real wage. Hence the labor
supply curve shifts rightward until it intersects Nd at point e.

Once again, total tax revenue declines during the second period; this is
represented in part (b) by the move from point d (associated with T2) to
point e.

To this point we have assumed that [0(T) +

t0''r)]

> 0—-any change

in T is only partially offset by a change in 0(r) in the opposite direction.
But now suppose the tax rate is raised to

and that this is above that

tax rate at which [8(T) + TO'(T)] switches sign in the manner and for

the reasons described in the previous section. Now [0(T) + rO'(r)] becomes
negative, which means that any change in r

is

more than offset by a change

in 0(T) in the opposite direction.
In Figure 2, part (a), the increase in the tax rate from 12 to
initially shifts the labor supply curve leftward from the position where
it passes through point e to a position where it passes through point f.
During the first period of the adjustment process tax revenue rises as
before, represented by the movement from e to f in part (b) of Figure 2.

However during the second period the increase in tax aversion activity in
response to the increase in the tax rate now causes a rightward shift in
the labor supply curve which more than offsets the initial leftward
shift, so that after the adjustment process is complete the labor supply
curve passes through point g on Nd which is below the initial point e.
The tax revenue decline during the second period of the adjustment
process, represented by the move from f to g in part (b), actually

17

results in a lower level of tax revenue at tax rate 13

than was realized

at the lower rate T2 (point g lies to the left of point e in part (b) of

Figure 2). Moreover the economy is now on the negatively sloped portion
of the Laffer curve.

The heavily drawn curve LC in part (b) is a tax rate-tax revenue

relationship, or Laffer curve, which for any given tax rate 1

indicates

the amount of tax revenue T realized after there has been complete
adjustment of tax aversion behavior to the given tax rate.

The segments

such as ab, cd, or ef, represent tax rate-tax revenue relationships
which indicate the amount of tax revenue realized before there has been
complete adjustment of tax aversion behavior to any given tax rate.

IV. Implications for the Political Economy of Deficits and Budget Policy
What are the implications of the above analysis for the political
economy of government deficits and budget policy? To answer this question
we will use the graphical representation of the model of equations (2)-(7)

as illustrated in Figure 2. All that needs to be added to Figure 2,
part (b), is government spending S which appears in equation (2). In
addition to measuring tax revenue T along the horizontal axis, we also
can measure government spending S along that axis, as shown in Figure 3.
The lynchpin of our analysis of the political economy of budget deficits
is the assumption (due to Buchanan and Lee) that the time horizon
relevant for political decision makers is shorter than that required for

complete private sector response to tax rate change. This assumption is
modeled here in stylized fashion by the discrete two—period adjustment
process wherein the time horizon relevant to political decision makers
only extends over the first period.

'2'

LC

0

A'
-Q

0

a'

G)T

Fly.

3

18

In the ensuing discussion we also make the following assumptions:
1.

Political decision makers desire to balance the budget.

2. Considerations other than budget policy objectives determine the
level of government spending (it must be taken as a given when
attempting to balance the budget), so that the burden of attaining
the balanced budget objective must fall on tax rate changes.

3. Political decision makers will be reluctant to change the tax rate
if they fear adverse voter reaction.

IV.A. The Budget Deficit Bias
Suppose that government spending is set at the level indicated by

the heavily drawn vertical line G0 in Figure 3. (It may be regarded as
coincidental that G0 passes through point h; it wouldn't affect the
discussion of this section if G0 were to the left of the position

indicated in Figure 3.) Given the assumption that political decision
makers have a shorter time horizon than the period of time required for
complete private sector response to tax rate change, the Laffer curve

IC is not relevant to the actions of political decision makers. Instead,
the relevant rate-revenue relationship only reflects private sector
response to any tax rate change over the horizon relevant to the political

decision maker. This response is only part of the complete response.
Given the assumption that complete adjustment by the private sector
to any tax rate change takes two periods, and that the time horizon
relevant to political decision makers only extends over the first period,
if we start from a zero tax rate position in Figure 3 and increase the
tax rate to

r1,

the relevant (one period) rate—revenue relationship is

19

given by ab. The level of realized tax revenue, given by point b, is

just sufficient to balance the budget. However when private sector
response to the new tax rate is complete (after two periods), realized
tax revenue at the tax rate

will be less, corresponding to point c on

LC. Moreover, despite the balanced-budget objective of political

decision makers, a budget deficit emerges, equal cb. Once again political
decision makers are faced with the need to raise the tax rate in order to

achieve a balanced-budget objective. The relevant (one period) raterevenue relationship is now cd. Political decision makers raise the tax
rate to

and tax revenue increases to the level corresponding to point

d (after one period). Again, however, after complete private sector
response to the higher tax rate (after two periods), a budget deficit

emerges, equal ed. If the process is repeated, eventually a viable
balanced budget position is achieved at point h, corresponding to the
tax rate

Recall that the level of government spending is assumed to be given
(determined by considerations other than the balanced budget objective)

so that the burden of attaining budget policy objectives must fall on

tax rate changes. Given this, and assuming that complete private
sector response to the tax rate change takes longer than the time period
relevant for political decision makers, if political decision makers are
generally reluctant to risk adverse voter reaction to tax rate increases,
especially a sequence of such increases, budget policy will have an

inherent bias towards deficits. For example, suppose political decision
makers raise the tax rate from

to

in Figure 3, attaining a balanced

budget (after one period) at point d, and suppose they are then evtcted

from office in large numbers by adverse voter reactton. After complete

20

private sector response (two periods), a deficit reemerges, equal ed, but
new political decision makers having witnessed the fate of their predecessors
are gun-shy of the further tax rate increases necessary to eliminate the
deficit.

Finally, note that even if the negatively sloped region of the

Laffer curve is not in the relevant tax rate range, the existence of the type
lagged private sector response envisioned here is conducive to the
existence of a budget deficit bias.

IV.B. Ignorance and Overshooting
Now suppose, quite realistically, that political decision makers
don't know the exact configuration of the Laffer curve, and in particular
whether they are on the upward or downward sloping portion of the curve.
Furthermore, suppose voters feel so strongly about achieving a balanced
budget that they are willing to tolerate repeated tax rate increases.
If tax rate increases occur along the upward sloping portion of the
Laffer curve, a balanced budget objective eventually can be realized.
However, given ignorance about the exact configuration of the Laffer curve,
it is entirely possible that political decision makers will overshoot
the tax rate which is

consistent with a viable balanced budget—-the rate

in Figure 3. Once this occurs the tax rate will be in the range of
the downward sloping portion of the Laffer curve. Pursuit of a balanced
budget objective initiated by tax rate increases in the downward sloping
range of the Laffer curve are self-defeating. If the tax rate in Figure

3 is r,

for

example, an attempt to reduce the associated budget deficit

jo by raising the tax rate to T6 still would give rise to the deficit lp

(after one period). This deficit would increase to kp after complete
private sector response (after two periods) and would be larger than the

initial deficit jo. It is readily apparent that a repeat of this process
would cause even larger deficits.

21

IV. C.

The Deficit Trap

If the economy is on the downward sloping portion of the Laffer
curve prospects for reducing the deficit by lowering the tax rate may well
run into political impediments, given that political decision makers are
uncertain both about the shape of the curve and the economy's location on
it.

The potential difficulty arises because of the nature of the two-period
adjustment process accompanying a tax rate reduction, in particular the
fact that tax revenue falls during the first period after the rate

reduction. Suppose the economy is on the downward sloping portion of the
Laffer curve at point k on Figure 3 with the tax rate at T6, for example,

and the associated budget deficit equals kp. Suppose enough political
decision makers believe this to be the case, though they can't be certain,
that it is possible through the political process to initiate a tax
rate reduction from T6

to

Furthermore, suppose that this rate reduction

T5.

is not large enough to cause [0(t)

+ tO'(t)] to switch from a negative to

a positive sign, recalling that along the downward sloping portion of the
Laffer curve [0(T) +

T0'(T)]

< 0 so that any change in t

is

more than

offset by a change in 0(T) in the opposite direction.
During the first period of the two-period adjustment process following
the rate reduction from

to

the effective tax rate falls from

t50(t6) to t50(i6); during the second period economic agents respond to the
lower tax rate 5 by reducing their tax aversion efforts so that 0 rises
from 0(t6) to 0(t5) and the effective tax rate rises from T50(t6)

to

t50(t5). In terms of the labor demand and supply curves (such as in

Figure 2, part (a)), during the first period of the adjustment process

22

the labor supply curve shifts rightward along the inelastic range of the

labor demand curve and tax revenue declines. However during the second
period the labor supply schedule shifts back leftwards by more than the
amount of the first period's rightward shift, and tax revenue rises by

more than the amount of the first period's tax revenue decline. Hence,
in Figure 3 the deficit increases from kp to mo in the first period and
then declines to jo during the second period.

After the complete two-period adjustment the deficit has been

reduced from kp to jo. However given that the relevant time horizon
for political decision makers it only the first period, the emergence of an
even larger deficit during the first period (from kp to mo) after the tax
rate reduction may well shake their faith in the wisdom of their action,
especially since they can't be certain that they were on the downward-sloping

portion of the Laffer curve in the first place. Conventional wisdom
(appropriate for the upward sloping portion of the Laffer curve) might
now well prevail, arguing that the tax rate should be increased to reduce
the deficit, thus reversing the initial tax rate reduction.
In sum, when the economy is on the downward sloping portion of the
Laffer curve, attempts to reduce the deficit by lowering the tax rate
can cause an even larger deficit over the politically relevant time

horizon. Conventional wisdom may then prevail and cause political
decision makers, uncertain about the shape of the Laffer curve, to reverse
themselves and raise the tax rate, moving the economy back up along the

downward sloping portion of the curve. Thus, once the economy is on the
downward sloping portion of the Laffer curve it may become trapped in
deficit by a combination of political expediency, uncertainty about the
shape of the curve, and a conventional wisdom which holds that increases
in tax rates reduce deficits.

23

IV. D.

Consequences of a Structural Deficit

Suppose the level of government spending exceeds the maximum
maintainable level of tax revenue, giving rise to what may be termed a

structural deficit. This is illustrated in Figure 4 where the level of
government spending is represented by the heavily drawn vertical line G1.
Unlike the situation depicted in Figure 3, it is not possible to

achieve a viable balanced budget. Moreover, given ignorance of the true
configuration of the Laffer curve, persistent attempts to balance the
budget by raising the tax rate will lead inevitably to positions along

the downward sloping portion of the long-run Laffer curve. For example,
suppose the tax rate is initially set at

.

After

two periods a deficit

equal to cb emerges. Successive attempts to balance the budget by
raising tax rates from

to

and eventually to

t4,

say, give rise to

the path cdefghi and the economy ends up on the ever diverging, self—

defeating downward sloping region of the Laffer curve. Indeed it may not
even be possible to attain a balanced budget during the first period
after a tax rate change--that is, before the onset of tax evading hehavior.
In that case the vertical line representing government expenditure would
be so far to the right in Figure 4 that it would be beyond the reach of
segments of the adjustment path given by cd, ef, and gh.

Perhaps the sort of calamity that Figure 4 suggests is highly
improbable if political decision makers are reluctant to engage in

repeated tax rate increases for fear of adverse voter reaction. Because of
this reluctance, political decision makers might simply decide to live with
an ongoing deficit, staying with a tax rate such as

and deficit cb.

However, it doesn't take blind pursuit of a balanced budget objective to

get onto the downward sloping portion of the Laffer curve. Attempts
to simply reduce the size of the deficit could trigger the same result.

r
C

A

•7j

a'

0

G,T

F/I:.

I

24

IV.

E.

Implications for Inflation and Indexation

We have not explicitly incorporated marginally progressive tax rates and the
indexation of tax brackets to inflation in our model, as represented by

equations (2)-(7). Nonetheless our analysis does seem to suggest some
implications for tax indexation and the effects of inflation on budget

deficits. A rough idea of the significance of inflationary bracket
creep during the inflationary decade of the 1970s is suggested by the
average marginal tax rate estimates of Barro and Sahaskul (1983):
weighted by adjusted gross income, the arithmetic average of the marginal

tax rates rose from 24 percent in 1970 to 30 percent in 1980. The tax
rate referred to in the ensuing discussion is envisioned as such a
measure--the weighted average of the different tax rates in a marginally
progressive tax structure.

It is commonly argued that indexation of a marginally progressive
income tax structure will give rise to larger deficits in the presence of

inflatIon than wouldbe the case without indexation. The argument is
predicated on the idea that the tax bracket creep caused by inflation
automatically generates more tax revenue; hence indexation would eliminate
such automatic tax revenue growth and therefore deficits would become

larger. However our line of analysis suggests that just the opposite
may be the case .

Why?

We have noted that the existence of a structural

deficit, such as depicted in Figure 4, combined with a reluctance to
increase the tax rate for fear of adverse voter reaction, might lead
political decision makers to refrain from tax rate increases and simply
live with an ongoing deficit--the deficit cb associated with the tax
rate

in Figure 4, for example. However, even absent discretionary

25

tax rate increases, an ongoing deficit such as cb may be inherently

unstable. To the extent that an ongoing deficit is accompanied by
inflation, and to the extent that the tax structure is not indexed to
inflation, the greater is the likelihood that the tax rate will be
automatically increased by bracket creep and the economy moved onto the
downward sloping region of the Laffer curve with evergrowing deficits.
Hence, contrary to conventional wisdom, indexation of the tax structure

might well help curb deficit growth rather than promote it.

V. Conclusions
When the effects of tax aversion behavior are explicitly recognized
the conditions for being on the negatively sloped portion of the Laffer
curve are considerably less restrictive than when tax aversion behavior

is not taken into account. However, even if there were only a positively
sloped tax rate-tax revenue relationship, or if a negatively sloped region
were not in the relevant tax rate range, the existence of a lagged private
sector response to tax rate change that exceeds the relevant time horizon

for political decision makers is conducive to the existence of a budget
deficit bias. Given the existence of a negatively sloped region of the
Laffer curve, especially if it begins at reasonably low tax rates,
determined attempts to eliminate or just reduce deficits can become self—

defeating, particularly if there is a structural deficit. Moreover, once
the economy is on the downward sloping portion of the Laffer curve a
combination of political expediency, uncertainty about the shape of the
curve, and a common belief that tax rate increases reduce deficits all

can conspire to keep the budget trapped in deficit. Finally, given the

26

existence of inflation and a marginally progressive income tax, deficit
growth may be less if there is indexation of income tax rates to inflation,
contrary to conventional wisdom.

Fl

Footnotes

1. See, for example, Srinivasan (1973), Yitzhaki (1974), McCaleb (1976),
Weiss (1976), Andersen (1977), Penceval (1979), Christiansen (1980),
Issachsen and Strøm (1980), Sandmo (1981), and Cowell (1981).

2. Cross and Shaw focus on the amounts of income avoiding and evading taxes
which they designate as A and E respectively, where in our notation
A

e2W. In our analysis e and 02 are used to develop

o1W and E

the concept of the effective tax rate.

3. •The specific form of the 0(T) function represented by the curve
passing through point m in Figure 1 is given by

0(T) =

(31+1)(1-T)3.

(i)

The function is decreasing in T

(T)

= —12(1-T)2T

and (T) = 0

<

0,

since

t<1

0 <

when T = 0 or 1.

It has an inflection point at

since

I,
I

320(t)

<

0,

0 <

>

0,

-

= 12(3T—1)(1—T)

L

1

i < —1
< 1

For the function given by (i) the effective tax rate T0(r) is
maximized when r =
0 for T >

.3.

.3,

and (0(T) +

TO'(T))

>

0 for T

< .3,

and

=

1/3

F2

4. One might well ask at this point about the empirical significance of
tax aversion. Tax avoidance is a legal and common practice as
evidenced by the employment of an industry of tax accountants and

attorneys, and the widespread use of itemized deductions. Tax
evasion, the illegal nonpayment of taxes, is extensive and growing, and

its magnitude has been estimated in several recent studies. See for
example, Simon and Witte (1982), Witte (1984), and the recent
U.S. Internal Revenue Service report (1983), as well as the extensive

research in this area cited in each of these documents. Tax evasion as
envisioned inthese studies refers to amounts of income taxes

individuals and corporations should pay but do not. It refers to
income earned from both legal and illegal activity, and encompasses
the activities of the 1underground" as well as the "above ground"

economy. The latest IRS report estimates that $81.5 billion of federal
income tax was lost in the U.S. in 1981 due to unreported legal incomes
and another $9.0 billion due to unreported incomes earned in illegal

endeavors; the total loss of $90.5 billion approximately equaled 22
percent of total federal corporate and personal income taxes actually

collected in 1981. Summarizing findings in several countries,
Witte reports that in general the Scandinavian countries, West Germany,

and the United Kingdom have unrecorded economic activity (therefore
untaxable) comparable to that of the U.S. where such activity amounted
to approximately 12 percent of national income in 1979; in Italy such
activity was estimated to equal 20-25 percent of GNP, while Belgium
and France were estimated to lie somewhere between the estimates for the
U.S. and Italy.

F3

5.

In general this is significant for two reasons. First, the
concept of the tax aversion function and its associated effective tax
rate can in principle be incorporated in any macroeconomic model.
Second, the effective tax rate typically will enter a macro model
in several crucial places, as will become apparent in the ensuing
analysis.

6. Due largely to the pivotal role played by the tax aversion function
and the effective tax rate, the ensving analysis and its implications are
not altered significantly if a more demand—side (Keynesian-type, say)
framework is employed (see section B of the appendix).

7. The tax rate r

is

assumed to be proportional, as noted earlier.

8. The model represented by equations (2)-(7) is merely intended as an
illustrative vehicle for the analysis to follow. It was chosen because
of its generally familiar and recognizeable structure.

9. This point has been made by Shaller (1983) in a classical—type model
where the effects of tax aversion were not considered.

10. Inspection of the expression for

given in section A of the appendix

indicates that every term in the expression is multiplied by
(0(T) +

T0'(T)).

Therefore when (0(T) +

T0'(T))

will switch sign unless: the terms (N +

wf)

switches sign
and/or [(wN +

rk)Cy

+

happen to switch sign at just the same level of T where
(0(T) +

T0'(T))

switches sign and/or the magnitudes of the other terms

in the expression become such as to cause a sign switch at just
that level of T.

Such coincidence seems remote.

rCr]

References

Allingham, Michael G., Sandmo, Agnar, "Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical

Analysis, Journal of Public Economics, 1, (1972): 323-328.

-

Anderson, Per, "Tax Evasion and Labor Supply,' Scandinavian Journal of
Economics, 79, (1978): 375-383.
Barro, Robert J., and Sahasakul, Chaipat, 'Measuring the Average Marginal
Tax Rate from the Individual Income Tax," NBER Working Paper No.
1060, (January 1983).

Buchanan, James M., and Lee, Dwight, R., "Politics, Time, and the Laffer
Curve," J.P.E., 90, no. 4 (August 1982): 816—819.

Christiansen, Vidar, "Two Comments on Tax Evasion," Journal of Public
Economics, 13, (1980): 389—393.

Clotfelter, Charles T., "Tax Evasion and Tax Rates: An Analysis of
Individual Returns," Review of Economics and Statistics, 65,
(1983), 363—373.

Cowell, F.A., "Taxation and Labor Supply with Risky Activities," Economica,
48, no. 192, (1981): 365-379.

Cross, Rodney and Shaw, G.K., "On the Economics of Tax Aversion," Public
Finance, 37, no. 1 (1982): 36-47.

Isachen, Arne J. and Strdm, Steinar, "The Hidden Economy: The Labor
Market and Tax Evasion," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 82,
no. 2, (1980): 304-311.

Kane, E.J., "A Cross Section Study of Tax Avoidance by Large Commercial
Banks," in D.A. Belsey et al. (eds.), Inflation, Trade, and Taxes.
Essays in honor of Alice Bourneouf (Ohio State University Press, 1976):
2 18-246.

R2

Kane, E.J. and Valentini, J.J., "Tax Avoidance by Savings and Loan
Associations before and after the Tax Reform Act of 1969," Journal of
Monetary Economics, 1, (1975): 41-63.

McCaleb, Thomas S., "Tax Evasion and the Differential Taxation of
Labor and Capital Income," Public Finance, 31, no. 2, (1976): 287-294.
Penceval, John H., "A Note on Income Tax Evasion, Labor Supply, and
Nonlinear Tax Schedules," Journal of Public Economics, 12, (1979):
115-124.

Sandmo, Agnar, "Income Tax Evasion, Labor Supply, and the Equity-Efficiency
Tradeoff," Journal of Public Economics, 16, (1981): 265-288.
Shaller, Douglas R., "The Tax_Cut_But_Revenue-Will-Not-Decline Hypothesis
and the Classical Macromodel," Southern Economic Journal, 49, no. 4
(April 1983), 1147—1153.

Simon, Carl P., and Witte, Ann D., Beating the System, Auburn House
Publishing Co., Boston, 1982.
S-'inivasan, T.N., "Tax Evasion: A Model," Journal of Fublic Economics, 2,
(1973): 339-346.

Tobin, James, "The Reagan Economic Plan--Supply-Side, Budget and Inflation,"
in The Reagan Economic Plan (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco, 1981).

U.S. Internal Revenue Service, Income Tax Compliance Research, Department
of the Treasury, Office of the Assistant Commissioner (Planning,
Finance, and Research), Research Division, 1983.
Weiss, Laurence, "The Desireability of Cheating Incentives and Randomness
in the Optimal Income Tax," Journal of Political Economy, 84, no. 6,
(1976): 1343-1352.

R3

Witte, Ann D., 1Unofficial and Unrecorded Market Activity in Developed
Economies: What is and can be Known?," Crime and Justice: An
Annual Review of Research, vol. 5. (Norval Morris and Michael Tonry
(eds.)). Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984.

Yitzhaki, S., "A Note on 'Income-Tax Evasion: A Theoretical Analysis,'"
Journal of Public Economics, 3, (1974), 201-202.

Appendix

, and

A. Derivation of ,

in a Classical—type model

The model is specified by equations (2)-(7) in the text. Recognize
that by the structure of the classical model, equations (2) and (4) -(7)

may be solved independently of (3), so that by substitution of (4) into (2)
the model may be represented more compactly (ignoring the time subscript on T)

I(r)+G—{F(N)—C[F(N)—Te(T)(wN+rK), (1—Te(T))r]} = 0

N-f(w) = 0
N-N[(1-TO(T))w] = 0

Te(T)(wN+rK)—T = 0

Totally differentiating this system of equations and using Cramer's rule yields

.I=

(8a)

.f-_ o

where

(—)

Ir_tO(T)KCy+(1TO(T))Cr

(—)

(—)

F(N)(1_Cy)_TO(t)WCy

(+)
1

0

(+)

0

(

1

)

-rOyt)K

(+)
Teyt)W

TO(T)NC

0

(+)

0

-fw

(-)

_(1_TO(T))Nw 0

(+)
TO(T)

N

—

A2

and where D is obtained from C by replacing the last column of C with d where

(+)

yr

(wN+rK)C +rC

(?)

d =
(—)

-(wN+rK)

Expanding

=

_ rT

't)Y+Te(TCJ w_(1_T0(TNwj< 0

and

IDI= (O(T)+t8'(T)X[Ir+Cr_TO(T)(KCy+Cr) ]E—TO(T)KF}
where
E =

N(N+wf)Te(T)_(wN+rKXf_(1_Te(T))N)

and
F =

[(wN+rK)Cy+rCr

'

w[T0(T) (N+wfw)cy+fWFN(

N) (1Cr)

where the signs of E and F and hence DI are ambiguous. Setting K equal zero

in CI and DI gives (11) in the text.

A3
Again using Cramer's rule, replacing the third column of C with d, it
is readily shown that

dw — —

(B(T)+'rO'(T))N

0 as (&(T)+TO'(T)) >0

1w1_T0(TwJ
Replacing the second column of C with d, by Cramer's rule
dN

=-

[(O(T)+TO'(T))N

ffw_(l_TT)wj

]

>

0 as (O(t)+tO'(t))

>

0

Replacing the first column of C with d to form a matrix H, by Cramer's
rule

dr_

H >0

dT

C

where
iHI

= (e(T)+TeI(T))Nw[fw(FM(N)(Cy_1)_TO(T)WCy)+T0(T)NCy]
+

[(wN+rK)Cy+rCr] w_(1_T0(t)w] }

0

B. Tax Revenue-Tax Rate Relationship in a Fixed Wage, Flexible Price
Keynesian Model

It is possible to generate a Laffer curve from Keynesian—type models.

This is illustrated here for the conventional fixed-wage-flexible—price
Keynesian model.

The model is specified quite conventionally as follows (ignoring the time
subscript on

I(r)+G_{y-C[(y—T),(1—T6(r))r]) = 0

(ib)

M(y,(1—Te(T))r)—M/p = 0

(2b)

FN(N)_W/p = 0

(3b)

w-i/p = 0

(4b)

y-F(N) = 0

(5b)

=0

(6b)

t&(t)wN+ie(t)rK-T

where W is the fixed money wage and all other variables and functions are as

defined previously in the paper. Goods market equilibrium is given by (ib),
money market equilibrium by (2b), the labor market is represented by
(3b) and (4b), the production function by (5b), and the tax revenue function

by (6b). The model may be represented more compactly by substituting
(sb), (4b), and (5b) into (ib), (2b), and (6b) to give

I(r)+G_{F(N)_C[F(N)_r6(T)(FN(N)N+rK),

(1—To(T))r]

} =

0

M(F(N),(1_Te(r)r)_FN(N) = 0
To(T)FN(N)N+Te(T)rK_T = 0

B2

Totally differentiating this system of equation and using Cramer's rule

yields
(7b)

where

(?)

(—)

0
_(1_CY)FN(N)_Te(T)(FNN(N)N+FN(N))

(+)

A =

0

(-)

MYFN(N)_ — FNN(N)

(—)

(1_TO(T))Mr

(?)

—1

Ir_T8(TCy

(+)

TO(T)K

TO(T)(FNN(N)N+FN(N))

and where B is obtained from A by replacing the first column of A with b where
(+)

Cy(FN(N)+rK)
(?)

b =

(O(T)+TO'(T))

(—)

rMr
( —)

-(wN+rK)

Even if Samuelson's correspondence principle is invoked to establish that
Al <

0,

it is clear from inspection of the signs of the elements of A and b

that the sign of IBI, and hence of (7b), is ambiguous. Again using Cramer's

B
rule and assuming IA < 0, if the second column of A is replaced with b
to form a matrix C, it follows that (assuming (O(T)+TO'(T))>O)

dN
—
dT

=

C
A

<0

and from (5b) that

<0.
dT

Hence it is not difficult to see that while increasing the tax rate T causes
output to fall over the whole range of the tax rate (0<T<1), total tax
revenue T could at first rise over some range of T and then decline over the
remainder.

