NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS OF FINANCIAL SHOCKS
Urban Jermann
Vincenzo Quadrini
Working Paper 15338
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15338

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2009

We would like to thank Pietro Reichlin for a helpful discussion and seminar participants at Bank of
Italy, CEMFI in Madrid, CERGE in Prague, ITAM in Mexico, Kansas City Fed, National Bank of
Belgium, New York Fed, 2009 SED meeting in Istanbul, University of Alicante, University of Porto,
University of Virginia and Wharton School. Some material in this paper was previously incorporated
in the companion paper "Financial Innovations and Macroeconomic Volatility". Financial support
from the National Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Urban Jermann and Vincenzo Quadrini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Macroeconomic Effects of Financial Shocks
Urban Jermann and Vincenzo Quadrini
NBER Working Paper No. 15338
September 2009
JEL No. E32,G10
ABSTRACT
In this paper we document the cyclical properties of U.S. firms' financial flows. Equity payouts are
procyclical and debt payouts are countercyclical. We develop a model with explicit roles for debt and
equity financing and explore how the observed dynamics of real and financial variables are affected
by 'financial shocks', that is, shocks that affect the firms' capacity to borrow. Standard productivity
shocks can only partially explain the movements in real and financial variables. The addition of financial
shocks brings the model much closer to the data. The recent events in the financial sector show up
clearly in our model as a tightening of firms' financing conditions causing the GDP decline in 2008-09.
Our analysis also suggests that the downturns in 1990-91 and 2001 were strongly influenced by changes
in credit conditions.

Urban Jermann
Finance Department
Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
jermann@wharton.upenn.edu
Vincenzo Quadrini
Department of Finance and Business Economics
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
701 Exposition Boulevard
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
quadrini@usc.edu

1

Introduction

Recent economic events starting with the subprime crisis in the summer of
2007 suggest that the financial sector plays an important role as a source of
business cycle fluctuations. While there is a long tradition in macroeconomics
to model financial frictions, most of the literature has focused on the role
played by the financial sector in propagating shocks that originate in other
sectors of the economy. For example in the propagation of productivity
shocks. Instead, the importance of financial shocks—that is, perturbations
that originate directly in the financial sector—has not been fully explored
in the literature. Moreover, most of the previous studies have not tried
to replicate simultaneously real aggregate variables and aggregate flows of
financing, in particular, debt and equity. In this paper we attempt to make
some progress along these dimensions.
We start by documenting the cyclical properties of firms’ equity and debt
flows at an aggregate level. We then build a business cycle model with explicit roles for firms’ debt and equity financing. Debt contracts are not fully
enforceable and the ability to borrow is limited by an enforcement constraint.
The enforcement constraint is subject to random disturbances which we call
‘financial shocks’. To examine the model’s empirical implications, we propose
a method for recovering the financial shocks directly from the model’s enforcement constraint using time series data for debt, capital and output. Our
method parallels the standard approach for measuring productivity shocks
as residuals from the production function using empirical measurements of
output, capital and labor.
Using the constructed series of financial and productivity shocks, we show
that the model driven solely by productivity shocks fails to capture the key
dynamic features of U.S. business cycles as well as the behavior of equity
and debt flows. The model augmented with financial shocks is much closer
to the data—not only for capturing the dynamics of financial flows but also
for generating the dynamics of the real business cycle quantities, especially
labor. The simulation of the model show a worsening of firms’ ability to
borrow in 2008-09 with a sharp economic downturn. This is in line with the
standard interpretation of the economic events beginning in the summer of
2007. The simulation of the model also shows that the economic downturns
in 1990-91 and 2001 were strongly influenced by changes in credit conditions.
In our model firms finance investment with equity and debt. The firms’
ability to borrow is limited by an enforcement constraint that depends on
1

the lifetime profitability of the firm. As the profitability varies with the
business cycle, so does a firm’s ability to borrow. In this regard our model is
related to Kiyotaki & Moore (1997), Bernanke, Gertler & Gilchrist (1999),
and Mendoza & Smith (2005). Our model, however, differs in two important
dimensions. First, we allow firms to have negative equity payouts, which can
be interpreted as new equity issues. Therefore, in choosing the stock of equity
the firm is not limited to reinvesting profits.1 Second, we consider shocks that
affect directly the financial sector of the economy. Therefore, the financial
sector can act as a source of the business cycle, in addition to affecting the
propagation of shocks that originate in other sectors of the economy. In
this respect our paper is related to Benk, Gillman & Kejak (2005) who also
consider shocks affecting the financial sector. However, the nature of the
financial shocks and the structure of the model considered in these papers
are very different from ours. Recent contributions by Christiano, Motto
& Rostagno (2008), Gilchrist, Yankov & Zakrajsek (2009) and Kiyotaki &
Moore (2008), have also considered shocks that originate in the financial
sector and suggest that these shocks could play an important role as a source
of macroeconomic fluctuations.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we consider some empirical evidence on real and financial cycles in the US economy. Section
3 presents the model and characterizes some of the properties analytically.
Model calibration and quantitative findings are presented in Section 4.

2

Real and financial cycles in the U.S.

This section presents the main empirical observations that motivate the paper. It describes the properties of real and financial business cycles. We start
by reporting the business cycle properties of firms’ aggregate financial flows.
To our knowledge, these properties have not been previously documented
and explored in the macro literature.
Figure 1 plots the net payments to equity holders and the net debt repurchases in the nonfinancial business sector (corporate and noncorporate).
1

There are other studies that allow for equity issuance over the business cycle. See, for
example, Choe, Masulis & Nanda (1993), Covas and den Haan (2005), Leary and Roberts
(2005), and Hennessy & Levy (2005). The main focus of these studies, however, is on the
financial behavior of firms, not in the quantitative relevance of financial frictions for the
macroeconomic propagation of aggregate shocks.

2

Financial data is from the Flow of Funds Accounts of the Federal Reserve
Board. Equity payout is defined as dividends and share repurchases minus
equity issues of nonfinancial corporate businesses, minus net proprietor’s investment in noncorporate businesses. This captures the net payments to business owners (shareholders of corporations and noncorporate business owners).
Debt is defined as ‘Credit Market Instruments’ which include only liabilities
that are directly related to credit markets transactions. It does not include,
for instance, tax liabilities. Debt repurchases are simply the reduction in
outstanding debt (or increase if negative). Both variables are expressed as
a fraction of nonfarm business GDP. See Appendix A for a more detailed
description.

Figure 1: Financial flows in the nonfinancial business sector (corporate and
noncorporate): 1952.1-2009.1. Source: Flow of Funds, Federal reserve Board.
Two patterns are visible in the figure, very strongly so for the second half
of the period considered. First, equity payouts are negatively correlated with
debt repurchases. This suggests that there is some substitutability between
equity and debt financing. Second, while equity payouts tend to increase in
booms, debt repurchases increase during or around recessions. This suggests
3

that recessions lead firms to restructure their financial positions by cutting
debt and reducing the payments made to shareholders.
The properties of real and financial cycles are further characterized in
Table 1. The table reports the standard deviations and correlations with
GDP for equity payouts and debt repurchases in the nonfinancial sector.
Statistics for a number of key business cycle variables are also presented.
Equity payouts and debt repurchases are normalized by the value added
produced in the sector. For these two variables we do not take logs because
some observations are negative. All variables are detrended with a band-pass
filter that preserves cycles of 1.5-8 years (Baxter and King (1999)).
Table 1: Business cycles properties of macroeconomic and financial variables,
1984:1-2009:1.
Std(Variable)

Corr(Variable,GDP)

0.84
0.49
5.98
1.18
0.60

0.83
0.87
0.81
0.38

1.05
1.29

0.41
-0.61

Macroeconomic variables
GDP
Consumption (N.D.& S.)
Investment
Hours
TFP
Financial variables
EquPay/GDP
DebtRep/GDP

Notes: Financial data is from the Flow of Funds Accounts of the Federal
Reserve Board. Equity payout is net dividends minus net issue of corporate
equity (net of share repurchases) minus proprietor’s net investment in the
noncorporate sectors. Debt repurchase is the negative of the net increase in
credit market instruments. Both variables are divided by their sectoral GDP.
The macroeconomic variables have been logged. All variables are detrended
with a band-pass filter that preserves cycles of 1.5-8 years (Baxter and King
(1999). See Appendix A for more details.

We focus on the period after 1984 for two reasons. First, it has been
widely documented in relation with the so called Great Moderation that
1984 corresponds to a break in the volatility in many business cycle variables
(quite possibly the downturn in 2008 might mark a further break). Second,
as documented in Jermann and Quadrini (2008), this time period also saw
major changes in U.S. financial markets compared to the previous period.
In particular, spurred by regulatory changes, share repurchases have become
4

more common, and this seems to have had a major impact on firms’ payout
policies and financial flexibility. This is apparent in Figure 1 where the
volatility of the financial flows changes after the early 1980s. Therefore, by
concentrating on the period after 1984 we do not have to address the causes
of the structural break that arose in the early 1980s.
The correlations of equity payouts and debt repurchases with output confirm the properties we highlighted in Figure 1. Equity payouts are procyclical
and debt repurchases are countercyclical for the nonfinancial business sector.
These properties also hold if we exclude the noncorporate business and consider only the nonfinancial corporate sector (not reported in the table to
economize on space). The business cycle properties of the real variables
reported in Table 1 are well known, and we will get back to them when
comparing the model to the data.

3

Model

We start with the description of the environment in which an individual firm
operates as this is where our model diverges from a more standard business
cycle model. We then present the household sector and define the general
equilibrium.

3.1

Financial and investment decisions of firms

There is a continuum of firms, in the [0, 1] interval, with a gross revenue
function F (zt , kt , lt ) = zt ktθ lt1−θ . The variable zt is the stochastic level of
productivity, kt is the input of capital depreciating at rate δ, lt is the input
of labor. Consistent with the typical timing convention, kt is chosen at time
t − 1, and therefore, it is predetermined at time t. Instead, the input of labor
lt can be flexibly changed in period t.
Firms use equity and debt. Debt, denoted by bt , is preferred to equity
(pecking order) because of its tax advantage as, for example, in Hennessy
and Whited (2005). Given rt the interest rate, the effective gross rate for the
firm is Rt = 1 + rt (1 − τ ), where τ represents the tax benefit.
The ability to borrow is bounded by the limited enforceability of debt
contracts as firms can default on their obligations. Let V t (kt+1 , bt+1 ) be the
equity value of the firm at the end of the period, after investing and paying
the shareholders. At this point the individual states of the firm are given by
5

the new stock of capital, kt+1 and the new debt, bt+1 . The equity value is
defined as the expected discounted value of equity payouts starting from the
next period, that is,
V t (kt+1 , bt+1 ) = Et

∞
X

mt+j dt+j ,

j=1

where mt+j is the relevant stochastic discount factor, which we will derive
later, and dt+j is the payment to the shareholders (equity payout). We have
made explicit that the equity value at the end of the period depends on the
individual state variables, capital and debt. The subscript t captures the
dependence on the aggregate states. The firm’s value is typically decreasing
in the end-of-period debt because, everything else equal, debt reduces the
future payments that can be made to the shareholders.
Default arises after the realization of revenues. In case of default, the firm
(equity owners) has the ability to retain the revenues F (zt , kt , lt ), as these are
liquid funds that can be easily diverted, and renegotiates the debt. In case
of renegotiation the lender can sell the firm but can recover only a fraction
ξt < 1 of the equity value V t . The variable ξt is stochastic and takes the
same value for all firms. The stochastic nature of this variable derives from
changes in the liquidity of the firm’s assets (resale value) and/or the relative
bargaining powers of firm owners and lenders in case of renegotiation. This
is described in details in Appendix B.
Because of the loss of value in liquidating the firm (ξt < 1), both parties
have an interest in renegotiating the debt. Appendix B describes in details
the intra-period transactions and timing of the renegotiation game and show
that this leads to the following enforcement constraint:
ξt V t (kt+1 , bt+1 ) ≥ F (zt , kt , lt ).

(1)

The variable ξt plays a crucial rule in determining the borrowing capacity
of the firm and we refer to its stochastic innovations as “financial shocks”.
Since ξt is the same for all firms, the stochastic innovations are aggregate
shocks. Therefore, we have two sources of aggregate uncertainty: productivity, zt , and financial, ξt . Since these are not idiosyncratic shocks, we will
concentrate on the symmetric equilibrium where all firms are alike (representative firm).
To see more clearly how ξt affects the financing and production decisions
of the firm, we rewrite the enforcement constraint in a slightly modified
6

fashion. First, let’s define Vt (kt , bt ) = dt + V t (kt+1 , bt+1 ) the equity value
of the firm at the beginning of the period, before making any payment to
the shareholders. At the beginning of the period the individual states are
the capital and the debt chosen in the previous period. The enforcement
constraint (1) can then be rewritten as:
h

i

ξt Vt (kt , bt ) − dt ≥ F (zt , kt , lt ).
At the beginning of the period kt and bt are given. The only variables
that can be changed to balance the enforcement constraint are the input of
labor, lt , and the equity payout, dt . Therefore, if we start from a pre-shock
state in which the enforcement constraint is binding and the firm wants to
keep the production plan unchanged, a negative financial shock (lower ξt )
requires a reduction in equity payout dt . In other words, the firm is forced
to increase its equity, and therefore, to reduce the new debt. However, if the
firm cannot reduce dt , it has to cut employment. Thus, whether the financial
shock affects employment depends on the flexibility with which the firm can
change its financial structure, that is, the composition of debt and equity
financing.
To formalize the rigidities affecting the substitution between debt and
equity, we assume that the firm’s payout is subject to a quadratic cost:
¯2
ϕ(dt ) = dt + κ · (dt − d)
where κ ≥ 0, and d¯ is a coefficient whose value is equal to the long-run payout
target (steady state).
The equity payout cost should not be interpreted necessarily as a pecuniary cost. It is a simple way of modeling the speed with which firms can
change the source of funds when the financial conditions change. Of course,
the possible pecuniary costs associated with share repurchases and equity
issuance can also be incorporated in the function ϕ(.). The convexity assumption would then be consistent with the work of Hansen & Torregrosa
(1992) and Altinkilic & Hansen (2000), showing that underwriting fees display increasing marginal cost in the size of the offering.
Another way of thinking about the adjustment cost is that it captures
the preferences of managers for dividend smoothing. Lintner (1956) showed
first that managers are concerned about smoothing dividends over time, a
fact further confirmed by subsequent studies. This could derive from agency
problems associated with the issuance or repurchase of shares as emphasized
7

by several studies in finance. The explicit modeling of these agency conflicts,
however, is beyond the scope of this paper.2
The parameter κ is key for determining the impact of financial frictions.
When κ = 0 the economy is almost equivalent to a frictionless economy. In
this case, debt adjustments triggered by the financial shocks can be quickly
accommodated through changes in firm equity. When κ > 0, the substitution
between debt and equity becomes costly and firms readjust the sources of
funds slowly. In this case, financial shocks can have non-negligible effects, in
the short-run, on the production decision of firms.
Firm’s problem: We now write the problem of the firm recursively. The
individual states are the capital stock, k, and the debt, b. The aggregate
states, which we will make precise later, are denoted by s.
The firm chooses the input of labor, l, the equity payout, d, the new
capital, k 0 , and the new debt, b0 . The optimization problem is:
(

)
0

0

0

0

V (s; k, b) = max
d + Em V (s ; k , b )
0 0
d,l,k ,b

(2)

subject to:
(1 − δ)k + F (z, k, l) − wl +

b0
= b + ϕ(d) + k 0
R

ξEm0 V (s0 ; k 0 , b0 ) ≥ F (z, k, l)

The problem is subject to the budget and the enforcement constraints.
The function V (s; k, b) is the cum-dividend (fundamental) market value of
the firm and m0 is the stochastic discount factor. The variables w and R
are, respectively, the wage rate and the effective gross interest rate. The
stochastic discount factor, the wage and interest rate are determined in the
general equilibrium and are taken as given by an individual firm.
2

As an alternative to the adjustment cost on equity payouts, we could use a quadratic
cost on the change of debt, which would lead to similar properties. Therefore, our model
can be interpreted more broadly as capturing the rigidities in the adjustment of all sources
of funds, not only equity.

8

Denote by µ the Lagrange multiplier associated with the enforcement
constraint. The first-order conditions are:
1
Fl (z, k, l) = w ·
,
1 − µϕd (d)


0







0

(3)
0



0

0

0



(1 + ξµ)E m̃ 1 − δ + 1 − µ ϕd (d ) Fk (z , k , l ) = 1,

(4)

(1 + ξµ)RE m̃0 = 1.

(5)





(d)
is the ‘effective’ stochastic discount factor. Subscripts
where m̃0 = m0 · ϕϕdd(d
0)
denote derivatives. The detailed derivation is in Appendix C.
Especially important for understanding the key findings of the paper is
the optimality condition for labor, equation (3). As usual, the marginal productivity of labor is equalized to the marginal cost. However, the marginal
cost is the wage rate augmented by a wedge that depends on the ‘effective’
tightness of the enforcement constraint, that is, µϕd (d). A tighter enforcement constraint increases the effective cost of labor and reduces the firm’s
demand for labor. Similarly, when the enforcement constraint becomes less
tight, the effective cost of labor declines, increasing its demand. Therefore,
the main channel through which financial shocks are transmitted to the real
sector of the economy is by affecting the demand of labor.
To get further insights, it will be convenient to consider the special case
without any cost of equity payout, that is, κ = 0. Thus, ϕd (d) = ϕd (d0 ) = 1,
m̃0 = m0 and condition (5) becomes (1 + ξµ)REm = 1. Taking as given the
aggregate prices R and Em0 , this condition implies that there is a negative
relation between the financial shock, ξ, and the multiplier µ. In other words,
lower liquidation values of the firm’s equities make the enforcement constraint
more binding. Then from condition (3) we see that a higher value of µ implies
a lower demand of labor.
This mechanism is reinforced when κ > 0. In this case it will be costly
to re-adjust the financial structure and the change in ξ induces a larger
movement in µ. Of course, the change in the policies of all firms will also
affect the equilibrium prices, with some feedback on the individual policies.
To derive the response of prices we have to close the model and derive the
general equilibrium.

9

3.2

Households sector and general equilibrium

There is a continuum of homogeneous households maximizing the expected
P
t
lifetime utility E0 ∞
t=0 β U (ct , lt ), where ct is consumption, lt is labor, and β
is the discount factor. Households are the owners (shareholders) of firms. In
addition to equity shares, they hold non-contingent bonds issued by firms.
The household’s budget constraint is:
wt lt + bt + st (dt + qt ) =

bt+1
+ st+1 qt + ct + Tt
1 + rt

where wt and rt are the wage and interest rates, bt is the one-period bond, st
the equity shares, dt the equity payout received from the ownership of shares,
qt is the market price of shares, and Tt = Bt+1 /[1 + rt (1 − τ )] − Bt+1 /(1 + rt )
are lump-sum taxes financing the tax benefits received by firms on debt.
The first order conditions with respect to labor, lt , next period bonds,
bt+1 , and next period shares, st+1 , are:
wt Uc (ct , lt ) + Uh (ct , lt ) = 0

(6)

Uc (ct , lt ) − β(1 + rt )EUc (ct+1 , lt+1 ) = 0

(7)

Uc (ct , lt )qt − βE(dt+1 + qt+1 )Uc (ct+1 , lt+1 ) = 0.

(8)

The first two conditions are key to determine the supply of labor and
the risk-free interest rate. The last condition determines the market price of
shares. After re-arranging and using forward substitution, this price is:
qt = Et

∞
X
j=1

β j · Uc (ct+j , lt+j )
dt+j .
Uc (ct , lt )
!

Firms’ optimization is consistent with households’ optimization. Therefore, the stochastic discount factor is equal to mt+j = β j Uc (ct+j , lt+j )/Uc (ct , lt ).
We can now provide the definition of a recursive general equilibrium. The
set of aggregate states s are given by the current value of productivity z, the
current value of the financial variable ξ, the aggregate capital K, and the
aggregate bonds B. Therefore, s = (z, ξ, K, B).
Definition 3.1 (Recursive equilibrium) A recursive competitive equilibrium is defined as a set of functions for (i) households’ policies c(s; b) and
10

l(s; b); (ii) firms’ policies d(s; k, b), l(s; k, b), k(s; k, b) and b(s; k, b); (iii)
firms’ value V (s; k, b); (iv) aggregate prices w(s), r(s) and m(s, s0 ); (v) law
of motion for the aggregate states s0 = H(s). Such that: (i) household’s policies satisfy the optimality conditions (6)-(7); (ii) firms’ policies are optimal
and V (s; k, b) satisfies the Bellman’s equation (2); (iii) the wage and interest
rates are the equilibrium clearing prices in the labor and bond markets and
m(s, s0 ) = βUc (ct+1 , lt+1 )/Uc (ct , lt ); (iv) the law of motion H(s) is consistent
with individual decisions and the stochastic processes of z and ξ.

3.3

Some characterization of the equilibrium

To illustrate some of the properties of the model, it will be convenient to
look at two special cases in which the equilibrium can be characterized analytically. First, we show that for a deterministic steady state with constant
z and ξ, the default constraint is always binding. Second, if τ = 0 and
κ = 0, changes in ξ (financial shocks) have no effect on the real sector of the
economy.
Proposition 3.1 If τ > 0 the enforcement constraint binds in the steady
state.
In a deterministic steady state m = 1/(1 + r) and ϕd (d) = ϕd (d0 ) =
1. Therefore, the first order condition for debt, equation (5), simplifies to
¯
(1 + ξµ)Rm
= 1, where ξ¯ is the steady state value. Substituting the above
¯
definition of m, we get (1 + ξµ)R
= 1 + r. Because R = 1 + r(1 − τ ), we
must have that µ > 0 if τ > 0. Thus, as long as there is a tax benefit from
issuing debt, the enforcement constraint is binding in a steady state.
With uncertainty, however, the constraint may not be binding at all times
because firms may reduce their borrowing in anticipation of future shocks.
However, the constraint is always binding if τ is sufficiently large and the
shocks are sufficiently small. This will be the case in the quantitative exercises we will present in the next sections.
Let’s consider now the stochastic economy concentrating on the special
case in which τ = 0 and κ = 0. We have the following proposition:
Proposition 3.2 With τ = 0 and κ = 0, changes in ξ have no effect on l
and k 0 .

11

When κ = 0 we have that ϕd (d) = ϕd (d0 ) = 1 and m̃0 = m0 . Therefore,
the first order condition (5) can be written as (1 + ξµ)REm0 = 1. From the
household’s first order condition (7) we have that (1+r)Em0 = 1. Combining
these two conditions we get (1 + ξµ)[1 + r(1 − τ )] = 1 + r. When τ = 0 this
condition implies ξµ = 0. Therefore, µ is always zero and, assuming that
the aggregate prices do not change, the firm’s choice of l and k 0 will not be
affected by the change in ξ.
What we have to show next is that the sequence of prices do remain
constant if firms do not change l and k 0 . This becomes obvious once we
recognize that changes in debt issuance and equity payout associated with
fluctuations in ξ cancel out in the household’s budget constraint. Therefore,
the sequence of prices do not change in equilibrium and financial shocks are
fully neutral for the real sector of the economy.
We have then established that, when τ = 0 and κ = 0, business cycle
movements are only driven by fluctuations in aggregate productivity z. The
model becomes a standard RBC model. In fact, the key first order conditions
become:
wUc (c, l) + Ul (c, l) = 0,
Fl (z, k, l) = w,
βUc (c0 , l0 )
E
Uc (c, l)
(

)

0

0

0



1 − δ + Fk (z , k , l ) = 1.

which are the first order conditions for the standard RBC model. In this particular version of the model, the financial structure of firms is undetermined,
that is, firms are indifferent between debt and equity.

4

Quantitative analysis

In this section we show first that the model with only productivity shocks
cannot replicate the business cycle movements of real and financial flows experienced by the U.S. economy since the mid 1980s. We then show that
adding financial shocks not only improves the model’s predictions for the financial flows, but also for the key macroeconomic variables, especially working hours. In particular, the consideration of financial shocks allows the
12

model to capture the GDP downturn of 2008-09, as well as the downturns
in the previous two recessions, 1990-91 and 2001. This suggests that tighter
credit conditions have played an important role in all the recessions experienced by the U.S. economy since the mid 1980s. Let’s first describe the
parametrization.

4.1

Parametrization

The parameters can be grouped into two sets. The first set includes parameters that can be calibrated using steady state targets, some of which
are typical in the business cycle literature. The second group includes parameters that cannot be calibrated using steady state targets. The model
doesn’t admit a closed form solution in general, and therefore, we use numerical methods. In the computation we conjecture that the enforcement
constraints are always binding and solve a linear approximation of the dynamic system (see Appendix D). The model solution is then used to check
the initial conjecture of bonding constraints. We have also solved the model
with a more general non-linear approach that accommodates occasionally
binding constraints. Appendix E describes the computational method and
shows that the solution based on the linear approximation is quite accurate.
4.1.1

Parameters set with steady state targets

The period in the model is a quarter. We set β = 0.9825, implying that the
annual steady state return from holding shares is 7.32 percent. The utility
function takes the form U (c, l) = ln(c)+α·ln(1−l) where α = 1.9265 is chosen
to have steady state hours equal to 0.3. The Cobb-Douglas parameter in the
production function is set to θ = 0.36 and the depreciation to δ = 0.025. The
mean value of z is normalized to 1. These values are standard in the literature
and they are based on the typical steady state targets. The quantitative
properties of the model are not very sensitive to this first group of parameters.
The tax wedge is set to τ = 0.35. This corresponds to the benefit of debt
over equity if the marginal tax rate is 35 percent. This parameter is important
for the quantitative performance of the model because it determines whether
the enforcement constraint is binding. As we will see, with this value of τ (and
the remaining parametrization of the model), the enforcement constraint is
almost always binding in all simulations conducted in the paper.

13

¯ is chosen to match the average
The mean value of the financial variable, ξ,
leverage, that is, the ratio of debt, b, over the capital stock, k. We impose
a steady state leverage of 0.46 which is the average value over the period
1984-2009:1 for the Nonfinancial Business sector in the Flow of Funds data.
4.1.2

Parameters that cannot be set with steady state targets

The parameters that cannot be set with steady state targets are those determining the stochastic properties of the shocks and the cost of equity payout,
the parameter κ. Of course, in a steady state equilibrium, the stochastic
properties of the shocks do not matter and the equity payout is always equal
to the long-term target. Therefore, we have to use an alternative procedure.
For the productivity shock zt we follow the standard Solow residuals approach. This recovers the realizations of the productivity shock from the
production function using aggregate times series for output and factor inputs (capital and labor). To construct the series of financial shocks ξt , we
follow a similar approach but using the enforcement constraint: given empirical times series for output, productivity, capital and debt, we derive the
financial shocks as residuals from the enforcement constraint. This approach
implies that we do not directly force any endogenous variable in the model
to perfectly match an individual data series. Once we have constructed the
series for the two shocks over the period 1984:1-2009:1, we estimate a two
dimensional autoregressive system.
Let’s start with the productivity shocks. From the production function
used in the model we have
ẑt = ŷt − θ k̂t − (1 − θ) ˆlt
where ẑt , ŷt , k̂t and ˆlt are the percentage (or log-) deviations from the deterministic trend. Given the parameter θ chosen above and the empirical series
for ŷt , k̂t and ˆlt , we construct the series for ẑt .
For the financial variable ξt we use the enforcement constraint under the
assumption that it is always binding, that is,
ξt V t = yt .
The assumption that the enforcement constraint is always satisfied with
equality will then be verified ex-post.
The construction of the series for ξt using the enforcement constraint
requires empirical series for V t and yt . While GDP is the natural empirical
14

counterpart for output yt , choosing the empirical counterpart of V t is more
challenging. At least for publicly traded firms, we could use stock market
valuations. However, given the noise in stock market prices and the well
known difficulties for small scale models to match stock prices data, we do
not follow this route. Instead, we use the model to derive a representation
of V t in terms of variables that can be measured more conveniently from the
data.
Given the recursive structure of the model, V t can be expressed as a
function of the following four variables: (zt , ξt , kt+1 , brt+1 ). The variable brt+1 ≡
bt+1 /Rt is the end-of-period value of the debt. The reason we use brt+1 instead
of bt+1 is because the former corresponds more directly to the value reported
in the data (end-of-period balance sheet).3 Then, the linearized version of
the enforcement constraint can be written as:
ξˆt = cz zbt + cy ybt + ck kbt+1 + cbbbrt+1 ,
where the hat sign denotes log-deviations from the steady state. The terms
(cz , cy , ck , cb ) are coefficients that are functions of the model parameters.
Therefore, given empirical series for zbt , ybt , kbt+1 and bbrt+1 , we can construct
the series for the financial variable ξˆt .
For ybt and kbt+1 , we use the same empirical counterparts as for the construction of the productivity shocks zt . For bbrt+1 we use the debt series for
nonfinancial businesses consistent with the debt data discussed earlier in the
paper. All series are in real terms and the log value is linearly detrended. A
more detailed description is provided Appendix A.
Once we have constructed the time series for the productivity and financial shocks, we estimate the two dimensional system
ẑt+1
ξˆt+1

!

=A

ẑt
ξˆt

!

+

εz,t+1
εξ,t+1

!

,

(9)

where A is a two-by-two matrix.
At this point we are left with the equity cost parameter κ. This is chosen
so that the standard deviation of equity payout (normalized by output) is
as in the data over the period 1984-2009:1. Note that the coefficients used
3

We could have expressed the equity value as a function of (zt , ξt , kt , bt ). However,
the specification in terms of kt+1 and bt+1 /Rt is preferable because the terms kt+1 and
bt+1 /Rt represents the end-of-period value of capital and debt, which correspond to the
balance sheet values reported in the data.

15

to derive the financial shocks, cz , cy , ck , cb , are themselves a function of the
estimated transition matrix A and the payout cost parameter κ. We therefore have to use an iterative procedure. We start with initial guesses for A
and κ, solve the model to derive cz , cy , ck , cb , and then we estimate the shock
process to get a new value for A. The process is repeated until convergence.
Convergence is extremely fast and it is not sensitive to different initial conditions. Because payout volatility is decreasing in the cost parameter κ, this
parameter is also easily determined.4
Figure 2 displays the constructed series for productivity and financial
shocks. The full set of parameters values are reported in Table 2.
Table 2: Parametrization.
Description

Discount factor
Tax advantage
Utility parameter
Production technology
Depreciation rate
Enforcement parameter
Payout cost parameter
Std of productivity innovations
Std of credit innovations
Correlation of shock innovations

β = 0.9825
τ = 0.3500
α = 1.8991
θ = 0.3600
δ = 0.0250
ξ¯ = 0.1965
κ = 0.2460
0.0044
0.0111
0.357


Matrix for the shocks process

4

A=

0.928
0.053

−0.004
0.971



An alternative approach to construct the financial shocks that does not require an
iterative procedure is based on the approximation of V t by the book value of equity
kt+1 − bt+1 /Rt . In the model, V t tracks quite closely the book value kt+1 − bt+1 /Rt . In
the special case where τ = 0 and κ = 0, V t is exactly equal to kt+1 − bt+1 /Rt . As it turns
out, the shocks measured through the model implied V t , are very similar to those obtained
by simply replacing the market value of equity V t by the book value kt+1 − bt+1 /Rt (see
Figure 2). It would also be possible to change the model by specifying the enforcement
constraint as ξt (kt+1 − bt+1 /Rt ) ≥ yt . The quantitative properties are almost unaffected
by this change.

16

4.2

Findings

We now study the dynamics of the model induced by the constructed series of
shocks. In particular, starting with the initial values ẑ1984:1 and ξˆ1984:1 , we use
the estimated parameters of the autoregressive structure (9) to generate the
sequences of innovations εz,t and εξ,t that replicate exactly the series ẑt and
ξˆt , for t=1984:2,..,2009:1. We then feed these innovations into the model and
compute the responses for the key macroeconomic and financial variables.
Although we feed into the model the actual sequence of shocks, they are not
perfectly anticipated by the agents. They forecast future values of zt and ξt
using the autoregressive system (9).
4.2.1

Productivity shocks

We consider first the dynamics of the model induced by the series of productivity shocks εz,t only. The financial shocks εξ,t are set to their unconditional
¯
mean of zero and the initial value of ξ to its mean ξ.
Figure 3 plots the series of output, hours worked and financial flows. To
highlight the importance of financial frictions, the figure also reports the
responses generated by the model without financial frictions. This version of
the model is obtained by setting τ = 0 and κ = 0. With these two parameter
values, the real sector of the model becomes equivalent to the standard real
business cycle model. The financial flows become indeterminate because
firms are indifferent between debt and equity financing. Thus, the financial
flows are plotted only for the model with financial frictions.
As can be seen from the figure, the series generated by the two models,
with and without financial frictions, poorly match their empirical counterparts. In particular, while the data shows an output boom during the 1990s,
the simulated series displays a decline. This pattern is also present in working
hours, a fact that has been emphasized in McGrattan and Prescott (2007).
It is also worth noting that the model does not generate the large output
drop observed during the last two quarters of 2008 and the first quarter of
2009. Also, the drops in output experienced by the US economy during the
previous two recessions, 1990-91 and 2001, are significantly smaller than in
the data.
The performance of the model in terms of labor is even worse. The model
is now also unable to generate enough volatility of hours. In the sensitivity
analysis we show that this finding is robust to the alternative specification
17

of preferences based on indivisible labor as in Hansen (1985).
The model does also a poor job in capturing the movements in debt
and equity flows, which are plotted in the lower panels of Figure 3. The
properties of the model with financial frictions are further illustrated by the
impulse responses to a one-time productivity shock reported in Figure 6.
One conclusion we draw from Figure 3 is that, with only productivity
shocks, financial frictions do not improve the performance of the model. In
fact, as shown in the upper left panel, output is now slightly less volatile than
in the case without financial frictions. To understand why financial frictions
dampen the response of output to productivity shocks, we should look at
the enforcement constraint (1). Consider a positive productivity shock. This
affects directly the right hand side of the enforcement constraint, making it
tighter. The fact that the enforcement constraint becomes tighter counterbalances the expansionary impulse induced by the productivity improvement.
As a result, output increases less.
4.2.2

Financial shocks

Figure 4 plots the series of output, hours worked, and financial flows in
response to the sequence of financial shocks. With financial shocks only, the
dynamics of output and labor is now much closer to the data. In particular we
now see a boom in output and hours during the 1990s. Furthermore, financial
shocks generate sharp drops in output and labor in all three recessions: 199091, 2001 and 2008-09.
The improved performance of the model relies on the direct impact that
financial shocks have on the demand for labor. As shown in the upper right
panel, financial shocks generate much larger fluctuations in working hours
than the productivity shocks. More importantly, they generate large drops
in labor during the three recessions, as well as an upward trend during the
1990s.
The importance of the financial shocks for the demand of labor can be
seen from the first order condition (3), which for convenience we rewrite here:
Fl (z, k, l) = w ·



1
1 − µϕd (d)



The variable µ is the multiplier for the enforcement constraint. A negative
financial shock makes the enforcement constraint tighter, increasing the multiplier µ and the wedge on the cost of labor. This effect becomes bigger if the
18

change in equity payout is costly (in which case ϕd (d) 6= 1). Intuitively, if
the firm wants to keep the same production scale and hire the same number
of workers, it has to reduce the equity payout. Because this is costly, the
firm chooses in part to reduce the equity payout and in part to reduce the
input of labor. Impulse response functions to a one-time financial shock are
displayed in Figure 7.
The model with financial shocks also performs much better in capturing
the dynamics of the financial flows as shown in the lower panels of Figure
4. The series generated by the model closely mimic the main features of the
empirical series for debt and equity flows. Of course, we wouldn’t expect this
parsimonious model to fit the data perfectly. In particular, the volatility of
debt repurchases is somewhat higher than in the data.
Figure 5 plots the series generated by the model in response to both
shocks: productivity and financial. Overall, the model does a reasonable job
matching output and hours worked as well as the financial flow series. For
financial flows and labor, the performance of the model is very similar to the
case with only financial shocks. In fact, the movements of these variables are
mostly driven by financial shocks. For output, the performance is somewhat
worse than the case with only financial shocks, but still better than in the
case with only productivity shocks. In particular, the model continues to
predict sharp drops in output during each of the three major recessions.
4.2.3

Second moments

Business cycle models have traditionally been evaluated by comparing the
second moments of the simulated series with the moments of the empirical
series. Clearly, comparing the whole paths of the time series as we did in the
previous subsections represents a tougher test than just looking at second
moments. Nevertheless, we report here how the model performs along this
dimension. As shown in Table 3, the model matches many of the moments
quite well.
Consider first the model driven by productivity shocks only and without
financial frictions. This is the standard RBC model. All moments presented
in the table are based on band-passed filtered series that contain fluctuations
from 6 to 32 quarters. This model generates a standard deviation of output
of 0.77% compared to the empirical standard deviation of 0.84%. Still, the
standard deviation of hours worked is substantially lower than in the data.
Focusing on second moments masks the failure of the model to match
19

Table 3: Business cycles properties of macroeconomic and financial variables.

Data
1984:1-2009:1

With Frictions
Productivity &
Financial Shocks
κ = 0.246
τ = 0.35

With Frictions
Productivity
Shocks Only
κ = 0.246
τ = 0.35

Without Frictions
Productivity
Shocks Only
κ=0
τ =0

Standard deviations
GDP
Consumption
Investment
Hours
EquPay/Y
DebtRep/Y

0.84
0.49
5.98
1.18
1.05
1.29

0.84
0.20
3.34
0.87
0.85
1.82

0.48
0.15
1.62
0.28
0.49
0.75

0.77
0.23
2.95
0.40

Correlation with GDP
Consumption
Investment
Hours
TFP
EquPay/Y
DebtRep/Y

0.83
0.87
0.81
0.38
0.41
-0.61

0.36
0.98
0.81
0.74
0.67
-0.77

0.93
1.00
0.12
0.90
-0.25
0.07

0.85
0.99
0.98
1.00

Notes: All variables are detrended with a band-pass filter that preserves cycles of 1.5-8 years
(Baxter and King (1999).

output and labor time series over the past 25 years as we have shown above.
In the model, productivity shocks move output mainly directly and through
hours worked, generating a correlation of 1 between productivity and output.
In the data, this correlation is only 0.38. The addition of financial frictions
reduces the amplitude of output fluctuations and the model is unable to
match the correlations of debt and equity flows with output.
Adding financial shocks to the model with financial frictions dramatically improves the model’s ability to match labor hours volatility, as well as
the correlations of debt and equity flows with output. One dimension along
which the model remains weak is the volatility of consumption. The volatility of consumption generated by the model is less than half the empirical
value. This is even slightly worse than the model with productivity shocks
only. Among other things, this is due to the fact that in the model financial
shocks and financial frictions affect consumers only indirectly. Overall, this
suggests that adding some type of financial friction and financial shocks to
the consumption side of the model would be a fruitful avenue. We leave this
20

for future work.
4.2.4

Sensitivity analysis

Since Hansen (1985), it has become common in business cycle studies to use
a linear specification of the disutility of labor. Here we consider the utility
function log(ct ) − αlt . We maintain a steady state value of hours worked
equal to 0.3, which requires α = 2.713. All remaining parameters are kept
unchanged and we use the same sequence of shocks we constructed earlier.5
As shown in Figure 8, the performance of the model is similar to the
benchmark case: with only productivity shocks the model does poorly but
the addition of financial shocks brings the model much closer to the data. The
main difference with the benchmark case is that hours worked (and output)
become now somewhat more volatile, particularly in the case with financial
shocks (this is what we would expect with linear disutility of leisure).
Let’s look now at the sensitivity with respect to the equity payout cost
parameter κ. In the benchmark case, κ was set to 0.246 to match the empirical standard deviation of equity payouts. Here we reduce its value to one
tenth. With lower κ, output and hours worked become less responsive to
financial shocks and financial flows become more volatile. As shown in Figure 9, the paths for output and hours worked are now somewhere in between
the benchmark case shown in Figure 5, and the case with only productivity shocks shown in Figure 3. However, despite having reduced κ to one
tenth its benchmark value, financial shocks still contribute significantly to
the volatility of output and working hours.

5

Conclusion

Are financial frictions and shocks that affect firms’ ability to borrow important for macroeconomic fluctuations? The analysis of this paper suggests
that they are. Models driven solely by productivity shocks have a number of
known shortcomings in replicating key macroeconomic variables. We propose
a model that incorporates explicitly the financial flows associated with firms’
debt and equity financing. Within this model we show that shocks to firms’
ability to borrow, combined with some rigidities in the adjustment of their
5

In principle we should re-calibrate κ and generate a new series of financial shocks.
Doing so would not change the key findings.

21

financial structure, can bring the model closer to the data. This is possible
thanks to the impact that financial shocks have on the demand of labor.
When we use the model to interpret recent economic events, the following picture emerges: The recent crisis shows up clearly in our model as a
tightening of firms’ financing conditions that have caused a sharp downturn
in GDP (and labor) starting in the second half of 2008. Tight financial conditions have also been important in the previous macroeconomic downturns
of 1990-91 and 2001.

22

Appendix
A

Data sources

Financial data is from the Flow of Funds Accounts of the Federal Reserve Board.
Debt is ‘Credit Market Instruments’ of Nonfinancial Business (F. 101 line 17).
Because the net increases in liabilities (Flow Tables) are seasonally adjusted while
the levels (Balance Sheet Tables) are not, we construct the seasonally adjusted
series for the stock of liabilities using the flow data. The initial stock at the end of
1983 is taken from the Balance Sheet data. The credit market liabilities includes
mainly corporate bonds (for the corporate part), mortgages and bank loans (for
corporate and noncorporate). It does not include trade and tax payables. The
series is deflated with the Price Index for Gross Value added in the Business Sector
(National Income and Product Accounts, NIPA, Table 1.3.4). Debt Repurchases
are defined as the negative of the change of debt divided by the Gross Value Added
for the Business Sector (NIPA Table 1.3.5.), adjusted by the price index.
To compute the historical average Leverage Ratio we use ‘Credit Market Liabilities’ divided by ‘Assets’ of the Nonfinancial Corporate Business (B.102, line 1
and 21) and Noncorporate Business (B.103, line 1 and 23).
Equity payout is defined as ‘Net Dividends’ in the Nonfinancial Corporate Business (F.102, line 3) minus ‘Net New Equity Issue’ in the Nonfinancial Corporate
Business (F.102, line 38), minus ‘Proprietors Net Investment’ in the Nonfinancial
Noncorporate Business (F103, line 29, F104, line 23).
The Capital Stock is constructed from adding up Capital Expenditures of the
Nonfinancial Business (F.101 line 4) minus Consumption of Fixed Capital of Domestic Business (F8. line 15). The initial stock value is from the Fixed Asset
Table (Table 6.1) for the nonfinancial corporate businesses, sole proprietorships
and partnerships, including the stock of inventory from (NIPA Table 5.7.5) at
the end of 1983. Nominal values are deflated by the Price Index for Fixed Nonresidential Investment (NIPA Table 1.1.4.). Investment is defined as the Capital
Expenditures of the Nonfinancial Business (F.101 line 4). The alternative of constructing the capital stock assuming a constant depreciation rate with the same
investment data does not significantly alter the results.
Aggregate series for GDP and Consumption (nondurables and services) is from
NIPA Table 1.1.3. Hours worked are ‘Total Private Aggregate Weekly Hours’
from the Current Employment Statistics national survey. All series are seasonally
adjusted.

23

B

Enforcement constraint

Firms start the period with liabilities bt . Before producing they choose the labor
input, lt , investment, it = kt+1 − (1 − δ)kt , equity payout, d˜t , and the next period
debt, bt+1 . The tilde over the equity payout captures the costs associated with
payouts as specified in the main text of the paper. The payments to workers,
suppliers of investments, shareholders and holders of previous debt is made before
the realization of revenues. In order to make these payments the firm contracts an
intra-period loan to cover the cash flow mismatch during the period. The intraperiod loan is equal to Lt = wt lt + it + d˜t + bt − bt+1 /Rt and it is fully repaid at
the end of the period after the realization of revenues. Because it is repaid within
the period, there is no interest. Given the budget constraint bt + wt lt + it + d˜t =
F (zt , kt , lt ) + bt+1 /Rt , it can be verified that the intra-period loan is equal to the
firm’s revenues, that is, Lt = F (zt , kt , lt ).
The decision to default on the intra-period loan arises after the realization of
revenues F (zt , kt , lt ). Because the firm has the ability to divert these revenues,
the intra-period lender can only access the residual equity of the firm. Suppose
that the liquidation value of the firm is a fraction ψt of the residual equity value,
that is, ψt V t . The variable ψt is stochastic and depends on (unspecified) markets
conditions.6 Notice that at the end of the period the intertemporal debt is not
due until the next period. Therefore, it is only the residual equity of the firm (net
of the intertemporal loan) that guarantees the intra-period loan.
Because ψt < 1, there is a loss of value in the liquidation of the firm. Therefore,
both the lender and the firm have an interest in renegotiating.
Bargaining is over the repayment of the intra-period debt. Denote by et the
payment agreed upon by the contractual parties. By reaching an agrement the
firm makes the payment et but continues operation. Therefore, the firm gets
F (zt , kt , lt ) − et + V t and the intra-period lender gets et . Without agreement, the
firm gets the threat value F (zt , kt , lt ) and the lender gets the liquidation value
ψt V t . Therefore, the net value of reaching an agreement for the firm is V t − et
and for the lender is et − ψt V t .
Denote by η the bargaining power of the firm and 1 − η the bargaining power
6

This fraction can result from the assumption that the sale of the firm requires the
search for a buyer with which the lender bargains the price. The fraction ψt can then
being interpreted as the probabilities of finding the buyer and/or the bargaining power
of the lender in the determination of the selling price. The probability of finding a buyer
and/or the price extracted in bargaining increase when the market conditions improve.

24

of the lender. The bargaining problem solves:


η

1−η



max (V t − et ) (et − ψt V t )
et

Taking the first order conditions and solving we get et = V t [1 − η(1 − ψt )].
Incentive-compatibility requires that the value of not defaulting, V t , is not
smaller than the value of defaulting, F (zt , kt , lt ) − et + V t . Therefore, the enforcement constraint is V t ≥ F (zt , kt , lt ) − et + V t . Using et = V t [1 − η(1 − ψt )] derived
above, the enforcement constraint can be written as:
V t ≥ F (zt , kt , lt ) + η(1 − ψt )V t
Collecting terms and rearranging we get:
ξt V t ≥ F (zt , kt , lt ),
where ξt = 1 − η(1 − ψt ).
If we assume that the bargaining power of the firm is η = 1, we have that ξt is
the fraction recovered in the sale of the firm, that is, ξt = ψt . However, we will get
the same functional form for any value of the bargaining power η > 0. Also notice
that, although we have not done it explicitly here, it is not difficult to see that the
stochastic nature of ξt can also derive from a shock to the bargaining power of the
firm η.
We would like to point out that the particular timing about the payments
and decision to default is only made for analytical convenience. For example, the
assumption that the firm contracts an intra-period loan is a short cut to the fact
that firms carry ‘cash’ or ‘liquidity’ to the next period. The cash is then used to
pay the equity holders (including dividends) and to finance working capital (wages
and investment). When interpreted this way, the payments of dividends comes
from previous period earnings, which is a more natural interpretation of reality.
All of this can be formalized by explicitly adding cash. However, to avoid the
introduction of an additional state variable, the assumption of the intra-period
loan achieves the same outcome without complicating the analysis.

C

First order conditions

Consider the optimization problem (2) and let λ and µ be the Lagrange multipliers
associate with the two constraints. Taking derivatives we get:
d:

1 − λϕd (d) = 0

25

l:

λFl (z, k, l) − λw − µFl (z, k, l) = 0

0

(1 + ξµ)Em0 Vk (s0 ; k 0 , b0 ) − λ = 0
λ
(1 + ξµ)Em0 Vb (s0 ; k 0 , b0 ) + = 0
R

k :
b0 :

The envelope conditions are:
h

i

Vk (s; k, b) = λ 1 − δ + Fk (z, k, l) − µFk (z, k, l)
Vb (s; k, b) = −λ

Using the first condition to eliminate λ and substituting the envelope conditions
we get:
1
1 − µϕd (d)

0 h
i
0 ϕd (d )
(1 + ξµ)Em
1 − δ + (1 − µ0 ϕd (d0 ))Fk (z 0 , k 0 , l0 ) = 1
ϕd (d)


ϕd (d0 )
=1
(1 + ξµ)R Em0
ϕd (d)




Fl (z, k, l) = w

Defining m̃0 = m0 ϕd (d0 )/ϕd (d) and substituting we get (3)-(5).

D

Numerical solution: linear approximation

If the enforcement constraint is always binding, we can solve the model by loglinearizing the dynamic system around the steady state. Of course, whether the
enforcement constraint is always binding needs to be verified. This will be done
in the next section (Appendix E). In that section will also show more generally
the accuracy of the linear approximation compared to the solution obtained with
a nonlinear approximation.
The equilibrium of the model is characterized by the following system of dynamic equations:
wUc (c, l) + Ul (c, l) = 0


Uc (c, l) = β

R−τ
1−τ



(10)

EUc (c0 , l0 )

26

(11)

wl + b −

b0
+d−c=0
R

1
Fl (z, k, l) = w
1 − µϕd (d)


(12)


(13)




(1 + ξµ)E m̃(c, l, d, c0 , l0 , d0 ) 1 − δ + (1 − µ0 ϕd (d0 ))Fk (z 0 , k 0 , l0 ) = 1 (14)
(1 + ξµ)RE m̃(c, l, d, c0 , l0 , d0 ) = 1
F (z, k, l) − wl − b +

b0
− k 0 − ϕ(d) = 0
R

(15)
(16)

ξEm(c, l, c0 , l0 )V 0 = F (z, k, l)

(17)

V = d + Em(c, l, c0 , l0 )V 0

(18)

Equations (10)-(12) are the first order conditions for households and their
budget constraint. Notice that in equilibrium the tax payments of households in
the budget constraint is accounted for by a lower interest earned on bonds, R.
Notice also that 1 + r = (R − τ )/(1 − τ ), which is the term used in the first order
condition for the choice of bonds. Equations (13)-(15) are the first order conditions
for firms and (16)-(18) are the budget constraint, the enforcement constraint and
the value function for firms.
We have nine dynamic equations. After linearizing around the steady state,
we can solve the nine equations system for the nine variables ct , dt , lt , wt , Rt , Vt ,
µt , kt+1 , bt+1 , as linear functions of the states, zt , ξt , kt , bt .

E

Linear and nonlinear solution

The simulations presented in the paper are based on the first order approximations
of the dynamic system. In order to apply this method we have conjectured that
the enforcement constraint is always binding during the simulated period. There
are two ways of checking whether the enforcement constraint is in fact binding.
As a first approximation, we can check whether the Lagrange multiplier µ
implied by the linearized system is always positive during the simulated period.

27

Because the linearized system is based on the assumption that the enforcement
constraint is always binding, there is no guarantee that the linearized solution
for the multiplier µ is positive. Therefore, if µ takes negative values over some
periods, we would question the accuracy of the solution based on the log-linear
approximation. Fortunately, in our simulation with both productivity and financial
shocks, the multiplier touches zero in only one of the 101 simulated quarters (from
1984:1 to 2009:1). In all other quarters it is always positive. This is also the case
when the simulation is done with only one of the two shocks.
The fact that the Lagrange multiplier in the linear solution does not take
negative values during the simulation period is not a proof that the enforcement
constraint has always been binding during the period. A more accurate test would
require solving the model using a higher order approximation that allows for the
enforcement constraint to be occasionally non-binding. We have then solved the
model using a nonlinear approximation.
The nonlinear approach approximates the four conditional expectations in
equations (11), (14), (15) and (18) as functions of the four-dimensional state vector (z, ξ, k, b) through a finite element representation that interpolates linearly
between the grid points of the state space. Starting with initial guesses for the
conditional expectations, we can compute all variables of interest by solving simple
systems of nonlinear equations. We first solve for a system including a binding
enforcement constraint (condition (17)). If the solution for the multiplier is negative, we set it equal to zero, and then solve the system containing the rest of the
equations (and therefore, ignoring condition (17)). New values for the conditional
expectations are produced through Gauss-Hermite quadrature (zt , ξt are assumed
to be lognormal). We iterate on the four functions for conditional expectations
until convergence.
Figure 10 compares the simulated paths for a set of variables generated with
the linear and nonlinear solutions. The nonlinear method uses 18 grid points for
each of the 4 state variables for a total of 184 grid points. As shown in the upper
left panel, the multipliers obtained from the simulation of the model using the two
methods are almost indistinguishable after an initial period of adjustment. The
same holds for the variables in the second and third rows of the figure. Small
differences are visible in the first 20 periods. This is due to the fact that we start
the simulation at the deterministic steady state, when the average debt level in
the nonlinear method is somewhat higher than in the deterministic steady state.
As shown in the upper right panel, even at the point where the multiplier
touches zero (this is the third quarter of 2007), the optimal solution does not
require an effective loosening of the constraint. Based on the normal probability

28

distribution, the probability that the multiplier equals zero is only 0.0009 for the
benchmark calibration. As we discussed earlier, lowering the tax subsidy for debt
τ , increasing the volatility of the shocks, and increasing the equity cost κ would
all contribute to increasing the probability that the multiplier goes to zero. But
as long as the changes in these parameters are not too big, the properties of the
simulated variables would not change significantly.

29

References
Altinkilic, O. and R. S. Hansen (2000). Are There Economies of Scale
in Underwriting Fees? Evidence of Rising External Financial Costs,
Review of Financial Studies, 13(1), 191-218.
Baker M., and J. Wurgler (2000). The Equity Share in New Issues and
Aggregate Stock Returns, Journal of Finance, 55(5), 2219-2257.
Baxter, M. and R. G. King (1999). Measuring Business Cycles: Approximate Band-Pass Filters for Macroeconomic Time Series. Review of
Economics and Statistics, 81(4), 575-93.
Benk, S., M. Gillman, and M. Kejak (2005). Credit Shocks in the Financial Deregulatory Era: Not the Usual Suspects. Review of Economic
Dynamics, 8(3), 668-87.
Bernanke, B., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1999). The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework”, in: Taylor, J. B.
and M. Woodford (editors), Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1C,
chapter 21, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Choe, H., R. W. Masulis, and V. Nanda (1993). Common stock offerings
across the business cycle: Theory and evidence, Journal of Empirical
Finance, 3-31.
Christiano, L., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2008). Financial Factors in
Business Cycle. Unpublished manuscript, Northwestern University and
European Central Bank.
Covas, F. and W. den Haan (2005). Debt and Equity Finance over the
Business Cycle. Unpublished manuscript, Bank of Canada and London
Business School.
Gilchrist, S., V. Yankov, and E. Zakrajsek (2009). Credit Risks and the
Macroeconomy: Evidence from an Estimated DSGE Model. Unpublished manuscript, Boston University and Federal Reserve Board.
Hansen, D. G. (1985). Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle. Journal
of Monetary Economics, 16(3), 309-27.

30

Hansen, R. S. and P. Torregrosa (1992). Underwriter Compensation and
Corporate Monitoring. Journal of Finance, 47(4), 1537-55.
Hennessy, C. A. and A. Levy (2005). Why Does Capital Structure Choice
Vary with Macroeconomic Conditions?, forthcoming Journal of Monetary Economics.
Hennessy, C. A. and T. M. Whited (2005). Debt Dynamics. Journal of
Finance, 60(3), 1129-65.
Kiyotaki, N. and J. H. Moore (1997). Credit Cycles. Journal of Political
Economy, 105(2), 211-48.
Kiyotaki, N. and J. H. Moore (2008). Liquidity, Business Cycle, and Monetary Policy. Unpublished manuscript, Princeton University and Edinburgh University.
Leary, M. T and M. R. Roberts (2005). Do Firms Rebalance Their Capital
Structures?, Journal of Finance, 2575-2620.
Lintner, J. (1956). Distribution of Incomes of Corporations Among Dividends, Retained Earnings, and Taxes. American Economic Review, 46,
97-113.
McGrattan, E. R. and E. C. Prescott (2007). Unmeasured Investment
and the Puzzling U.S. Boom in the 1990s. NBER Working Paper No.
13499.
Mendoza, E. and K. A. Smith (2006). Quantitative Implications of a DebtDeflation Theory of Sudden Stops and Asset Prices. Journal of International Economics, 70(1), 82-114.

31

Fig 2: Productivity Shocks and Financial Shocks
Productivity Shock
0.02
0
-0.02
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2000

2005

2010

Financial Shock
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1
1985

1990

1995

Financial Shocks Compared to Shocks Implied by Book Equity (.)
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Fig 3: Productivity Shocks only: Data (thick line), No Financial Frictions (-), Financial Frictions (--)
GDP

Hours worked
0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0

0

-0.02

-0.02
-0.04

-0.04

-0.06
-0.06
-0.08

-0.08
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

1985

1990

Debt Repurchase

1995

2000

2005

2010

2005

2010

Equity Payout
0.08
0.06

0.05

0.04
0

0.02
0

-0.05

-0.02
-0.04
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

1985

1990

1995

2000

Fig 4: Model with Financial Shocks versus Data (thick line)
GDP

Hours worked
0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0

0

-0.02

-0.02
-0.04

-0.04

-0.06
-0.06
-0.08

-0.08
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

1985

1990

Debt Repurchase

1995

2000

2005

2010

2005

2010

Equity Payout
0.08

0.1

0.06
0.04

0.05

0.02
0

0

-0.02
-0.04

-0.05

-0.06
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

1985

1990

1995

2000

Fig 5: Model with both Shocks and Data (thick line)
GDP

Hours worked
0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0

0

-0.02

-0.02
-0.04

-0.04

-0.06
-0.06
-0.08

-0.08
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

1985

1990

Debt Repurchase

1995

2000

2005

2010

2005

2010

Equity Payout
0.08

0.1

0.06
0.04

0.05

0.02
0

0

-0.02
-0.04

-0.05

-0.06
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

1985

1990

1995

2000

Fig 6: Impulse Responses to Productivity Shock
-3

0

Enforcement Constraint Multiplier, µ

Productivity Shock -

x 10

0.05

-1

0

-2
-0.05
-3
-0.1

-4
-5

0

10

30

40

50

-0.15

time
Output

-3

0

20

x 10

3
2

-2

1

-3

0

-4

-1
0

10

30

40

50

-2

time
Debt Repurchase/Y

-3

5

20

x 10

10

20

40

50

20

40

50

10

20

30
time
Investment

40

50

10

20

40

50

-3

-1

-5

0
x 10

0

10
-3

6

x 10

30
time
Hours Worked

30
time
Equity Payout/Y

4

0

2
-5

-10

0

0

10
-3

0

x 10

20

30

40

50

-2

time
V - Equity Value (ex div)

0
-3

5

-1

x 10

0

-2
-5
-3
-10

-4
-5

0

10

20

30
time

40

50

-15

0

30
time

Fig 7: Impulse Responses to Financial Shock
Enforcement Constraint Multiplier, µ

Financial Shock .
0

0.2
0.15

-0.005

0.1
-0.01

-0.015

0.05

0

10

30

40

50

0

time
Output

-3

0

20

x 10

5

0

-4

-5

0

10

30

40

50

-10

time
Debt Repurchase/Y

-3

20

20

x 10

0

10

-2

5

-4

0

-6
0

10
-3

8

x 10

20

30

40

50

-8

10

x 10

20

30
time
Hours Worked

40

50

20

40

50

30
time
Equity Payout/Y

0

10

20

30
time
Investment

40

50

0

10

20

40

50

0.01
0

4

-0.01

2

-0.02

0

0

time
V - Equity Value (ex div)

6

0

x 10

-3

2

15

-5

10
-3

-2

-6

0

10

20

30
time

40

50

-0.03

30
time

Fig 8: Sensitivity analysis: Hansen (1985) utility (Both shocks (-), productivity shocks only (--))
GDP
0.04

Hours worked
0.06

Data

0.04

0.02

0.02

0

0

-0.02

-0.02
-0.04

-0.04

-0.06
-0.06
-0.08

-0.08
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

1985

1990

Debt Repurchase

1995

2000

2005

2010

2005

2010

Equity Payout
0.08

0.1

0.06
0.04

0.05

0.02
0

0

-0.02
-0.05

-0.04
-0.06
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

1985

1990

1995

2000

Fig 9: Sensitivity analysis: Equity Payout Cost at one tenth of benchmark value (both shocks)
GDP

Hours worked
0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0

0

-0.02

-0.02
-0.04

-0.04

-0.06
-0.06
-0.08

-0.08
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Debt Repurchase
0.15
0.1

0.05

0.05

0

0

-0.05

-0.05
-0.1
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Fig 10: Linear and Nonlinear Solutions

Multiplier Enforcement Constraint , -nonlinear, -- linear
0.08
0.06

-6

1

((V-d) - y) / y

x 10

0.5

0.04

0

0.02
-0.5
0
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

-1

1985

1990

GDP, y

1995

2000

2005

2010

2005

2010

2005

2010

Hours Worked, h
0.32

1.1

0.31

1.08
0.3
1.06
0.29
1.04
0.28
1.02
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

1985

1990

Debt Repurchase

1995

2000

Equity Payout
0.12

0.1

0.1
0.05
0.08
0

0.06

-0.05

0.04
0.02
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

1985

1990

1995

2000

