                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE SUBPRIME CRISIS AND HOUSE PRICE APPRECIATION

                                     William N. Goetzmann
                                           Liang Peng
                                        Jacqueline Yen

                                       Working Paper 15334
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15334


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2009




Thanks to Justin Haaheim for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by William N. Goetzmann, Liang Peng, and Jacqueline Yen. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Subprime Crisis and House Price Appreciation
William N. Goetzmann, Liang Peng, and Jacqueline Yen
NBER Working Paper No. 15334
September 2009
JEL No. G01

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper argues that econometric analysis of housing price indexes before 2006 generated forecasts
of future long-term price growth and low estimated probabilities of extreme price decreases. These
forecasts of future increases in home-loan collateral values may have affected both the demand and
the supply of mortgages. Standard time series models using repeat-sales indices suggested that positive
trends had a long half-life. Expectations based on such models supported expectations that could lead
to an asset bubble.

Analysis of data from the HMDA loan data base and LoanPerformance.com at the MSA level and
at the loan level substantiates both supply and demand effects of past price trends in housing markets,
particularly with respect to subprime mortgage applications and approvals. At the MSA level, past
home price increases are associated with higher subprime applications and loan to value ratios. Approval
probability of subprime loans was not affected by higher loan to value ratios. At the loan level, the
approval probability of subprime applications is also positively associated with past home price
appreciation. These results differ for prime mortgages.


William N. Goetzmann                               Jacqueline Yen
School of Management                               Yale School of Management
Yale University                                    135 Prospect Street
Box 208200                                         P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200                           New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER                                           Jacqueline.yen@yale.edu
william.goetzmann@yale.edu

Liang Peng
University of Colorado at Boulder
419 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309-419
liang.peng@colorado.edu
I. Introduction
The recent subprime mortgage crisis in the United States was preceded by a sharp
increase in housing prices in the early 2000s. Economists at the time interpreted this
increase variously as a classic housing bubble, the results of home-owner money illusion,
or evidence of binding supply constraints in key housing markets.2 Regardless of which
view is correct, one potentially important implication of the housing price run-up before
2006 is the effect it had on mortgage lending.
A key feature of house price indexes until 2006 is the degree to which they could be
forecasted by past trends. In this paper, we examine the effect of this apparent
predictability on perceptions about future house prices on the demand and supply of
mortgages. While back-tests of forecasting models might have alerted market participants
to the potential for model failure, empirical analysis of widely-quoted data sources like
the Case-Shiller indexes and the OFHEO indexes clearly predicted continued growth.
Risk models based on such forecasts suggested that housing would be good collateral for
loans over multiple-year horizons.
On the demand side, extrapolation of past trends can influence both the level of
household investment in housing and the risk characteristics of the applicant pool. First,
expectations of positive future home price growth based on past trends renders housing a
more attractive asset, suggesting that a household will increase allocation to housing over
the near term.3 Applicants borrow to finance this allocation, which makes them riskier
from a lender’s perspective. Second, because the after-tax financial benefits of
mortgaged home ownership are increasing in income,4 higher forecast returns may also
bring more low-income loan applicants into the market. In this paper we look for
evidence of increases in demand, applicant risk, and participation conditional on past
trends.
On the supply side, mortgage lenders may interpret greater past price increases as
evidence of lower default risk because the loan to value ratio is expected to fall with
future house price increases.5 Consequently, lenders may accommodate the increased
demand for mortgages because the expected future recovery from foreclosure is expected
to exceed the outstanding mortgage principal. The supply of mortgage loans thus
increases for all types of mortgages, but the effect may be most pronounced for
borrowers with poor credit quality because of the participation effect.
To explore these hypotheses, we analyze 2006 Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA)
mortgage data, historical Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO) home
price indexes for American metropolitan statistic areas (MSAs), and 2006

2
  cf. Case and Shiller (2003), Brunnermeier and Julliard (2008) and Glaeser, Gyourko and
Saks (2005).
3
  For example, in a standard mortgage default decision model, changes in home prices are
an important explanatory variable. Deng, Quigley, and Van Order (2000) provide a
survey of the literature on these models.
4
  C.f. Goetzmann and Spiegel (2004)
5
  c.f. Doms, Mark, Furlong, Fred and Krainer, John (2007)


                                                1

                  Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1340577
LoanPerformance.com data on average loan to value ratios. We conduct MSA level and
loan level analyses.
We first document the implication for forecasting based on reliance on standard
econometric models using housing price data. Because of the strong autoregressive
component in housing indices at the national and at the MSA level over the past 25 years
most quantitative models using data up to 2006 forecast low probabilities for a crash in
the near term. Ex post, these models were completely wrong. Ex ante, however, there
was no consensus of model failure, even among professional economists. Our study first
documents the (mis) performance of standard time-series models, and them explores the
degree to which such mistaken forecasts may have affected demand and supply of capital.
We examine demand for mortgages using the HMDA mortgage application data
aggregated at the MSA level. The variation in past home price growth across MSAs
allows us to observe the relationship between home prices and demand for mortgages.
Consistent with our demand story, 2006 mortgage applications for both prime and
subprime mortgages are significantly and positively correlated with home price increases
between 2000 and 2005. These results are robust to controls for demographic factors
such as population and per capita income. In addition, we find evidence of increased
household allocation to housing in MSAs with greater past home price appreciation. For
example, the loan size to applicant income ratio is positively correlated with past home
price appreciation. One possible story for the increase in leverage is that homeowners
believed they could sell their home for more than the mortgage principal should they not
be able to meet the payments.
This result is robust to controls for income per capita and the ratio of median home prices
to median household incomes. We also find that the loan to value ratio for both prime
and subprime applications is negatively correlated with past house price increases,
suggesting that borrowers invested more of their own personal wealth in home equity.
Further, we find that the home value to income ratio for both prime and subprime
applications is positively correlated with past home price increases, showing that
borrowers sought to purchase more expensive houses holding constant their incomes.
Overall, the results indicate that in MSAs with greater past home price growth the
demand for prime and subprime mortgages was higher and the applicant pool was
riskier.
To analyze the effect of past home prices on mortgage supply, we turn to the HMDA
mortgage approvals data. We note that the approvals are conditional on the quality and
quantity of the applications across MSAs.6 In addition, competition among lenders will
also affect approvals in the cross section. Cross-sectional regressions show that prime
mortgage approvals are decreasing in past home price growth while subprime mortgage
approvals are unchanged. This suggests that subprime lenders accommodated the extra
demand in MSAs with higher past home price growth while prime lenders did not. Given
6
 For example, a positive shift in demand may bring less creditworthy investors to the
mortgage market, which would result in a lower rate of mortgage approval if
underwriting standards do not change. However supply effects might cause a loosening
of credit standards, leaving total number of approvals unchanged.


                                              2

                Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1340577
that applicant leverage was increasing in past home prices, prime lenders may not have
accommodated the extra demand because it corresponded to applicants with higher loan
to income ratios who were perceived as more risky. Subprime lenders, on the other hand,
did accommodate the demand suggesting that they believed that future home price
increases would compensate for the increased leverage of the borrowers.
When we compare the effect of leverage on prime and subprime approvals, we find that
in MSAs with higher past price appreciation, prime lenders approve applications with
lower loan to income ratios and subprime lenders approve applications with higher loan
to income ratios. We also test the effect of past price changes on the loan to value ratios
of approved prime and subprime mortgages. The coefficient on past price increases is
negative and significant for both prime and subprime approvals, with and without
controlling for loan to value ratios of applications. Since loans with lower loan to value
ratios are less risky holding constant other factors, this result provides no evidence for
looser underwriting standards used by either prime or subprime lenders. We also have
robust results showing that the home value to income ratio of subprime and prime
approvals is increasing in greater past price growth. This indicates that both prime and
subprime lenders allowed borrowers to buy more expensive homes in MSAs with great
past price increases.
Loan level probit analysis provides more direct evidence of supply effects. Past price
appreciation significantly reduces the approvals of prime mortgages but significantly
increases the approvals of subprime mortgages. The results are robust to controls such as
loan to income ratios. The negative relation between past home price growth and prime
approvals might be capturing the higher leverage and risk of prime applications in MSAs
with greater past price rises. The positive relation between past home price growth and
subprime approvals suggests that subprime lenders were more likely to accommodate
increased demand in MSAs with greater past price growth despite the higher level of
leverage in the applications.
Overall, our empirical evidence suggests that both subprime borrowers and lenders
considered past housing returns as a factor in the home purchase process and the
underwriting process – perhaps extrapolating the recent past as a forecast of future home
values. In contrast, while prime borrowers considered past housing returns in their
housing demand as well, prime lenders did not accommodate the demand and instead
approved a smaller fraction of prime loans in MSAs with higher past housing returns and
thus applications with higher leverage ratios.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows; Section II reviews the related literature.
Section III discusses the predictability of home price indexes. Section IV examines the
implication of using time-series models and housing indexes for evaluation of future
collateral values; particular attention is paid to forecasts of housing price trends using
data available immediately prior to the subprime crisis, and it considers whether model
failure could have been reasonably anticipated. Section V examines the extent to which
subprime mortgage applications and approvals were influenced by past price trends.
Section VI considers alternative explanations. Section VII provides a discussion of the
results and concludes.



                                            3
II. Related Research
Much of the recent research about the subprime crisis has focused on the process of
origination and securitization in order to understand the roots of the disaster. Demyanyk
and Van Hemert (2007) for example, show that the credit quality of securitized loans
declined over the period 2001-2006. They find that home price declines after 2006
explain borrower delinquency and argue that price increases in the early 2000’s masked
the potential magnitude of the crisis. 7 Rajan, Seru, and Vig (2008) show that from 1997-
2006, lending rates increasingly relied on hard information and propose that future
default rates were underestimated because of the lack of soft information. Mian and Sufi
(2008) use a zip-code level data to test whether or not the credit expansion at the
subprime level was due to credit supply or credit demand. Measuring unfulfilled demand
as previously rejected mortgage applications, they find that lending standards loosened
from 2001 to 2005 where previous unmet demand was high. They conclude that the
increased issuance of subprime mortgages was due to an increase in the supply of credit
as opposed to an increase in demand for credit. They conjecture that the growth in
housing price indexes in markets with high subprime issuance was a result of greater
credit access.
Other researchers have focused on the role that the emergence of a secondary market
played in supplying the credit. Gabriel and Rosenthal (2006) find evidence that
securitization of subprime mortgage loans greatly increased access to credit among low-
income homeowners – consistent with stated government social policy.8 Keyes et. al.
(2008) look at the risks created by the securitization by exploring the exposure of the
secondary mortgage market to moral hazard in loan origination. They find that
securitized loans were more likely to default following the crisis, consistent with a story
of lower underwriting standards.
The relative contribution of the current paper is to focus on the role past home price
appreciation played in both the demand and the supply of prime and subprime mortgages.
It is limited to the extent that we develop neither a formal tenure choice model nor a
formal mortgage default model. We focus instead on a specific input to such models.
We argue that price index appreciation and apparent long-term predictability were
potentially important factors in the decision processes of many market participants, and
we test some empirical implications of this argument. In particular, we focus on the
demand side and suggest a story where individuals made a rational investment decision
when applying for a prime or subprime mortgage. The inclusion of prime mortgages in
our analysis also provides a benchmark for interpreting the subprime mortgage results.



7
  Their findings are consistent with the considerable evidence that home prices are
important co-determinants of default. See, for example Downing, Wallace and Stanton
(2005) and Crews Cutts and Van Order (2005).
8
  The policy implications of the subprime mortgage market are further explored in
Wachter, Russo and Hershaff (2005) and Calem, Gillen and Wachter (2003).


                                            4
Our assertion is that expectations of future appreciation, based upon extrapolation of past
trends, may be a factor in the decision functions of both home buyers and mortgage
lenders, and help explain several of the recently-documented empirical findings,
including the deterioration of credit standards and the increase in the supply of credit to
previously constrained markets. While individual homeowner exuberance or irrationality
may have played a role in stimulating the demand for housing and mortgage credit in the
2000s, marginal home buyers may rationally decide to become home owners or existing
home buyers may increase mortgage leverage when the expected future appreciation is
high. Moreover, while moral hazard has been advanced as one explanation for the
deterioration of credit standards, evidence that credit standards seemed looser in MSAs
with greater past price rises suggests that the decision functions of lenders and originators
are affected also by the expectation of future house price appreciation.


III. Predictability of House Price Indexes
Most current measures of home price appreciation are based upon the repeat-sales
regression [RSR].9 The RSR relies upon repeated sales of individual properties to
estimate a time-series of past rates of capital appreciation. The well-known Case-Shiller
indexes are based upon the RSR, as are the OFHEO indexes used to monitor the capital
adequacy of the housing agencies, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
Case and Shiller (1989) found that RSR housing indexes follow an autoregressive
process, rendering them highly predictable. In part, this predictability is an artifact of the
estimation procedure that by necessity has difficulty in identifying closely-timed
shocks.10 However, the inertia in housing indexes is also due to actual economic
phenomena. Housing is not as efficient, nor as liquid as the stock market. News is not
rapidly impounded in prices but instead manifests itself slowly. Unlike securities
markets, housing markets have fewer pure speculators, housing is difficult to sell short,
time on the market matters, and there are important factors of individual preferences and
beliefs. People are reticent to sell their homes for many reasons other than price. Besides
inducing inertia in housing indexes, these factors may also distort inferences regarding
the value of a home in the market as collateral.11 Case and Shiller (2003) argue that the
inertia in housing prices provides a natural condition for the development of a bubble
because of the potential for overly optimistic beliefs about future price increases to form.
One problem with relying on housing indexes as evidence of market values is that they
are conditioned upon market liquidity. Crashes only appear to develop slowly in house
price indexes because transactions decrease as buyers are unwilling to recognize a loss.12
Thus, an econometric forecast that ignores the potential for illiquidity can be misleading.
Such liquidity-adjusted price indexes were not widely available for a broad spectrum of

9
    Cf. Bailey, Muth and Nourse (1963).
10
     cf. Geltner (1997).
11
     Cf. Lin and Vandell (2007), Goetzmann (1993).
12
     Goetzmann and Peng (2005), Clayton, Miller and Peng (2008)


                                              5
housing markets before 2006. In other words, market participants may have been making
unconditional forecasts based on conditional data.


IV. Time Series Forecasts
IV.1 Data
Monthly Case-Shiller indexes for twenty of the major metropolitan areas in the United
States are available for download at the S&P website.13 Quarterly indexes for all MSAs
in the United States, and for each state, are available from the OFHEO website.14 The
major difference between these two sources is the underlying data. The OFHEO data is
constructed from transactions or appraisals associated with mortgages purchased or
insured by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac since 1975.                    These mortgages are
overwhelmingly “prime” loans, and thus by definition not subprime. The data used to
construct the Case-Shiller indexes are not restricted to transactions associated with prime
mortgages, nor do they rely on appraised values.
IV.2 Trends
Figure 1 plots the Case-Shiller indexes with a common value in December 1999. The
figure suggests that the price appreciation in housing after 2000 on average was higher
than before 2000 – at least up until the recent crash.
More distinctive is the inertia in the series. This may be partly due to the fact that Case
and Shiller use a three-month moving average, but adjusting for this, the momentum in
the indexes still seems powerful. Ignoring high-level econometrics for a moment, cover
up the graph from 2006 on and ask yourself whether you would have predicted a
significant price correction in the next two years. There was little historical precedent for
a major correction. One could only point to the price slump in some markets after 1990
as a precedent and a few other regionally limited events.
Figure 2 provides additional insight into the earlier price dynamics. It is constructed by
identifying all the OFHEO MSA indexes for which continuous data are available between
1980 and 2005. Since there are more than 380 MSAs in the OFHEO data set, a plot like
Figure 1 is not meaningful. The K-means clustering algorithm is applied15 to aggregate
the data. The algorithm groups indexes by minimizing within group sums of squared
deviations from the group mean index. An arbitrary choice of five group centers allows
sufficient range of performance. At least three distinct trends can be seen. One set of
cities, mostly in Texas, Oklahoma and Louisiana, peak about 1986 and then drop by a
factor 10% to 20%. Another group, comprising mostly of California cities and Boston
peak around 1990 and dropped by a similar magnitude over the next five years. A group
comprising mostly of Florida cities had a dramatic run-up in the 1980s, then flattened out

13
   http://www2.standardandpoors.com/portal/site/sp/en/us/
page.topic/indexes_csmahp/0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,0,0,0,0,0.html
14
   http://www.ofheo.gov/hpi.aspx
15
   Which intersect, by construction, in 1995.


                                             6
after 1990. Two groups of mostly “Heartland” cities showed relatively consistent
performance over the period. Thus, twenty-five years of housing data demonstrates some
macro-economic dynamics, although slumps on portfolios of cities were on the order of
10% to 20% nominal depreciation over horizons of five years.
This is not to say that cross-sectionally, individual cities did not experience extended
periods of real price depreciation. Other studies of these data show that homeowners in
specific cities have historically faced significant housing price risk.16 Nevertheless, it
would have been easy to believe that the trends in these figures provided some basis for
estimating the timing and magnitude of future price declines – particularly since the
OFHEO figures were produced by a government agency for the specific purpose of
evaluating precisely such risk.
IV.3 Risk and Return
Figure 3 plots the annualized arithmetic mean return and standard deviation of the Case-
Shiller indexes for which data are available from 1987 through 2005. Over this time
period, the arithmetic annual growth in the CPI index was 3.7%, so nearly all of the
MSAs experience real price appreciation in the time period. The Case-Shiller composite
index of the ten cities experienced a 6.7% return and a 2.25% standard deviation. The
standard deviation is obviously a misleading indicator of long-term risk because of the
documented inertia in the time-series.
Figure 4 is a similar plot for the OFHEO indexes, with the MSA corresponding to the
Case-Shiller indexes labeled. For the most part, the Case-Shiller cities had higher returns
compared to the typical city in the OFHEO sample. The relative volatility of Miami and
Las Vegas are noteworthy.
IV.4 Time-Series Dependency
Figure 5 plots the monthly housing returns for the Case-Shiller Los Angeles series (from
1987) against its lagged values for horizons up to 25 months. The plots for the other
cities are not reported, but the Los Angeles return series inter-temporal dependency is
fairly representative of that of other Case-Shiller indexes. The correlation is reported in
the upper left corner of the plot. Even at a two-year horizon, the correlation is positive,
suggesting that current trends are sustained over multiple year horizons. Figure 6 plots
the quarterly housing returns for the OFHEO Los Angeles series (from 1980). The lag
correlation now extends out to 24 quarters – more than six years. Correlations after the
first three years are negative, suggesting mean reversion in the LA housing market at
long horizons.
Taken together, the monthly and the quarterly correlations of lagged returns suggest that
a time series’ forecast based on an ARIMA model is potentially useful.
IV.5 Forecasting Methodology



16
     Caplin, Chan, Freeman and Tracy (1999), Goetzmann and Spiegel (2002).


                                            7
Undoubtedly some mortgage market participants used state-of-the-art forecasting tools to
predict defaults and to assess future collateral risk. By 2006, not only was the inertia of
housing indexes well known, but the link between house price values and defaults had
been well studied17. Thus, predicted home values were natural variables to include in
both a mortgage default and a collateral recovery model. In this section we estimate
future values using a simple ARIMA specification to model the historical structure, and
then use that model to forecast future index values and confidence bands. 18 This
standard model allows for lags, differencing, an intercept term and a moving average
component. The long-term trends in the figures above suggest that multiple-year lags
may contain useful forecasting information. Thus, the maximum number of lags, up to
24 months, is used for the Case-Shiller data. In all cases the data are first-differenced, an
intercept included, and for most, a three-month moving average is employed, reflecting
the fact that housing prices have expected positive trends, and that the Case-Shiller
methodology uses a three month moving average.19
IV.6 Forecast at the End of 2005
In this section we estimate confidence bounds for nineteen of the twenty Case-Shiller
indexes with the end of 2005 as the forecasting point.20 Figure 7 plots the forecasted
trends, the actual trends, and the confidence bounds at two standard errors above and
below the trend. In fifteen out of the nineteen cases the actual index value ended below
the lower confidence bound, suggesting that the ex ante forecaster would have regarded
such an event to be highly unlikely. The ARIMA model forecasted positive future price
increases in all nineteen of the twenty cities. While some MSAs like Seattle, Washington
were forecast to grow as much as 40% in price over three years, many MSA’s were
relatively flat, and expected total growth over three years was in the range of 3% to 6%.
More relevant for the mortgage lenders and borrowers at the beginning of 2006 was the
ex ante probability of a decrease in house prices over a three year horizon. In some
markets the forecasting model suggested this was a highly unlikely event. For seven
markets the chance of a drop in value at the end of a three year period was estimated at
less than 5%. However, for many large markets, including Los Angeles, San Diego, San
Francisco, New York, Boston and Los Vegas, the models would have suggested that a
drop in prices in the range of 15% to 25% lay within the realm of possibility. The

17
   c.f. Capozza, Kazarian and Thomson (1997), Downing, Stanton and Wallace (2005)
among others.
18
   The details of the estimation may be found in the documentation for the R statistical
language. Shumway and Stoffer (2006) point out inconsistencies in the use of the R
ARIMA code for differenced series estimation, and offer a modified code to overcome
these issues. This paper used their code available at
http://www.stat.pitt.edu/stoffer/tsa2/index.html. The prediction uses a Kalman filtering
method, and does not take into account parameter uncertainty associated with the time-
series model.
19
   Eight MSAs were estimated with ARIMA(18,1,3), five with ARIMA(12,1,3), one with
ARIMA(6,1,3), two with ARIMA(3,1,3) and four with ARIMA(3,1,0).
20
   The time series for Dallas is too short to estimate the ARIMA model.


                                             8
standard errors in the ARIMA model would have warned of the possibility of a
significant drop in several major markets on the order of magnitude of previous housing
market crashes. Thus, it is difficult to argue that the models as such provided
unreasonable predictions of risk and return, given historical experience. Ex post, one
could argue that the assumption of normality in the ARIMA residuals, and the failure to
account for parameter uncertainty in the model resulted in overly tight confidence
bands.21 How current were robust estimation methods among market participants at the
time? It is difficult to know. Using the model as a general guide to risk evaluation does
not seem to have been entirely foolhardy, except with the hindsight of the dramatic
market crash. Would an expert at the end of 2005 have had any reason to doubt the
validity of the data or the model? Some evidently did.
Certainly Case and Shiller (2003) sought to use alternative data collected from surveys of
homeowners to identify a bubble in the housing market before 2006. They polled
homeowners about their expectations of future price increase in various cities. The
expectations for growth over the next ten years in many cities exceeded 10% per year.
They interpreted the evidence as suggestive of an economic fallacy, since the longer term
growth in home prices had been below 10%. While is it not difficult to believe that
homeowners had an unsophisticated anticipation of future price increases in the early
2000’s it is harder to believe that financial institutions and professional risk managers
would get swept up in irrational beliefs about future home prices without relying on the
analysis of hard data and reliable statistical models. The rational calculation of default
probability and recovery through foreclosure should provide an institutional constraint on
the consequences of individual naiveté with respect to the risk and return of investing in a
home.
IV.7 Model Validity
A natural test in 2006 of the reliability of housing price forecasts might have been to see
whether a time-series econometric model did a reasonable job at bounding the
performance of housing markets in previous years. Using the same methodology as
above, we made five-year ahead forecasts using data prior to 2000. Good model
performance is measured by the frequency of the housing index lying within a four-sigma
band. Figure 8 shows the results of this test. Six of the nineteen markets exceeded their
two-sigma confidence band. Fourteen of the nineteen indexes exceeded the five-year
forecast. The rate of model failure should have given an analyst grounds to doubt the
reliability of the confidence bands, at the very least.
A counter-argument is that we cannot presume that each observation is independent.
Thus, even though roughly a third of the markets exceeded their bands this would be
insufficient to reject the validity of the model for risk assessment. In fact, as the above
analysis suggests, housing markets were not independent. However, for purposes of risk
assessment, high correlation across markets should be grounds for greater caution, not
greater comfort. It simply means that the historical data is insufficient to provide a
reliable test of model validity.
21
  See Brunnermeier and Julliard (2008) and Goetzmann and Valaitis (2006) for examples
of robust modeling of housing trends.


                                             9
Should we be skeptical of the ARIMA forecasting model in general? Is it just a poor tool
for analyzing housing price trends? To consider that possibility, we step back to 1995.
At this point, fourteen series’ are available. A five-year forecast, shown in Figure 9,
compared with the actual performance to the year 2000 presents a slightly more
reasonable picture of model performance. Three series’ exceeded their confidence bands,
but only just barely in every case. One thing to note is that the model consistently under-
estimated the growth of housing markets by extrapolating the past long-term drift that
incorporated significant historical slumps in several cities. On balance, there might have
been moderate grounds for some skepticism about model reliability, but the strong
evidence for inertia in housing price indexes would not have been disputable.


V. Market Effects
V.1 Past market growth and demand for mortgages
So far, we have shown that the pre-2006 house price indexes demonstrated a strong,
multi-year, lagged dependency suggesting that they could be forecast out to multiple year
horizons. A standard ARIMA forecast indeed predicted future price increases in virtually
all the major Case-Shiller markets, and suggested negligible probabilities of a crash. An
important caveat is that back-tests of the model might have provided grounds for
skepticism, as well as the evident lack of sufficient time-series data to accurately estimate
long-horizon dependencies. In this section we consider the implications of reliance on
these models.
Case and Shiller (1993) argue that the high level of index predictability might lead
market participants to buy in anticipation of future price increases and to believe that they
could sell before a price downturn – classic asset bubble expectations. Therefore,
holding constant other factors that affect the home purchase decision, such as income,
LTV, etc, the greater past price rises are, the more likely potential buyers would like to
become home owners. Consider a marginal buyer who has a negative value of owning a
home – the expected cost caused by delinquency and thus foreclosure is sufficiently high
to offset the expected benefit of ownership. A greater anticipated rise in value would
increase the expected benefit of home ownership and reduce the expected cost. The cost
will decrease even though the probability of delinquency may be the same because when
delinquency happens, the owner has a better chance to sell her house for a profit instead
of going through a foreclosure. Additionally, expected home price gains increase the
leverage a home owner could bear without increasing the expected cost.
We hypothesize that the increasing participation and increasing mortgage leverage due to
greater anticipated future price increases had an effect on the demand for mortgages.
First, the total demand for mortgages, being prime and/or subprime, would increase with
anticipated future price increases. In addition to the increased number and volume of
applications, increased demand may manifest itself in higher spending on housing as
captured by higher loan to income ratios, lower loan to value ratios, and higher value to
income ratios. Second, we expect the riskiness of the mortgage applicant pool increase
due to increased participation and allocation to housing. We test both aspects of the


                                             10
demand effect using 2006 HMDA loan level data.22 Subprime loans are identified using
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s subprime lender list23.
V.2 Empirical evidence on mortgage demand
Table 1 reports univariate and multivariate cross-MSA regression results predicting the
demand for prime mortgages in 2006. The log of the number of loan applications and the
log of the dollar volume of loan applications are regressed on past price rises from 1999:4
to 2005:4 (the log of the ratio of the OFEHO house price index in 1999:4 to the index in
2005:4) and an additional set of variables. The univariate regressions show a positive
correlation between the demand for prime mortgages and past price increases – the
coefficient of past price change is positive and significant at the 1% level. However, this
positive relationship might be induced by any one of a number of other variables. For
example, big cities with more home buyers would simply have higher demand for
mortgages, and cities with higher employment rates and higher income would also have
more demand. To account for these effects, we include the following control variables in
the multivariate regressions: the log of the population of the MSA from the 2006
American Community Survey dataset [ACS], the log of the MSA unemployment rate in
2006 from Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), the log of the percentage of the population
over 65 from ACS, the log of the percentage of the population with a high school degree
from ACS, and the log of income per capita (in $ thousands) from ACS.
The multivariate regressions in Table 1 also provide strong evidence that past price rises
increase the demand for prime mortgages. While the coefficient of past price change is
smaller in the multivariate regressions than in the univariate regressions, it is still positive
and significant at the 1% level. It is worth noting that adding control variables
dramatically increases the R squares – from 0.11 for loans and 0.25 for volume in the
univariate regressions to 0.93 for both loans and volume in the multivariate regressions.
Further, the coefficients of the control variables seem sensible. A MSA with a larger
population, a lower unemployment rate, and a larger portion of the population below 65
years old would have higher demand for prime mortgages.
Table 2 reports similar univariate and multivariate regressions of the demand for
subprime mortgages in 2006 as measured by the number and dollar amount of
applications. Additional regressions control the demand for prime mortgages. The
regressions provide strong and robust evidence that past price rises increase the demand
for subprime mortgages. The coefficient on past price change is significant not only
when controlling for demographic factors, but when controlling for prime mortgage
applications. The prime mortgage applications should capture any missing factors that
would influence broad demand for home mortgages in the MSA, including any effects
due to constraints on growth. Controlling for prime mortgage applications has another
22
   Available from www.ffiec.gov/hmda/hmdarawdata.htm#by_msa. Avery, Brevoort,
and Canner (2007) estimate that 80% of all home lending in the U.S. is covered by the
2006 HMDA data set. All data in this paper uses loans marked for home purchase. We
also define “approved” loans as those that are ultimately originated to avoid double
counting loans approved by multiple institutions.
23
   Available from www.huduser.org/datasets/manu.html


                                              11
useful interpretation in the context of the Case and Shiller bubble hypothesis. If one
assumes that unreasonable extrapolation of past price increases is the same for prime and
subprime borrowers, then the prime loan variable should capture demand-side “irrational
exuberance.” The remaining price rise effect is either due to even greater irrationality on
the part of the subprime borrower or it is due to the greater willingness of the subprime
lenders to approve applications, i.e. relaxation of constraints on the capital supply side.
The results suggest that past price changes affect the demand for subprime mortgages
more strongly than the demand for prime mortgages.
We next test the second aspect of the demand effect: that the average riskiness of loan
applications increases with past price appreciation. We use the log of loan size to
applicant annual income ratio as a proxy for riskiness of loan applications and a measure
of mortgage leverage. It is plausible that, holding constant applicant income and other
factors, the greater the loan size, the higher the probability of delinquency and default.
Therefore, the loan to income ratio is correlated with riskiness of loan applications.
Table 3 reports univariate and multivariate regressions of the average of the log of loan
size to income ratio on the past price change for both prime and subprime mortgage
applications. Table 3 provides strong evidence of a riskier applicant pool in MSAs with
higher past price appreciation: the coefficient of past price changes is positive and
significant at the 1% level for both prime and subprime mortgages. The coefficients on
the control variables also appear to be sensible. For example, the greater the
unemployment rate in an MSA, the higher the average riskiness of mortgage applicants in
the MSA (higher loan to income ratios). We also confirm that the result is capturing an
applicant’s desire to borrow more (the spending effect), given her income, and not the
presence of more expensive houses. The coefficient of past price changes is still
significant when we control for the log of the ratio of median existing single family home
price to median household income using data from economy.com.
We further test the hypothesis that borrowers tend to buy more expensive homes, given
their loan amount and income, in MSAs with greater past price appreciation. We run two
types of regressions. Table 4 regresses the loan to value ratio on past price changes. The
average loan-to-value ratios at the MSA level are provided by LoanPerformance.com.
We expect to see that the loan to value ratio is decreasing in past price appreciation. This
would be evidence that borrowers want to invest more in home equity, which means
borrowers want to buy more expensive homes given the loan amount. Results in Table 4
support the hypothesis. The coefficient on past price appreciation is negative and
significant for both prime and subprime loan applications. The result is robust to a
control for the ratio of median existing single family home price to median household
income, so the relation is not due to higher home prices.
Table 5 regresses the home value to income ratio on past price changes, and tests the
hypothesis that borrowers want to buy more expensive homes, given their income. The
home value to income ratio for an MSA is constructed by dividing the average loan to
income ratio for this MSA in Table 3 with the average loan to value ratio for this MSA in
Table 4. The positive and significant coefficient of past price changes indicates that
borrowers want to buy more expensive homes given their income. The result is robust to
the control for the ratio of median single family home price to median household income.


                                            12
In sum, Tables 1 through 5 provide evidence for three aspects of the demand effect.
First, demand for mortgages is increasing in past price appreciation. Second, the average
riskiness of mortgage applications is increasing in past price appreciation. Third, both
prime and subprime borrowers want to buy more expensive homes given their income
and loan amount in MSAs with greater past price increases.
V.3 Empirical evidence on mortgage supply
The apparent predictability of future price changes might also affect lenders’ behavior.
Past price rises could support a lender’s view that the collateral value upon which the cost
of future borrower default depends will be worth as much or more than the original loan
value as long as the positive serial correlation in lagged returns is reliable. As a result,
holding constant other factors, lenders may be more willing to make loans (more relaxed
underwriting standards) in MSAs with high past price appreciation. The increased supply
of mortgages should then appear in higher approval and origination rates.
Table 6 tests if past price appreciation increases prime loan approvals, which are
measured by the number of loans approved and the total dollar loan amount. In Table 6,
when we do not control for loan applications, more loans are approved in MSAs with
greater past price increases. However, when we control for loan applications, past price
increases has a negative coefficient. This indicates that the prime lenders approve a
smaller portion of applications in MSAs with greater past price appreciation. Relating
this result with our earlier finding that the riskiness of applications is increasing in greater
past price changes, we have no evidence to support the hypothesis that prime lenders
accommodated increased demand in high-growth MSAs.
Table 7 conducts the same analysis on subprime loans. The coefficient on past price
increases is positive and significant when we do not control for applications, but is
insignificant (positive and significant in one specification) once we control for demand as
measured by the volume of applications. This result provides weak evidence that
subprime lenders accommodated increased demand. Despite the higher leverage and thus
greater riskiness of loan applications in MSAs with greater past price appreciation (which
we established in Table 4), subprime lenders approve roughly the same portion of
applications.
Table 8 formally tests the differences between prime and subprime approvals. The
dependent variable is the approvals for subprime loans minus the approvals of prime
loans. The regressions control for the difference between subprime and prime
applications. Table 8 shows that the coefficient on past price increases is positive and
significant in all specifications. This result shows that subprime lenders approve a larger
portion of applications than prime lenders in high-growth MSAs.
We further consider whether the leverage of approved loans relates to past price changes
for both prime and subprime loans. Table 9 regresses the loan to income ratios of
approved loans on past price changes, with and without controlling for the loan to income
ratios of applications. For prime loans, when we do not control for the loan to income
ratio of applications, past price changes have a positive and significant coefficient.
However, once we control for the loan to income ratio of applications, past price changes


                                              13
have a negative and significant coefficient. This result suggests that prime lenders
approve applications with lower loan to income ratios in MSAs with greater past price
changes. This is consistent with the notion that prime lenders did not use looser
underwriting standards in such MSAs. However, in the same regressions for subprime
approvals, the coefficient on past price increases is positive and significant with and
without controlling for the loan to income ratio of applications. This result shows that
subprime lenders approved application with higher leverage in MSAs with greater past
price changes, which is consistent with the notion that subprime lenders used looser
underwriting standards in high-growth MSAs.
Table 10 tests whether past price changes are related to the loan to value ratio of
approved prime and subprime mortgages. The coefficient on past price increases is
negative and significant for both prime and subprime approvals, with and without
controlling for the loan to value ratios of applications. Because loans with lower loan to
value ratios are less risky holding constant other factors, Table 10 provides no evidence
of looser underwriting standards among both prime and subprime lenders. Though
applicants in MSAs with greater home price appreciation wanted to buy more expensive
houses for a given loan amount, lenders did not accommodate this spending demand.
Table 11 tests whether the ratio of home value to borrower income of approved prime
and subprime mortgages is related to past price changes, with and without controlling for
the ratio of value to income in applications. The results are consistent. For both
approved prime and subprime loans, the value to income ratio is increasing in greater past
price changes. This indicates that for a given income, both prime and subprime lenders
allowed borrowers to buy more expensive homes in MSAs with great past price
increases.
V.3 Loan level evidence on mortgage supply
We also test the supply effect at the loan level using probit analysis on the
approval/rejection of loan applications. The analysis uses all mortgage applications for
purchasing owner-occupied single family houses secured by first liens. Separate probit
analysis is conducted for prime and subprime applications. Dependant variables are 1 if
an application is approved and 0 if not. Explanatory variables are past price rises in the
MSA of the application, the log percentage of the minority population in the census tract
of the loan application, HUD median family income in dollars (log) in the MSA of the
loan application, the log of the percentage of tract median family income compared to
MSA/MD median family income, the log of the size of the application to the income of
the applicant, and a dummy that equals 1 if preapproval was requested. additional
explanatory variables control for the riskiness of applications. Note that the data do not
allow us to control for the loan to value ratio at the loan level.
Table 12 reports the probit analysis for prime and subprime mortgage applications. Past
price rises have opposite effects on the approval of prime and subprime applications.
Greater price rises reduce the approval probability for prime applications and increase the
approval probability of subprime applications. This indicates significant distinctions
between prime and subprime lenders. In the context of our earlier results that loan
applications tend to be more risky in MSAs with greater past price increases, the results


                                            14
in Table 12 do not provide evidence for looser underwriting standards among prime
lenders but do provide evidence of looser underwriting standards among subprime
lenders.
Coefficients on the other explanatory variables in the probit analysis are sensible. A
lower percentage of minority population, a higher median income, a larger ratio of tract
to MSA median income, and a lower loan to income ratio increase the probability for an
application to be approved. The results seem to suggest that the control variables
effectively help proxy for riskiness of applications.
To visualize the effects of past price rises on subprime approvals, Figure 10 plots the
relationship between the growth of the OHHEO indexes over the period 2000 to 2005
against the log dollar amount of subprime loans originated in 2006 for new home
purchases (in thousands). The positive relationship in Figure 10 between past price
growth and dollar of subprime issuance is clearly evident.24
While there is evidence in the behavioral finance literature that lower-income people are
less financially sophisticated25, our empirical analysis indicates that past price
appreciation affects not only the demand for subprime mortgages but subprime mortgage
lenders, though the evidence suggests that lenders may have merely accommodated
increased demand because of increased capital. Mian and Sufi (2008) in fact show that
capital supply constraints were meaningful in the period, although they also document a
trend towards looser standards. Thus our results provide strong evidence that the binding
but loosening supply constraint based upon forecasts using house price indexes as inputs
helped contribute to more subprime applications and also possibly approvals in “hot”
cities as opposed to only overly-optimistic buyer demand. The increased capital story
does not explain why subprime mortgage approvals were more sensitive to higher
demand in MSAs with higher past price appreciation than prime approvals.


VI Alternative explanations
VI.1 Moral Hazard
Consider the Keys et. al. (2008) explanation for the volume of subprime issuance: that
loan originators did not care about the quality of the loans because there was a ready
market to securitize them. Our empirical results do not rule out this moral-hazard
explanation, but we find evidence that may require further elaboration of the moral
hazard model. If subprime lenders simply made every loan they could, regardless of the
probability of default or the expected recovery upon default, we would not expect to see
approval probability of subprime application correlated with past price increases at the
loan level. Our empirical evidence substantiates the effects of past house price changes

24
   Susan Wachter also documents this correlation for housing and mortgage data in 2002
in her presentation to the Evolving Housing Finance Marketplace Roundtable, January
16, 2008.
25
   For example Dhar and Zhu (2006)


                                           15
on both mortgage applications and approvals, which suggests that extrapolations of past
price increases in these markets seem to be consistent with the rationality of both
borrowers and lenders – if one can call trust in price extrapolation rational. Work needs
to be done to distinguish between reliance on a model and lender moral hazard.
VI.2 Reverse causality
Mian and Sufi (2008) hypothesize that the price growth from 2000 to 2005 was caused by
increasing access to credit, which in turn pushed up housing prices. As with the moral
hazard story, we do not rule this hypothesis out. In fact, a classic bubble would include
prices increasing on expectations of future price rises and vice-versa. Our examination
of the 1995 to 2000 price indexes suggests, however, that some housing markets were
rising before the widespread access to credit by subprime borrowers. An important
implication of the credit-driving-prices story in the context of the current paper is that it
raises the question of reverse-causality in the cross-sectional regressions – that the
relationship we document is an artifact of past lax credit access (where past credit access
is proxied by 2006 subprime issuance) having driven up prices.
In some sense, subprime credit issuance in 2006 was forward-looking, regardless. When
forecasting future growth and risk of loss, a lender might be wise to factor in how much
of that forecast is predicated on continuing past credit policies, since a sudden change in
market conditions – like a credit crunch, or a drop in demand for mortgage-backed
securities would represent a regime-change that should alter parameters in a forecasting
model. However, if lenders expected the conditions that led to past price increases in
certain markets to continue (including lax credit standards) then extrapolation of past
trends would remain a relevant input to lending risk analysis.


VII. Discussion
VII.1 Interpretation of Basic Results
This paper document results regarding the effects of past house price changes on
applications and approvals of both prime and subprime mortgages. First, econometric
models applied to housing index data up to 2006 predicted future price increases and low
probabilities of an extreme crash in home values. Second, past price appreciation
increased mortgage applications, the leverage of borrowers, and the prices of purchased
homes (with borrower income and loan amount held constant). Third, past price changes
evidently affected the approvals of prime and subprime applications differently. We have
no evidence that prime lenders used looser underwriting standards, but we do have some
evidence for subprime lenders. Overall, our analysis provides evidence of extrapolation
of past price gains by subprime borrowers and likely lenders.
We also considered alternative explanations for theories about the subprime crisis, and
the observed correlations documented in the cross-sectional regressions, including moral
hazard and reverse causality. Moral hazard as the cause of the subprime crisis would
require an additional explanation regarding why the approval probability of subprime
applications at the loan level is correlated to past house price increases. The reverse


                                             16
causality argument is one possible additional explanation. If both were true, it would
suggest a deeply dysfunctional, perhaps even cynical capital market. We cannot rule this
possibility out, but the hypothesis we propose is at least consistent with lenders having
the intention of quantifying and managing risk.
VII.2 Implications for Risk Management
The evidence in this paper also raises the broader issue of the role of statistical analysis of
historical data for the purposes of risk management. The difference between uncertainty
and risk is the potential for expressing the range of future outcomes quantitatively. The
development of good housing indexes made econometric forecasting possible, but it also
created the potential for risk models to fail. It is thus a strange twist that the technology
for quantifying risk led to a reliance on models that are, themselves, liable to failure.
The larger irony of the subprime crisis is that it struck the financial markets at a time that
might otherwise have been considered a revolution in risk management. In institutional
portfolio management, the world had finally rejected security specific risk measures –
“safe” securities lists – in favor of prudent portfolio diversification.26           Even as
institutional managers extended their portfolios beyond stocks and bonds into the world
of hedge funds, they tracked such things as their exposure to numerous risk factors:
interest rate shocks, market moves, emerging market events, shifts in inflation, the value
premium, the size factor and many more. Indeed the complaint heard most in the early
part of the decade was not about the lack of risk measures, but rather that risk assessment
had come to dominate return generation in portfolio decision-making.
In banking, Basel II had been considered a major new paradigm for the institutional
evaluation of risk. It validated a “value-at-risk” approach for determining bank capital
requirements, encouraging institutions to build models relying upon the statistical
analysis of historical data.
In the domain of housing and mortgages, one would have been inclined to trust in the
nearly two decades of experience by investment banks with mortgage-backed securities
issuance, and to take comfort in the existence of well-capitalized arbitrageurs and hedge
funds who marginally profited by driving away pricing inefficiencies through the
application of high-tech statistical models.
Perhaps most importantly, an entire government agency, the Office of Federal Housing
Enterprise Oversight [OFHEO] existed for evaluating the capital adequacy of the large
quasi-governmental mortgage insurance companies; Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
OFHEO carefully collected housing and mortgage data from these agencies and
constructed indexes of home price appreciation, using well-tested, academically validated




26
  An important exception to this is the triple A standard for money market funds and the
investment grade standard for regulated institutional portfolios such as banks and
insurance companies.


                                              17
econometric methodologies, in order to continuously assess the relationship between the
value of the underlying collateral – the housing stock – and the agencies’ liabilities. 27
In all of these sectors, the explosion of data, increasingly sophisticated and well-tested
models and the widespread employment of well-trained professional analysts, and the
genuine commitment of regulatory entities in banking and mortgage insurance provided
reasonable grounds for comfort that any potential future crisis in the financial markets
and institutions would be detectable and quantifiable.
The further irony is that the innovations in securitization in the early 2000’s were
likewise deemed revolutionary. Although the instruments were complex, the concept
was simple. Institutions became risk packagers who creatively parsed risks and sold them
to the entities most suited to hold them. For example, if the residual tranche of a
collateralized mortgage obligation was inappropriate for a fixed income mutual fund, it
might be perfect for a speculative hedge fund seeking high return and willing to take high
risks. The safer tranches that remained might better match the risk appetite of the mutual
fund. Market observers generally believed that securitization, which had created a liquid,
global, efficient market for risk, rendered our financial system robust to any single
negative shock.28 After all, if mortgages in a single city went bad, this loss would be
diffused broadly among the world’s investors rather than being concentrated in a single,
possibly fragile institution. And still better, those harmed would be those who were best
prepared for the loss.
Parallel to the innovations in the asset-backed securitization market were remarkable
strides in tools for mitigating corporate default risk. Credit default swaps were a new
form of financial contract in the early 2000s and they became a major mechanism for
measuring and allocating the risk of corporate bond defaults. This revolution in the
monetization of risk extended equally to the commodities markets – particularly to
energy futures – where over-the-counter trading, while not new, grew dramatically.
Market participants and observers in the early part of the decade were not naïve enough
to believe that the twin revolutions in risk management and securitization had eliminated
risk, or even reduced it much. They did mostly believe that the new quantification and
commodification of risk allowed for a more efficient allocation of it, and a new, more
precise awareness of its consequences. Again, these beliefs seem in retrospect to have
been pitifully optimistic. The point germane to the evidence in this paper is that the
foundation of these beliefs rested, in part, on quantification and modeling – the collection
and analysis of data -- and forecasting of the range of future trends.
One general lesson for future risk management to take from the analysis in this paper is
that unconditional forecasts made on conditional data can go very wrong. In the case of
the subprime crisis, data were generated under institutional conditions such as a liquid
markets for securitized mortgage debt and for housing. Failure of these conditions after
2006 represented an important (and difficult to model) regime-switch.

27
  Cf. Calhoun (1996)
28
  Some readers will not count themselves among these market observers. There were
certainly contrarian views.


                                            18
19
References
Avery, Robert B., Brevoort, Kenneth P. and Canner, Glenn B., ''The 2006 HMDA Data''
Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 93 (December 2007), pp. A73-A109.
Bailey, M., R. Muth and H. Nourse, 1963, “A Regression Method for Real Estate Price
Index Construction,” J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 58 pp. 933–942.
Brunnermeier, Markus and Christian Julliard, 2008, “Money Illusion and Housing
Frenzies,” Review of Financial Studies, 21(1), 135-180.
Calem, Paul S., Gillen, Kevin and Wachter, Susan M., 2003, “The Neighborhood
Distribution of Subprime Mortgage Lending,” U of Penn, Inst for Law & Econ Research
Paper 03-39.
Calhoun, Charles A., 1996, “OFHEO House Price Indexes: HPI Technical Description,”
Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight.
Caplin, A, S Chan, C Freeman, J Tracy, 1999, “Household Asset Portfolios and the
Reform of the Housing Finance Market,” TIAA-CREF Research Dialogues.
Capozza, Dennis R., Dick Kazarian, Thomas A. Thomson, 1997, “Mortgage Default in
Local Markets,” Real Estate Economics, 25 (4), pp. 631-655.
Case and R. Shiller, 1987, Prices of Single-Family Homes since 1970: New Indexes for
Four Cities. New England Economic Review Sep/Oct 87 (1987), pp. 45–56.
Case, Karl E., and Robert J. Shiller, 1988, “The Behavior of Home Buyers in Boom and
Post-Boom Markets,” New England Economic Review pp. 2-46, November/December.
36.
Case, Karl E., and Robert J. Shiller, 1989, “The Efficiency of the Market for Single-
Family Homes,” American Economic Review 79(1):125-37.
Case, Karl E. and R. Shiller, 1990, Forecasting Prices and Excess Returns in the Housing
Market, AREUEA J. 18, pp. 253–273.
Case Karl E. and Robert J. Shiller, 2003, "Is There a Bubble in the Housing Market?,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Economic Studies Program, The Brookings
Institution, vol. 34(2), pages 299-362.
Clayton, Jim, Norman Miller, and Liang Peng, 2008, “Price-Volume Correlation in the
Housing Market: Causality and Co-movement,” Journal of Real Estate Finance and
Economics, forthcoming
Crews Cutts, Amy, and Robert A. Van Order, 2005, “On the economics of subprime
lending, “The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 30, 167-196.
Demyanyk, Yuliya and Van Hemert, Otto, 2008,” Understanding the Subprime
Mortgage Crisis, New York University Working Paper.



                                           20
Deng, Y., Quigley, J., and Van Order, J., 2000. “Mortgage Terminations, Heterogeneity,
and the Exercise of Mortgage Options.” Econometrica, 68(2): 275-308.
Dhar, Ravi and Ning Zhu, 2006, “Up Close and Personal: Investor Sophistication and the
Disposition Effect,” Management Science, Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2006, pp. 726-740.
Doms, Mark, Furlong, Fred and Krainer, John, 2007, "Subprime Mortgage Delinquency
Rates" Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2007-33
Downing, Chris , Richard Stanton and Nancy Wallace, 2005, “An Empirical Test of a
Two-Factor Mortgage Valuation Model: How Much Do House Prices Matter?” Real
Estate Economics, Volume 33 Issue 4, Pages 681 – 710.
Gabriel, Stuart and Stuart Rosenthal, 2007, “Secondary Markets, Risk, and Access to
Credit: Evidence from the Mortgage Market,” Working Paper, Syracuse University.
Geltner, David, 1997, “Bias and Precision of Estimates of Housing Investment Risk
Based n Repeat-Sales Indexes: A Simulation Analysis,” Journal of Real Estate Finance
and Economics, 14: 155–171.
Glaeser, Edward L., Gyourko, Joseph E. and Saks, Raven E., 2005, “Why Have
Housing Prices Gone Up?” The American Economic Review, Volume 95, Number 2, May
, pp. 329-333.
Goetzmann, William N., 1992, The Accuracy of Real Estate Indexes: Repeat Sales
Estimators. Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 5, pp. 5–53.
Goetzmann, William N. and Liang Peng, 2006, “Estimating House Price Indexes in the
Presence of Seller Reservation Prices, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(1):
100–112.
Goetzmann, William N. and Matthew I. Spiegel, 2002, “Policy Implications of Portfolio
Choice in Underserved Mortgage Markets,” in Low-Income Homeownership: Examining
the Unexamined Goal by Nicolas P. Retsinas and Eric S. Belsky.
Goetzmann, William N. and Eduardas Valaitis, 2006, “Simulating Real Estate in the
Investment Portfolio: Model Uncertainty and Inflation Hedging,” Yale ICF Working
Paper No. 06-04
Keys, Benjamin J., Mukherjee, Tanmoy K., Seru, Amit and Vig, Vikrant, 2008, “Did
Securitization Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans,” SSRN Working
Paper.
Lin, Zhenguo and Kerry D. Vandell, 2007, “Illiquidity and Pricing Biases in the Real
Estate Market,” Real Estate Economics, Volume 35, Issue 3, Pages 291-330.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2008, “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion:
Evidence from the 2007 Mortgage Default Crisis,” working paper, University of Chicago.




                                          21
Pennington-Cross, Anthony, and Souphala Chomsisengphet, 2007, “Subprime
Refinancing: Equity Extraction and Mortgage Termination,” Real Estate Economics 35,
233-263.
Rajan, Uday, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2008, “ The Failure of Models That Predict
Failure: Distance, Incentives and Defaults,” Working paper
Shiller, Robert, ,1991, Arithmetic Repeat Sales Price Estimators. Journal of Housing
Economics 1, pp. 110–126.
Shumway, Robert H., and David Stoffer, 2006, Series Analysis and Its Applications: With
R Examples, Springer Texts in Statistics.
Wachter, Susan M., Russo, Karl and Hershaff, Jonathan E., 2005, “Subprime Lending:
Neighborhood Patterns Over Time in US Cities.” U of Penn, Inst for Law & Econ .




                                           22
Figure 1
Figure 2




   1
Figure 3




   2
Figure 4




   3
Figure 5




   4
Figure 6




   5
Figure 7




   6
Figure 8




   7
Figure 9




   8
Figure 10




   9
Figure 11




  10
                                Table 1. Demand for prime mortgages and past price changes

This table reports cross-sectional MSA level linear regressions regarding the determinants of the demand for prime mortgages
in 2006. The demand is measured with the number of mortgage applications (in log) and the volume of applications (in log of $
thousands). Explanatory variables for each MSA are: [past price change (log)] the log of the ratio of the OFEHO house price
index in 1999:4 to the index in 2005:4, [population (log)] the log of the population of the MSA from the 2006 American
Community Survey dataset [ACS], [unemployment% (log)] the log of the MSA unemployment rate in 2006 from Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS), [65 and above% (log)] the log of the percentage of the population over 65 from ACS, [high school%
(log)] the log of the percentage of the population with a high school degree from ACS, and [income per capita (log)] the log of
income per capita (in $ thousands) from ACS. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard deviations are reported in parentheses.
*** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at 10% level.

Explanatory variables                                               Dependant variables
                                           Loans (in log)                                        Volume (in log)
Past price change (log)         ***1.752                    ***0.488                 ***3.134                      ***1.606
                                 (0.269)                     (0.087)                  (0.289)                       (0.096)
   Population (log)                                         ***1.078                                               ***1.071
                                                             (0.021)                                                (0.024)
Unemployment% (log)                                         ***-0.240                                              ***-0.233
                                                             (0.060)                                                (0.072)
 65 and above% (log)                                        ***-0.318                                              ***-0.651
                                                             (0.093)                                                (0.108)
  High school% (log)                                          0.199                                                  -0.261
                                                             (0.316)                                                (0.392)
Income per capita (log)                                       0.103                                                ***1.023
                                                             (0.175)                                                (0.210)
     Sample size                   376                         344                        376                         344
     Adjusted R2                   0.11                        0.93                       0.25                        0.93




                                                               11
                              Table 2. Demand for subprime mortgages and past price changes

This table reports cross-sectional MSA level linear regressions regarding the determinants of the demand for subprime
mortgages in 2006. The demand is measured with the number of mortgage applications (in log) and the volume of applications
(in log of $ thousands). Explanatory variables for each MSA are: [past price change (log)] the log of the ratio of the OFEHO
house price index in 1999:4 to the index in 2005:4, [population (log)] the log of the population of the MSA from the 2006
American Community Survey dataset [ACS], [unemployment% (log)] the log of the MSA unemployment rate in 2006 from
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), [65 and above% (log)] the log of the percentage of the population over 65 from ACS, [high
school% (log)] the log of the percentage of the population with a high school degree from ACS, [income per capita (log)] the
log of income per capita (in $ thousands) from ACS, and [Prime applications (log)] the number (for loan regressions) or volume
(for volume regression) of prime mortgage applications. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard deviations are reported in
parentheses. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at 10% level.

Explanatory variables                                             Dependant variables
                                           Loans (in log)                                     Volume (in log)
Past price change (log)     ***2.624         ***1.049         ***0.558         ***3.957          ***2.175        ***0.573
                             (0.318)          (0.129)          (0.104)          (0.331)           (0.140)         (0.150)
   Population (log)                          ***1.321         ***0.238                           ***1.316        ***0.248
                                              (0.032)          (0.091)                            (0.034)         (0.081)
Unemployment% (log)                          **0.200          ***0.441                            *0.203         ***0.435
                                              (0.090)          (0.080)                            (0.103)         (0.081)
 65 and above% (log)                           -0.015         ***0.304                           **-0.334        ***0.315
                                              (0.147)          (0.098)                            (0.160)         (0.108)
  High school% (log)                        ***-1.654         ***-1.854                         ***-2.155        ***-1.895
                                              (0.519)          (0.418)                            (0.588)         (0.415)
Income per capita (log)                        -0.194           -0.297                             0.493         **-0.527
                                              (0.261)          (0.201)                            (0.308)         (0.221)
Prime applications (log)                                      ***1.005                                           ***0.996
                                                               (0.081)                                            (0.073)
     Sample size              376               344              344              376              344              344
     Adjusted R2              0.16              0.88             0.93             0.28             0.89             0.94




                                                             12
                               Table 3. Application loan to income ratios and past price changes

This table reports cross-sectional MSA level linear regressions regarding the loan to income ratio of the prime and subprime
mortgage applications in 2006. The dependant variable is the MSA average ratio (in log) of loan size to applicant gross annual
income. Explanatory variables for each MSA are: [past price change (log)] the log of the ratio of the OFEHO house price index
in 1999:4 to the index in 2005:4, [population (log)] the log of the population of the MSA from the 2006 American Community
Survey dataset [ACS], [unemployment% (log)] the log of the MSA unemployment rate in 2006 from Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS), [65 and above% (log)] the log of the percentage of the population over 65 from ACS, [high school% (log)] the log of the
percentage of the population with a high school degree from ACS, [income per capita (log)] the log of income per capita (in $
thousands) from ACS, and [Price income ratio (log)] the log of the ratio of median existing single family home price to median
household income from economy.com. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard deviations are reported in parentheses. ***
denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at 10% level.

Explanatory variables                                               Mortgage types
                                               Prime                                               Subprime
Past price change (log)     ***0.329         ***0.325         ***0.304          ***0.219           ***0.209       ***0.137
                             (0.025)          (0.025)          (0.028)           (0.020)            (0.021)        (0.027)
   Population (log)                                           **-0.015                                               0.003
                                                               (0.008)                                             (0.007)
Unemployment% (log)                                           ***0.067                                            ***0.065
                                                               (0.022)                                             (0.023)
 65 and above% (log)                                          ***-0.091                                              0.029
                                                               (0.030)                                             (0.027)
  High school% (log)                                           **0.282                                              -0.167
                                                               (0.135)                                             (0.131)
Income per capita (log)                                        **0.153                                            ***0.180
                                                               (0.064)                                             (0.059)
Price income ratio (log)                       0.020            0.004                              **0.029           0.013
                                              (0.014)          (0.015)                             (0.014)         (0.015)
     Sample size              376               368              336              376                368              336
     Adjusted R2              0.32              0.32             0.37             0.17               0.18            0.18




                                                              13
                                Table 4. Application loan to value ratio and past price changes

This table reports cross-sectional MSA level linear regressions regarding the loan to value ratio of the prime and subprime
mortgage applications in 2006. The dependant variable is the MSA average ratio (in log) of loan size to home value of
mortgage applications, which is inferred from two ratios: the average loan to value ratio of mortgage approvals from Loan
Performance and the ratio of the average size of mortgage applications to the average size of mortgage approvals from HMDA.
Explanatory variables for each MSA are: [past price change (log)] the log of the ratio of the OFEHO house price index in 1999:4
to the index in 2005:4, [population (log)] the log of the population of the MSA from the 2006 American Community Survey
dataset [ACS], [unemployment% (log)] the log of the MSA unemployment rate in 2006 from Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS),
[65 and above% (log)] the log of the percentage of the population over 65 from ACS, [high school% (log)] the log of the
percentage of the population with a high school degree from ACS, [income per capita (log)] the log of income per capita (in $
thousands) from ACS, and [Price income ratio (log)] the log of the ratio of median existing single family home price to median
household income from economy.com. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard deviations are reported in parentheses. ***
denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at 10% level.

Explanatory variables                                                Mortgage types
                                               Prime                                              Subprime
Past price change (log)     ***-0.118        ***-0.116        ***-0.080         ***-0.175         ***-0.183       ***-0.196
                             (0.010)          (0.011)          (0.012)           (0.012)           (0.013)         (0.017)
    Population (log)                                            -0.002                                              0.003
                                                               (0.003)                                             (0.005)
Unemployment% (log)                                              0.003                                             **0.025
                                                               (0.007)                                             (0.012)
 65 and above% (log)                                            -0.013                                             **0.059
                                                               (0.011)                                             (0.023)
  High school% (log)                                           **0.103                                              0.072
                                                               (0.052)                                             (0.069)
Income per capita (log)                                       ***-0.125                                             0.030
                                                               (0.024)                                             (0.031)
Price income ratio (log)                      **-0.013         *-0.010                            **0.021          **0.018
                                               (0.006)         (0.005)                            (0.009)          (0.008)
     Sample size               347               339              336              347              339              336
     Adjusted R2               0.28              0.30            0.41              0.25             0.26             0.29




                                                              14
                            Table 5. Application home value to income ratio and past price changes

This table reports cross-sectional MSA level linear regressions regarding the home value to income ratio of the prime and
subprime mortgage applications in 2006. The dependant variable is the MSA average ratio (in log) of home value to applicant
gross annual income, which is inferred from two ratios: the average loan to value ratio (in table 4) and the average loan to
income ratio of mortgage applications. Explanatory variables for each MSA are: [past price change (log)] the log of the ratio of
the OFEHO house price index in 1999:4 to the index in 2005:4, [population (log)] the log of the population of the MSA from the
2006 American Community Survey dataset [ACS], [unemployment% (log)] the log of the MSA unemployment rate in 2006 from
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), [65 and above% (log)] the log of the percentage of the population over 65 from ACS, [high
school% (log)] the log of the percentage of the population with a high school degree from ACS, [income per capita (log)] the
log of income per capita (in $ thousands) from ACS, and [Price income ratio (log)] the log of the ratio of median existing single
family home price to median household income from economy.com. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard deviations are
reported in parentheses. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at 10% level.

Explanatory variables                                                Mortgage types
                                                Prime                                              Subprime
Past price change (log)      ***0.434         ***0.431          ***0.384         ***0.375          ***0.376         ***0.333
                              (0.031)          (0.032)           (0.033)          (0.025)           (0.026)          (0.030)
    Population (log)                                              -0.013                                               0.000
                                                                 (0.008)                                             (0.009)
Unemployment% (log)                                             ***0.064                                               0.039
                                                                 (0.023)                                             (0.025)
 65 and above% (log)                                            **-0.078                                              -0.030
                                                                 (0.031)                                             (0.037)
  High school% (log)                                               0.179                                             *-0.239
                                                                 (0.153)                                             (0.144)
Income per capita (log)                                         ***0.278                                            **0.150
                                                                 (0.073)                                             (0.068)
Price income ratio (log)                        0.022              0.014                             -0.000           -0.004
                                               (0.018)           (0.017)                            (0.018)          (0.018)
     Sample size               347               339                336             347               339               336
     Adjusted R2               0.39              0.39              0.48             0.32              0.32             0.33




                                                               15
                                Table 6. Approvals of prime mortgages and past price changes

This table reports cross-sectional MSA level linear regressions regarding the determinants of the approvals of prime mortgages
in 2006. The approvals are measured with the number of mortgage approved (in log) and the volume of mortgage approved
(in log of $ thousands). Explanatory variables for each MSA are: [past price change (log)] the log of the ratio of the OFEHO
house price index in 1999:4 to the index in 2005:4, [population (log)] the log of the population of the MSA from the 2006
American Community Survey dataset [ACS], [unemployment% (log)] the log of the MSA unemployment rate in 2006 from
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), [65 and above% (log)] the log of the percentage of the population over 65 from ACS, [high
school% (log)] the log of the percentage of the population with a high school degree from ACS, [income per capita (log)] the
log of income per capita (in $ thousands) from ACS, and [Prime applications (log)] the log of prime mortgage applications.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard deviations are reported in parentheses. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at
the 5% level, and * at 10% level.

Explanatory variables                                              Dependant variables
                                            Loans (in log)                                    Volume (in log)
Past price change (log)    ***1.614    ***0.359     ***-0.094   ***-0.083     ***2.973    ***1.452    ***-0.091        -0.012
                            (0.266)     (0.083)       (0.016)    (0.017)       (0.286)     (0.090)      (0.018)       (0.022)
    Population (log)                   ***1.052                 ***0.076                  ***1.047                   ***0.070
                                        (0.019)                  (0.014)                   (0.022)                    (0.011)
Unemployment% (log)                    ***-0.260                ***-0.041                 ***-0.245                  **-0.033
                                        (0.086)                  (0.013)                   (0.068)                    (0.013)
 65 and above% (log)                   ***-0.260                 *0.027                   ***-0.585                     0.009
                                        (0.086)                  (0.016)                   (0.099)                    (0.017)
  High school% (log)                    *0.497                  ***0.317                    0.053                    ***0.291
                                        (0.297)                  (0.073)                   (0.370)                    (0.077)
Income per capita (log)                  0.176                  ***0.083                  ***1.092                   ***0.159
                                        (0.164)                  (0.031)                   (0.194)                    (0.033)
Prime applications (log)                             ***0.975   ***0.905                               ***0.978      ***0.912
                                                      (0.003)    (0.013)                                (0.003)       (0.011)
     Sample size             376          344           376        344          376          344          376            344
     Adjusted R2             0.10         0.93          0.99       0.99         0.14         0.93         0.99          0.99




                                                              16
                              Table 7. Approvals of subprime mortgages and past price changes

This table reports cross-sectional MSA level linear regressions regarding the determinants of the approvals of subprime
mortgages in 2006. The approvals are measured with the number of mortgage approved (in log) and the volume of mortgage
approved (in log of $ thousands). Explanatory variables for each MSA are: [past price change (log)] the log of the ratio of the
OFEHO house price index in 1999:4 to the index in 2005:4, [population (log)] the log of the population of the MSA from the
2006 American Community Survey dataset [ACS], [unemployment% (log)] the log of the MSA unemployment rate in 2006 from
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), [65 and above% (log)] the log of the percentage of the population over 65 from ACS, [high
school% (log)] the log of the percentage of the population with a high school degree from ACS, [income per capita (log)] the
log of income per capita (in $ thousands) from ACS, and [Subprime applications (log)] the log of subprime mortgage
applications. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard deviations are reported in parentheses. *** denotes significance at the
1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at 10% level.

Explanatory variables                                               Dependant variables
                                           Loans (in log)                                     Volume (in log)
Past price change (log)   ***2.658    ***1.087        0.012       -0.007       ***4.019    **2.252     **0.047         0.023
                           (0.320)     (0.138)       (0.022)     (0.034)        (0.332)    (0.146)      (0.024)      (0.034)
   Population (log)                   ***1.334                  **-0.044                  ***1.329                    -0.029
                                       (0.034)                   (0.022)                   (0.036)                   (0.018)
Unemployment% (log)                      0.129                  ***-0.080                   0.119                   ***-0.089
                                       (0.094)                   (0.019)                   (0.105)                   (0.019)
 65 and above% (log)                    -0.019                    -0.004                  **-0.341                     0.002
                                       (0.158)                   (0.029)                   (0.167)                   (0.033)
  High school% (log)                  ***-1.918                   -0.191                  ***-2.454                  *-0.245
                                       (0.570)                   (0.128)                   (0.617)                   (0.132)
Income per capita (log)                 -0.245                    -0.043                    0.412                     -0.096
                                       (0.271)                   (0.057)                   (0.310)                   (0.057)
Subprime applications                               ***1.008    ***1.044                               ***1.004     ***1.025
       (log)                                         (0.005)     (0.017)                                (0.004)      (0.012)
    Sample size              376          344          376         344           376         344          376           344
    Adjusted R2              0.16        0.87          0.99        0.99          0.28        0.88         0.99         0.99




                                                               17
                              Table 8. Differences in approvals of prime and subprime mortgages

This table reports cross-sectional MSA level linear regressions concerning the differences between the effect of past price
changes on prime mortgage approvals and the effect on subprime mortgage approvals in 2006. The dependant variable is the
approvals for subprime mortgages minus the approvals for prime mortgages in the same MSA. The approvals are measured
with the number of mortgage approved (in log) and the volume of mortgage approved (in log of $ thousands). Explanatory
variables for each MSA are: [past price change (log)] the log of the ratio of the OFEHO house price index in 1999:4 to the index
in 2005:4, [population (log)] the log of the population of the MSA from the 2006 American Community Survey dataset [ACS],
[unemployment% (log)] the log of the MSA unemployment rate in 2006 from Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), [65 and above%
(log)] the log of the percentage of the population over 65 from ACS, [high school% (log)] the log of the percentage of the
population with a high school degree from ACS, [income per capita (log)] the log of income per capita (in $ thousands) from
ACS, [Difference in applications] the log of subprime mortgage application minus the log of prime mortgage applications.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard deviations are reported in parentheses. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at
the 5% level, and * at 10% level.

Explanatory variables                                                Dependant variables
                                            Loans (in log)                                     Volume (in log)
Past price change (log)   ***1.044     ***0.728      ***0.085    ***0.124       ***1.046   ***0.800     ***0.148     ***0.194
                           (0.112)      (0.112)       (0.030)     (0.036)        (0.119)    (0.116)      (0.028)      (0.031)
    Population (log)                   ***0.283                   **0.021                  ***0.282                   **0.021
                                        (0.027)                   (0.009)                   (0.027)                   (0.010)
Unemployment% (log)                    ***0.387                  ***-0.087                 ***0.364                  ***-0.100
                                        (0.086)                   (0.022)                   (0.088)                   (0.024)
 65 and above% (log)                    **0.241                  **-0.085                   **0.244                  **-0.094
                                        (0.108)                   (0.036)                   (0.110)                   (0.043)
  High school% (log)                   ***-2.414                 ***-0.417                 ***-2.507                 ***-0.488
                                        (0.505)                   (0.151)                   (0.486)                   (0.152)
Income per capita (log)                 *-0.421                    -0.101                  ***-0.681                  *-0.116
                                        (0.222)                   (0.064)                   (0.220)                   (0.065)
     Difference in                                   ***1.099    ***1.078                               ***1.090     ***1.066
     applications                                     (0.020)     (0.024)                                (0.017)      (0.021)
     Sample size             376          344           376         344           376         344          376          344
     Adjusted R2             0.16         0.51          0.95        0.95          0.15        0.51         0.95         0.95




                                                                18
                                Table 9. Approval Loan to income ratio and past price changes

This table reports cross-sectional MSA level linear regressions regarding the average loan to income ratio (in log) of prime and
subprime mortgage approvals in 2006. Explanatory variables for each MSA are: [past price change (log)] the log of the ratio of
the OFEHO house price index in 1999:4 to the index in 2005:4, [population (log)] the log of the population of the MSA from the
2006 American Community Survey dataset [ACS], [unemployment% (log)] the log of the MSA unemployment rate in 2006 from
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), [65 and above% (log)] the log of the percentage of the population over 65 from ACS, [high
school% (log)] the log of the percentage of the population with a high school degree from ACS, [income per capita (log)] the
log of income per capita (in $ thousands) from ACS, and [Application LTI (log)] the average loan to income ratio of mortgage
applications. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard deviations are reported in parentheses. *** denotes significance at the
1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at 10% level.

Explanatory variables                                              Dependant variables
                                           Prime approvals                                  Subprime approvals
Past price change (log)   ***0.321     ***0.302    ***-0.016      *-0.007     ***0.269     ***0.192   ***0.059       ***0.059
                           (0.025)      (0.028)      (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.021)      (0.026)    (0.011)        (0.013)
    Population (log)                   **-0.016                    -0.001                     0.002                    -0.001
                                        (0.007)                   (0.001)                   (0.007)                   (0.003)
Unemployment% (log)                    ***0.067                    -0.002                  ***0.068                     0.004
                                        (0.022)                   (0.003)                   (0.023)                   (0.007)
 65 and above% (log)                   ***-0.105                 ***-0.010                    0.016                    -0.013
                                        (0.030)                   (0.003)                   (0.026)                   (0.012)
  High school% (log)                    **0.329                  ***0.049                    -0.174                    -0.011
                                        (0.131)                   (0.015)                   (0.128)                   (0.040)
Income per capita (log)                 **0.154                    -0.006                  ***0.173                    -0.004
                                        (0.063)                   (0.005)                   (0.059)                   (0.016)
 Application LTI (log)                              ***1.031     ***1.013                             ***0.958       ***0.952
                                                     (0.006)      (0.008)                              (0.035)        (0.036)
     Sample size             376          344          376          344          376           344       376             344
     Adjusted R2             0.30         0.37         0.99         0.99         0.24         0.23       0.91           0.90




                                                              19
                                Table 10. Origination loan to value ratio and past price changes

This table reports cross-sectional MSA level linear regressions concerning the effect of past price changes on prime and
subprime mortgage origination Loan to Value Ratio (LTV) in log in 2006. Explanatory variables for each MSA are: [past price
change (log)] the log of the ratio of the OFEHO house price index in 1999:4 to the index in 2005:4, [population (log)] the log of
the population of the MSA from the 2006 American Community Survey dataset [ACS], [unemployment% (log)] the log of the
MSA unemployment rate in 2006 from Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), [65 and above% (log)] the log of the percentage of the
population over 65 from ACS, [high school% (log)] the log of the percentage of the population with a high school degree from
ACS, [income per capita (log)] the log of income per capita (in $ thousands) from ACS, [Difference in applications] the log of
subprime mortgage application minus the log of prime mortgage applications, and [Application LTV (log)] the average LTV of
mortgage applications. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard deviations are reported in parentheses. *** denotes significance
at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at 10% level.

Explanatory variables                                               Dependant variables
                                           Prima approvals                                   Subprime approvals
Past price change (log)   ***-0.154    ***-0.122 ***-0.073       ***-0.072     ***-0.143    ***-0.148 ***-0.107       ***-0.113
                           (0.008)      (0.009)      (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.008)      (0.009)    (0.013)        (0.012)
    Population (log)                     0.000                      0.001                      0.000                    -0.000
                                        (0.002)                   (0.001)                    (0.002)                   (0.002)
Unemployment% (log)                      0.004                      0.004                   ***0.017                   **0.012
                                        (0.006)                   (0.004)                    (0.006)                   (0.005)
 65 and above% (log)                     0.002                    *0.010                    ***0.052                  ***0.041
                                        (0.010)                   (0.006)                    (0.008)                   (0.007)
  High school% (log)                     0.058                     -0.006                      0.055                     0.041
                                        (0.038)                   (0.024)                    (0.037)                   (0.035)
Income per capita (log)                ***-0.125                 ***-0.045                    -0.010                    -0.016
                                        (0.020)                   (0.011)                    (0.020)                   (0.017)
 Application LTV (log)                              **0.687      ***0.625                              ***0.212       ***0.182
                                                     (0.035)      (0.037)                               (0.058)        (0.056)
     Sample size             349          344          347           344         349            344       347             344
     Adjusted R2             0.50         0.63         0.84         0.86         0.49          0.57       0.59           0.63




                                                               20
                           Table 11. Origination home value to income ratio and past price changes

This table reports cross-sectional MSA level linear regressions concerning the effect of past price changes on prime and
subprime mortgage origination home value to income ratio (VTI) in 2006. Explanatory variables for each MSA are: [past price
change (log)] the log of the ratio of the OFEHO house price index in 1999:4 to the index in 2005:4, [population (log)] the log of
the population of the MSA from the 2006 American Community Survey dataset [ACS], [unemployment% (log)] the log of the
MSA unemployment rate in 2006 from Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), [65 and above% (log)] the log of the percentage of the
population over 65 from ACS, [high school% (log)] the log of the percentage of the population with a high school degree from
ACS, [income per capita (log)] the log of income per capita (in $ thousands) from ACS, [Difference in applications] the log of
subprime mortgage application minus the log of prime mortgage applications, and [Application VTI (log)] the average VTI of
mortgage applications. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard deviations are reported in parentheses. *** denotes significance
at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at 10% level.

Explanatory variables                                               Dependant variables
                                           Prime approvals                                   Subprime approvals
Past price change (log)   ***0.463     ***0.424     ***0.036     ***0.055      ***0.391     ***0.340   ***0.092       ***0.082
                           (0.030)      (0.030)      (0.008)      (0.009)       (0.024)      (0.027)    (0.013)        (0.014)
    Population (log)                   **-0.017                  ***-0.004                     0.001                     0.002
                                        (0.008)                   (0.001)                    (0.007)                   (0.003)
Unemployment% (log)                    ***0.063                    -0.001                   **0.052                   **0.020
                                        (0.023)                   (0.005)                    (0.023)                   (0.010)
 65 and above% (log)                   ***-0.107                 ***-0.029                    -0.036                    -0.014
                                        (0.031)                   (0.006)                    (0.029)                   (0.013)
  High school% (log)                     0.270                   ***0.105                    *-0.229                    -0.037
                                        (0.138)                   (0.033)                    (0.133)                   (0.058)
Income per capita (log)                ***0.280                     0.005                   ***0.184                  **0.062
                                        (0.069)                   (0.013)                    (0.067)                   (0.029)
 Application VTI (log)                              ***0.982     ***0.959                              ***0.798       ***0.782
                                                     (0.014)      (0.016)                               (0.027)        (0.029)
     Sample size             347          344          347           344         347            344       347             344
     Adjusted R2             0.42         0.53         0.97         0.98         0.39          0.42       0.87           0.87




                                                               21
                                          Table 12. Probit analysis of loan approvals

This table reports the probit analysis for the approval of prime and subprime mortgage applications respectively. The analysis
uses all applications for conventional mortgages for purchasing owner occupied single family houses from each MSA.
Dependant variables are 1 if an application is approved and 0 if not. Explanatory variables are: [past price change (log)] the
log of the ratio of the OFEHO house price index in 2005:4 to the index in 1999:4, [population minority% (log)] the log of the
percentage of the minority population in the census tract of the loan application, [median income (log)] HUD median family
income in dollars (log) in the MSA of the loan application, [tract to MSA median income percentage (log)] the log of the
percentage of tract median family income compared to MSA/MD median family income, [loan size to income ratio (log)] the log
of the size of the application to the income of the applicant, [preapproval dummy] a dummy that equals 1 if preapproval was
requested, [applicants per capita (log)] the log of the number of applicants in an MSA divided by the total population in the
MSA, and [VTL] the log of the requested loan size to the average MSA home value or originated loans. Standard deviations are
reported in parentheses. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at 1% level.

Explanatory Variables                          Prime Approvals                                 Subprime Approvals

                                  ***-0.332       ***-0.612                       ***0.0663        ***0.124
   Past price change (log)
                                   (0.006)         (0.006)                         (0.010)          (0.010)
                                  ***-0.095       ***-0.088                       ***-0.047        ***-0.043
 Population minority % (log)
                                   (0.001)         (0.001)                         (0.001)          (0.001)
                                  ***0.382        ***0.490                        ***-0.025        ***-0.021
     Median income (log)
                                   (0.004)         (0.004)                         (0.006)          (0.006)
Tract to MSA median income        ***0.335        ***0.418                        ***0.117         ***0.109
      percentage (log)             (0.002)         (0.002)                         (0.003)          (0.004)
  Loan size to income ratio       ***-0.025       ***-0.021                       ***-0.108        ***-0.113
            (log)                  (0.001)         (0.001)                         (0.001)          (0.001)
                                  ***0.359        ***0.370                        ***0.842         ***0.845
     Preapproval dummy
                                   (0.003)         (0.002)                         (0.014)          (0.014)
                                                  ***-0.027                                        ***-0.007
  Applicants per capita (log)
                                                   (0.001)                                          (0.001)
   Number of Observations         6,449,088       6,449,088                        1,412,857       1,412,857




                                                              22
