NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RISK AND EXPECTED RETURNS OF PRIVATE EQUITY INVESTMENTS:
EVIDENCE BASED ON MARKET PRICES
Narasimhan Jegadeesh
Roman Kräussl
Joshua Pollet
Working Paper 15335
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15335

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2009

We thank Steven Kaplan, Per Stromberg, and seminar participants at Stern School of Business, New
York University, and Cornell University. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from Inquire
UK and Inquire Europe. All errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Narasimhan Jegadeesh, Roman Kräussl, and Joshua Pollet. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Risk and Expected Returns of Private Equity Investments: Evidence Based on Market Prices
Narasimhan Jegadeesh, Roman Kräussl, and Joshua Pollet
NBER Working Paper No. 15335
September 2009
JEL No. G12,G24
ABSTRACT
We estimate the risk and expected returns of private equity investments based on the market prices
of exchange-traded funds of funds that invest in unlisted private equity funds. Our results indicate
that the market expects unlisted private equity funds to earn abnormal returns of approximately 1%
per year. We also find that the market expects listed private equity funds to earn zero or marginally
negative abnormal returns net of fees. Both listed and unlisted private equity funds have market betas
close to one and positive factor loadings on the Fama-French SMB factor. Private equity fund returns
are positively related to GDP growth and negatively related to the credit spread. In addition, we find
that market returns of exchange traded funds of funds and listed private equity funds predict changes
in self-reported book values of unlisted private equity funds.

Narasimhan Jegadeesh
Goizueta Business School
Emory University
1300 Clifton Road
Suite 507
Atlanta, GA 30322
and NBER
narasimhan_jegadeesh@bus.emory.edu
Roman Kräussl
FEWEB
VU University Amsterdam
de Boelelaan 1105
1081 HV Amsterdam
The Netherlands
rkraeussl@feweb.vu.nl

Joshua Pollet
Eli Broad College of Business
315 Eppley Center
Michigan State University
E. Lansing, MI 48824
pollet@msu.edu

I.

Introduction

Private equity (PE) refers to equity securities in private companies that are not publicly
traded. Private equity funds that specialize in PE investments opened up this asset class to
institutional investors and other capital market participants. The early successes of some
large PE funds led to a rapid growth of this asset class. Capital commitment to private
equity in the U.S. has grown rapidly from around $20 billion in 1990 to over $496 billion
in 2007.
Although PE has experienced rapid growth, the risk and return profile of this asset
class is not well understood. Many news stories in the media suggest that PE investments
yield higher returns than traditional asset classes.1 A recent news release by Thomson
Financial and the National Venture Capital Association announced that Thomson
Reuters' US Private Equity Performance Index (PEPI)2 “across all horizons outperformed
public market indices, NASDAQ and the S&P 500, through 9/30/2008.” For example, for
the 20-year period ending in September 2008, PEPI earned annualized return of 15.4%
after fees, which is more than twice the return of 7.5% earned by S&P 500.
A number of academic papers also report superior returns for private equity
investments. Ljungqvist and Richardson (2003) find that private equity investments
outperformed the S&P 500 by more than 5%. Cochrane (2005), Kaplan and Schoar
(2005), Peng (2003) and others also find that private equity funds outperform the S&P
500. However, these papers use databases that suffer from potential selection bias.
Performance information is usually compiled from self-reported data provided by large
private equity investors. It is quite likely that investors who do not have good experiences
with their PE investments exit those investments or choose not to report their
performance. Hence, PE funds that performed poorly are less likely to be included in
these databases.

1

See Phalippou and Gottschalg (2009) for examples of several news articles that report high expectations
for returns from PE investments. For example, the Financial Times (September 26, 2005) reports that a
survey of large U.K. investors found that these “investors hope to make an average annual net return of
12.8 percent from their private equity investments.”
2
See http://www.nvca.org/pdf/Q3_08_VC_Performance_Release.pdf. The Private Equity Performance
Index (PEPI) is computed based on “quarterly statistics from Thomson Reuters' Private Equity Performance
Database analyzing cash flows and returns for more than 1,900 US venture capital and private equity
partnerships with a capitalization of $828 billion. Sources are financial documents and schedules from
Limited Partner investors and General Partners.”

2

Moreover, the estimated performance of PE funds depends critically on the
valuation of non-exited investments at the end of the sample period. For instance, Kaplan
and Schoar use funds’ self-reported values of such non-exited investments and find that
the value-weighted performance of PE funds exceeds S&P 500 return by about five
percent per year. However, Phalippou and Gottschalg (2009) argue that it is more
reasonable to write-off non-exited investments after a certain period of time and they find
that PE funds underperform the market by three to six percent per year.
This paper examines the risk and return of private equity investments using
market prices of two samples of publicly traded firms that invest in private equity. The
first sample is publicly traded fund of funds (FoFs) that invest in private equity funds.
Funds of funds accounted for 14% of global commitments made to private equity funds
in 2006 according to Preqin, a research and consultancy firm focusing on alternative asset
classes. FoFs that invest in unlisted PE funds are traded on many exchanges outside the
US, including the London Stock Exchange and exchanges in Continental Europe. Since
we observe market prices for these FoFs, we can determine the risk and return profile of
the underlying PE funds from market prices.
The dataset we use has several advantages. First, it is free from selection bias. As
Cochrane (2005) notes, “overcoming selection bias is the central hurdle” in evaluating
the performance of PE investments. Moreover, we determine the value of investments
from market prices and we do not rely on self-reported data for valuation. Therefore, we
are able to circumvent critical shortcomings of self-reported data used in extant studies.
Our approach extracts an estimate of the market’s ex-ante expectation of
abnormal returns for PE investments from market prices. In contrast, the extant literature
examines ex-post performances of unlisted PE funds. These studies find a wide range of
abnormal returns, ranging from -6% in Phalippou and Gottschalg (2009) to 32% in
Cochrane (2005). The findings in these papers provide interesting insights into past
performances of PE funds in various datasets, based on different sets of assumptions.
However, both investors and practitioners are interested in understanding what they can
expect to earn in the long run through PE investments.
The intuition behind our approach is straightforward. The listed FoFs in our
sample are structured as closed-end funds. The relation between the market prices of

3

these FoFs and the amount they invest in unlisted PE funds provides a measure of the
value added by the underlying PE funds. However, FoFs charge an extra layer of
management fees and performance fees. After taking into account the present value of
these fees, the market value of their equity invested in unlisted PE funds enables us to
determine abnormal returns that the PE funds earn in the long run.
We present an analytically tractable model to determine the range of possible
values for FoF fees based on the fee structure we observe in the data. The results of this
model provide upper and lower bounds for abnormal returns that the market expects from
investments in underlying PE funds. We find that the market expects PE funds to earn
abnormal returns greater than 0.25% and less than 2.25% for a fund with the typical fee
structure (e.g. base management fee of 1.5% and incentive fee of 10%) with discounts
between 5% and 19%. We use simulations that capture the actual fee structure of each
individual FoF as well as the observed fund discount to narrow the range of plausible
abnormal return expectations. Our results indicate that the expected abnormal return is
between 0.3% and 1.2%. For a plausible range for the payout ratio of FoFs, i.e. from 0.3
to 0.5, the ex ante estimate of the expected abnormal return is approximately 1%. While
the wide range of estimates in the existing literature is based on particular datasets used
in the respective studies as well as additional assumptions, our results imply that the
market does not expect PE funds to earn such extreme abnormal returns in the long run.
Indeed, we find that any suggestion that the market expects either negative abnormal
returns in the long run or positive abnormal returns in excess of three percent in the long
run is inconsistent with the market prices that we observe.
We also examine risk and returns of publicly traded funds that invest in private
equity. We refer to these funds as listed private equity (LPE). LPEs are similar to unlisted
PE funds in several respects. The managers of LPEs are compensated through
management fees and performance fees similar to unlisted PE funds.3 The LPEs also
invest in private equity. These LPEs have the same opportunity sets as PE funds, to the

3

From Gompers and Lerner (1999) and Kaplan and Schoar (2005) find that the compensation scheme for
PE funds are relatively homogeneous with most funds using fee structure of 1.5–2.5% annual management
fee and a 20% performance fees.

4

extent that excess returns may be available to skilled investors who specialize in PE
investments.
However, there are several organizational differences between LPEs and unlisted
PE funds that may lead to differences in values that they are able to capture. For example,
Jensen (2007) argues that unlisted PE funds’ partnership structure may contribute to their
value since they are not exposed to agency costs associated with diffusely owned publicly
traded firms. Also, since PE funds have finite lives, they are committed to returning to
their investors when they float funds in the future. Therefore, their reputational concerns
provide them with an added incentive to perform. Since LPEs have an indefinite life, they
are relatively insulated from such concerns. If any value that PE funds are able to add
comes from the inherent incentives due to their organizational structure, then they would
add more value than LPEs. Therefore, the return that the market expects LPEs to earn
provides a lower bound on the returns unlisted PE funds would provide their LPs.
We are also able to determine the risk characteristics of PE investment since we
have market prices available for all of the listed private equity vehicles in our database.
The extant literature attempts to estimate the risk characteristics of PE investments based
on their cash payouts to investors and based on the valuations of these investments when
they raise follow-up capital. Because it is difficult to determine the market values of all
investments made by PE funds based on cash payouts or additional financing rounds for
some of their investments, additional assumptions are necessary to determine the risk of
these investments. The estimates of systematic risk in this literature seem to depend
significantly on these assumptions. For example, the estimates of beta range from about
0.5 in Hwang, Quigley, and Woodward (2005) to 4.66 in Peng (2001).
In related work, Martin and Petty (1983) and Brophy and Guthner (1988) use a
samples of 11 and 12 listed venture capital funds, respectively, to examine their risk and
ex-post returns over about a five-year period. Bilo, Christophers, Degosciu, and
Zimmermann (2005) examine the risk and return characteristics of a larger sample of
listed private equity. Although these studies use market prices of listed private equity
investments, they also suffer from a selection bias since they require all firms in their
samples to survive their entire sample period.

5

Both listed and unlisted private equity funds in which FoFs invest have betas
close to one and they have positive betas on Fama-French SMB factor. Private equity
fund returns exhibit a positive correlation with GDP growth and negative correlation with
credit spread. We also find that market returns of listed fund of funds and listed private
equity predict future changes in self-reported book values of unlisted private equity
funds. This result indicates that the performance of FoFs provides vital information about
the performance of the unlisted PE industry.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section II describes the
sample. Section III provides estimates of market’s ex-ante expected abnormal returns for
PE investments by unlisted PE funds and listed PE funds. Section IV examines the risk
characteristics of the funds and Section V examines the sensitivity of PE investments to
macroeconomic conditions. Section VI examines the ability of FoF and LPE returns to
predict future changes in unlisted PE funds’ self reported book values and Section VII
concludes.

II.

Sample

A.

PE Fund of Funds

Unlisted PE funds are typically organized as limited partnerships. Outside investors have
partnership interest in the funds as limited partners (LPs), and fund managers as general
partners (GPs). PE fund of funds (FoFs) are intermediaries that raise funds from investors
and invest in these PE funds as limited partners. In the US, only large institutions and
qualified wealthy investors who meet certain minimum wealth and income criteria are
allowed to invest in unlisted PE funds.
Many other countries, however, do not have similar restrictions. Therefore,
although the PE funds typically impose minimum thresholds for LP investments, small
investors in Europe can invest in unlisted PE funds through FoFs. Some of these FoFs are
listed on European and Australian stock exchanges and they are actively traded.
First, we identify FoFs from the SDC Platinum database and obtained a list of
FoFs from the Dow Jones Private Equity Funds of Funds database. Next, we augment this
data with the list of components for the S&P Listed Private Equity Index, PowerShares
Listed Private Equity Fund, Power Shares International Listed Private Equity Fund,

6

Listed Private Equity Index, and International Listed Private Equity Index. We match the
names in this augmented list to the universe of traded stocks on Datastream. For the list
of FoFs from these sources, we obtain annual reports from company websites and from
industry sources for sample period (1994 to 2008). We examine each annual report to
identify FoFs that invest at least 50% of their capital in PE funds and our final sample
contains 26 FoFs.
Table 1a and 1b present descriptive statistics for our sample of FoFs. Ten FoFs in
the sample are listed in London, 14 are listed in continental Europe and two are listed in
Australia. The FoFs range in market capitalization from $14 million to $5.6 billion over
our sample period. The average market capitalization of FoFs during our sample period is
$314 million and the median is $214 million. Twenty of the 26 FoFs indicate that their
main focus is buyout PE funds. Although these FoFs are traded outside the US, 11 of
them focus on investments in North America. In terms of the value of investments, 68.6%
of the assets are managed by FoFs that focus on North America. Therefore, although the
FoFs are listed outside the US, a significant part of their investments flow to North
America. The annual reports of these FoFs indicate that these funds invest in a wide
variety of unlisted PE funds raised by well-known PE groups.4 Since the median number
of distinct unlisted PE funds held by each FoF is 28, the combined portfolio of all FoFs is
a well-diversified portfolio of PE investments. The aggregate ownership by large
investors, which is defined as investors with ownership of more than 3% of the shares
outstanding, is about 47% on average. Therefore, even large investors invest through
these vehicles.
B.

Listed Private Equity Funds

Our primary source for listed private equity funds is the SDC Platinum database. The
managers of LPEs classified as “funds” in the SDC data are compensated through
management fees, as in the case of unlisted PE funds.5 Table 2 presents the descriptive
4

Among others: Berkshire Fund VII, Blackstone Capital Partners V, Carlyle International Partners II,
Goldman Sachs Capital Partners VI, KKR 2006 Fund, Lehman Brothers Venture Partners V, Vanguard
VII, and Warburg Pincus Private Equity X.
5
To check the completeness of the SDC database, we examine a sample of stocks that were not classified
in the SDC database as “funds” but were included as components of LPE indices such as the S&P Listed
Private Equity Index. We find that stocks not classified in the SDC database as “funds” are holding
companies for separate operating companies. The companies in this sample do not compensate their

7

statistics for the sample of LPEs. There are a total of 129 LPEs in our sample. Ninety-two
of these funds are listed in the London Stock Exchange and 16 are listed on US
exchanges. The distribution of stage focus is much more diverse for LPEs than for FoFs.

III.

Expected abnormal returns from PE Investments

We begin by analyzing the market’s expectation of the abnormal return for unlisted PE
investments. Earlier papers in this literature follow the traditional approach and examine
the ex-post performance of unlisted PE funds. For example, Kaplan and Schoar (2005)
and Ljungqvist and Richardson (2003) use cash inflows and outflows from samples of PE
funds and investigate whether these funds outperformed their benchmarks.
Ex-post return is the sum of ex-ante expected return and unexpected return. One
can appeal to rational expectations, and assume that the mean of the unexpected
component of returns is zero, and use ex-post returns as an unbiased measure of
expected returns. In most situations, ex-ante expected returns are unobservable and
hence ex-post realized return is the only feasible route to estimate expected returns.
While ex-post return provides useful insights into past performance, it does not
necessarily provide a measure of market’s expectation of returns that would be earned in
the long term through investments in PE funds. Even ignoring the issue of selection bias,
past performance may have been biased by unexpectedly good outcomes during the
sample periods in earlier studies. For example, PE funds that invested in start-up
companies may have unexpectedly benefited from the Internet boom and the generally
stellar performance of Internet stocks that are likely unique to the 1990s. Therefore,
because such unexpectedly good outcomes dominated the sample period in many
studies, it is likely that the ex-post returns are biased estimates of expected returns.

A.

An Analysis of Funds of Funds

A.1

Methodology

The unique advantage with our FoF data is that we observe both the amount of money
that the FoFs raise and their market value. The difference between the market value of the

managers using the typical PE management fee structure used by the companies classified as “funds” in the
SDC database.

8

FoFs and the amount of funds that FoFs invest in unlisted PE funds represent the net
present value (NPV) of the underlying unlisted PE fund investments. We determine the
abnormal returns that the market expects from PE fund investments based on the NPV of
these investments.
While the economic basis for our methodology is straightforward, there are a few
practical issues that we need to address. First, FoFs charge their own fees for managing
the funds they raise. These fees are paid out of earnings from their investments, but the
market capitalization of equity shares in the FoFs only reflects the present values of afterFoF fee cash flows. Therefore, the market value of the funds invested by the FoFs in
underlying PE portfolio is the sum of the market capitalization of the traded shares of
FoFs and the present value of FoF fees.
Figure 1 illustrates our approach. FoFs invest the amount they raise at the IPO
(after issuance costs) in unlisted PE funds. This is the book value of the initial investment
in PE. The unobserved market value of this PE investment has two components. The first
component is the market value of FoF equity, i.e. the value of the investors’ shares, and
the second component is the value of FoF fees. The difference between the total market
value of PE investments and the book value is the net present value of the underlying
portfolio of PE investments. If the market expects positive abnormal returns from PE
investments then the total market value is greater than the book value, as Panel A
illustrates. However, if the market expects PE investments to earn negative abnormal
returns then the total market value is less than the book value, as Panel B illustrates.
Holding all else constant, the magnitude of the net present value reflects the magnitude of
abnormal returns that the market expects the underlying PE funds to earn in the long run.
The computation of the market value of traded shares is straightforward since we
have data on prices and number of shares outstanding. The calculation of the present
value of FoF fees, however, is less straightforward since claims to these fees are not
traded. We use two approaches to compute the present value of FoF fees and extract
market expectation of abnormal returns for PE investments. In the first approach, we use
a theoretical model to derive analytic formulas for the present value of the FoF fees as a
function of the market value of traded shares and the fee structure. This model uses
simplifying assumptions about the fee structure for analytic tractability. However, we

9

show that we can use the results of this model and observed FoF discounts to determine
upper and lower bounds on the magnitude of abnormal returns that the market expects PE
funds to earn.
In the second approach, we incorporate the actual fee structure. Since this more
general model is not analytically tractable, we use Monte Carlo simulations to compute
the present value of FoF fees. We determine market’s expectation of the abnormal return
for PE fund investments using our simulation results and the observed average FoF
discount.

A.2

Market Value of Equity in FoFs

The market value of FoF equity and the book value are key inputs for determining
market’s expectations of abnormal returns for PE investments. We get the most accurate
measure of the amount that FoFs actually invest in PE funds at the time of the initial
public offering (IPO) of each FoF since the amount invested is raised in cash at that time.
Therefore, in much of our analysis we will focus on valuation in the months immediately
following the IPO.
We first examine the relation between market prices and post-IPO book value or
the net asset value (NAV) of FoFs. Specifically, we examine the FoF discount at time t,
defined as:

Dt = 1 −

Price t
.
NAVt

(1)

We obtain prices and NAV data from Datastream. The NAV until the first financial
statement after IPO is based on the value of funds raised at IPO. Since the NAV at this
time accurately reflects the amount invested in underlying PE funds, we avoid any
problems with self-reported NAVs of the underlying funds. As we progress through time,
some of the investments get marked to NAV reported by the underlying PE funds.
However, in the early stages of a FoF’s life, NAV is likely to be close to the dollar value
of FoF investments since very few assets are marked up or down at that stage.
Table 3 presents the average discounts for FoFs over the first 12 months after
their IPOs. Although the FoFs are issued at a premium at IPOs (to cover issuance costs),
they trade at a discount of approximately 3% three months after the IPO. The average

10

discount gradually increases to approximately 12% by month 10 and fluctuates around
this level for the remainder of the year.
FoF discounts follow a similar path as discounts for U.S. closed end funds that
invest in publicly traded stocks and bonds in Weiss (1989) and Peavy (1990). Closed-end
funds are also issued at a premium, but they eventually trade at a discount. Weiss and
Peavy report that the closed-end fund discount stabilizes at about 10% to 12% after six
months subsequent to the IPOs. Since both FoFs and closed-end funds trade at substantial
discounts, these funds are not expected to add sufficient value to justify their fees.
Essentially, fund discounts imply that any additional value created by the abnormal
returns that the underlying PE funds are expected to generate is not sufficient to offset the
fees that the FoFs charge. To calculate a more precise estimate of the market’s
expectation about performance, we must take into account the present value of FoF fees
in addition to the market value of FoF equity.
Predictable underperformance of FoFs subsequent to the IPOs indicates that the
IPO price does not reflect the true value of the underlying PE investments net of FoF
fees. The results in Table 3 indicate that the discount stabilizes towards the end of the
first year. Indeed, subsequent tests indicate that we do not find any abnormal returns after
the initial period. This evidence indicates that the price after one year is reliable measure
of the true value of traded shares. Therefore, we use the evidence that FoF discount is
about 12% to determine market’s expectation of abnormal returns.

A.3

Bounds on Expected Abnormal Returns

In this subsection we analytically determine the present value of FoF fees as a function of
the parameters of the fee structure, market’s expectation of abnormal returns, and other
factors. These analytical results provide upper and lower bounds on market’s expectation
of abnormal returns for the underlying portfolio of PE investments. As we show below,
the distance between these bounds is fairly narrow and this range excludes many
empirical estimates presented in the literature.
The FoF fees have a fixed component and an incentive component.6 The fixed
component, or the base management fee, is specified as a fixed percentage of the assets
6

In our sample, all FoFs have a base management fee and 19 out of the 26 FoFs have an incentive fee.

11

managed by the FoF. The incentive component is specified as a percentage of profits that
FoFs earn. The incentive fees are payable only if the NAV exceeds a high watermark,
which is the highest NAV that the FoF had previously reached. Several funds also have a
hurdle rate, and the incentive fee is payable as a percentage of the returns that exceed the
hurdle rate. To make the model analytically tractable, we make some simplifying
assumptions about the fee structure in this subsection. We assume that the fee structure
comprises only a fixed fee and an incentive fee with no hurdle rate. We also assume in
this subsection that the incentive fees are not subject to high watermark.
Our model is specified as follows. Let NAVt be the assets under management at
time t and let λ be the base management fee expressed as a fraction of NAVt . Let Ru ,t be
the return of the underlying PE fund portfolio held by the FoF (gross of FoF fees). We
assume that { Ru ,t } is independently and identically distributed. Let π be the proportional
incentive fee, which is computed as a fraction of the return after the base management fee
is paid. Similarly, let θ be the proportional reinvestment rate (retention ratio), which is
also computed as a fraction of the return after the base management fee. By construction,
each FoF makes the following distributions at time t+1:
= λ NAVt

Base Managment Fee

= π NAVt ( Ru ,t +1 − λ )

Incentive Fee
Distribution to FoF Shareholders

= (1 − θ − π ) NAVt ( Ru ,t +1 − λ )

(2)

= θ NAVt ( Ru ,t +1 − λ ) ,

Re tained Earnings

To ensure that investors receive positive distributions on average, the sum of
retention ratio ( θ ) and the proportional incentive fee ( π ) must be less than unity.
Consequently, the retention ratio has a range from zero to 1 − π and the payout ratio
( 1 − θ ) has a range from π to unity. In this context, the payout ratio is the proportion of

NAVt ( Ru ,t +1 − λ ) that is distributed to investors or paid to the manager as the incentive
fee. Given these distributions, the evolution of the net asset value is:

(

)

NAVt +1 = 1 + θ ( Ru ,t +1 − λ ) NAVt .

(3)

In general, the base management fee inherits some of the underlying fund risk as long as
the fund retains a portion of its earnings for reinvestment. However, if all earnings are

12

paid out as distributions to managers and shareholders, i.e. if θ = 0 , then the base
management fee is riskless.
In addition to the simplifying features of the fee structure that we discussed
earlier, the distribution we specify above also deviates from the actual fee structure if

(R

u ,t +1

− λ ) < 0 . Implicitly, this specification assumes that the FoF manager pays the fund

if the fund return is lower than λ . However, FoF managers do not make such payments in
practice. Instead, the high watermark condition reduces subsequent incentive
compensation by the amount corresponding to any return shortfall. While our assumption
is analytically appealing, it changes the timing of cash flows to managers and understates
the value of the incentive fee to the managers due to the time value of money. Therefore,
we relax this assumption in our simulation analysis (see next subsection) to address any
potential issues related to this bias.
Our valuation model assumes that the expected returns are for all traded claims
are determined by CAPM. Let α be the abnormal return that the market expects the
underlying PE funds to earn. Therefore, the expected return for the underlying PE is:7
Et ⎡⎣ Ru − R f ⎤⎦ = α + βu ( Et [ Rm ] − R f ) ,

(4)

where βu is the underlying fund beta, Et [ Rm ] is the expected return on the market, and

R f is the riskfree rate.8 We assume that all of these moments are constant for
convenience.
The parameters of the model must satisfy two technical conditions. First,

α − λ + R f > 0 to guarantee that the expectation of the risk-adjusted distribution to
investors is positive, i.e., the cash flows that investors receive have positive economic
value, and consequently, the price of the asset is strictly positive.9 Second,

7

Since PEs make investments at privately negotiated prices, the expected returns from their investments
can deviate from CAPM expected returns depending on thier skill.
8
Note that the return earned by the underlying portfolio is defined in this context using the quantity of
money invested in the PE funds and not the market value of the underlying portfolio. The market value of
the portfolio of underlying PE investments would incorporate the effect of any anticipated outperformance,
and hence, in an efficient market the expected abnormal returns based on the market value of the
underlying PE portfolio would be zero.
9
In our sample, the average base management fee equals 1.5% and the average riskfree rate equals 6%.
Unless PE funds are expected to earn large negative abnormal returns, the condition α − λ + R f > 0 holds.

13

R f − θ (α − λ + R f ) > 0 to guarantee that the transversality condition is satisfied, i.e., the
value of the equity stake is finite because the risk-adjusted distributions do not grow
faster than the riskfree rate.
The present value of FoF equity Ve,t is:

⎡ ∞ (1 − θ − π )( R − λ ) NAV ⎤
t+s
t + s −1
⎥
Ve,t = Et ⎢ ∑
s
⎢ s=1
⎥
(1 + Et [ Re ])
⎣
⎦

(5)

where Et [ Re ] is the discount rate for equity. Since distributions to shareholders are made
after payment of base management fees, Et [ Re ] will usually be different from the
discount rate for the underlying PE funds.
Proposition 1 below provides an analytic solution for the present value of
investor’s claims that is stated in terms of the fund discount as well as an expression for
the endogenously determined value of Et [ Re ] .
Proposition 1. The FoF discount and the associated discount rate for equity are specified
by the following two equations:

Dt = 1 −

(1 − θ − π ) (α − λ + R f )
Ve,t
= 1−
NAVt
R f − θ (α − λ + R f )

(6)

and

⎛
Rf
Et [ Re ] = R f + ⎜
⎜ α − λ + Rf
⎝

⎞
⎟⎟ βu ( Et [ Rm ] − R f ) .
⎠

(7)

Proof: See appendix.

The first expression indicates that the FoF discount is a decreasing function of the
expected abnormal return and an increasing function of both the base fee and the
incentive fee. The expression for the discount rate for equity implies that the systematic
risk for the net-of-fee return is a scaled version of the systematic risk for the underlying
portfolio. Since the base management fee is a fixed proportion paid before the
distribution to shareholders, this obligation is similar to a debt obligation and magnifies
the risks borne by equity holders. Therefore, the base fee increases the systematic risk
faced by investors holding all else constant. Interestingly, the expression for the discount

14

factor also indicates that the proportional reinvestment policy does not change the
systematic risk of the investors’ claims.
We also determine the present value of the incentive fees, Vi ,t . Since the ratio of
the incentive fee to the distribution to investors is π/(1–θ–π), Proposition 1 implies that

Vi ,t is given by:
Vi ,t
NAVt

=

π (α − λ + R f )

R f − θ (α − λ + R f

)

.

(8)

The discount rate for the incentive fee, Ri, is equal to the discount rate for the
distributions to investors. Both investors and fund managers have claims that are a fixed
proportion of the underlying distribution net of the base fee.
Although the fee structure in the model makes simplifying assumptions, the
results we derive in this subsection provide upper and lower bounds on market’s
expectation of abnormal returns under the actual fee structures we observe in practice.
First, we determine a lower bound. We proceed by addressing the following question.
Given the level of FoF discount observe, what is the lowest possible level of market’s
expectation of abnormal returns?
As we discussed in the context of Figure 1, the difference between the NAV and
the total market value of FoF investments is positively related to the expected abnormal
return. We observe the NAV and the market value of equity. The only unobservable
component of total market value is the value of FoF fees. For any given value of NAV
and market value of equity, a smaller value of FoF fees would imply a smaller expected
abnormal return. Therefore, if we find a lower bound for the value of FoF fees, then we
also have a lower bound for the expected abnormal return. If we assume that the incentive
fee is zero, i.e. π = 0 , then we have a lower bound for FoF fees. In addition, this
assumption also implies that the hurdle rate and high watermark condition are irrelevant.
Rearranging Equation (6) and setting π = 0 , yields the following lower bound α l :
⎛ 1 − Dt ⎞
⎟.
⎝ 1 − θ Dt ⎠

αl = λ − R f + R f ⎜

We use the same intuition to find an upper bound for the expected abnormal
return as well. If we find an upper bound for the value of FoF fees, then there exists a

15

(9)

corresponding upper bound for α . The value of FoF fees without a hurdle rate will be
greater than the value with a positive hurdle rate. Since the hurdle rate in practice is nonnegative, the present value of incentive fee is an upper bound on the present value of the
incentive fee in practice.10 Therefore, the α in Equation (6) is itself an upper bound for
the expected abnormal return because this equation was derived while ignoring the hurdle
rate. Specifically, we get following upper bound α h by rearranging Equation (6):
⎛

1 − Dt
⎝ 1 − π − θ Dt

αh = λ − Rf + Rf ⎜

⎞
⎟.
⎠

(10)

The average discount in Table 3 twelve months after FoFs’ IPOs is about 12%
and the two standard deviation confidence interval around this point estimate ranges from
5% to 19%. Figure 2 plots that upper and lower bounds of α when the discount equals
the point estimate of 12% and for discounts of 5% and 19%, which are the extreme points
of the confidence interval. In this figure we set the risk-free rate ( R f ) equal to 6% (the
historical average yield for long-term bonds during our sample period) and the base
management fee ( λ ) equal to 1.5% (the average base management fee in our sample). To
determine the upper bound we also set the incentive fee ( π ) equal to 10% (the average
incentive fee for FoFs that have an incentive fee). This value of π overstates the average
incentive fee for our sample because the sample includes FoFs that do not charge any
incentive fees. Hence, it provides an upper bound compared to the average incentive fee
for the full sample (including FoFs that do not have any incentive fee).
Since the bounds are a function of market’s expectation of the retention ratio ( θ )
Figure 2 presents the bounds for payout ratios ( 1 − θ ) ranging from 0.25 to 1. The
average payout ratio during the sample period is approximately 0.3, but this average is
not necessarily the market’s expectation of the ratio in the future. Because many of the

10

This discussion overlooks the mismatch between the timing of incentive fee payments in the model
compared to standard practice whenever the underlying portfolio return is sufficiently low. The value of
incentive component of the management fee is understated due to the time value of money because
negative incentive payments in the model are delayed in the real world to offset subsequent profits.
However, for sufficiently high hurdle rates, disregarding the hurdle rate in the model more than
counterbalances this understatement. Using our simulations we verify that Equation (10) does provide an
upper bound on the market’s expectation of management skill for the average hurdle rate in the sample.

16

funds in our sample are early in their life cycle, they may have artificially low payout
ratios during this time period.
We plot these upper and lower bounds as a function of the payout ratio for the
three different valuation levels. Figure 2 indicates that the lower bound for α is always
greater than 0.25% and the upper bound is always less than 2.25%. The difference
between the upper and lower bounds on α for a given discount level and payout ratio is
less than 1%. Thus, the model produces a relatively narrow range for the market’s
expectation of α relative to the wide range of estimates offered in the literature. This
range, however, indicates that the market considers PE investments as positive NPV
projects net of the fees charged by the underlying PE funds. Hence, we rule out negative
expected abnormal returns.

A.4

Expected Abnormal Returns – Simulation Results

This subsection presents simulations designed to determine the market’s expectation of
the abnormal return for unlisted PE funds. The simulations incorporate the hurdle rate
and the high watermark features of the typical FoF fee structure that we observe in
practice. They also correctly account for the fact that incentive fees are non-negative even
if the underlying portfolio earns a negative return.
Our simulation methodology requires the selection of several parameter values.
We assume that the riskfree rate is equal to 6%, based on the average Treasury bond rate
during our sample period. We also assume the market risk premium is 4% and the
standard deviation of stock market returns is 15% per year. In addition, we assume that

β = 1 for the underlying PE investments and that the fund-specific standard deviation is
15% per year. We choose these parameters to be consistent with the actual values we
observe in the data and we note that the results are not particularly sensitive to these
parameter values.
We simulate the annual return for the underlying portfolio of each fund using the
single factor model with an adjustment for the level of the expected abnormal return.
Each component of this annual portfolio return is drawn independently and identically
over time from a normal distribution. We calculate the base management fee and the
incentive fee using fund-specific base management rate, incentive rate, and hurdle rate

17

for each particular fund. The base fee is a fixed proportion of the underlying portfolio
value at the beginning of the period that is collected by the fund manager at the end of
each period. The incentive fee is the maximum of a fraction of the underlying portfolio
proceeds minus the base management fee that is above the hurdle rate and zero. The
incentive fee is subject to the typical hurdle rate and high watermark provisions. The
payout ratio, in conjunction with the fund-specific base management rate, determines the
distribution to investors. The lower bound of the distribution to investors is zero. Each
fund reinvests the residual after all fees and distributions, i.e. retained earnings, in the
underlying portfolio for the next period. Each sample path for returns is simulated for 300
years and we repeat this process 5,000 times for each fund, holding the expected
abnormal return and payout ratio constant.
We calculate the present value of all distributions to investors using a constant
discount rate. The discount rate for the distribution to investors depends on the systematic
risk of these distributions. Since we derive the relevant theoretical beta in the last section
under simplifying assumptions, the theoretical beta does not reflect the true beta for these
distributions when we include the hurdle rate and high watermark provisions. Instead, we
find the appropriate beta for these distributions using an iterative methodology.
We use the betas from the analytical solution in the last subsection as the starting
point. Next, we calculate the return for each period using the present value of subsequent
distributions at the beginning of the current period, the present value of subsequent
distributions at the beginning of the subsequent period, and the distribution at the end of
the period. Then we use this return series and regress it on the simulated market return
series. The coefficient estimate from this regression is the next iterative estimate for beta.
We continue this process until difference between consecutive iterative estimates for beta
is less than 0.001, i.e., the sequence converges. Once we have the appropriate beta for the
distributions to investors for a particular fund, we calculate the relevant discount rate and
the present value of these distributions for each sample path. We average these present
value calculations and then we compute the simulated discount for the fund. We repeat

18

this exercise for the expected abnormal return ranging from -3% to 3% in increments of
1% and for the payout ratio ranging from 0.25 to 1 in increments of 0.05.11
Table 4 presents the simulated average of FoF discounts across funds for the
expected abnormal return ranging from -2% to 2% and various levels of the payout ratio.
As we would anticipate, the average fund discount decreases as α increases because
investors will be willing to pay more if they expect the underlying PE funds to earn
higher returns holding all else constant. For a relatively low expected abnormal return,
the discount decreases with the payout ratio. For example, if α is equal to -2%, the
average discount is 62% for a payout ratio of 0.25 compared to a discount of 28% when
the payout ratio is 1. Intuitively, if abnormal performance is low relative to FoF fees, the
market would prefer that each fund increase its payout ratio because reinvestment
destroys value.
Analogously, the discount increases or the premium decreases with the payout
ratio for large expected abnormal returns. For example, if α is equal to 2%, the average
premium is 18% if the payout ratio is 0.25 compared to a premium of only 2% if the
payout ratio is 1. This result is also intuitive. The market would prefer that each fund
decrease its payout ratio whenever abnormal performance is high relative to FoF fees
because reinvestment in the underlying PE funds is a positive NPV project. Hence, the
simulations indicate that high reinvestment magnifies the impact of abnormal
performance relative to FoF fees.
What levels of α are consistent with the observed level of the average FoF
discount that we observe in Table 3? Each curve in Figure 3 plots the simulated FoF
discount for a given expected abnormal return as a function of the payout ratio, i.e. each
curve is an iso- α curve. The horizontal line in Figure 3 reflects the statistical average FoF
discount of 12%. Each intersection of an iso- α curve with this horizontal line is a
possible combination of the expected abnormal return and the payout ratio that is
consistent with market prices.
This figure indicates that there is a relatively narrow range of possible expected
abnormal returns that are consistent with the observed FoF discount of 12%. First, we
11

Since some funds have an incentive fee of 20%, the lower bound for the payout ratio of these funds must
be greater than 0.2 (or 20%).

19

consider the plausibility of substantial negative expected abnormal returns. Figure 3
indicates that if the market expects the underlying PE funds to have an average abnormal
return of less than -1% per year, the FoF discount would be then at least 20% which is
more than two standard deviations greater than our point estimate of 12%. Hence the
estimates of -6% to -3% abnormal returns in Phalippou and Gottschalg (2009) are
significantly smaller than the market’s ex-ante expectation. Indeed, the horizontal line at
a discount of 12% is always below the iso- α for α = 0 , and hence, the market expects
positive abnormal returns from the underlying portfolio of PE funds.
Figure 3 also implies that if α is greater than or equal to 2%, FoFs would trade at a

premium, rather than a discount, for any expectation of the payout ratio. Intuitively, if

α equals 2%, then the abnormal returns PE funds earn will more than compensate for
FoF fees. In this case, the smallest possible premium is 2.3% (discount of -2.3%), i.e,
more than four standard deviations away from the average discount of 12%. Therefore,
many of the large estimates of α in the literature based on ex-post performance are much
greater than the level anticipated by the market.
While Figure 3 does not extend the curves to include payout ratios lower than
0.25 due to technical restrictions imposed by the large incentive fees of some FoFs in the
sample, analyzing such a payout ratio for funds with lower incentive fees would not
change our findings. Note that iso- α curves outside the range of 0% and 2% diverge from
the horizontal line as the payout ratio decreases to 0.25. This divergence pattern would
continue for lower payout ratios because the impact of abnormal performance relative to
fees is magnified by reinvestment. Hence, our results indicate that the market expects

α to be between 0 and 2% regardless of the market’s expectation of the payout ratio. If
we consider a plausible payout ratio range, such as 0.3 to 0.5, a more detailed version of
Figure 3 would indicate that the expected abnormal return is bounded between 0.8% and
1.2%, or approximately 1%.12

B.

An Analysis of Listed Private Equity Funds (LPEs)

12

We also examined the simulated discount for a range of alternative parameter values for market volatility
and the risk premium. These variations do not dramatically change the pattern of results.

20

This section examines whether LPEs add value. LPEs and PE funds have similar
operational focus since they both invest in private equity. LPE managers are also
compensated through management fees and at least in some cases, with incentive fees.
However, there are several differences in the organizational structure that could lead to
performance differences between LPEs and PEs. Since LPEs are closed end funds with
indefinite life they do not have the same reputational concerns as PE funds. In fact, the
typical discount in the case of closed-end fund suggests that the organizational structure
of LPEs would result in agency costs such as unduly high fees or less than optimal effort
on the part of fund managers.
In contrast, several papers have argued that PE funds’ incentive structure aligns
their interests with that of limited partners. Also, since PE funds have finite life, they are
committed to returning to their investors for funds they float in the future and reputational
concerns provide them with an added incentive to perform. Therefore, the organizational
structure of PE funds may incentivize them to add more value than that of LPEs.
Since LPEs likely suffer from higher agency costs, we would expect them to
underperform PE funds. Since they both operate in the same PE space, but LPEs have
higher agency costs, the expected performance of LPEs provides a lower bound on the
expected performance of PE funds. The difference between the expected performances of
LPEs and PEs would provide a quantitative measure of the agency costs.
To investigate whether the market expects LPEs to earn abnormal returns, we
examine the discounts for these LPEs soon after their IPOs. As we discussed earlier,
discounts ratio based on the IPO price are likely to be a biased indicator of market
expectations. Therefore, we first examine the pattern of LPE discount in event time after
IPOs. We use the beginning of the first month when data are available on Datastram as
the IPO date.
Table 5 presents the discount over the first 12 months after IPOs. LPEs trade on
average at a 4% premium to NAV at the end of their first month. However, the premium
declines to about 1.9% by the end of six months. By the end of 12 months after IPO, the
LPEs trade at a discount of 1.7%. These results indicate that although the IPO premium
disappears by the end of 12 months, LPE price is close to its NAV. Therefore, the market
expects LPEs to have abnormal returns close to zero.

21

IV.

Risk Characteristics of FoFs and LPEs

The extant literature provides a wide range of estimates for systematic risk of PE
investments. For example, the estimates of beta range from about 0.5 in Hwang et al.
(2005) to 4.66 in Peng (2001). This wide range illustrates the difficulty in estimating
betas for these investments. To a large extent, the difficulty arises from the fact that these
studies estimate betas from investment cash flows rather than from market prices. As
result, the beta estimates depend on the underlying assumptions.
In turn, the difficulty in estimating the risk of PE funds precludes the reliable
evaluation of the performance of PE funds. For example, Phalippou and Gottschalg’s
(2009) analysis show that the measured performance is quite sensitive to reasonable
changes in assumptions about beta. In their sample, the abnormal returns for PE funds
changes from -3% per year when they assume beta is equal to one, to -6% per year when
they assume an “industry/size-matched cost-of-capital.”
This section examines the systematic risk of FoFs and LPEs. Since we have
market prices, we are able to estimate multiple dimensions of risk using traditional time
series regressions. This section present systematic risk measured with respect single
factor and multifactor models. In addition, we also present the sensitivity of FoF and LPE
performances to macroeconomic risks. To examine the systematic risk of PE investments,
we construct value-weighted indices of FoFs and LPEs. Each month we include all funds
in the relevant group with the necessary price and return information.

A.

Market Risk and Fama-French Factor Risks

We examine systematic risk in the context of CAPM and the Fama-French (1993) and
Carhart (1997) four-factor models. Since our FoF and LPE samples comprise
international funds, we use MSCI world index as the appropriate proxy for the market
factor. We also examine the systematic risk with respect to the S&P 500 index to
examine the sensitivity of our indices to US markets. We fit the following time series
regressions to estimate systematic risk:

Ri ,t − R f ,t = α i + β i , m ( Rm,t − R f ,t ) + βi , smb SMBt + βi ,hml HMLt + βi , mom MOM t + ε i ,t ,

22

(11)

where Ri ,t is the fund index return and R f ,t is the risk-free rate. We use one-month U.S.
Treasury Bill rate as risk-free rate. SMB, HML, and MOM are the size, book-to-market
and momentum factor portfolios. We obtain factor portfolio returns from Kenneth
French’s website. We note that these three factors are constructed only from US stocks.
Given the international composition of fund portfolios, we would ideally like to use
international factors but we are constrained to use US factors because we do not have
international factor data. Nevertheless, since the US equity market is the largest part of
any world portfolio, the sensitivity of the fund indices to the US factors will shed
important insights into the nature of PE risk.
Table 6 presents the regression estimates and corresponding Newey-West
standard errors with six lags. Betas with respect to the MSCI World index for the FoFs
and LPEs are 0.93 and 0.84, and with respect to the S&P 500 index are 0.80 and 0.71,
respectively. The R2s are also larger with respect to the MSCI index. Since the underlying
funds have international exposures, both FoF and LPEs have higher sensitivity to the
MSCI World index, and the MSCI index has a larger explanatory power than the S&P
500 index.
Table 7 presents the regression estimates for the four-factor model. With the
MSCI index as the market factor, the betas with respect to the SMB factor are 0.44 and
0.54 for the FoF and LPE indices respectively, and both these estimates are significantly
greater than zero. Therefore, both FoFs and LPEs behave more like small firms than large
firms. This finding is intuitive since many of the PE investments are made in firms that
are smaller than a typical listed firm.
The beta with respect to HML is 0.35 for FoFs and 0.39 for LPEs. Although these
point estimates are not significantly different, HML beta is not significantly different
from zero for FoFs but it is significant for LPEs. Therefore, both FoFs and LPEs are more
sensitive to value firms than growth firms. One possible explanation for this finding is
that these funds have significant investments in buyouts and targets of buyouts are
perhaps more likely to be value firms than growth firms. In unreported results, we
examined the betas from a four-factor model separately for funds with buyout focus and
venture capital (VC) focus. We found that buyout funds’ HML beta estimate was

23

significantly positive but VC funds’ HML beta estimate was not significantly different
from zero. Therefore, even VC funds on average are not sensitive to the growth factor.
Overall, we find that the risk profiles of FoFs and LPEs are quite similar. The
betas with respect to various risk factors are not statistically different for these two
categories of funds. Although the geographic composition of the FoFs and LPEs are
different, the similarities indicate that their risk structures are not particularly different.
As we discussed earlier, private PE funds and LPEs differ in their organizational
structure because LPEs have indefinite life while PE funds have finite life and they are
likely to be more sensitive to reputational concerns because they are constrained to
periodically go back to the market to raise funds for future operations. Our earlier
findings indicate that PE funds add more value than LPEs, which is likely due to this
organizational difference. However, this difference between PE funds and LPEs need not
necessarily affect their risk exposure since they operate in the same space.
Our analysis of the implications of the FoF fee structure showed that FoF equity
might be viewed as a levered claim on the underlying PE funds because the base
management fee is equivalent to debt contract. Therefore, the market beta of FoF equity
provides an upper bound for the market beta of the underlying portfolio of PE funds.
Conceptually, we could “unlever” the FoF betas based on our analysis in Section
III. The practical impact of accounting for the implicit leverage effect due to the base
management fee, however, may not be as large. For example, Kaplan and Stein (1990)
find that the even when firms increase the debt in their capital structure from about 25%
of their capital to about 81% the change in equity betas is “surprisingly small.” Therefore,
the true betas of the underlying PE funds may be closer to the FoF equity betas than what
is suggested by the leverage effect due to base management fee.
In earlier work, Kaplan and Schoar (2005) acknowledge the difficulty in
estimating betas because of “the lack of true market values for fund investments until the
investments are exited” and assume that beta equals one. Phalippou and Gottschalg
(2009), however, conjecture that “the assumption of a beta as 1 is likely to overstate
relative performance” and they use an industry/size-matched cost-of-capital benchmark.
However, our findings indicate that the betas for FoFs and LPEs are not significantly
different from one.

24

B.

Alphas

The alphas for FoFs and LPEs are on average not different from zero both with CAPM
and four-factor benchmark. These results indicate that these funds on average performed
as expected, conditional on the realizations of the risk factors. Essentially, the market was
not surprised ex-post by the performance of this asset class. Thus, the discount one year
after the IPO does not appear to be biased by any systematic error in the expectations of
market participants. We would like to caution that these estimated alphas should not be
used as a measure of whether or not PE investments themselves are able to earn abnormal
returns. In an efficient market, the market would anticipate any potential ability of PEs to
earn abnormal returns above their cost of capital, and this ability will be reflected in
market prices. Therefore, the market price-based returns earned by PEs should only
compensate investors for systematic risk.

V.

FoF and LPE Performance and Economic Environment

This section examines the relation between fund performance and macroeconomic
activity. We use US GDP growth and credit spread to capture macroeconomic activity
and we fit the following regression:
Ri ,t − R f ,t = α i + β i , m ( Rm,t − R f ,t ) + δ i ,GDP ΔGDPt + δ i ,credit Credit Spreadt + ε i ,t

(12)

where ΔGDP is percentage real GDP growth and credit spread is the difference between
the yield on BAA and AAA rated corporate bonds.13 For ease of interpretation, we
standardize both ΔGDP and Credit Spread by demeaning them and dividing them by
their respective standard deviation. Therefore, the slope coefficients denote fund returns
for one standard deviation change in these variables. We use MSCI world index as the
market portfolio in the results we report.14
GDP growth would have a positive impact on fund performance after controlling
for contemporaneous market returns if macroeconomic risk have a greater effect on early

13

We obtain the data regarding macroeconomic activity from the St. Louis Federal Reserve website.
We find similar results when we use the S&P 500 index as the market portfolio. In addition, IPO volume
is not significantly related to the performance of the FoF index or the LPE index after controlling for GDP
growth and the credit spread and the inclusion of IPO volume does not qualitatively change the estimates
for the other regressors.

14

25

stage firms than on large cap firms that form a large part of the market index. Healthy
GDP growth could potentially allow private firms to access capital markets and go
public, which would have a positive impact on PE investments.
However, economic growth also could attract greater competition. For instance,
Gompers and Lerner (2000) find that valuation becomes richer and hence the increased
competition that comes with economic growth may have a negative impact on fund
performance. Kaplan and Schoar (2005) report that funds started when there is increased
competition tend to underperform other funds, and find support for hypothesis that
performance suffers when money chases deals. The net effect of the positive impact of
economic growth and the negative impact of increased competition on the cost of future
investments depends on which of these effects dominate.
Credit spread also provides a measure of the economic environment. Koopman,
Kräussl, Lucas, and Monteiro (2009), among others, show that credit spread is
countercyclical. As Fama (1990) argues, widening spread generally signals deteriorating
business conditions, which would make it difficult times for private firms to go public.
Moreover, widening credit spread also increases the cost of raising new debt and hence it
would likely have an adverse impact on the performance of private firms. Therefore, we
expect a negative relation between the performance of PE funds and credit spread.
Table 8 reports the estimates for equation (12). We find that GDP growth is
positively related to returns for both FoFs and LPEs. One standard deviation change in
GDP growth leads to 2.04% and 1.29% increase in excess returns for FoFs and LPEs,
respectively. Our results indicate that the increase in the value of existing investments of
PE funds more than offset the negative impact of potentially increased competition on
returns from future investments.
We also find that credit spreads are negatively related to FoF and LPE returns,
after controlling for market returns and also after accounting for GDP growth. FoFs are
more sensitive to credit spreads than LPE and the difference in the slope coefficients is
significant at the five percent level. One possible explanation for this difference is that
because the PE funds that underlie FoF investments may be hurt more by deteriorating
capital markets because of their finite life. The LPEs may not have the same urgency to

26

liquidate their investments in unfavorable market conditions as PE funds because of their
indefinite life.
VI.

PEPI and Fund Indices

Practitioners and industry sources such as the National Venture Capital Association use
the Private Equity Performance Index (PEPI) to measure the performance of PE funds.
Thomson Reuters computes PEPI based on cash flows from the PE funds in the Thomson
database, based on self-reported book values of these funds. As Phalippou and Gottschalg
(2009) and others have noted, self-reported book values tend to be overstated.
Any bias aside, self-reported book values may not reflect changes in their market
values in a timely manner. For instance, book values reported by funds may only partially
adjust to changes in their true value. Under this partial adjustment hypothesis, PEPI
would not reflect true changes in the value of PE investments in a timely manner since
smoothed book values are used to compute PEPI.
In contrast to PEPI, we compute the FoF and LPE indices using market prices.
Since market prices reflect fundamental values in a timely manner, these indices should
be able to predict changes in PEPI under the partial adjustment hypothesis. To examine
whether FoFs and LPE indices can predict future changes in book values that underlie
PEPI, we examine the relation between PEPI returns and contemporaneous and lagged
values of MSCI World index returns and fund index returns.
Table 9 reports the regression results. Since PEPI is published quarterly, we fit the
regressions with quarterly returns. The slope coefficient in univariate regression with
MSCI as the independent variable is 0.39, which is statistically significant. This slope
coefficient is significantly smaller than the analogous coefficient for FoFs, which may be
due to the fact that PEPI is computed using data from PE funds that largely invest in US
companies, while the FoFs invest in international PE funds. Partial adjustment of book
values used in the computation of PEPI will also result in a smaller slope coefficient
because the slope coefficient estimate for contemporaneous returns will understate the
true sensitivity of PE funds to the stock market.
To test the delayed adjustment hypothesis, we include both the contemporaneous
and lagged MSCI World returns in the regression specification. In addition, we also add

27

contemporaneous and lagged returns on the FoF index as additional explanatory
variables. Since FoF returns reflect changes in the value that are unique to the PE sector,
lagged FoF returns should be able to incrementally predict PEPI returns under the
delayed adjustment hypothesis.
The results in column 6 of Table 9 indicate that the slope coefficients on lagged
MSCI World and FoF index returns are at 0.09 and 0.11, respectively, both statistically
significant. Therefore, both lagged MSCI World and FoF index returns are useful in
predicting PEPI returns. In fact, the predictive power of lagged FoF index return is at
least as strong as that of lagged MSCI World index returns although the FoF index
returns in much noisier since it is constructed with only 26 FoFs. We found similar
results when we used LPE index returns in the place of FoF index returns. These results
support the delayed adjustment hypothesis and imply that this index provides crucial
information about the performance of the unlisted PE industry.

VII.

Conclusion

We estimate the risk and expected returns on private equity investments based on
the market prices of exchange traded funds of funds that invest in unlisted private equity
funds. We also examine the risk and expected returns of listed private equity funds. Our
results indicate that the market expects unlisted private equity funds to earn abnormal
returns of about zero to two percent. We also find that the market expects listed private
equity to earn zero to marginally negative abnormal returns net of their fees.
Earlier studies document abnormal returns for unlisted PE funds that range from 6% (e.g Phalippou and Gottschalg, 2009) to +32% (Cochrane, 2005). While these
estimates are based on the datasets used in the respective studies and additional
assumptions, our results indicate that the market does not expect PE funds to earn such
extreme abnormal returns in the long run. In fact, we show that any proposition that the
market expects negative abnormal returns, or positive abnormal returns in excess of about
two percent in the long run are inconsistent with the market prices that we observe.
Since we use data for FoFs in our empirical analysis, our estimates of the
expected abnormal return for the portfolio of unlisted PE investments includes any ability
that FoFs might have in selecting unlisted PE funds, i.e. selection skill of FoFs, in

28

addition to the ability of the average unlisted PE fund manager to outperform public
equity, i.e. management skill. We cannot disentangle selection skill from management
skill solely based on data for FoFs. But in a related context, Fung and Hseih (2000) find
that the performance of hedge fund FoFs and the general population of hedge funds are
about equal after accounting for selection bias in hedge fund databases and the fees of
hedge fund FoFs. Their results indicate that FoFs exhibit little selection skill for hedge
funds. To the extent that their findings can be generalized, the selection skill of FoFs for
PE funds is unlikely to be a significant factor.
Both listed and unlisted private equity funds have betas close to one and they have
positive betas on Fama-French SMB factor. Private equity fund returns exhibit positive
correlation with GDP growth and negative correlation with credit spread, which proxies
for business conditions. Finally, we find that market returns of listed fund of funds and
listed private equity predict future changes in self-reported book values of unlisted
private equity funds.

29

Appendix

We assume that the CAPM determines the market value of each claim. The value of the
base management fee, Vb ,t , is the starting point of our analysis. Each period's base
management fee is proportional to a stochastic process because a portion of the proceeds
is reinvested. Hence, the appropriate discount rate, Et [ Rb ] , depends on the retention ratio
and the systematic risk of the underlying portfolio:
⎡ ∞ λ NAV
⎤
t + s −1 ⎥
Vb ,t = Et ⎢ ∑
.
s
⎢ s=1 (1 + Et [ Rb ]) ⎥
⎣
⎦

(A1)

The present value of the fixed fees is proportional to the amount invested in the
underlying portfolio, i.e. Vb ,t = δ NAVt . We find the discount rate, Et [ Rb ] , as well as the
proportionality constant, δ , starting from the following equation:
⎡ λ NAVt + δ NAVt +1 ⎤
δ NAVt = Et ⎢
(A2)
⎥.
1 + Et [ Rb ]
⎣
⎦
We use the evolution of net asset value and rearrange this equation:
⎡ λ + δ 1 + θ ( Ru ,t +1 − λ ) ⎤
⎥.
δ = Et ⎢
(A3)
1 + Et [ Rb ]
⎢
⎥
⎣
⎦
Substituting the expected return for the underlying portfolio and rearranging again
yields an expression for Et [ Rb ] in terms of:

(

Et [ Rb ] =

)

λ
+ θ α − λ + R f + β u ( Et [ Rm ] − R f ) .
δ

(

)

(A4)

Similarly, we write the actual return, Rb ,t +1 :

λ
(A5)
+ θ α − λ + R f + βu ( Rm,t +1 − R f ) + ε u ,t +1 .
δ
The systematic risk of the base fee, βb , is equal to θβu . Hence, the CAPM indicates
λ
Et [ Rb ] = + θ α − λ + R f + βu ( Et [ Rm ] − R f ) = R f + θβu ( Et [ Rm ] − R f ) .
(A6)
δ

(

Rb ,t +1 =

)

(

)

The expected return is the riskfree rate plus an adjustment for the systematic riskiness of
the fees based on reinvestment. In the absence of any reinvestment, the discount rate
is R f .
We rearrange to solve for δ as a function of the parameters:

δ=

λ
.
R f − θ (α − λ + R f )

(A7)

Therefore, the present value of the base management fee relative to net asset value and
the associated discount rate are given by the following two equations:
Vb ,t
NAVt

=

λ
R f − θ (α − λ + R f )

30

(A8), and

Et [ Rb ] = R f + θβ u ( Et [ Rm ] − R f ) .

(A9)

In the absence of any market inefficiencies, the price of the investors' claim Pt is
equal to the present value of the distributions to investors, Ve,t :
⎡ ∞ (1 − θ − π )( R − λ ) NAV ⎤
t+s
t + s −1
⎥.
Ve,t = Et ⎢ ∑
(A10)
s
⎢ s=1
⎥
+
1
E
R
[
]
(
)
t
e
⎣
⎦
Analogously, the present value of the distributions to investors is proportional to
the amount invested in the underlying portfolio, i.e. Ve,t = η NAVt . We find the discount

rate, Et [ Re ] , as well as the proportionality constant,η , starting from the following
equation:
⎡ λ NAVt + δ NAVt +1 ⎤
(A11)
⎥.
+
E
R
1
[
]
t
e
⎣
⎦
Again, we use the evolution equation for net asset value and rearrange:
⎡ (1 − θ − π ) ( Ru ,t +1 − λ ) + η 1 + θ ( Ru ,t +1 − λ ) ⎤
⎥.
(A12)
η = Et ⎢
1 + Et [ Re ]
⎢
⎥
⎣
⎦
Substituting the expected return for the underlying portfolio and rearranging again
yields an expression for Et [ Re ] in terms ofη .

η NAVt = Et ⎢

(

)

⎛ 1−θ − π
⎞
Et [ Re ] = ⎜
+ θ ⎟ α − λ + R f + β u ( Et [ Rm ] − R f )
⎝ η
⎠
Similarly, we write the actual return, Re ,t +1 :

(

)

(A13)

⎛ 1−θ − π
⎞
Re,t +1 = ⎜
(A14)
+ θ ⎟ α − λ + R f + β u ( Rm,t +1 − R f ) + ε u ,t +1 .
⎝ η
⎠
The systematic risk of the base fee, β b , is equal to ( (1 − θ − π / η ) + θ ) β u . Hence, the

(

)

CAPM indicates
⎛ 1−θ − π
⎞
⎛ 1−θ − π
⎞
+ θ ⎟ α − λ + R f + βu ( Et [ Rm ] − R f ) = R f + ⎜
+ θ ⎟ βu ( Et [ Rm ] − R f ) . (A15)
⎜
⎝ η
⎠
⎝ η
⎠
We rearrange to solve for η as a function of the parameters:

(

)

η=

(1 − θ − π ) (α − λ + R f )
R f − θ (α − λ + R f )

.

(A16)

Therefore, the present value of the distributions to investors relative to net asset value and
the associated discount rate are given by the following two equations:

(1 − θ − π ) (α − λ + R f )
Ve,t
= 1−
NAVt
R f − θ (α − λ + R f )
⎛
Rf
Et [ Re ] = R f + ⎜
⎜ α − λ + Rf
⎝

31

⎞
⎟⎟ βu ( Et [ Rm ] − R f ) .
⎠

(A17), and

(A18)

References

Bilo, S., H. Christophers, M. Degosciu, and H. Zimmermann, 2005, Risk, Returns, and
Biases of Listed Private Equity Portfolios, WWZ Working Paper, No. 1/05,
University of Basel.
Brophy D.J., and M.W. Guthner, 1988, Publicly Traded Venture Capital Funds:
Implications for Institutional “Fund of Funds” Investors, Journal of Business
Venturing 3, 187–206.

Carhart, M., 1997, On the Persistence of Mutual Fund Performance, Journal of Finance
52, 57–82.
Cochrane, J.H., 2005, The Risk and Return of Venture Capital, Journal of Financial
Economics 75, 3–52.

Fama, E., 1990, Stock Returns, Expected Returns, and Real Activity, Journal of Finance
45, 1089-1108.
Fama, E., and K. French, 1993, Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and
Bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
Gompers, P., and J. Lerner, 1999, An Analysis of Compensation in the U.S. Venture
Capital Partnership, Journal of Financial Economics 51, 3–44.
Gompers, P., and J. Lerner, 2000, Money Chasing Deals? The Impact of Fund Inflows on
Private Equity Valuations, Journal of Financial Economics 55, 281-325.
Hwang, M., J. Quigley, and S. Woodward, 2005, An Index for Venture Capital, 19872003, Contributions to Economic Analysis & Policy 4, 1-43.
Jensen, M.C., 2007, The Economic Case For Private Equity, Unpublished Harvard NOM
Research Paper No. 07-02.
Kaplan, S.N., and A. Schoar, 2005, Private Equity Performance: Returns, Persistence,
and Capital Flows, Journal of Finance 60, 1791–1823.
Kaplan, S.N. and J.C. Stein, 1990, How Risky is the Debt in Highly Leveraged
Transactions? Journal of Financial Economics 27, 215-245.
Koopman, S.J., R. Kräussl, A. Lucas, and A., Monteiro, 2009, Credit Cycles and Macro
Fundamentals, Journal of Empirical Finance 16, 42-54.

32

Ljungqvist, A., and M. Richardson, 2003, The Cash Flow, Return and Risk
Characteristics of Private Equity, NBER Working Paper, #9454.
Martin, J.D., and J.W. Petty, 1983, An Analysis of the Performance of Publicly Traded
Venture Capital Companies, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 18, 401–
410.
Peng, L., 2001, Building a Venture Capital Index, ICF Working Paper, No. 00-51, Yale
University.
Phalippou, L., and O. Gottschalg, 2009, The Performance of Private Equity Funds,
Review of Financial Studies 22, 1747-1776.

Weiss, Kathleen, 1989, The Post-offering Price Performance of Closed-end Funds,
Financial Management 18, 57-67.

33

Table 1a. Sample Statistics – Funds of Funds
Notes: This table presents sample statistics for our sample of twenty-six private equity funds of
funds (FoFs). The sample period is 1994 to 2008.

US
Europe
London
Australia
Total

N
0
14
10
2
26

<20m
20m - 100m
100m - 500m
500m - 1000m
1000m – 2500m
>2500m
Total

N
0
7
12
3
3
1
26

Early-Stage
Expansion
Balanced
Buyout
Other PE
Total

North America
Europe
Rest of the World
Total

Total
2
2
0
20
2
26
N
11
11
4
26

Panel A: Exchange
% USD
Active
0.0%
0
68.9%
14
30.9%
10
0.3%
1
100%
25
Panel B: Size
%
% USD
Active
0.0%
0.0%
0
26.9%
2.9%
6
46.2%
31.3%
12
11.5%
17.4%
3
11.5%
30.7%
3
3.9%
17.7%
1
100%
100%
25
Panel C: Stage Focus
%
% USD
Active
7.7%
2.3%
2
7.7%
2.2%
2
0.0%
0.0%
0
76.9%
87.7%
19
7.7%
7.8%
2
100%
100%
25
Panel D: Geographical Focus
%
% USD
Active
42.3%
68.6%
11
42.3%
29.2%
11
15.4%
2.3%
3
100.0%
100.0%
25
%
0.0%
53.9%
38.5%
7.7%
100%

34

%
0.0%
53.9%
38.5%
3.9%
96.2%

Dead
0
0
0
1
1

%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
3.8%
3.8%

%
0.0%
23.1%
46.2%
11.5%
11.5%
3.9%
96.2%

Dead
0
1
0
0
0
0
1

%
0.0%
3.8%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
3.8%

%
7.7%
7.7%
0.0%
73.1%
7.7%
96.2%

Dead
0
0
0
1
0
1

%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
3.8%
0.0%
3.8%

%
42.3%
42.3%
11.5%
96.2%

Dead
0
0
1
1

%
0.0%
0.0%
3.8%
3.8%

Table 1b: Descriptive Statistics – Funds of Funds
Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics for twenty-six funds of funds (FoFs) for the period
1994 to 2008. The first column for every variable shows the median while the second shows the
average. Market capitalization is the number of shares outstanding multiplied by price per share
in millions of USD. Institutional ownership is the percentage of outstanding shares for each FoF
held by institutional investors. Underlying PE Funds is the number of distinct unlisted PE funds
held by the FoF.

Market Capitalization

Median
203.8

Average
312.4

Base Management Fee
Incentive Fee
Hurdle rate

1.50%
10.00%
8.00%

1.40%
10.73%
9.54%

Institutional Ownership
Underlying PE Funds

46.59%
28

47.15%
42

35

Table 2. Sample Statistics – Listed Private Equity Funds
Notes: This table presents the sample statistics for our sample of 129 listed private equity funds
(LPEs). The sample period is 1994 to 2008.

US
Europe
London
Rest of the World
Total

N
16
7
92
14
129

<20m
20m - 100m
100m - 500m
500m - 1000m
1000m - 2500
>2500m
Total

N
28
67
26
5
0
3
129

Early-Stage
Expansion
Balanced
Buyout
Other PE
Total

N
25
34
44
13
13
129

North America
Europe
Rest of the World
Total

N
17
78
34
129

Panel A: Exchange
%
% USD
Active
12.4%
59.3%
16
5.4%
0.9%
5
71.3%
32.7%
81
10.9%
7.1%
9
100.0%
100.0%
111
Panel B: Size
%
% USD
Active
21.7%
1.3%
22
51.9%
11.2%
57
20.2%
31.2%
25
3.9%
11.6%
4
0.0%
0.0%
0
2.3%
44.7%
3
100.0%
100.0%
111
Panel C: Stage Focus
%
% USD
Active
19.4%
4.7%
18
26.4%
26.0%
30
34.1%
13.8%
40
10.1%
13.4%
11
10.1%
42.1%
12
100.0%
100.0%
111
Panel D: Geographical Focus
%
% USD
Active
13.2%
46.0%
17
60.5%
21.4%
68
26.4%
32.6%
26
100.0%
100.0%
111

36

%
12.4%
3.9%
62.8%
7.0%
86.1%

Dead
0
2
11
5
18

%
0.0%
1.6%
8.5%
3.9%
14.0%

%
17.1%
44.2%
19.4%
3.1%
0.0%
2.3%
86.1%

Dead
6
10
1
1
0
0
18

%
4.7%
7.8%
0.8%
0.8%
0.0%
0.0%
14.0%

%
14.0%
23.3%
31.0%
8.5%
9.3%
86.1%

Dead
7
4
4
2
1
18

%
5.4%
3.1%
3.1%
1.6%
0.8%
14.0%

%
13.2%
52.7%
20.2%
86.1%

Dead
0
10
8
18

%
0.0%
7.8%
6.2%
14.0%

Table 3. FoF Discount in Event Time
Notes: This table reports the average fund discounts in event time for exchange-traded funds of
funds (FoFs) that invest in unlisted private equity funds. Event month 1 is the first month after the
initial public offering; event month 2 is the second month, and so on.

Event Month Average Discount
1
-3.06%
2
0.63%
3
2.87%
4
5.47%
5
7.72%
6
7.50%
7
8.77%
8
10.37%
9
10.57%
10
11.64%
11
12.09%
12
11.54%

Standard Error
0.52%
1.84%
1.79%
1.88%
2.04%
2.60%
2.50%
2.79%
2.58%
2.74%
2.85%
3.53%

37

t-statistic
-5.93
0.34
1.60
2.91
3.78
2.89
3.51
3.71
4.10
4.24
4.24
3.27

Table 4. Simulated FoF Discount
Notes: This table reports the average (across funds) of the simulated FoF discount for each particular combination of the payout ratio and the
expected abnormal return. We calculate the discount for each fund as unity minus the average simulated present value of all distributions to
investors divided by the initial NAV of the fund. We compute the relevant present value of FoF equity separately for each FoF using the fundspecific fee structure. These calculations are based on 5,000 fund-specific performance simulations. The simulation methodology is discussed in
greater detail in the text. The expected abnormal return (α) is the market’s expectation of the abnormal return for the underlying portfolio of PE
investments. The payout ratio is the fraction of a fund’s earnings that is paid out to equity holders.

Payout Ratio (1-θ)
0.25
0.50
0.75
1

-2%
62.52%
43.94%
33.99%
27.65%

Expected Abnormal Return (α)
-1%
0
1%
53.19%
40.09%
18.29%
34.97%
24.09%
10.69%
26.01%
17.72%
7.35%
20.78%
13.49%
6.03%

38

2%
-17.91%
-6.13%
-3.41%
-2.29%

Table 5: LPE Discount in Event Time
Notes: This table reports the average discount in event time for listed private equity funds. Event
month 1 is the first month after the initial public offering; event month 2 is the second month, and
so on.

Event Month Average Discount
1
-4.08%
2
-4.48%
3
-3.31%
4
-3.76%
5
-2.66%
6
-1.88%
7
-1.70%
8
-1.52%
9
1.54%
10
-0.04%
11
0.96%
12
1.74%

Standard Error
1.87%
2.00%
2.11%
1.98%
2.16%
2.12%
2.15%
2.12%
2.30%
2.22%
2.13%
2.26%

39

t-statistic
-2.18
-2.24
-1.57
-1.90
-1.23
-0.89
-0.79
-0.72
0.67
-0.02
0.45
0.77

Table 6. The Performance of Private Equity (CAPM)
Notes: This table reports market model regression estimates for value weighted FoF and LPE
indices. We use MSCI World or S&P 500 indices as market proxies. One-month Treasury bill
rate is the riskfree rate. The dependent variables are excess returns on the indices reported in the
column headings. The standard errors are based on the Newey-West estimator with 6 lags (in
parentheses). The sample period is from January 1994 to December 2008.

Intercept
MSCI World

FoF
0.0002

FoF
-0.0005

(0.0051)

(0.0058)

0.9227***

LPE
-0.0023

(0.0035)

(0.0042)

0.8384***

(0.1956)

S&P 500

LPE
-0.0017
(0.1827)

0.7999***

0.7071***

(0.2128)

R2
Observations

0.3881
180

0.3043
180

*** - Significant at the 1% level.

40

(0.2026)

0.3843
180

0.2851
180

Table 7. The Performance of Private Equity (4-Factor Model)
Notes: This table reports the four-factor model estimates for value-weighted FOFs and LPE indices. We use MSCI World or S&P 500 indices as
market proxies. One-month treasury rate is the riskfree rate. SMB and HML Fama-French size and book-to-market factors, respectively, and UMD
is momentum factor. The dependent variables are excess returns on the indices reported in the column headings. The standard errors are based on
the Newey-West estimator with 6 lags (in parentheses). The sample period is from January 1994 to December 2008.

Intercept
MSCI World

FoF
-0.0023

FoF
-0.0038

(0.0060)

(0.0068)

0.9943***

LPE
-0.0058

(0.0041)

(0.0048)

0.9093***

(0.2272)

S&P 500

LPE
-0.0045
(0.1924)

0.9244***

0.8338***

(0.2498)

SMB
HML
MOM
R2
Observations

(0.2173)

0.4354***

0.5421***

(0.1344)

(0.1532)

(0.1463)

(0.1648)

0.3529

0.3912

0.3949*

0.4236*

(0.2192)

(0.2470)

(0.2221)

(0.2426)

0.0609

0.0876

0.0543

0.0756

(0.0786)

(0.0895)

(0.0566)

(0.0540)

0.4507
180

0.3954
180

0.4937
180

0.4299
180

* - Significant at the 10% level.
*** - Significant at the 1% level.

41

0.5389***

0.6349***

Table 8. The Impact of the Macroeconomic Environment on the Performance of Private Equity
Notes: This table reports the estimates of a regression of excess returns on value-weighted FoFs and LPE indices on MSCI world index, GDP
growth and credit spread. One month Treasury bill rate is the riskfree rate. Both GDP growth and the credit spread are de-meaned and scaled by
their standard deviations. The dependent variables are excess returns on the indices reported in the column headings. The standard errors are based
on the Newey-West estimator with 6 lags (in parentheses). The sample period is from January 1994 to December 2008.
Dependent Variable: LPE Index Excess Return

Intercept

FoF
0.0004

FoF
0.0006

FoF
0.0006

LPE
-0.0012

LPE
-0.0015

LPE
-0.0015

(0.0037)

(0.0038)

(0.0034)

(0.0028)

(0.0028)

(0.0027)

MSCI World

0.7961***

0.7270***

0.7101***

0.7587***

0.7152***

0.7045***

(0.1142)

(0.1066)

(0.1163)

GDP growth

0.0204**
(0.0079)

Credit spread
R2
Observations

0.4874
180

(0.0972)

(0.1335)

0.0087*

0.0129**

(0.0045)

(0.0050)

-0.0261***

-0.0212***

(0.0049)

(0.0051)

0.5458
180

0.5583
180

* - Significant at the 10% level.
** - Significant at the 5% level.
*** - Significant at the 1% level.

42

0.4318
180

(0.1152)

0.0055*
(0.0029)

-0.0166***

-0.0133***

(0.0041)

(0.0040)

0.4594
180

0.4654
180

Table 9. Lead-Lag Relation for the Private Equity Performance Index (PEPI) and the FoF, LPE and MSCI World Indices
Notes: This table examines the lead-lag relation between the performance for the PEPI in the United States and the returns for the FoF, LPE and
MSCI World indices. The dependent variable is the quarterly return on PEPI for the United States, reported by Thomson Reuters and the National
Venture Capital Association (NVCA) from Q1 of 1994 until Q3 of 2008. MSCI World is the return to the MSCI World index. The FoFs is the
value-weight return on the index of listed funds of funds that invest in unlisted private equity funds. The standard errors are based on the NeweyWest estimator with 6 lags (in parentheses).
Dependent Variable: Private Equity Performance Index (PEPI) Return

Intercept

1
0.0153**

2
0.0149**

3
0.0137**

4
0.0122*

(0.0054)

(0.0062)

5
0.0093*

(0.0062)

(0.0062)

(0.0048)

(0.0045)

MSCI World

0.3863***

0.2677***

0.3355***

0.3480***

(0.0469)

(0.0444)

(0.0407)

MSCI World (Lag)

6
0.0088**
(0.0350)

0.0867*
(0.0526)

LPE FoFs

0.2593***

0.1268***

(0.0244)

(0.0270)

LPE FoFs (Lag)
R2
Observations

0.4879
59

0.4152
59

0.5414
59

* - Significant at the 10% level.
** - Significant at the 5% level.
*** - Significant at the 1% level.

43

0.2381***

0.0596**

0.0476**

(0.0235)

(0.0249)

(0.0217)

0.0925**

0.1450***

0.1071***

(0.0408)

(0.0316)

(0.0355)

0.4604
58

0.6439
58

0.6565
58

Figure 1. The Expected Abnormal Return and Market Value vs. Book Value of PE Investments
Panel A: Expected Abnormal Return > 0

Panel B: Expected Abnormal Return < 0

120

120

Value of
FoF Fees
100

100

Book Value

Book Value
Value of
FoF Fees

80

80

Market Value
of FoF Equity

Market Value
of FoF Equity

60

60

Market Value of PE Invetments

Funds Invested in Unlisted PE

Market Value of PE Invetments

44

Funds Invested in Unlisted PE

Figure 2. Upper and Lower Bounds for the Expected Abnormal Return
2.50%

2.25%

Expected Abnormal Return (α)

2.00%

1.75%

Upper Bound for Discount = 5%

1.50%

Lower Bound for Discount = 5%
Upper Bound for Discount = 12%

1.25%

Lower Bound for Discount = 12%
Upper Bound for Discount = 19%

1.00%

Lower Bound for Discount = 19%

0.75%

0.50%

0.25%

0.00%
0.25

0.30

0.35

0.40

0.45

0.50

0.55

0.60

0.65

0.70

0.75

0.80

0.85

0.90

0.95

1.00

Payout Ratio (1‐θ)

Notes: This figure presents the upper and lower bounds for the expected abnormal return (α) for three different levels of the FoF
discount: 5%, 12%, and 19%. These three levels reflect the point estimate and the end points of the 95% confidence interval for the
average FoF discount twelve months after the initial public offering (see Table 3). The bounds for the expected abnormal return are
determined by equations (9) and (10) in Section III.A.3 discussing the model.
45

Figure 3. Simulated Relation for the Discount and the Expected Abnormal Return
60%

Discount = 12%
50%

40%

Abnormal Return (α)

30%

3.00%
2.00%

Discount

20%

1.00%
0.00%

10%

‐1.00%
‐2.00%

0%
0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

1

‐3.00%

‐10%

‐20%

‐30%

‐40%

Payout Ratio (1‐θ)

Notes: This figure presents the simulated relation between the average (across funds) FoF discount and payout ratios for different levels of the
expected abnormal return (α). The line labeled Discount = 12% plots the average discount observed in the sample one year after the initial public
offerings for the funds of funds. We calculate the discount for each fund as unity minus the average simulated present value of all distributions to
investors divided by the initial NAV of the fund. The expected abnormal return is the market’s expectation of the abnormal return for the
underlying portfolio of PE investments. The simulation methodology is discussed in greater detail in the text.

46

