                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           TIEBREAKER: CERTIFICATION AND MULTIPLE CREDIT RATINGS

                                          Dion Bongaerts
                                       K.J. Martijn Cremers
                                       William N. Goetzmann

                                        Working Paper 15331
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15331


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2009

Bongaerts is with Finance Group, RSM Erasmus University Rotterdam, and Cremers and Goetzmann
are with International Center for Finance, Yale University. We would like to thank Patrick Behr, Michael
Brennan, Mark Carlson, Erwin Charlier, Long Chen, Joost Driessen, Frank Fabozzi, Frank de Jong,
Rik Frehen, Gary Gorton, Jean Helwege, Mark Huson, Ron Jongen, Pieter Klaassen, David Lesmond,
Hamid Mehran, Catherine Nolan, Frank Packer, Ludovic Phalippou, Paolo Porchia, Jörg Rocholl,
Joao Santos, Joel Shapiro, Chester Spatt, Walter Stortelder, Dan Swanson, Anjan Thakor, Laura Veldkamp,
Evert de Vries, Jacqueline Yen, Weina Zhang, and an anonymous referee as well as conference participants
at the Financial Crisis conference at Pompeu Fabra University, the European Finance Association
annual meetings in Bergen (Norway, 2010), the Texas Finance Festival at UT Austin, the RMI conference
at National University of Singapore, the NBER meeting on Credit Ratings in Cambridge, the Conference
on Credit Rating Agencies at Humboldt University, the American Finance Association annual meetings
in Denver (2011) and seminar participants at University of Amsterdam, Rotterdam School of Management
and the Dutch National Bank for helpful comments and information. We especially thank Campbell
Harvey, an anonymous associate editor and an anonymous referee for many helpful comments and
advice. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Dion Bongaerts, K.J. Martijn Cremers, and William N. Goetzmann. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tiebreaker: Certification and Multiple Credit Ratings
Dion Bongaerts, K.J. Martijn Cremers, and William N. Goetzmann
NBER Working Paper No. 15331
September 2009, Revised July 2011
JEL No. G12,G14,G24

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper explores the economic role credit rating agencies play in the corporate bond market. We
consider three existing theories about multiple ratings: information production, rating shopping and
regulatory certification. Using differences in rating composition, default prediction and credit spread
changes, our evidence only supports regulatory certification. Marginal, additional credit ratings are
more likely to occur because of, and seem to matter primarily for regulatory purposes, but do not seem
to provide significant additional information related to credit quality.


Dion Bongaerts                                     William N. Goetzmann
Roetersstraat 18                                   School of Management
1018 WB Amsterdam,                                 Yale University
Netherlands                                        Box 208200
dbongaerts@rsm.nl                                  New Haven, CT 06520-8200
                                                   and NBER
K.J. Martijn Cremers                               william.goetzmann@yale.edu
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
martijn.cremers@yale.edu
Credit Rating Agencies (CRAs) report information about the credit risk of fixed income securities.

The various ways the information is used by financial, legal and regulatory entities may potentially

influence the nature of the information production process. Bond ratings are not only used to assess

risk, they are also used for regulatory certification, e.g. to classify securities into investment grade (IG)

and high yield (HY, or junk) status. These classifications in turn influence institutional demand and

serve as bright-line triggers in corporate credit arrangements and regulatory oversight. Regulations may

mandate insurance companies and banks to keep much higher reserve capital for high yield issues than

for investment grade corporate bonds. Other institutions like pension funds and mutual funds are often

restricted by their charters in the amount of HY debt they can hold. Taken together, more than half of

all corporate bonds are held by institutions that are subject to rating-based restrictions on their holdings

of risky credit assets (Campbell and Taksler (2003)). Lower demand for high yield bond can significantly

increase the cost of borrowing for those issuers and is related to capital structure decisions (see Ellul,

Jotikasthira and Lundblad (2009), Kisgen and Strahan (2009), Kisgen (2006, 2009)). The institutional

and regulatory importance of credit ratings to issuers and investors has raised questions about whether

the current system provides the proper incentives for issuers to fully disclose value-relevant information,

and for investors to invest in research about credit risk.

    Using a sample from 2000 - 2008, we document that almost all large, liquid US corporate bond

issues are rated by both S&P and Moody’s. Fitch typically plays the role of a ”third opinion” for large

bond issues1 . During the time period the most prevalent institutional rule used for classifying rated

bonds was that, if an issue has two ratings, only the lower rating could be used to classify the issue (e.g.

into investment-grade or non-investment grade). However, for issues with three ratings, the middle

rating should be used (see, for example, the NAIC guidelines or the Basel II accord).2 Therefore, if

S&P and Moody’s ratings are on opposite sides of the investment grade boundary, the Fitch rating

(assuming it is the marginal, third rating) is the ’tie-breaker’ and will decide into which class the issue

falls. Moreover, this rule directly implies that adding a third rating cannot worsen the regulatory rating

classification, but could potentially lead to a higher one. Consistent with this option, we find that in

about 25% of Fitch rating additions, the addition leads to a regulatory rating improvement, i.e., the

resulting middle rating is higher than the lowest rating before the Fitch rating addition. Ex ante,

such an improvement would be particularly important when S&P and Moody’s ratings are on opposite

sides of the investment grade boundary. Absent the improving third rating, the split between S&P

and Moody’s would result in a classification of high yield. Thus, the value of the Fitch rating is that


                                                     1
it can only push the issue up into the investment grade category, not pull it down into the high yield

category.3

    In this paper, we explore the nature of this tie-breaking role in the context of the broader question

of why corporate bonds generally have multiple credit ratings. We consider three hypotheses that could

lead to demand for multiple credit ratings, an ’information production’ hypothesis, a ’rating shopping’

hypothesis and a ’regulatory certification’ hypothesis. These are not mutually exclusive but they have

some different empirical implications that we exploit to shed light on their relative importance.

    Under the information hypothesis, investors are averse to uncertainty, which is reduced by adding

extra ratings (see e.g. Güntay and Hackbarth (2010)). Under the rating shopping hypothesis, issuers

’shop’ for an additional rating in the hope of improving their rating (see e.g. Poon and Firth (2005),

Skreta and Veldkamp (2009), Sangiorgi, Sokobin and Spatt (2009)). Under the regulatory certification

hypothesis (see e.g. Brister, Kennedy and Liu (1994)), market and regulatory forces can naturally

arise from a need for credibly separating bond issues into two types: informationally sensitive and

non-informationally sensitive (Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) and Boot and Thakor (1993)). These

correspond to non-investment grade (also called high yield) and investment grade ratings, respectively.

If the regulatory certification role of CRA dominates, only the weaker issuers may need a third rating.

This leads us to investigate whether the option of a third rating leads to adverse selection effects. As

mentioned before, these hypotheses are not mutually exclusive. For example, rating shopping could be

more important and thus more prevalent around the HY-IG boundary.

    We find the strongest evidence in favor of the regulatory certification hypothesis. First, we consider

what happens if a Fitch rating is added for bond issues at the IG/HY boundary, when Fitch could be

the tie-breaker and potentially move the bond issue into the IG class. The yield improves if Fitch rates

the issue IG, but there is no change following a HY rating, with a 40 basis point difference between an

IG and HY classification. This economically large difference suggests that the certification effect can

significantly lower the issuer’s cost of capital.

    Second, Fitch rating additions or changes for issues that are not close to the HY-IG boundary do

not seem to be related to changes in yields. We find this not only for Fitch rating additions in a sample

of bond issues already rated by both Moody’s and S&P, but also for the full sample of all bonds and

using quarterly panel regressions of credit spread changes on rating updates made by Moody’s, S&P

and Fitch. In contrast, credit rating changes (especially downgrades) made by both Moody’s and S&P


                                                    2
are significantly associated with credit spread changes across the whole rating spectrum.

    Third, Cox proportional hazard model regressions indicate that having and getting a Fitch rating

is positively associated with the potential to break the tie between Moody’s and S&P ratings, but again

only around the IG-HY boundary. Fourth and finally, comparing default predictions on a one year

horizon across credit rating agencies for corporate bonds rated by all three agencies over 2000 - 2008,

we find that Moody’s ratings perform best, immediately followed by S&P and then by Fitch. Ratings

by Moody’s and S&P add significant forecasting power to those of Fitch, whereas the reverse is not the

case. This is consistent with Fitch providing limited additional valuation information relative to that

contained in Moody’s and S&P ratings.

    Thus, the credit spread change regressions provide no support for the information production

hypothesis; i.e. that the additional Fitch ratings provide significant information to investors. However,

further tests provide some suggestive evidence in support of the rating shopping hypothesis around the

HY-IG boundary for possible regulatory arbitrage, but not anywhere else. While the additional Fitch

rating tends to be more optimistic than pre-existing Moody’s and S&P ratings, investors do not seem

to incorporate such increased optimism by lowering credit spreads. This would undermine any rationale

to engage in rating shopping. However, we find that the additional Fitch rating is ”extra” optimistic

for issues rated just below IG or for those issues where Fitch is the tie-breaker around the IG-HY

boundary, i.e. more so than elsewhere on the rating spectrum. Those are exactly the issues where we

would expect rating shopping incentives to matter most. Specifically, if Moody’s and S&P ratings are

on opposite sides of the HY-IG boundary, the additional Fitch rating is more likely than otherwise to

lead to an improvement in the regulatory rating classification, which in this particular case means an

improvement from HY to IG classification (using ’the worst of 2 and median of 3 ratings applies’ rule).

This evidence is suggestive of rating shopping around the HY-IG boundary, or that the marginal rating

is used for regulatory arbitrage.4

    Endogeneity is a significant concern in our study, as we rely on controlling for confounding variables

for identification. We seek to mitigate major selection issues by focusing on credit spread changes and

Fitch rating additions. We also directly estimate selection effects using the Cox proportional hazard

model to explain the time to add the third rating.

    Taken together, our results suggest that a major function of Fitch ratings could be to avoid adverse

selection for intermediate quality corporate bonds (Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) and Boot and Thakor


                                                     3
(1993)). Relatively uninformed investors may be reluctant to trade bond issues where they may be

at a considerable information disadvantage, i.e. HY or junk issues. Investors specialized at producing

information might find it too costly to do so for medium quality issues, unless they can generate

profit from trading at an informational advantage with uninformed investors, This could lead to a no-

trade region for these intermediate quality bonds. An additional rating that give a clear signal about

whether research will yield relevant information (or whether relatively uninformed investors may be at

a disadvantage) could resolve such a no-trade region. The generally optimistic Fitch ratings may also

be requested as a precautionary measure. For example, issues rated by Fitch ratings are more likely to

have subsequent Moody’s and S&P rating transitions, suggesting that these issues have relatively less

stable ratings.

    In the long run, a necessary condition for any credit rating agency to have credibility about the IG-

HY classification is that it produces and uses value-relevant information about the firm. A rubber-stamp

rating without research will not serve the certification purpose in the long run. If the regulatory emphasis

on credit ratings is reduced or regulation as to which rating should be used is tightened in the aftermath

of the recent credit crisis, the certification effect documented in this paper may become less pronounced.

In particular, our results suggest that fewer firms may opt for multiple ratings as a result, unless the

marginal CRA can convince the market that its ratings are useful not just for regulatory reasons but

also provide additional information about credit risk (and particularly about separating information-

sensitive from information-insensitive securities). Indeed, less regulatory emphasis on ratings may spur

increased competition among CRAs to improve their information production, especially around the

IG-HY boundary.

    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I contains our motivation for the

empirical tests and the various hypotheses in light of the existing literature. In section II, we discuss

the sample construction and methodology. Section III presents the empirical results on the three

hypotheses. Section IV concludes.




                                                     4
I    Motivation

A    Credit Rating Agencies and Regulation

    There are currently three major credit rating agencies (CRAs) in the U.S. market: S&P, Moody’s

and Fitch. In addition to these big three, there are seven smaller CRAs that issue credit ratings that

qualify for meeting regulatory standards. While the purpose of a credit rating is to reflect the credit-

worthiness of an issue or issuer, the rating agencies have some discretion in the philosophy underlying

their rating system and are not required to make their rating methodology public.5

    CRAs are licensed as Nationally Recognized Statistical Rating Organizations (NRSRO) by the

Securities and Exchange Commission. This official designation has a number of effects. First, CRAs

are exempt from Regulation FD, allowing corporations to share value-relevant information with the

rating agency without disclosing it publicly. Second, the SEC designation allows credit ratings to be

used for meeting regulatory requirements that call for a minimum or an average rating value. For

example, the SEC requires that money market mutual funds hold instruments with a credit rating in

one of the two short-term higher credit rating categories.6 This effectively provides a ”safe harbor” for

money market mutual funds with respect to litigation over fund failures. Kisgen (2006) discusses the

strong link between short and long term debt ratings and access to the commercial paper market. He

concludes that in order to have access to the commercial paper market, typically a rating of BBB is

required.

    US insurance companies explicitly rely on NRSRO ratings for determining risk-based capital. In

particular, bonds held by insurance companies are assigned capital charges based upon their credit

ratings. For example, a US life insurance company needs to hold over 3 times as much reserve capital

for a BB rated bond compared to a BBB rated bond. At the time of writing, European insurance

companies will soon be subject to comparable regulations with the implementation of ’Solvency II.’

Banking regulations enacted under the so-called ’Basel II accords’ impose very similar risk-based capital

requirements.7 Many pension funds and mutual funds are restricted from investing in non-investment

grade corporate bonds by their charter. Although there is much discussion about treating bank and

insurance assets in the context of their total portfolio that would take into account co-variance rather

than security-specific risk, as of mid-2010, a large portion of U.S. institutional portfolios are still subject

to rules and regulation tied to ratings by a relatively small number of NRSROs. The impact of such


                                                      5
rules and regulations on the functioning of the corporate bond market, in particular in determining

supply and demand, is almost certainly non-trivial since a vast majority of this market is dominated by

institutions that are subject to rating-related restrictions, either through explicit rules and regulations,

or through restrictions stated in their charters.8

    In June, 2008, the SEC proposed eliminating language in many regulations pertaining to NRSROs,

and instead to allow an alternative decision-making function, perhaps recognizing that reliance on credit

ratings agencies had the potential to distort the information-gathering and investment decision-making

process. In addition, several other regulations were implemented to try to make rating agencies more

accountable and increase the transparency of the rating process. The motivation for these (proposed)

changes stemmed from the subprime mortgage crisis that began in 2007, and from concerns that the

top three CRAs may represent an oligopoly enabled by government regulation. Among other things,

the concern is that this oligopoly might not be the optimal mechanism for revealing information related

to the risk of fixed income securities, and instead might be used as an artificial safe-harbor to excuse

investment managers from exercising business judgment. As such, it could allow the CRAs to extract

rents from corporations by virtue of serving as ”gate-keepers” to the investment-grade (IG) rating,

especially as the CRAs are paid by the corporations whose bonds are rated. Moreover, competition

among CRAs could lead to a so called ”race to the bottom”, i.e. competition over deteriorating

standards to attract more customers. This is an often heard concern about the structured finance

market in the (subprime) mortgage crisis.

    While all of the aforementioned issues are of a regulatory nature, the wider financial industry has

also grown increasingly dependent on CRAs. Financial institutions center self-regulation around credit

ratings, e.g. mutual funds stating in their charter to only invest in investment-grade (IG) quality fixed

income securities. Trading and internal risk management models often take credit ratings either as

primary or as calibration inputs. Many corporate credit arrangements, like collateral requirements and

haircuts are further driven by credit ratings. Moreover, ratings are an important factor in determining

whether a bond qualifies for inclusion in prominent corporate bond indices like the Barclays Capital

(formerly Lehman Brothers) US Corporate IG Index.9 Inclusion in such an index may greatly improve

the liquidity of an issue, since for example index tracking institutions will trade more in them. Several

papers show that a higher liquidity leads to lower credit spreads (see for example Chen, Lesmond and

Wei, 2007). Typically, these procedures tend to incorporate all (multiple) rating information available,

extending possible certification effects well beyond those resulting from financial regulation.


                                                     6
B    Why Multiple Ratings Matter

    In this subsection, we consider three different mechanisms that could lead firms to solicit and pay

for multiple ratings. We base these hypotheses also on empirical evidence provided by the previous liter-

ature, as summarized in the next subsection. The three hypotheses we consider are (i) the ”information

production” hypothesis, (ii) the ”rating shopping” hypothesis and (iii) the ”regulatory certification”

(or clientele, or regulation) hypothesis. Below, we will give a short description of each and discuss its

testable empirical predictions. As these hypotheses could co-exist and are generally not mutually exclu-

sive, we discuss both how they are related and how we can identify some differing empirical predictions

that allow us to distinguish which hypothesis may dominate empirically. These empirical predictions

are summarized in Table I.

    First, the reason to apply for multiple ratings could be the need for increased information produc-

tion. More ratings can reduce uncertainty about the credit quality of the rated bonds. In a setting in

which each CRA relies on different kinds of information to rate bonds, multiple perspectives are advan-

tageous and reduce uncertainty about default probability. CRAs may specialize in evaluating particular

drivers of default and thus each may have some advantage that justifies its continued existence in the

marketplace. Thus, one would expect that issuers with greater ex-ante uncertainty are more likely to

apply for extra ratings, since the potential reduction of uncertainty is largest for them. Moreover, under

the information production hypothesis, an extra rating in agreement with the existing ratings would

reduce credit quality uncertainty and thereby lower credit spreads.

    Second, the ”rating shopping” effect can arise in a setting in which CRAs do not perfectly agree or

there is considerably uncertainty about credit quality, while issuers may have better information about

their own credit quality. In this case, issuers can seek to maximize their average rating by soliciting

multiple bids or following a stopping rule that chooses the first rating agency whose rating equals or

exceeds the firm’s own assessment of quality. Applying for private ratings and making these public

only if favorable, or deciding which CRA to use based on advice from an investment bank that has

knowledge about (gaming) each CRA’s precise rating algorithms leads to similar patterns.

    The rating shopping hypothesis thus predicts that issuers will only apply for any additional rating

if they think it will be an improvement. Therefore, additional ratings are on average better. Further, if

the issuer applies for an additional rating and this additional rating is an improvement, credit spreads



                                                    7
should go down. This can be either because the additional rating is actually closer to the firm’s true

credit quality or because it is not, but the market mistakenly takes the new rating at face value. In the

latter case, if the market is not fooled, there would be no incentive to engage in rating shopping.

    The third explanation for multiple ratings is ”regulatory certification”. Financial regulation has

traditionally relied heavily on credit ratings to determine the suitability and riskiness of fixed income

investments. For instance, bond ratings are used to score the quality of bonds in the investment

portfolios of insurance companies and banks and regulatory capital reserve requirements are determined

by this score. Ratings are also important in the structured finance market, the commercial paper market,

and the overnight repo market. They are used to determine ”haircuts” at the discount window of the

central bank and for determining whether projects qualify for government assistance (see for example

the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2000)). They may be the basis for financial contracting

between private parties, as the world witnessed in the case of AIG’s rating downgrade that triggered

a need for increased collateral in its counterparty arrangements. This event underscores the enormous

potential impact of certification.

    The most prominent distinction made in financial regulation as it pertains to credit ratings is

whether an issue, issuer or structured product is ”investment grade” (IG) or ”high yield” (HY). In

particular, the most prevalent institutional rule used for classifying rated bonds is that, if an issue

has two ratings, only the worse rating can be used to classify the issue into investment-grade or non-

investment grade. However, if an issue has three ratings, the middle rating is used (see for example the

NAIC guidelines or the Basel II accord).1011 Therefore, if S&P and Moody’s ratings are on opposite

sides of the investment grade boundary, the Fitch rating (assuming it is third rater) will decide into

which class the issue falls. This classification creates strong incentives for issuers trying to achieve

an investment grade rating. Thus, the IG-HY boundary is associated with a clear discontinuity in

institutional demand. Assuming a downward sloping demand curve, the lower demand for high yield

bond significantly increases the cost of borrowing for those issuers (see Ellul, Jotikasthira and Lundblad

(2010) and Kisgen and Strahan (2009)).12

    Under the regulatory certification hypothesis, the principal value of a CRA which systematically

gives better ratings (i.e., in our data Fitch) than the other CRAs (i.e., Moody’s and S&P) is simply

that it helps satisfy the bright-line requirements of financial regulation. A rating from this CRA could

be requested by issuers for whom the extra rating might make them qualify for an IG classification.



                                                    8
In addition, issuers that consider themselves likely to experience a future downgrade from IG to HY

could opt for an extra rating for precautionary motives. This could lead to adverse selection effects, as

relatively weaker firms with higher credit spreads would then be more likely to apply for a Fitch rating.

    Therefore, under the regulatory certification hypothesis, split ratings at the IG boundary by

Moody’s and S&P should give significant incentives to get an additional rating from Fitch. More-

over, an additional rating may provide a hedge against the regulatory and rule-based effects of possible

future rating downgrades, while also increasing the probability to reap regulatory benefits from up-

grades. This effect should be more pronounced for issuers expecting to have more volatile ratings over

time.

    Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) and Boot and Thakor (1993) show that the information and regula-

tory certification hypotheses can be inherently related in a setting with two types of investors, in which

issues with a lower credit quality carry more uncertainty. Type I investors have a time-varying natural

demand for bonds and high research costs, and type II investors are without the natural demand but

have low research costs.13 Since type I investors are at an informational disadvantage relative to type

II investors, they will only invest in high credit quality securities for which the informational gain of

type II investors is small, i.e. in informationally insensitive assets, to avoid losses due to trading with

informed investors (see Gorton and Pennacchi (1990)). Typically, type II investors will provide liquid-

ity to this market to accommodate aggregate demand shocks. On the other end of the credit quality

spectrum, it is worthwhile for type II investors to generate the information needed.14 The region in the

middle could suffer from a market breakdown if Type II investors only make money if they could profit

from informed trading with type I investors (as in Boot and Thakor (1993)).15

    The importance of regulatory certification could be in preventing a market breakdown for interme-

diate quality bonds. In this setting, credit ratings can restore trading by reducing the uncertainty about

the value of information. Ratings will not only yield information about credit quality, but also about the

profitability of research. If the conclusion is ”no substantial information benefit”, then type I investors

would invest and type II would not bother to research. If the conclusion is ”significant information

benefit”, then type I investors would not invest and type II investors would invest to hold the security.

The IG-HY boundary is the prime candidate for the location on the credit quality spectrum where the

unconditionally expected gains from informational trading offset the costs for acquiring information.

This setting thus explains how a certification effect could arise in equilibrium.



                                                    9
    The regulatory certification and rating shopping hypotheses also have some possibly similar fea-

tures. In particular, while a rating shopping effect could be observed across the whole rating scale,

rating shopping incentives are likely strongest around the IG-HY boundary. Therefore, the distinction

between these two hypotheses merits discussion. The central prediction of rating shopping is that ad-

ditional ratings are, on average, optimistic relative to existing ratings. Thus, if rating shopping is most

important around the IG-HY boundary, the positive bias of the marginal rating should also be largest

there. In contrast, certification would give no reason to expect the additional CRA to be more positive

there as compared to other parts of the rating scale. Specifically, certification predicts that if Moody’s

and S&P ratings are on opposite sides of the IG-HY boundary, it is significantly more likely the issuer

pays for the (assumed marginal) Fitch rating. However, in contrast to the rating shopping hypothesis,

regulatory certification does not imply that this Fitch rating would be relatively (to Moody’s and S&P

ratings) more positive than Fitch ratings at other part of the rating scale.

    Second, the expectation of future rating changes decreases incentives for rating shopping but in-

creases the importance for regulatory certification. Rating shopping is more worthwhile if investors

expect that ratings will remain relatively stable, as in that case credit rating improvements are less

likely to be undone or become redundant. Under the regulatory certification hypothesis, (future ex-

pected) rating volatility creates a strong precautionary motive, motivating issuers to get an additional

rating to hedge against any possible future downgrade below IG.16 For this reason, additional ratings

may be associated with adverse selection, as issuers expecting more negative credit news may be more

likely to apply for such precautionary, additional ratings.

    Each of the three explanations of multiple ratings (information production, rating shopping and

regulatory certification) thus has distinct empirical predictions, though different explanations can co-

exist. There are potential differences in whether or not we would expect (i) credit spread effects of

agreeing ratings, (ii) credit spread effects of relatively optimistic ratings across the rating spectrum,

(iii) more uncertainty increasing the number of ratings and (iv) extra ratings when these could push

an issue into the IG category, (v) greater optimism of the additional rating around the boundary and

(vi) any positive or negative association between additional ratings and the likelihood of future rating

changes (see Table I for a summary).

    [Table I about here]

    Under information production, an additional rating that is in agreement with the prior ratings will


                                                    10
reduce uncertainty and thereby lower credit spreads, while more uncertainty would make an additional

rating more worthwhile and therefore lead to more ratings.

     Under rating shopping, more uncertainty would again lead to more ratings since initial ratings will

err more often. Additional ratings are likely to be better and better ratings would lower the credit

spread.17 Time variation in ratings makes shopping less worthwhile since the preferred outcome will be

less stable.

     Under regulatory certification, a better extra rating would only lead to a lower spread at the

boundary but unconditionally an additional rating could be a manifestation of adverse selection (only

weaker issuers take an extra rating) and consequently be associated with higher credit spreads. Higher

time variation in ratings will give rise to a rating-hedging incentive and thereby increase the probability

of having an extra rating even for issues that are not directly at the boundary.



C    Related Research

     As asset pricing relies fundamentally on the production and dissemination of information, and this

process is endogenously determined, the related literature is vast. CRAs are only one type of research

and information provider to the securities markets. Much of the academic literature about the role

of research and information providers has focused on equity analysts rather than CRAs rating corpo-

rate debt. Studies on the equity markets have addressed a broad range of questions about research

providers, ranging from whether analysts’ opinions convey value-relevant information, to whether con-

flicts of interest and personal, strategic considerations influence the nature of the information provided.

CRAs present a different institutional structure for analysis. While the same basic principles regarding

information production apply, CRAs have become integral to regulation pertaining to the credit market

(see also the discussion above).

     Research about the role of CRAs is more limited. Theory has asked what role CRAs play in

the equilibrium pricing process. Boot, Milbourn and Schmeits (2006) highlight CRAs as a valuable

coordination device, in which CRAs provide little value-relevant information at the investment grade

boundary other than regulatory certification, but some useful valuation information about riskier issues.

Carlson and Hale (2005) point out that when each investor’s optimal strategy is dependent on the

strategy followed by other investors, the public rating provided by the rating agency can serve to



                                                    11
coordinate investor actions. Bannier and Tyrell (2006) introduce reputation and competition among

rating agencies. Under certain conditions, this will stimulate investors to search for private information

and will thus not only restore a unique equilibrium, but could even lead to a more efficient one.

    Each of the three potential explanations for multiple ratings finds support in the existing academic

literature. On the issue of information production, a number of papers have looked at the effects of

rating changes on asset prices. For example, Kliger and Sarig (2000) use a refinement in the Moody’s

ratings system to show that rating changes channel information to the market that changes the value of

the debt. However, their results also suggest that this information leaves the aggregate company value

intact and thus only influences the value of the debt relative to the value of the equity. Güntay and

Hackbarth (2010) investigate the effect of analyst dispersion on credit spreads. They find that higher

analyst dispersion is associated with higher credit spreads and conclude that this is probably due to

cash flow uncertainty.

    Jewell and Livingston (1999) investigate whether ratings differ systematically across rating agencies.

They find that the average Fitch rating is much better than Moody’s and S&P ratings, but that this

effect disappears once they restrict their sample to bonds only rated by all three CRAs. They also

investigate whether rating shopping takes place, but find no evidence. Covitz and Harrison (2003) look

at the trade-off that rating agencies face between income resulting from giving out favorable ratings and

expected future fees from customers resulting from reputation. They argue that reputation concerns

dominate and prevent CRAs from being ”bribed” by customers. Bannier, Behr and Güttler (2010),

like Poon (2003) and Poon and Firth (2005), investigate possible adverse selection and hold-up in the

context of CRA and issuer incentives when CRAs issue ratings on an unsolicited basis.18

    Inspired by the financial crisis and the allegations addressed at CRAs, several recent theoretical

papers put forward models to motivate rating shopping. Skreta and Veldkamp (2009) develop a model

where incentives for rating shopping increase as the complexity of the products increases. Bolton,

Freixas and Shapiro (2009) show that naive investors in the market may give incentives to CRAs to

inflate their ratings and that in a duopoly, this gives extra incentives for rating shopping, which in turn

aggravates the problem. Sangiorgi, Sokobin and Spatt (2009) develop a theoretical model of rating

shopping and explore biases in ratings conditional upon heterogeneity across issuers in the extent to

which different raters agree.

    In research most closely related to our own, Cantor and Packer (1997) also look for evidence of the


                                                    12
information effect, the shopping effect and the certification effect. They use issuer-level ratings data

for the year 1994 to understand the motivation for using a third rating agency, but do not use bond

price and yield data to evaluate the market effects and price implications of the third rating. Like our

paper, they find that the third CRA rating is systematically more optimistic. However, they fail to

find evidence that the use of a third CRA is motivated by information, rating shopping or certification

effects. Since the time of their study, bond price data has become more widely available for research.

This allows us to conduct more powerful tests of the market response to the additional rating, and to

understand in greater detail how market participants interpret and use ratings.

    Another closely related paper is Becker and Milbourn (2009), which considers the impact of the

major growth in market share of Fitch since 1989. They find that more ”competition leads to lower

quality in the ratings market: the incumbent agencies produce more issuer-friendly and less informative

ratings when competition is stronger.” They explain this by applying the reputation model of Klein and

Leffler (1981), considering CRA incentives to invest in information production in order to improve their

reputation. First, such incentives would be weaker if future rents are diminished as a result of increased

competition. Second, if demand is more elastic with greater competition, this may force CRAs to spend

less on expensive information production or tempt them more responsive to issuer demands, potentially

inducing rating shopping.

    Brister, Kennedy and Liu (1994) find evidence of a ”super-premium” in yields of junk bonds due

to regulation around the IG boundary. Based on only S&P rating data, they find that yields increase

disproportionally from a BBB to BB rating relative to the increase in default risk. Moreover, in a

recent paper, Kisgen and Strahan (2009) find that credit spreads change in the direction of a Dominion

bond rating after the accreditation of Dominion as an NRSRO. They also find that this effect is much

stronger around the IG boundary, indicating the importance of regulatory certification. Finally, Kisgen

(2006) and Kisgen (2009) investigate whether discrete rating boundaries influence capital structure

decisions before and after rating changes respectively. Kisgen (2006) finds indeed evidence of reduced

debt issuance when ratings are close to an up- or downgrade, suggesting that credit ratings directly affect

capital structure decisions in a way not incorporated by traditional capital structure theories. Moreover,

this effect is especially pronounced around the IG boundary. Kisgen (2009) finds that managers lower

leverage after a rating downgrade, suggesting that managers target credit ratings rather than debt levels

or leverage ratios. This effect is again more pronounced around the IG boundary.




                                                    13
     With respect to the nature of the certification effect that we find, our research relates to earlier

work on security design. Gorton and Penacchi (1990) set up a model that incentivizes uninformed

investors to transform risky assets into information-sensitive and information-insensitive parts, where

for the latter category they can avoid losses due to trading with informed investors. Boot and Thakor

(1993), on the other hand, develop a model in which security issuers lower funding costs by making

informed trading more profitable. Our setup motivating the exploration of the regulatory certification

hypothesis uses key insights of both papers. In particular, the non-trading region in our setup is the

result of the absence of the uninformed investor, whereas the uninformed investor is needed to make

trading profitable for the informed investor.




II     Sample Construction and Methodology

A    Main Measures and Controls

     We measure uncertainty or opaqueness by Analyst Dispersion of the firm’s earnings per share

or by the dispersion between Moody’s and S&P ratings (like the IG-HY barrier dummies, we also

require stability of the difference over at least 1 quarter).19 While rating dispersion is also a measure of

regulatory relevance, analyst dispersion is not, which will get us the required identification. We consider

two measures of rating dispersion: Notches of MSP Rating Dispersion, which is the absolute values of

the rating difference between Moody’s and S&P, and S&P and Moody’s Disagree, which is a dummy

equal to one if their ratings are not the same.

     Our main measure for the importance of regulations pertaining to the IG-HY boundary is denoted

by Fitch could push IG, which is a dummy variable equal to one if Moody’s and S&P ratings are on

opposite sides of this boundary such that a Fitch rating would be decisive for the IG-HY classification.

In some regressions this measure is interacted with the outcome from Fitch.

     To avoid spurious results due to omitted variables in our regressions, we correct for several issue and

issuer characteristics as well as for business cycle effects. On the issue level, we correct for callability

(using a dummy), size (offering size), and term structure effects (duration and convexity). On the

issuer level, we correct for credit risk (using the inputs of the Merton (1974) model, leverage and

volatility), profitability (ROA), systematic risk (equity beta) and tangibility of assets (PPE/total book



                                                    14
assets). Tangibility of assets is important since Moody’s is the only CRA that also incorporates expected

recovery in their ratings. We also include R&D intensity (R&D expenditure over book assets) as an

additional control. R&D intensity can be associated with several pricing mechanisms in the corporate

bond markets. For example, higher R&D industries may have higher growth opportunities and therefore

lower credit spreads. On the other hand, R&D projects tend to be riskier than normal projects,

which may increase credit risk. We will control for the aggregate effect. In the credit spread changes

regressions, we also include time fixed effects as controls for business cycle effects, since market wide

default probabilities, liquidity and risk premia are likely to vary with the business cycle.



B    Data and Filters

    For our main analysis, we use corporate bond pricing data from the TRACE database and merge

it with bond characteristic and rating data from FISD, equity data from CRSP, financial data from

Compustat Industrial Quarterly and analyst data from I/B/E/S. Our time series ranges from July 1st

2002 up to December 31st 2008.20 The TRACE data contain all trades in TRACE-eligible bonds by

NASD members that were disseminated to the public. The dissemination to the public happened in

phases, resulting in an expanding universe of bonds. A more comprehensive description of the TRACE

database as well as the dissemination process is given in Downing, Underwood and Xing (2005).

    We apply several filters to our dataset to remove bonds with special features that we do not want

to consider, and to remove seemingly erroneous entries.21 Next, we use the FISD characteristics to

match the trades to bond characteristics using CUSIPs.22 We only use senior unsecured notes and

bonds. We discard all bonds that are exchangeable, putable, convertible or pay-in-kind, that have a

non-fixed coupon, that are subordinated, secured or guaranteed or are zero coupon bonds. Removing

callable bonds would reduce our sample substantially, so we leave those in, but correct for this feature

in our regressions using a dummy variable.

    To diminish the impact of remaining data errors, we average the prices of all trades in each bond

by trading day. To reduce the effect of over-representation of very liquid bonds, we then make monthly

observations by only recording for each bond the last available daily average credit spread of every

month. We then construct quarterly observations by only looking at the last month every quarter. To

avoid issues with severe illiquidity and distressed debt as well as issues relating to non-linearity of credit

spreads with respect to rating scales, we remove all issues with an average (based on average Moody’s,


                                                     15
S&P) worse than B- (B3). For all bond trades in our sample, we calculate yields and credit spreads.

The benchmark rate that is used to construct credit spreads is based on an interpolation of the yields

of the two on-the-run government bonds bracketing the corporate bond with respect to duration.

    Ratings data is obtained from FISD as provided by Mergent. The credit ratings data provider con-

firmed that due to changes in their data collecting procedures, the rating data before 2000 is incomplete.

This is illustrated by Figure 1, which shows the number of rated bond issues each quarter by Moody’s,

S&P and Fitch as well as the proportion of all bond issues in the sample rated by each of these CRAs

in a given quarter from 1994 - 2008. While the number of rated bond issues is steadily increasing over

time for all three CRAs, the sudden jump in the number of issues rated by S&P strongly suggests that

too many bond issues before 2000 have missing S&P ratings (i.e., issues had S&P ratings, but these are

missing from the database). Specifically, the percentage of all issues rated by S&P equals 58% at the

end of 1999 and jumps to 94% in 2000, and remains above 85% until the end of the sample. There is

likewise a significant, though smaller, jump in the percentage of bond issues rated by Fitch, from 29%

at the end of 1999 to 39% in 2000. As a result, for the analyses that do not require pricing data, we

use rating data from the second quarter of 2000 onwards. For our credit spread regressions the impact

of this will be minor, as TRACE only starts in the middle of 2002 and is dominated by data from 2004

onwards (when the number of bond issues contained in TRACE is greatly expanded).23

    [Figure 1 about here]

    We follow convention and use a numerical rating scale to convert ratings. Therefore, for Fitch

and S&P (with Moody’s rating between parentheses), the numerical scores corresponding to the rating

notches are, respectively, 1 for AAA (Aaa), 2 for AA+ (Aa1), 3 for AA (Aa2), 4 for AA- (Aa3), 5 for

A+ (A1), 6 for A (A2), 7 for A- (A3), 8 for BBB+ (Baa1), 9 for BBB (Baa2), 10 for BBB- (Baa3),

11 for BB+ (Ba1), 12 for BB (Ba2), 13 for BB- (Ba3), 14 for B+ (B1), 15 for B (B2) and 16 for B-

(B3). However, we will still refer to more optimistic ratings, i.e. implying lower bankruptcy likelihood,

as ’higher’ or ’better’ ratings.

    Equity market data is obtained from CRSP. We calculate (rolling window) historical daily idiosyn-

cratic volatility and betas to the CRSP value-weighted index based on half a year of historical trading

data. An AR(1) filter is used to filter out bid-ask bounces in daily closing prices. For an observation

to be included, we need at least 111 return observations in the last half year.




                                                   16
    Company data is obtained from Compustat Quarterly. We download data on firm size (total book

assets), debt (long and short term debt), profitability (earnings), tangibility of assets (PPE), R&D

spending (obtained from Compustat Annual, since usually reported in the annual only) and industry

(SIC code). From these data, we construct a leverage variable (total debt over total book assets), a

tangibility of assets variable (PPE/total book assets), an R&D spending variable (R&D expenses/total

book assets and a dummy for missing values) and a profitability variable (total earnings over total

assets). We also construct a ’SIC division’ variable that is defined as the division that the 2-digit SIC

belongs to. Observations with SIC codes 9100 to 9999 (Public Administration) are excluded because of

possible implicit government guarantees.

    Analyst forecast data on the annual EPS are obtained from I/B/E/S. We download summary data

including number of analysts, standard deviation of forecasts, minimum and maximum forecast from

the unadjusted file. Following Güntay and Hackbarth (2010), we divide forecast dispersion measured

by analyst standard deviation by the share price to end up with dispersion per dollar invested.

    We construct two samples with a quarterly frequency; a credit spread sample and a rating sample.

Because the rating sample does not require trade observations, this is a more inclusive panel, especially

for the less liquid bonds. Moreover, the period for which we have reliable data is also longer. Almost all

bonds in our final sample are rated by both Moody’s and S&P (see also Figure 1). Specifically, about

95% of all bonds in our database with at least 2 ratings are rated by both S&P and Moody’s. This

lack of cross-sectional variation in having an S&P or Moody’s rating means that we can only study the

implications for having Fitch as a third rating.

    Accordingly, we remove from our sample all bond issues that do not have ratings from both S&P

and Moody’s. For this sample of bond issues rated by both Moody’s and S&P and using quarterly

observations for 2000-2008, about 68% of observations have a Fitch rating. As a result, the main

focus of our paper will be to consider the ’marginal’ role of Fitch ratings, while controlling for S&P

and Moody’s ratings. Table II presents summary statistics for the quarterly credit spread sample.

For completeness, Internet Appendix Table IA.I presents summary statistics for the quarterly ratings

sample. Figure 2 presents the average credit spreads over our sample by rating category. There is very

significant variation, especially starting the second half of 2007.

    [Table II and Figure 2 about here]




                                                    17
III      Empirical Results

A     Rating Differences and Rating Information

      Following Cantor and Packer (1997), we show that Fitch ratings are on average significantly more

optimistic than both Moody’s and S&P ratings for the same issue in the same quarter and present

the results in Table III and Figure 3. S&P is also, in general, more optimistic than Moody’s but the

difference is much smaller (both for the full sample and for the Fitch-rated sample alone).

      [Table III and Figure 3 about here]

      Next, we investigate the bond market reaction to the rating updates issued. We are most specifically

interested in the informational content of Fitch rating changes compared to the informational content of

Moody’s or S&P rating updates. To minimize issues relating to selection, we limit ourselves for this test

to the sample that is rated by all three CRAs. Table IV presents the results of regressing end-of-quarter

credit spread changes on dummy variables for these up- and downgrades for each CRA. All regressions

on credit spread changes in the paper use standard errors clustered by issuer (unless stated otherwise)

and include a large number of controls with time fixed effects.

      [Table IV about here]

      The credit spread change regressions in columns 1 - 3 of Table IV indicate that all CRAs appear

to be highly informative in single CRA specifications. However, in the joint specification in column

7, only S&P and Moody’s rating updates seem to contain relevant information associated with credit

spread changes. For example, Moody’s and S&P downgrades, respectively, are related to credit spread

increases of 8 and 17 basis points, respectively. However, Fitch rating updates are not statistically

significantly associated with changes in credit spreads. In joint significance tests, we can reject that

Fitch rating downgrade coefficients are equal to S&P or Moody’s rating downgrade coefficients, though

not for the equivalent rating upgrade coefficients. When we restrict ourselves to the upper end of the

rating spectrum (see column 5, using only issues with average rating of A- or better), Fitch seems to

contain no information even in the single CRA specification. We cannot reject that the reactions to

Fitch upgrades and downgrades are statistically different from each other in the presence of the up and

downgrades from the other CRAs, while we can for Moody’s and S&P (see Internet Appendix Table

IA.IX for these tests on Moody’s and S&P).



                                                    18
    However, rating changes of Fitch at the IG boundary do matter, i.e. when Moody’s and S&P

ratings are on opposite sides of the IG-HY boundary and Fitch could be the tie-breaker and change the

classification of the bond issue into IG versus HY. Economically, the credit spread change associated

with Fitch changing the classification to IG rather than HY is about 49 basis points in the full sample

(column 4, p-value of 2.82%), about 41 basis points in a sample of bonds rated BBB+ or worse (column

6, p-value of 5.87%), and again about 41 basis points in the full sample controlling for Moody’s and S&P

rating updates (column 8, p-value of 6.07%). These results are consistent with a regulatory certification

effect and inconsistent with an information effect.

    Table V presents regressions of price reactions to Fitch additions after the bond has been in our

sample for at least one quarter without a Fitch rating but with both Moody’s and S&P ratings. Here,

the sample consists of all issues rated by both Moody’s and S&P, and thus no longer conditions on

also having a Fitch rating as for the sample used for Table V. The subsequent table considers selection

directly in modeling the addition of a Fitch rating using Cox proportional hazard model regressions. If

selection effects were very strong, one could expect that the event of a Fitch addition by itself would be

associated with a change in credit spreads. For example, if adverse selection would lead only firms with

poorer prospects to request a (generally more optimistic) Fitch rating, we would expect to see a Fitch

rating addition to be associated with an increase in the credit spread. However, column 1 in Table V

indicates that a Fitch addition is not related to any change in credit spreads at all (coefficient of -2.28

basis points with a t-statistic of -0.65). This lack of any effect mitigates selection issues, although we

do find a mild adverse selection effect in a robustness test in Internet Appendix Table IA.6 where the

sample is restricted to the pre-crisis period.

    [Table V about here]

    Table V also fails to show any evidence in favor of an information production effect. When a Fitch

rating is added that confirms the average Moody’s and S&P rating, this does not lead to a significantly

lower credit spread (see columns 2 - 7). Neither does the interaction of the added Fitch rating with

measures of uncertainty show any significant effect (see column 6 with the Analyst Dispersion interaction

and column 7 with the ’Notches of MSP Rating Dispersion’ interaction). The negative (positive) sign

of a Fitch rating added that is better (worse) than the average Moody’s and S&P rating is consistent

with rating shopping and information production, but is not statistically significant. Likewise, the

coefficients on Fitch Added, Better and Fitch Added, Worse are not statistically different from each



                                                      19
other.

    However, columns 3 - 5 provide strong evidence in favor of the regulatory certification hypothesis.

In the cases for which Moody’s and S&P ratings are on opposite sides of the IG-HY boundary, a Fitch

rating added that makes the issue qualify for IG is associated with a substantial drop in the credit

spread. The difference between Fitch classifying such bond issues as IG rather than HY is associated

with a difference in about 41 basis points (p-value of 3.23%) in the credit spread. This result is robust

to using either the whole sample or only issues with average Moody’s and S&P ratings between BBB+

and BB- (column 3 and 4, respectively) and to double clustering credit spread changes in both issuer

and time dimensions.24



B    Adding a Fitch Rating

    This section considers the selection of Fitch as the third rater (all bond issues in our sample

are restricted to be rated by both Moody’s and S&P). In Table VI, we use Cox proportional Hazard

regressions to model getting a Fitch rating, including variables that may be related to each of the three

hypotheses. In the Cox model, an ’exit’ is defined as the event of getting a Fitch rating. The Cox model

has the convenient property that one can focus on the relative rank of each subject in the cross-section

by ignoring the baseline hazard rate and optimizing the partial likelihood function only. The baseline

hazard rate can be separated out (as in any proportional hazard model), and therefore needs no specific

parametric form that can influence our results.

    [Table VI about here]

    In our analysis, we employ several proxies for information uncertainty: (i) the absolute difference

in number of notches difference between the Moody’s and S&P ratings and a dummy equal to one if the

S&P and Moody’s ratings are different, (ii) idiosyncratic volatility of daily stock returns, (iii) equity

analyst dispersion. We further include variables related to the relative importance of ratings, such as

leverage, firm size and issue offering size. A positive coefficient on the variables relating to information

uncertainty could be interpreted as evidence for information or rating shopping effects.

    We investigate the certification effect by including the Fitch Could Break Tie dummy which equals

one if Moody’s and S&P ratings are on opposite sides of the IG-HY boundary. This approach exploits

the fact that regulations typically prescribe that if an issue has three ratings, the median rating should


                                                    20
be used to determine the issue’s rating, while the worst rating should be used if there are two ratings.

Therefore, if Moody’s and S&P ratings are on opposite sides of the IG-HY boundary, an additional Fitch

rating would be decisive about whether or not the issue becomes investment grade. As a robustness

check, we also include a dummy variable indicating whether Moody’s and S&P ratings are on opposite

sides of the A- boundary. The A- boundary obviously does not have the same regulatory importance

as the investment grade boundary, such that its coefficient would be expected to be insignificant.

    Finally, we add several other controls that influence bond prices, such as rating group dummies

based on the average Moody’s and S&P ratings, whether the issue is redeemable, the maturity, liqui-

dation values (using proxies for fixed assets and R&D expenses), the maturity left and the square of

the maturity left, and always include industry dummies. Standard errors are again clustered by issuer.

The sample consists of all issues that are rated by both Moody’s and S&P over 2000 - 2008.

    Empirically, we find that all the coefficients on variables related to uncertainty (i.e., analyst dis-

persion, idiosyncratic equity volatility and a dummy indicating Moody’s and S&P rating differences as

well as a variable measuring the size of the dispersion in notches) are either insignificant, or have the

wrong (i.e., negative) sign for an information or rating shopping effect. For example, we find that issues

with greater idiosyncratic volatility are less likely to get a Fitch rating, even though further information

production may be relatively useful for those issues. Thus, we find no support in the data for either

the information or the rating shopping effects.

    On the other hand, column 1, 2 and 5 show that if an issue has Moody’s and S&P ratings on opposite

sides of the IG-HY boundary, the (conditional) likelihood that the issue gets a Fitch rating increases

considerably. The economic significance of the coefficient on Fitch could push IG is considerable. For

example, the coefficient of 0.717 in column 1 implies that issues where Fitch is the tie-breaker have

about twice (2.05 = exp(0.717)) the hazard rate, i.e. are about twice as likely to get a Fitch rating.

We interpret this as strong evidence in favor of a certification effect: it is precisely in those cases where

the marginal rating (i.e., Fitch) is decisive for the critical regulation classification of the bond issue into

investment and non-investment grade, that Fitch is much more likely to (be asked to) give a rating.

    The downside of the Cox regression is that it basically discards any observations that already have

a Fitch rating, thereby ignoring some potentially useful information. Therefore, we try to corroborate

the results that regulatory certification is an important explanation for having a Fitch rating by directly

modeling having a Fitch rating using a logistic regression. Estimates of this regression can be found


                                                      21
in Internet Appendix Table IA.VII, which confirms that Fitch could push IG is strongly positively

associated with having a Fitch rating, while none of the three main measures of uncertainty provide

any evidence for the information production hypothesis. With a 12% higher probability to have a Fitch

rating if the other two CRAs split at the IG boundary, these results are also economically large. Internet

Appendix Table A.VIII shows that these results are robust with double clustering.



C    CRA Performance

    This subsection investigates the general performance of each CRA in default prediction. The main

purpose is to corroborate our previous finding that in general, Fitch rating changes or Fitch rating

additions are not associated with credit spread changes, unless Fitch is the tie-breaker around the IG-

HY boundary. If so, we would expect that Fitch rating differences to Moody’s and S&P ratings are

not significantly improving default prediction. We perform two tests. First, we run logistic regressions

of issue defaults on one-year lagged credit ratings. Second, we calculate accuracy ratios of the one-

year ahead default prediction (i.e., Gini coefficients) to measure rating performance of all three CRAs.

This method is also employed by the CRAs themselves for self-evaluation in their annual default study.

However, since sample periods and rated populations typically differ among CRAs, the self reported

results are not useful for comparative purposes.

    The sample we use for this analysis is different from the sample we use for our other analysis.

Since defaults are relatively rare events, we maximize the size of our sample by incorporating as many

issues as possible. Therefore, we include bonds from issuers for which we have no Compustat, CRSP

or IBES data as well as bonds with ratings worse than B-/B3. We still restrict ourselves to only

senior unsecured US bonds in US dollars. As before, we exclude bonds that are putable, exchangeable,

convertible, perpetual, asset backed or floating rate. We collect ratings for all these bonds in FISD that

are rated by all three CRAs between 2000 and 2008 and can be matched with the Moody’s Default

Risk Services Corporate database containing issuer default events. To avoid over-weighting issuers with

many bonds outstanding that are likely to default at the same time, we weight each bond at each point
                                                                              25
in time with the inverse of the number of bonds outstanding for its issuer.

    Table VII shows the results of our default prediction study. Panel A shows that default prediction

is best for Moody’s and worst for Fitch. This ranking holds true in terms of the pseudo R2 , as well as

to how much each CRA adds in default prediction relative to the others. First, we can compare the


                                                   22
pseudo R2 in flexible specifications with dummies for the various notched rating categories (i.e., AAA,

AA+, AA, AA-, and up to B-).26 The pseudo R2 for Moody’s is highest (37%, see column 1), followed

by S&P (33%, see column 3) and finally comes Fitch (32%, see column 5). In columns 2, 4 and 6, we

instead use a linear rating specification of the CRA ratings in notches, i.e., ’1’ corresponds to AAA, ’2’

to AAA-, etc. The resulting pseudo R2 s are quite similar, with pseudo R2 of 37%, 33% and 31% for

Moody’s, S&P and Fitch, respectively, which suggests that the linear specification is quite reasonable.

    [Table VII about here]

    In subsequent columns, we compare different pairs of ratings: Moody’s and Fitch ratings in columns

7 - 8, S&P and Fitch ratings in columns 9 - 10 and Moody’s and S&P ratings in column 11 - 12. For

each comparison, we find pseudo R2 is not increased by adding the CRA with a lower pseudo R2 in

columns 1 - 6. For example, the pseudo R2 in columns 7 - 8 combining Moody’s and Fitch ratings equals

36.7%, basically identical to the pseudo R2 of Moody’s ratings by themselves of 36.6% in column 2 but

higher than the pseudo R2 of Fitch ratings by themselves of 30.8% in column 6. The difference between

Fitch and Moody’s ratings is further in insignificant in column 8, while it is significant in column 7.

Thus, a Moody’s rating adds predictive power to a Fitch rating while the reverse is not the case. We

show the same pattern in columns 9 and 10 for the comparison of Fitch with S&P. Taken together,

these results suggest that conditional on a Fitch rating, Moody’s or S&P ratings provide significant

additional information for default prediction one-year ahead, while the reverse is not the case.

    Consistent with Panel A, the accuracy ratios (i.e., Gini coefficients) are highest for Moody’s and

lowest for Fitch. In Figure 4, we plot the cumulative fraction of default over the next year against the

cumulative fraction of ratings (from worst to best); this curve is also called a Cumulative Accuracy

Power curve (CAP-curve). Here, a smaller area in the upper left-hand corner of the graph implies

greater prediction accuracy. The accuracy ratios are the fractions of the areas underneath the plotted

lines minus the area under the 45 degree line multiplied by two, such that the accuracy ratio converges

to 1 as prediction accuracy improves and is equal to zero if ratings are assigned in a completely random

fashion. The graph shows that Fitch line is clearly below (and is thus worse than) the other two over

most of the rating spectrum.

    [Figure 4 about here]

    More formally, we find that accuracy ratio of Moody’s (77.9%) and S&P (76.5%) outperform Fitch



                                                   23
(71.8%), and that these differences are statistically significant. There is no statistical significant differ-

ence between Moody’s and S&P accuracy ratios (with standard errors calculated using a Jackknife with

re-sampling based on issuer). We conclude that these confirm the lack of support for the information

hypothesis in our data.27



D    Further Explorations of Regulatory Certification and Rating Shopping

    Arguably, rating shopping is more worthwhile around the IG boundary, thus leading to more

rating shopping at the boundary. On the other hand, under a certification effect, even for issuers at

the boundary that should not qualify for IG and thus expect a worse Fitch rating, the possibility of

achieving the IG status by sheer luck may be a motivation to apply for an additional Fitch rating.

Thus, at the boundary, one would expect more positive (optimistic) added Fitch ratings than elsewhere

in the rating spectrum if there is rating shopping.

    As a proxy for the level of optimism in the additional, third Fitch rating, we consider whether or

not the additional Fitch rating leads to a regulatory gain, defined as the difference between ’worst of

two’ to ’medium of 3’ ratings.

    Table VIII presents results of logistic regressions of regulatory gain on dummies indicating the

location of a bond in the rating spectrum. Observations are conditioned to have split ratings from

Moody’s and S&P as otherwise regulatory gain is impossible. The table provides some suggestive

evidence that the (additional) Fitch rating is more optimistic around the HY-IG boundary and thus

that some rating shopping might be going on around the IG-HY boundary.28

    [Table VIII about here]

    Moreover, the regulatory gain from the third, additional Fitch rating is largest if that Fitch rating

breaks the tie at the HY-IG boundary. If the Moody’s and S&P ratings are on opposite sides of the

HY-IG boundary, a regulatory gain is about 20% more likely (see columns 1 and 2). Fitch ratings being

generally more optimistic, the likelihood of a regulatory gain due to a Fitch rating addition in case

of Moody’s and S&P ratings disagreement is about 65% on average. As a result, this likelihood of a

regulatory gain climbs to about 85% if the Fitch rating could change the HY-IG regulatory classification

(controlling for everything else).

    Next, one of the predictions in Table I was that of a precautionary extra rating. Given the


                                                      24
demand shock of being below the IG boundary, issuers may want to hedge the risk of becoming HY

by taking an extra rating due to a precautionary motive. Unfortunately, ratings are too persistent

to empirically estimate the frequency of rating changes reliably from the rating history. However,

due to data constraints and the forward looking nature of this effect, we can perform the analysis of

this precautionary effect the other way around, i.e. we estimate the association of the probability of

undergoing a future rating change with a dummy for having a Fitch rating and several controls for

opacity and volatility. The results can be found in Table IX. Indeed, we find that having future rating

changes is positively related to having a Fitch rating, over and beyond the usual measures of volatility

and opacity. Having a Fitch rating is associated with a quarterly transition probability that is 1.0% to

1.28% higher, which is economically sizable (Moody’s and S&P average transition frequencies are 5.2%

and 5.5% respectively).

     [Table IX about here]

     If the certification effect arises naturally in a setting with information sensitive and insensitive

investors, one would expect a very liquid IG market and an illiquid HY market. Moreover, issues

around the middle region should have a low liquidity that can be restored if Fitch makes an issue

qualify for information insensitive. However, if Fitch gives a HY rating, an issue at the boundary will

truly fall into the no-trade region and have an exceptionally low liquidity. Table X confirms these

predictions empirically. Bonds that qualify for HY based on their Moody’s and S&P rating have a

substantially lower turnover than those that qualify for IG. However, if Fitch pulls them into the IG

category, this effect is compensated. On the other hand, if Fitch could pull them into the IG category

but rather gives a HY rating, liquidity drops dramatically, even after correcting for issue and time fixed

effects as well as the on-the-run effect (corrected for by age).

     [Table X about here]




IV      Conclusion

     Credit ratings play an important role in the capital markets. They are used by regulators and

market participants to establish capital requirements and, in a legal setting, to provide safe harbor for

fiduciaries. This widespread dependency upon credit ratings has the potential to influence how credit

rating agencies (CRAs) are used by issuers and how their ratings are evaluated by the market. A number


                                                    25
of theories have been proposed regarding how such dependency will affect the use of multiple CRAs,

the type of rating issued by CRAs depending upon their strategic position, and finally about how the

market interprets the informational output of rating agencies though the price formation process.

    In this paper, we utilize bond issue credit ratings, characteristics and market prices to evaluate

some of these proposed theories. We test three hypotheses: (i) ”Information Production,” whether the

third rater adds value-relevant information, (ii) ”Rating Shopping” and (iii) ”Regulatory Certification,”

in particular whether a third agency plays the role of tie-breaker at the boundary of being classified

as investment-grade versus high-yield. The certification effect could arise naturally as an equilibrium

outcome in a setting with information-sensitive and insensitive investors and assets along the lines of

Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) and Boot and Thakor (1993). An extra rating indicating the potential

value to be gained from research could (partially) resolve a no-trade region around the IG-HY boundary.

    Our empirical work contains several results. First, we find that significant differences exist across

multiple credit ratings of the same bond issue at the same point of time, with Fitch ratings on average

clearly more positive than Moody’s and S&P ratings. This is consistent with Fitch playing a strategic

role that reduces the threat that the other two CRAs could withhold investment-grade ratings and

extract compensation for regulatory certification, i.e., Fitch being available to push bonds into the

investment grade classification when the other two firms may disagree.

    Bond price data reveal how the market regards a rating by the third agency. In general, credit

rating agencies provide useful information to the market about credit risk. However, we find no robust

evidence that Fitch ratings provide additional information incorporated in bond prices, relative to the

information already contained in the Moody’s and S&P ratings. Thus even though Fitch ratings are

on average clearly better (i.e. more optimistic) than Moody’s and S&P ratings, there seems little

information contained in these ratings that the bond market incorporates. This is inconsistent with

both the information and rating shopping hypotheses.

    We find strong evidence that Fitch ratings have a regulatory certification effect. The likelihood of

getting a Fitch rating is strongly associated with Moody’s and S&P ratings being on opposite sides of

the investment grade boundary. This suggests that in equilibrium, Fitch ratings are sought as a kind

of ’tie-breaker’ in these cases. We find some suggestive evidence that Fitch ratings are relatively better

if the Fitch rating is decisive for the investment grade classification, as compared to all other Fitch

ratings. In particular, we find evidence that if Moody’s and S&P ratings are on opposite sides of the


                                                   26
HY-IG boundary, the additional Fitch rating is more likely than otherwise to lead to an improvement

in the regulatory rating classification, i.e., in this particular case to the IG classification. Overall, this

provides some evidence of rating shopping around the HY-IG boundary, or the marginal rating being

used for regulatory arbitrage.

    In the cross-section of bond prices, we find that the certification effect is strongly associated with

credit spreads. Controlling for the average Moody’s and S&P rating, for issues where Moody’s and

S&P ratings are on opposite sides of the investment grade boundary, a Fitch rating pushing the issue

into the investment grade category has credit spreads that are about 41 basis points lower than if the

Fitch rating would push the issue into the high yield category. Moreover, bond issues experiencing

relatively many rating changes by Moody’s and S&P are more likely to have a Fitch rating, suggesting

a precautionary motive of getting a Fitch rating. These results combined with additional results on for

example the liquidity of the bonds are consistent with a third CRA arising as a tie-breaker in equilibrium

to resolve a no-trade region in a setting with information-sensitive and insensitive investors and assets.




References

    Bannier, Christina E., Patrick Behr, and André Güttler, 2010, Rating opaque borrowers: why are
unsolicited ratings lower?, Review of Finance, 14, 263-294.
    Bannier, Christina E., and Marcel Tyrell, 2006, Modeling the Role of Credit Rating Agencies- Do
they Spark of Virtuous Circle?, Working Paper.
    Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2000, Credit Ratings and Complementary Sources of
Credit Quality Information, Working Paper.
     Becker, Bo and Todd T. Milbourn, 2008, Reputation and competition: evidence from the credit
rating industry, Working Paper.
    Bolton, Patrick, Xavier Freixas, and Joel Shapiro, 2009, The Credit Ratings Game, Working Paper
     Boot, Arnoud W.A., Todd T. Milbourn, and Anjolein Schmeits, 2006, Credit Ratings as Coordi-
nation Mechanisms, Review of Financial Studies, 19, 81-118.
    Boot, Arnoud W.A. and Anjan V. Thakor, 1993, Security Design, Journal of Finance, 48, 1349-
1378.
     Brister, Bill M., Robert E. Kennedy, and Pu Liu, 1994, The Regulation Effect of Credit Ratings
on Bond Interest Yield: The Case of Junk Bonds, Journal of Business Finance and Accounting, 21, 511
- 531.
    Campbell, John Y. and Glen Taksler, 2003, Volatility and Corporate Bond Yields, Journal of
Finance, 58, 2321-2349.



                                                     27
    Cantor, Richard M., and Franck Packer, 1997, Differences in Opinion and Selection Bias in the
Credit Rating Industry, Journal of Banking and Finance, 21, 1395-1417.
    Carlson, Mark A. and Galina B. Hale, 2005, Courage to Capital? A Model of the Effects of Rating
Agencies on Sovereign Debt Roll-over, Working Paper.
    Chen, Long, David A. Lesmond, and Jason Z. Wei, 2007, Corporate Yield Spreads and Bond
Liquidity, Journal of Finance, 62, 119-149.
    Covitz, Daniel M., and Paul Harrison, 2003, Testing Conflicts of Interest at Bond Rating Agencies
with Market Anticipation: Evidence that Reputation Incentives Dominate, Working Paper.
    Downing, Christopher, Shane Underwood, and Yuhang Xing, 2005, Is liquidity risk priced in the
corporate bond market?, Working Paper.
     Ellul, Andrew, Pab Jotikasthira, and Christian T. Lundblad, 2010, Regulatory Pressure and Fire
Sales in the Corporate Bond Market, Working Paper.
    Gorton, Gary B. and George G. Pennacchi, 1990, Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation,
Journal of Finance, 45, 49-72.
     Güntay, Levent and Dirk Hackbarth, 2010, Corporate Bond Credit Spreads and Forecast Disper-
sion, Journal of Banking and Finance, 34, 2328-2345.
    Jewell, Jeff, and Miles Livingston, 1999, A Comparison of Bond Ratings from Moody’s, S&P and
Fitch, Financial Markets, Institutions and Instruments, 8 1-45.
    Kisgen, Darren J., 2006, Credit Ratings and Capital Structure, Journal of Finance, 61, 1035-1072.
    Kisgen, Darren J., 2009, Do Firms Target Credit Ratings or Leverage Levels, Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis, 44, 1323-1344.
    Kisgen, Darren J. and Philip E. Strahan, 2009, Do Regulations Based on Credit Ratings Affect a
Firm’s Cost of Capital?, Working Paper.
    Klein, Benjamin and Keith B. Leffler, 1981, The Role of Market Forces in Assuring Contractual
Performance, Journal of Political Economy, 89, 615-641.
     Kliger, Doron, and Oded Sarig, 2000, The Information Value of Bond Ratings, Journal of Finance,
55, 2879-2902.
     McFadden, Daniel, 1973, Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior, in Zarembka,
P., ed.: Frontiers in Econometrics (Academic Press), 105-142.
   Partnoy, Frank, 2006, How and Why Credit Rating Agencies are Not Like Other Gatekeepers,
Working Paper.
    Poon, Winnie P. H., 2003, Are Unsolicited Ratings Downward Biased?, Journal of Banking and
Finance, 27, 593-14.
    Poon, Winnie P. H., and Firth, Michael, 2005, Are Unsolicited Credit Ratings lower? International
Evidence from Bank Ratings, Journal of Business Finance and Accounting, 32, 1741-771.
     Sangiorgi, Francesco, Jonathan Sokobin and Chester Spatt, 2009, Credit-Rating Shopping, Selec-
tion and the Equilibrium Structure of Ratings, Working Paper.
    Skreta, Vasiliki and Laura Veldkamp, 2009, Ratings Shopping and Asset Complexity: A Theory of
Ratings Inflation, Journal of Monetary Economics, 56, 678-695.




                                                 28
Notes

   1 For   smaller corporate bond issues, Fitch is occasionally one of two raters. However, almost all bonds in our sample
are rated by both Moody’s and S&P (see also Figure 1). Specifically, about 95% of all bonds in our database with at
least 2 ratings are rated by both S&P and Moody’s. This lack of cross-sectional variation in having an S&P or Moody’s
rating means that we can only study the implications for having Fitch as a third rating. We remove from our sample all
bond issues that do not have ratings from both S&P and Moody’s. For this sample of bond issues rated by both Moody’s
and S&P and using quarterly observations for 2000-2008, about 60% of observations have a Fitch rating. As a result, the
main focus of our paper will be to consider the ’marginal’ role of Fitch ratings, while controlling for S&P and Moody’s
ratings. Throughout the paper, we only consider the three major Credit Rating Agencies (CRAs), ignoring all others, as
they are much smaller at this point.

   2 The    National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) is the organization of state insurance regulators.

   3 For   firms with split Moody’s and S&P ratings, 13% of Fitch additions are such boundary cases.

   4 There   is some evidence that regulators are concerned about such ’ratings arbitrage.’ See e.g. proposals for the new
Basel II accord made in July 2008: ”If [an issue] has multiple ratings, the applicable rating would be the lowest rating. This
approach for determining the applicable rating differs from the New Accord. In the New Accord, if an exposure has two
ratings, a banking organization would apply the lower rating to the exposure to determine the risk weight. If an exposure
has three or more ratings, the banking organization would use the second lowest rating to risk weight the exposure. The
agencies believe that the proposed approach, which is designed to mitigate the potential for ratings arbitrage, more reliably
promotes safe and sound banking practices.” Source: http://www.occ.treas.gov/fr/fedregister/73fr43982.pdf.

   5 Indeed,   some ratings have a point-in-time perspective, whereas others (including the three major CRAs) employ
a ’through-the-cycle’ vision. Similarly, while some rating agencies aim to reflect cross-sectional variation in default
probabilities (like S&P and Fitch), others aim to also incorporate loss given default and reflect dispersion in expected loss
(like Moody’s).

   6 This   rule is likely to be revised in the future.

   7 See   http://www.occ.treas.gov/law/basel.htm for an overview of legal and regulatory news pertaining to the Basel
accords from the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC).

   8 Campbell    and Taksler (2003) report that about one third of all corporate bonds are held by insurance companies,
about 15% by pension and retirement funds, 5% to 10% by mutual funds and 5% by commercial banks; thus, approximately
60% of this market is held by institutions that qualify for ratings based constraints.

   9 The    Barclays US corporate IG Index Factsheet is available at https://ecommerce.barcap.com/indices/index.dxml.

  10 Quoting    the NAIC report: ”A security rated and monitored by two NRSROs is assigned the lowest of the two ratings.
A security rated by three or more NRSROs is ordered according to their NAIC equivalents and the rating falling second
lowest is selected, even if that rating is equal to that of the first lowest.” This report can be found at http://www.naic.org/
documents/committees_e_rating_agency_comdoc_naic_staff_report_use_of_ratings.doc. See also Basel Committee



                                                              29
on Banking Supervision (2000). If an issue has only one rating, that rating will be used. However, several regulations
prohibit institutional investors to invest in issues with only one rating.

  11 There   have been some time series changes in NAIC regulations, but these changes not significantly affected the validity
of our ’tie-breaking’ assumption at any point in time, i.e., that the worst of two ratings or the medium of 3 ratings is
used for NAIC classifications. First, the NAIC issues its own ratings and 1994 to 2001 the Securities Valuation Office
(SVO) of the NAIC would assign an NAIC rating to each security. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the ratings from
CRAs were critical, but that the final decision was at the NAIC analyst’s discretion. In 2001 a Provisional Exemption
rule was introduced under which bonds with standard features would be assigned a NAIC 1 or NAIC2 rating (i.e,
allowing smaller capital charges than HY) automatically if at least one CRA would rate it A- or higher at least two
CRAs rate it BBB- or higher without the interference of an SVO analyst. Effectively, this came down to a middle
rating rule (see http://www.naic.org/documents/svo_research_SVO_jan01cc.pdf). Second, on January 1, 2004, the
NAIC implemented a Filing Exemption rule, stating that any issue rated by one or more CRAs would be assigned an
NAIC rating based on the CRA equivalent rating. In case of split ratings, the ’second best’ rating would be taken (see
http://www.naic.org/documents/svo_FE_FAQ.pdf). Third and finally, this ’second best’ rule was changed to a ’second
worst’ rule in 2007. However, both, the ’second best’ as well as the ’second worst’ rule effectively boil down to ’worst
of 2 if only 2 and medium of 3 ratings’ rule in view of the low market share of the other CRAs besides the big three.
Our contact within the NAIC SVO argued that these guidelines were in general well adhered to by the individual state
regulators.

  12 See   further Chernenko and Sunderam (2009) on the effects of the market segmentation due to credit ratings on bond
issuance and investments.

  13 For   simplicity, one could think about type I investors as commercial banks, insurance companies and pension funds,
where the natural demand for bonds stems from the random flow of deposits and claims, and type II investors as hedge
funds and proprietary trading desks.

  14 Type    II investors do not suffer from the negative effect to utility due to uncertainty; if they need to trade due to
liquidity shocks, they trade amongst themselves on an equally informed basis.

  15 For   type I investors, the losses due to informed trading prevent them from investing in this region; they realize that
they are at an information disadvantage and thus do not enter this market, while the limited gains for type II investors
do not make it worthwhile for them to produce costly information in this intermediate region.

  16 An    alternative way to hedge is increasing the average maturity of their debt. However, this is costly since in this
region of the rating spectrum, the term structure of credit spreads is typically upward sloping.

  17 This   is not necessarily true when a rating agency rates too optimistically, but if credit spreads do not decrease, there
seems to be no benefit and thus no reason for rating shopping.

  18 Adverse   selection may explain why unsolicited ratings are on average worse than solicited ones. That is, firms that
receive a favorable unsolicited rating do not apply for a solicited rating anymore, whereas firms with an unfavorable unso-
licited rating pay for another (solicited) opinion. On the other, CRAs could create a holdup problem by underestimating
the creditworthiness of companies in their unsolicited ratings to prompt those companies to seek (improved) paid-for



                                                               30
solicited rating subsequently. The general conclusion of this literature is that for industrials unsolicited ratings are lower
than solicited ratings, and that this difference is largely due to adverse selection of debt issuers. There seems to be some
evidence for holdup by CRAs, but this is concentrated mainly on financials. Our dataset does not include information
on unsolicited ratings for US corporate bonds, so this paper does not address these findings directly. However, several
papers report a low incidence rate of unsolicited ratings, like for example Partnoy (2006), who estimates an incidence rate
of approximately 1%.

  19 To    avoid capturing timing mismatches between (multiple) rating transitions, we require that any particular ratings
situation has existed for at least a quarter. This will also mitigate concerns about not correcting for credit watches and
credit outlooks (for these variables our data are too sparse to be useful). Time variation in ratings is hard to measure,
since ratings are rather persistent. Therefore, we do not explicitly include time variation in ratings as a variable in our
regressions but analyze the correlation between having a Fitch rating and the likelihood of experiencing rating changes.

  20 The    TRACE database starts in July 2002.

  21 We    remove all trades that include commission, have a settlement period of more than 5 days, and all trades that are
canceled. Trades that are corrected, we correct. Moreover, we remove all trades for which we have a negative reported
yield, since these will be mainly driven by implicit option premia in the yield. We also found trades with a settlement
date later than or equal to the maturity date and removed those bonds. Furthermore, we found several records that we
suspect to be duplicates, resulting from both parties involved in a trade reporting to the system. Thus, we filter out
duplicate trades that have identical prices, trading time and volume. Moreover, some of the yields changes are extremely
high or low. We remove trades with credit spreads of more than 1000 bps and credit spread changes of more than 500bps.
Finally, we deleted all issues with duration of less than 1 year.

  22 CUSIPs     of non-exchange traded bonds do not change in case of mergers, acquisitions, etc (see http://www.cusip.com).

  23 FISD    confirmed that from mid-2003 on, they have been using automated rating feeds from the CRAs, whereas before
that time these ratings were collected by hand, increasing the potential for data errors in the earlier period.

  24 As    suggested by Cantor and Packer (1997), ratings by Fitch could be inflated. To address this issue, we repeat the
analysis of Table V where we correct all Fitch ratings by one notch (except for the tie breaking at the boundary). The
results can be found in Internet Appendix Table IA.II. These results are consistent with the results reported in Table V.
Furthermore, we show similar results in levels in Internet Appendix Table IA.IV, exploiting also observations that already
had a Fitch rating when they entered the sample. If anything, results are even stronger since an agreeing Fitch rating is
associated with a higher credit spread. The effect of certification is statistically and economically very similar. Finally,
one might be concerned that the large movements in credit spreads at the onset of the crisis might drive any of these
results. Internet Appendix Tables IA.V and A.VI (showing the results on the sample ending in June 2007) indicate that
this is not the case.

  25 That    is, the weighting is done in a Weighted Least Squared sense.

  26 For   all non-linear regressions in the paper we report McFadden (1973) Pseudo R2 s.

  27 As    a robustness check, we also investigate the predictive power of Fitch in case i) Moody’s and S&P disagree and ii)




                                                              31
when it breaks a tie at the IG/HY boundary. Results can be found in Internet Appendix Table A.III. For disagreements,
the additional predictive power of Fitch has the right sign, but is not significant at conventional levels. Also the tie-
breaking role around the IG/HY boundary does not yield any significant effect and has coefficients in the same direction
no matter whether Fitch pulls over or under the boundary.

  28 We   thank our NBER discussant, Michael Brennan, for suggesting this test.




                                                           32
                                              Table I
                                       Empirical Predictions

The various empirical predictions of the three hypotheses are summarize in the table below, where ’−’
indicates that the implication is not supported and ’+’ means it is supported.



 Reason for multiple ratings                            Information Rating            Regulatory

                                                        Production    Shopping        Certification

 (i) Additional agreeing rating lowers credit spreads        +              −                −

 (ii) Additional relatively optimistic rating lowers         +              +         Only    at     IG

 credit spreads (also away from IG-HY boundary)                                       boundary

 (iii) Uncertainty uniformly increases # of ratings          +              +             possible

 (iv) Additional rating especially if that could push     possible       possible            +

 the issue to an investment grade classification

 (v) Additional rating more optimistic (especially           −              +         Only for strate-

 around IG boundary)                                                                  gic CRA

 (vi) Additional rating associated with higher ex-           +              −                +

 pected time variation in ratings




                                                   33
                                            Table II
                         Summary Statistics for Credit Spreads Sample

The table presents summary statistics and a brief description for the sample of bonds issues that have
both a Moody’s and an S&P rating in the quarterly credit spreads sample for 2002 - 2008.


 Variable                       N      Mean     Std. Dev.     Min      Max     Explanation
 Fitch Could Break Tie        44,366   0.032       0.18        0        1      Moodys and S&P on opposite
                                                                               sides of the IG-HY boundary
 Fitch Rated                  44,366     0.68      0.47        0         1     Rated by Fitch
 Fitch Rating                 44,366     5.04      4.17        0        16     Fitch Rating
 Moodys Rating                44,366     7.33       3.6        1        18     Moody’s Rating
 S&P Rating                   44,366     7.17      3.55        1        17     S&P Rating
 Fitch makes IG               44,366    0.016      0.12        0         1     Fitch pulls IG
 Fitch denies IG              44,366   0.0066     0.081        0         1     Fitch denies IG
 Notches of MSP Rating        44,366     0.43      0.69        0        12     Absolute value of MSP rating
 Dispersion                                                                    difference
 Moodys Upgrade               44,366   0.027      0.16         0        1      Moody’s upgrade (common sam-
                                                                               ple)
 Moodys Downgrade             44,366   0.034      0.18         0        1      Moody’s downgrade (common
                                                                               sample)
 S&P Upgrade                  44,366   0.029      0.17         0        1      S&P upgrade (common sample)
 S&P Downgrade                44,366   0.038      0.19         0        1      S&P downgrade (common sam-
                                                                               ple)
 Fitch Upgrade                44,366   0.017      0.13         0        1      Fitch upgrade (common sample)
 Fitch Downgrade              44,366   0.024      0.15         0        1      Fitch downgrade (common sam-
                                                                               ple)
 Fitch Added, Better          44,366   0.0039    0.062           0        1    Fitch added and < MSP
 Fitch Added, Equal           44,366    0.005    0.071           0        1    Fitch added and = MSP
 Fitch Added, Worse           44,366   0.0003    0.017           0        1    Fitch added and > MSP
 Credit Spread                44,366   172.71    141.72        0.12   999.86   Credit spread
 Change in Credit Spread      44,366    18.39     68.33     -478.36   498.42   Credit spread change
 Redeemable                   44,366     0.69      0.46          0        1    callable
 Log of Offering Amount       44,366    12.03      1.88          0     15.42   log offering amount
 Duration                     44,366     6.32      3.72          1     18.91   duration
 Idios. Vol.                  44,366    0.016    0.0084      0.0012     0.11   idiosyncratic stock volatility
 Log of Total Assets          44,366    10.34      1.55        5.34    13.65   log of total assets
 Leverage                     44,366     0.34      0.17          0      5.77   leverage
 ROA                          44,366    0.014      0.02       -0.46     0.26   ROA
 PPE / Total Assets           44,196     0.36      0.24          0      0.95   PPE/total assets
 R&D / Total Assets           44,366    0.012     0.023          0     0.23    R&D/total assets
 R&D Missing                  44,366     0.43       0.5          0        1    R&D missing
 Analyst Dispersion           43,923   0.0033     0.013          0       1.1   analyst dispersion
 Beta                         44,366     0.95      0.39       -0.25     4.21   equity beta
 Convexity                    44,366    53.83     56.58          1    357.47   convexity
 Turnover                     43,292    13.15     15.27       0.018    85.99   trading volume over offering,
                                                                               times 1K




                                                 34
                                               Table III
                                      Average Rating Differences

Average rating differences for issues simultaneously rated by multiple CRAs, measured in rating notches,
and split up by rating categories. Rating categories are defined by average Moody’s and S&P ratings.
We follow convention and use the numerical rating scale to convert ratings. For Fitch and S&P (with
Moody’s rating in parentheses), the numerical scores corresponding to the rating notches are, respec-
tively, 1 for AAA (Aaa), 2 for AA+ (Aa1), 3 for AA (Aa2), 4 for AA- (Aa3), 5 for A+ (A1), 6 for A
(A2), 7 for A- (A3), 8 for BBB+ (Baa1), 9 for BBB (Baa2), 10 for BBB- (Baa3), 11 for BB+ (Ba1),
12 for BB (Ba2), 13 for BB- (Ba3), 14 for B+ (B1), 15 for B (B2) and 16 for B- (B3). Therefore, a
negative number means that the first mentioned rating agency gives on average a better rating than
the other CRA in that comparison. Quarterly data for 2000-2008 are used. t-statistics based on robust
standard errors clustered by issuer are in brackets. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.


                          Fitch vs.     Fitch vs.     Moody’s vs. S&P           Moody’s vs. S&P
        All Bonds         Moody’s          S&P       (Fitch rated sample)        (full sample)
    Difference            -0.538***     -0.397***           0.154***                0.185***
                            [-5.57]       [-3.99]             [2.79]                  [4.41]
    N                       70,624        70,747             70,738                 104,435
    N. issuers                450           449                452                     818

    AAA to AA-
    Difference              -0.111        -0.118              0.0217                    0.0415
                            [-1.53]       [-0.98]             [0.14]                    [0.47]
    N                        3,557         3,549               3,601                     8,619
    N. issuers                 37            37                  37                       57

    A+ to A-
    Difference            -0.751***     -0.599***             0.165*                   0.203***
                            [-5.85]       [-4.63]             [1.80]                     [2.68]
    N                       36,461        36,539              36,532                    48,905
    N. issuers                232           232                233                        475

    BBB+ to BBB-
    Difference            -0.294***     -0.223***              0.072                   0.117**
                            [-5.03]       [-3.82]             [1.11]                    [2.42]
    N                       24,177        24,193              24,186                   36,841
    N. issuers                277           278                 276                      451

    BB+ to BB-
    Difference            -0.492***      -0.0574             0.478***                  0.471***
                            [-4.76]       [-0.35]              [3.30]                    [4.71]
    N                        6,429         6,466               6,419                    10,070
    N. issuers                165           163                 165                       295

    B+ to B-
    Difference            -0.800***      -0.457**             0.369*                   0.430***
                            [-6.80]       [-2.46]             [1.82]                     [3.20]
    N                        3,279         3,272               3,282                     6,200
    N. issuers                 98            98                  99                       268


                                                    35
                                                               Table IV
                                             Change in Credit Spreads and Rating Changes

     Using quarterly panel data between 2002 and 2008, we regress changes in credit spreads for AAA to B- rated bonds that are rated by all
     three CRAs on rating up- and downgrades for all three CRAs, changes in bond and firm characteristics, dummies for boundary effects
     and time fixed effects. Up- and downgrades are coded as dummies indicating whether each of the three CRAs upgraded or downgraded
     its rating. The following firm and bond controls are included but not shown (all in changes): Leverage, liquidation/intrinsic value
     (PPE/total assets), R&D expenses (divided by total assets), ROA (return on assets), daily idiosyncratic equity volatility, Historical
     Equity Beta (half year daily corrected for Bid-Ask-bounces), Log Total Assets (firm size, book value) and Log Offering Size (issue
     size), Redeemable (dummy for callability), Duration and Convexity. Fitch Upgrade, Breaks Tie is a dummy indicating that a Fitch
     upgrade made the issue qualify for IG, while Fitch Downgrade, Breaks Tie is a dummy indicating that a Fitch downgrade made the
     issue lose its IG qualification. Fitch Could Break Tie is a dummy indicating that the S&P and Moody’s ratings are on opposite sides
     of the IG-HY boundary. Column (5) is restricted to issues rated A- or better by Moody’s and S&P, whereas column (6) is restricted
     to issues rated BBB+ or worse by Moody’s and S&P. t-statistics are in brackets (using robust standard errors clustered by issuer; N.
     issuer gives the number of issuers). *, ** and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively. ’F -test Fup=Fdown
     (p-value)’ gives the p-value for the coefficients on Fitch Upgrade and Fitch Downgrade being equal, while ’F -test Fup,tie=Fdown,tie
     (p-value)’ gives the p-value for the F -test of the coefficients on Fitch Upgraded, Breaks Tie and Fitch Downgraded, Breaks Tie being
     equal.




36
                                     (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)              (8)
     Moody’s Upgrade              -4.501**                                                                  -2.369           -3.125
                                   [-1.97]                                                                  [-1.11]          [-1.47]
     Moody’s Downgrade            14.19***                                                                  7.385*          7.575**
                                    [4.00]                                                                   [1.96]           [2.10]
     S&P Upgrade                              -5.594**                                                      -4.312           -4.423
                                               [-2.07]                                                      [-1.62]          [-1.59]
     S&P Downgrade                            22.34***                                                     18.75***         17.32***
                                                [5.25]                                                       [4.26]           [4.43]
     Fitch Upgrade                                        -6.463**     -5.612*       6.975    -8.209***     -4.807           -3.892
                                                           [-2.10]      [-1.83]      [0.59]     [-2.70]     [-1.59]          [-1.30]
     Fitch Downgrade                                      12.98**      10.52**      -0.595     22.30***      4.596            2.875
                                                            [2.46]       [1.99]     [-0.26]      [4.00]      [0.80]           [0.49]
     Fitch Upgrade, Breaks Tie                                          -17.59                  -16.26                       -14.94
                                                                        [-1.18]                 [-1.11]                      [-1.03]
     Fitch Downgrade, Breaks                                            31.53*                   24.67                        26.65
     Tie                                                                 [1.76]                  [1.45]                       [1.49]
     Continued on next page
     Table IV – continued from previous page

                                    (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)        (7)          (8)
     Fitch Could Break Tie                                            13.81**                  9.475*                 13.33**
                                                                       [2.39]                  [1.75]                  [2.48]
     Lagged Credit Spread        -0.253***   -0.258***   -0.251***   -0.253***   -0.400***   -0.255***   -0.259***   -0.261***
     Change                       [-11.07]    [-11.71]    [-11.08]    [-11.48]    [-15.02]    [-10.72]    [-11.72]    [-12.01]

     Sample                         All         All         All         All        ≤A-       ≥BBB+          All         All
     N                            24,282      24,282      24,282      24,282      11,330      12,952      24,282      24,282
     Adj. R2                       0.531       0.533       0.531       0.533       0.45        0.605       0.534       0.536
     N. issuers                     380         380         380         380         117         313         380         380
     F -test Fup=Fdown                                    0.15%       0.80%       56.30%      0.00%       15.00%      30.80%
     (p-value)
     F -test Fup,tie=Fdown,tie                                        2.82%                   5.87%                   6.07%
     (p-value)




37
                                                                  Table V
                                             Credit Spread Regressions on Fitch Rating Additions

     Using quarterly panel data between 2002 and 2008, we regress changes in credit spreads for AAA to B- rated bonds that are rated by
     Moody’s and S&P on rating additions from Fitch, the relative ranking of those additions and whether additions happened at the IG
     boundary, interactions with uncertainty measures and changes in bond and firm characteristics plus time fixed effects. Fitch Added,
     Better, Fitch Added, Equal and Fitch Added, Worse are dummies indicating whether a Fitch rating has been added that is respectively
     better than, equal to and worse than the average rating by Moody’s and S&P. Fitch Added, Makes IG and Fitch Added, Denies IG are
     dummies that indicate whether the added Fitch rating makes the issue qualify for IG or not, conditional on Moody’s and S&P ratings
     being on opposite sides of the boundary. See Table IV for descriptions of bond and firm level control variables. t-statistics are in
     brackets (using robust standard errors clustered by issuer in all columns except column 5, which uses double clustering by both issuer
     and time). *, ** and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively. ’F -test Fadded,IG=Fadded,HY (p-value)’ is
     the p-value of the F -test of Fitch Added, Makes IG and Fitch Added, Makes HY being equal. The sample is all issues rated by both
     Moody’s and S&P with their average rating better or equal to B-, except in column 4, where their average rating is between BBB+
     and BB-.

                                     (1)          (2)        (3)            (4)           (5)         (6)                  (7)
     Fitch Added                    -2.28
                                   [-0.65]




38
     Fitch Added, Better                         -5.832     -5.254        -8.644         -5.254      -7.243               -6.197
                                                 [-0.83]    [-0.75]       [-1.16]        [-0.66]     [-1.00]              [-0.88]
     Fitch Added, Equal                          -0.205     0.0847         3.238         0.0847        2.14                1.598
                                                 [-0.06]     [0.03]        [0.46]         [0.02]      [0.59]               [0.51]
     Fitch Added, Worse                           4.422      5.089         6.347          5.089       3.063                5.383
                                                  [0.84]     [0.94]        [0.81]         [0.98]      [0.40]               [0.97]
     Fitch Added, Makes IG                                 -30.47**      -23.00**      -30.47***
                                                            [-2.54]       [-1.98]        [-2.76]
     Fitch Added, Makes HY                                    10.8         22.93           10.8
                                                             [0.65]        [1.04]         [0.57]
     At IG boundary                                        15.32***      10.93**        15.32**
                                                             [3.22]        [2.56]         [2.23]
     Fitch Added, Equal *                                                                            -949.1
            Analyst Dispersion                                                                       [-0.90]
     Analyst Dispersion                                                                             700.4***
                                                                                                      [6.24]
     Continued on next page
     Table V – continued from previous page

                                    (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)           (7)
     Fitch Added, Equal *                                                                                    -4.755
             Rating Dispersion                                                                               [-0.82]
     S&P and Moodys Disagree                                                                                2.417**
                                                                                                              [2.02]
     Lagged Credit Spread        -0.257***   -0.257***   -0.258***    -0.277***    -0.258***   -0.265***   -0.258***
     Change                       [-14.39]    [-14.40]    [-14.81]     [-12.78]      [-5.78]    [-14.96]    [-14.67]

     Sample                         All         All         All      BBB+ to BB-      All         All         All
     Double Clustering              No          No          No            No          Yes         No          No
     N                            34,568      34,568      34,568       15,058       34,568      34,671      34,568
     Adj. R2                       0.531       0.531       0.532        0.626        0.532       0.535       0.531
     N. issuers                     668         668         668          463          668         669         668
     F -test                                              3.23%         5.58%       9.35%
     Fadded,IG=Fadded,HY
     (p-value)




39
                                           Table VI
                       Cox Regressions for Time to Adding Fitch Rating

Cox Proportional Hazard model regressions of the time to adding a Fitch rating on rating category
dummies based on average Moody’s and S&P (MSP) ratings, measures for uncertainty as Analyst
Dispersion (standard deviation of analyst earning forecasts normalized per dollar share value) and
MSP Rating Dispersion (absolute value of the notches difference between Moody’s and S&P), and
whether the Fitch rating ’could push’ the issue to IG or A-. F could push IG and F could push A-
are dummies indicating whether the Moody’s and S&P ratings are on opposite sides of the IG or A-
boundary respectively. Other controls that are included but not shown are the firm Beta, Leverage,
PPE / Assets, R&D Expenses / Assets, ROA, Log of Offering Amount, Maturity Left and Maturity
Left Squared and Redeemable (see Table IV for descriptions). Quarterly data for 2000-2008 are used,
and the sample consists of all issues with both Moody’s and S&P ratings that are on average rated
B- or better. Coefficients on the covariates in the partial hazard function are reported, and t-statistics
are in brackets (using robust standard errors clustered by issuer). *, ** and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively. Pseudo R2 refers to McFadden (1973) pseudo
R2 .
                                          (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)
      MSP A+ to A- Rating              1.553***                 1.548***     1.568***    1.524***
                                         [3.04]                   [3.06]       [3.08]      [3.06]
      MSP BBB+ to BBB- Rating          1.146**                   1.156**     1.119**     1.071**
                                         [2.28]                   [2.32]       [2.22]      [2.19]
      MSP BB+ to BB- Rating            1.346**                  1.481***     1.408***    1.292**
                                         [2.53]                   [2.79]       [2.60]      [2.49]
      MSP B+ to B- Rating              1.131**                   1.114**     1.159**     1.073**
                                         [2.06]                   [2.06]       [2.12]      [2.00]
      Fitch could pull IG              0.717***     0.693***                              0.702**
                                         [2.83]       [2.83]                               [2.44]
      Fitch could pull A                 0.248        0.221                                0.231
                                         [1.23]       [1.13]                               [1.00]
      Avg MSP BB+                                                              0.292
                                                                               [1.27]
      Avg MSP BBB-                                                             0.235
                                                                               [1.41]
      Notches of MSP                                                                       -0.128
                 Rating Dispersion                                                         [-0.72]
      S&P and Moodys Disagree            -0.307      -0.267       -0.254       -0.251
                                         [-1.16]     [-0.90]      [-1.03]      [-1.02]
      Analyst Dispersion                 -4.988      -4.262       -6.275       -6.479      -5.979
                                         [-0.58]     [-0.53]      [-0.69]      [-0.70]     [-0.64]
      Idiosyncratic Volatility         -26.11***   -23.85***    -25.62***    -26.08***   -26.61***
                                         [-3.95]     [-3.86]      [-3.86]      [-3.93]     [-3.88]
      Log of Total Assets               0.296***    0.200**      0.290***     0.299***   0.289***
                                          [5.53]      [2.57]       [5.39]       [5.67]      [5.26]

      N                                 38,351       38,351       38,351      38,351       38,351
      Pseudo R2                          0.029        0.019        0.029       0.029        0.028
      N. issuers                          813          813          813         813          813




                                                   40
                                                                        Table VII
                                                                   CRA Default Prediction

     Using yearly panel data between 2000 and 2008, we compare CRA performance with respect to default prediction on a one year horizon.
     Panel A shows results from a logit regression of issuer default events on rating scales, rating scale dummies and rating differences for
     the complete universe of bonds that are rated by all three CRAs. The rating variables are in notches where ’1’ corresponds to AAA,
     ’2’ to AAA-, etc. The difference variables measure the difference between the first minus the second CRA in notches. Only marginal
     effects are reported (multiplied by 10,000), and t-statistics are in brackets (using robust standard errors clustered by issuer). Panel
     B shows Accuracy Ratios and their differences for all three CRAs for a one and two year forecasting horizon. Standard errors are
     constructed using the Jackknife method with re-sampling at issuer level (equivalent to clustering by issuer). *, ** and *** indicate
     significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

     Panel A: Default prediction logit regressions

                              (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)       (7)        (8)         (9)       (10)       (11)      (12)
     Moody’s Rating                   4.23***                                                        04.25***                                    4.22***
                                       [4.60]                                                         [4.59]                                      [4.55]
     S&P Rating                                            5.02***                                                           5.08***   4.22***
                                                            [4.98]                                                            [4.97]    [4.55]




41
     Fitch Rating                                                                5.98***   4.25***               05.08***
                                                                                  [5.30]    [4.59]                [4.97]
     Difference Moodys                                                                     3.94***     -0.306
      and Fitch Ratings                                                                     [4.27]     [-0.75]
     Difference S&P and                                                                                           3.84***     -1.24
           Fitch Ratings                                                                                           [3.72]    [-1.49]
     Difference Moodys                                                                                                                 3.57***   -0.646
       and S&P Ratings                                                                                                                  [4.06]   [-1.40]

     Moodys Rat. FE          Yes        No         No        No          No        No        No         No          No         No        No        No
     Fitch Rat. FE           No         No         No        No          Yes       No        No         No          No         No        No        No
     S&P Rat. FE             No         No         Yes       No          No        No        No         No          No         No        No        No
     N                     104,966    112,329    97,371    112,329     103,803   112,329   112,329    112,329     112,329    112,329   112,329   112,329
     pseudo R2              0.371      0.366      0.333     0.333       0.323     0.308     0.367      0.367       0.337      0.337     0.367     0.367
     N. Issuers             1,994      2,066      1,949     2,066       1,984     2,066     2,066      2,066       2,066      2,066     2,066     2,066
     Table VII – continued from previous page

     Panel B: Accuracy ratios

                                  1 year horizon        2 year horizon
                                  Value     t-stat     Value      t-stat
     Moody’s Rating             0.779*** 25.38       0.713***     21.05
     Fitch Rating               0.718***     18.5    0.657***     15.97
     S&P Rating                 0.765*** 24.12       0.704***     20.15

     Moodys − Fitch Rating      0.062**      2.46    0.057**      2.25
     S&P − Fitch Rating         0.047*       1.83    0.047**      1.97
     Moodys − S&P Rating         0.015       1.31     0.009        0.8




42
                                              Table VIII
                                       Relative Rating Levels

The table shows logit regressions of achieving a regulatory gain on rating category dummies, Analyst
Dispersion (standard deviation of analyst earning forecasts normalized per dollar share value) as a
measure for uncertainty and whether the Fitch rating ’could push’ the issue to IG. F could push IG is
a dummy indicating whether the Moody’s and S&P ratings are on opposite sides of the IG boundary.
Other controls that are included but not shown are the firm Beta, Leverage, PPE / Assets, R&D
Expenses / Assets, ROA, Log of Offering Amount, Maturity Left and Maturity Left Squared and
Redeemable (see Table IV for descriptions). Quarterly data for 2000-2008 are used, and the sample
consists of all issues rated by Moody’s, S&P and Fitch that are on average rated B- or better. Marginal
effects are reported for the regressions and all t-statistics are in brackets (using robust standard errors
clustered by issuer). *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level,
respectively.

                                                             (1)       (2)         (3)
                     A+ to A-                             0.0691                0.0698
                                                            [0.43]               [0.42]
                     BBB+ to BBB-                          -0.155               -0.155
                                                           [-0.76]              [-0.75]
                     BB+ to BB-                           -0.0823               -0.016
                                                           [-0.34]              [-0.08]
                     B+ to B-                             -0.0516               -0.052
                                                           [-0.19]              [-0.19]
                     Fitch could push IG                 0.187***    0.196***
                                                            [3.73]     [3.62]
                     Analyst Dispersion                     5.461      5.366     5.192
                                                            [1.44]     [1.60]    [1.41]
                     Idiosyncratic Volatility              -1.432     -2.132    -1.735
                                                           [-0.34]    [-0.44]   [-0.40]
                     Log of Total Assets                  0.0351      0.0476    0.0316
                                                            [0.90]     [1.41]    [0.80]

                     Other Controls Included               Yes         Yes       Yes
                     Only with MSP disagreement            Yes         Yes       Yes
                     Fitch added                           Yes         Yes       Yes
                     Industry FE                           Yes         Yes       Yes
                     N                                     569         569       569
                     pseudo R2                             0.15       0.114     0.131
                     N. issuers                            170         170       170




                                                    43
                                              Table IX
                       Logistic Regressions for Having a Rating Transitions

Logit regressions of having a rating transition next quarter on rating category dummies (AAA and
AA+ are merged to avoid singularities), a dummy indicating whether the issue has a Fitch rating or
not, measures for uncertainty as idiosyncratic volatility, beta, Analyst Dispersion (standard deviation
of analyst earning forecasts normalized per dollar share value) and MSP Rating Dispersion (absolute
value of the notches difference between Moody’s and S&P). See Table IV for descriptions of bond and
firm level control variables. Quarterly data for 2000-2008 are used, the sample consists of all issues with
both Moody’s and S&P ratings. Only marginal effects are reported, and t-statistics are in brackets
(using robust standard errors clustered by issuer). *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

                                           Moody’s rating change      S&P rating change
                Fitch Rated                    0.0128***                 0.0102***
                                                  [3.68]                    [2.94]
                Idiosyncratic volatility        1.509***                  0.712***
                                                  [5.95]                    [3.17]
                Beta                            -0.00562                   0.00528
                                                 [-1.21]                    [0.96]
                Analyst Dispersion               0.0459                    0.0549
                                                  [1.27]                    [1.51]
                Notches of MSP                 0.0128***                 0.00611**
                    Rating Dispersion             [4.55]                    [2.16]

                MSP Rating FE                       Yes                       Yes
                Year FE                             Yes                       Yes
                N                                 104,629                   104,629
                Pseudo R2                          0.082                     0.067
                N. issuers                          818                       818




                                                    44
                                             Table X
                                       Turnover Regressions

OLS regressions of quarterly bond turnover, measured as aggregated trading volume over total value
of outstanding bonds on rating category dummies, a dummy indicating whether the issue has a Fitch
rating or not and controls for off-the-run vs on-the-run effects (age). F makes (denies) IG is a dummy
equal to 1 if Moody’s and S&P ratings are on opposite sides of the IG-HY boundary and the Fitch
rating is IG (HY). All other control variables are dropped due to the use of both time and issue fixed
effects. Monthly data for July 2002-December 2008 are used; the sample consists of all issues with both
Moody’s and S&P ratings. t-statistics are in brackets (using robust standard errors clustered by issuer).
*, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

                                                       (1)          (2)           (3)
                   MSP AAA to AA- Rating           -2.889***   -2.887***    -2.891***
                                                     [-2.92]      [-2.91]      [-2.91]
                   MSP BBB+ to BBB- Rating            0.722        0.749        0.745
                                                      [0.97]       [1.00]       [0.94]
                   MSP BB+ to BB- Rating            -2.434*      -2.543*      -2.554*
                                                     [-1.83]      [-1.78]      [-1.77]
                   MSP B+ to B- Rating             -5.368***   -5.270***    -5.280***
                                                     [-3.51]      [-3.40]      [-3.38]
                   Age                             -4.035***   -4.033***    -4.022***
                                                     [-6.91]      [-6.92]      [-6.91]
                   F makes IG                                  4.208***     4.213***
                                                                   [2.67]       [2.67]
                   F denies IG                                  -5.801**     -5.767**
                                                                  [-2.18]      [-2.16]
                   Fitch Rated                                                  0.952
                                                                                [1.40]

                   Time FE                            Yes          Yes         Yes
                   Issue FE                           Yes          Yes         Yes
                   N                                43,292       43,292      43,292
                   adj. R2                           0.278        0.279       0.279
                   N. issuers                         739          739         739




                                                   45
                                           Figure 1
                                FISD database coverage by CRA

The figure plots the percentage of bonds in FISD covered by S&P, Moody’s and Fitch. While FISD starts
earlier, we use ratings starting in 2000, as S&P data seems incomplete before, as this figure suggests.




                                                  46
                 Figure 2
Average Credit Spreads by Rating Category




                   47
                                              Figure 3
                                  Rating Differences Across CRAs

The figure plots rating differences for different pairs of credit rating agencies (CRAs). We use a numerical
scale for ratings, where a lower rating score means a better (more optimistic or lower bankruptcy likeli-
hood) rating (see Table III for the full rating scale). In the figure, a negative number thus means that the
first mentioned rating agency gives on average a better rating than the other CRA in that comparison.




                                                    48
                                        Figure 4
                              Default Prediction Accuracy

The figure plots the cumulative fraction of defaults on US corporate bonds over a one
year horizon against the cumulative fraction of ratings (from worst to best), for Moody’s,
S&P and Fitch based on data from 2000 to 2008.        The accuracy ratios that rating agen-
cies use for self-evaluation and that we report in Table VII Panel B are based on the
areas under the graphs.      A larger area under the graph corresponds to a better accu-
racy.   This type of graph is also known as a Cumulative Accuracy Power (CAP) curve.




                                            49
  Internet Appendix for ”Tiebreaker: Certification and Multiple
                        Credit Ratings”

                Dion Bongaerts, K.J. Martijn Cremers, William N. Goetzmann∗


     This Internet Appendix contains 9 supplementary tables to the main article.




   ∗ Citation format: Bongaerts, Dion, K.J. Martijn Cremers and William N. Goetzmann, XXXX, Internet Appendix

to ”Tiebreaker: Certification and Multiple Credit Ratings,” Journal of Finance XXX, pp XXXX, http://www.afajof.
org/IA/XXXX.asp. Please note: Wiley-Blackwell is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting
information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing material) should be directed to the authors of the
article.


                                                          1
                                         Table IA.I
                      Summary Statistics of Quarterly Ratings Sample

The table presents summary statistics and a brief description for the sample of bond issues that have
both a Moody’s and an S&P rating in the quarterly rating sample for 2000 - 2008.

 Variable                   Obs     Mean    Std. Dev.     Min     Max     Explanation
 Fitch Rated              104,629   0.68       0.47        0        1     Dummy for Fitch rating
 Fitch Rating              70,863   7.27       2.84        1       19     Fitch rating
 Moodys Rating            104,629   7.85       3.07        1       18     Moody’s Rating
 S&P Rating               104,629   7.66       2.99        1       20     S&P rating
 Fitch could push IG      104,629   0.04       0.19        0        1     Fitch could push IG
 Fitch could push A-      104,629   0.05       0.22        0        1     Fitch could push A-
 S&P and Moodys Dis-      104,629   0.37       0.48        0        1     Dummy for MSP disagree-
 agree                                                                    ment
 Notches of MSP Rat-      104,629    0.47      0.73        0       12     Notches of MSP rating
 ing Dispersion                                                           dispersion
 Analyst Dispersion       104,629      0       0.02         0     1.66    Analyst dispersion
 Stdev                    104,629    0.02      0.01      0.0012   0.13    Daily idiosyncratic equity
                                                                          volatility (past 180 days)
 Beta                     104,629    0.94      0.44      -1.01    4.39    Equity beta (past 180
                                                                          days)
 Log Total Assets         104,629    9.85      1.25       5.32    12.59   Log of total book value of
                                                                          assets
 PPE / Total Assets       104,629    0.38      0.23        0      0.96    PPE over total book as-
                                                                          sets
 R&D / Total Assets       104,629    0.01      0.02        0      0.23    R&D expenditure over to-
                                                                          tal book assets
 R&D missing              104,629    0.45       0.5        0        1     R&D expenditure missing
 Leverage                 104,629    0.35      0.15        0      6.04    Book leverage (debt/total
                                                                          assets)
 ROA                      104,629    0.01      0.02      -0.63    0.41    Return on book assets
                                                                          (earnings/total assets)
 Log    of     Offering   104,629   11.42       2.2        0      15.07   Log of offering amount
 Amount
 Maturity Left            104,629    9.61      10.71       0      98.52   Maturity left (years)
 Redeemable               104,629    0.56       0.5        0        1     Dummy if the bond is re-
                                                                          deemable




                                                 2
                                        Table IA.II
           Fitch Inflated Credit Spread Regressions on Fitch Rating Additions

This table is equivalent to Table V of the main article except that for determining whether Fitch is
better, equal or worse than the average of Moody’s and S&P rating, the Fitch rating is corrected with
one notch. Thus, an original AAA rating by Fitch would in this table correspond to a AA+ rating.
The column with only a dummy for a Fitch rating added in Table V is not replicated here since it is
invariant to this correction.
                                       (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)       (5)
       Fitch added and better        -0.726       0.132       -5.533       -2.973      -1.09
                                     [-0.09]      [0.02]      [-0.73]      [-0.35]    [-0.15]
       Fitch added and equal         -6.747       -6.22       -10.37        1.624     -1.683
                                     [-0.84]     [-0.77]      [-0.95]       [0.32]    [-0.13]
       Fitch added and worse          2.645       2.953        9.538        2.909      3.203
                                      [0.64]      [0.71]       [1.06]       [0.70]     [0.77]
       Fitch added and makes IG                -30.71***     -22.98**
                                                 [-2.86]      [-2.15]
       Fitch added and denies IG                  11.16        22.99
                                                  [0.60]       [0.89]
       At IG boundary                           15.57***     11.10***
                                                  [3.26]       [2.60]
       Fitch added and equal*                                              -2036.8
                analyst dispersion                                          [-1.10]
       analyst dispersion                                                 588.2***
                                                                             [4.13]
       Fitch added and equal*                                                          -8.636
                 rating dispersion                                                     [-1.11]
       rating dispersion                                                              2.399**
                                                                                        [2.00]

       Controls                        Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes        Yes
       Time FE                         Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes        Yes
       Segment                         All        All      BBB+ to BB-       All        All
       N                             34,621     34,621       15,100        34,724     34,621
       adj. R2                        0.531      0.532        0.626         0.534      0.531
       N. issuers                      671        671          465           672        671




                                                   3
                                        Table IA.III
                       CRA Default Prediction with MSP Disagreement

Using yearly panel data between 2000 and 2008, we compare CRA performance with respect to default
prediction on a one year horizon. The table shows results from a logit regression of issuer default events
on Moody’s and S&P rating scales, rating differences between Moody’s and Fitch, dummies for the
effect of Fitch as a tiebreaker when Moody’s and S&P are at different sides of the IG boundary and
time fixed effects for the complete universe of bonds that are rated by all three CRAs. The rating
variables are in notches where 1 corresponds to AAA. The difference variables measure the difference
between the First minus the second CRA in notches. Column 1 is restricted to cases where Moody’s and
S&P disagree. Only marginal effects are reported (multiplied by 10,000 for readability), and t-statistics
are in brackets (using robust standard errors clustered by issuer). *, ** and *** indicate significance at
the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

                                                               (1)         (2)
                         Moody’s Rating                      5.00***    3.91***
                                                              [3.28]     [4.00]
                         S&P Rating                           0.403       0.37
                                                              [0.54]     [0.65]
                         Difference Fitch vs Moody’s         5.00***
                                                              [3.28]
                         Fitch makes IG                                   -5.63
                                                                         [-1.52]
                         Fitch denies IG                                  -4.08
                                                                         [-0.96]

                         Year FE                               Yes        Yes
                         Moody’s and S&P disagree only         Yes        No
                         N                                    56,376    112,329
                         pseudo R2                            0.372      0.369
                         N. issuers                            1693      2066




                                                    4
                                          Table IA.IV
                            Credit Spread Regressions, Full Sample

Using quarterly panel data between 2002 and 2008, we regress credit spread levels for AAA to B- rated
bonds on bond and firm characteristics, with rating and time fixed effects. Main variables of interest
are whether a Fitch rating is better (F R < M SP ), equal to (F R = M SP ) or worse (F R > M SP ) than
the average Moody’s and S&P rating, as well as variables relating to regulation (IG). See Table IA.V
for descriptions of other control variable descriptions. However, levels instead of changes are used for
the controls. Time fixed effects are estimated for the IG and HY category separately to accommodate
the sharp widening of the IG/HY spread during the crisis. t-statistics are in brackets (using robust
standard errors clustered by issuer). *, ** and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level,
respectively.

                                             (1)              (2)       (3)       (4)
                    Fitch<MSP               4.314           5.487     3.771       4.1
                                            [1.14]          [1.42]    [1.00]    [1.12]
                    Fitch=MSP              7.151**        7.184**     6.594*   7.678**
                                            [2.12]          [2.15]    [1.94]    [2.27]
                    Fitch>MSP              16.37**        13.16**    16.68**   15.71**
                                            [2.28]          [2.04]    [2.30]    [2.18]
                    Fitch makes IG                       -26.35***
                                                           [-2.62]
                    Fitch denies IG                         18.22
                                                            [1.17]
                    analyst dispersion*                               207.4
                            Fitch=MSP                                 [1.40]
                    analyst dispersion                                252.2
                                                                      [0.95]
                    Rating dispersion*                                         -1.356
                            Fitch=MSP                                          [-0.35]
                    Rating dispersion                                           2.083
                                                                                [0.64]

                    Controls                Yes            Yes        Yes       Yes
                    Time FE by IG/HY        yes            yes        yes       yes
                    MSP Rating FE           yes            yes        yes       yes
                    N                      44,139         44,139     43,711    44,139
                    adj. R2                0.814          0.815      0.815     0.814
                    N. issuers              739            739        716       739




                                                     5
                                                           Table IA.V
                                  Change in Credit Spreads and Rating Changes, Pre-Crisis Sample

    Using quarterly panel data between 2002 and 2007Q2, we regress changes in credit spreads for AAA to B- rated bonds that are rated
    by all three CRAs on rating up- and downgrades for all three CRAs, changes in bond and firm characteristics, dummies for boundary
    effects and time fixed effects. Up- and downgrades are coded as dummies indicating whether each of the three CRAs upgraded or
    downgraded its rating. These firm and bond controls are included but not shown (all in changes): Leverage, liquidation/intrinsic value
    (PPE/total assets), R&D expenses (divided by total assets), ROA (return on assets), Stdev (daily idiosyncratic equity volatility),
    Historical Equity Beta (half year daily corrected for Bid-Ask-bounces), Log Total Assets (firm size, book value) and Log Offering Size
    (issue size), Redeemable (dummy for callability), Duration and Convexity. Fitch Upgrade, Breaks Tie is a dummy indicating that a
    Fitch upgrade made the issue qualify for IG, while Fitch Downgrade, Breaks Tie is a dummy indicating that a Fitch downgrade made
    the issue lose its IG qualification. Fitch Could Break Tie is a dummy indicating that the S&P and Moody’s ratings are on opposite sides
    of the IG-HY boundary. Column (5) is restricted to issues rated A- or better by Moody’s and S&P, whereas column (6) is restricted
    to issues rated BBB+ or worse by Moody’s and S&P. t-statistics are in brackets (using robust standard errors clustered by issuer; N.
    issuer gives the number of issuers). *, ** and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively. ’F -test Fup=Fdown
    (p-value)’ gives the p-value for the coefficients on Fitch Upgrade and Fitch Downgrade being equal, while ’F -test Fup,tie=Fdown,tie
    (p-value)’ gives the p-value for the coefficients on Fitch Upgraded, Breaks Tie and Fitch Downgraded, Breaks Tie being equal.

                                     (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)               (8)




6
    Moody’s Upgrade              -5.546**                                                                   -2.794            -2.472
                                  [-2.44]                                                                   [-1.41]           [-1.28]
    Moody’s Downgrade            14.59***                                                                  9.905**          9.704***
                                   [4.42]                                                                    [2.56]            [2.66]
    S&P Upgrade                              -9.268***                                                    -8.036***         -7.805***
                                               [-3.20]                                                      [-3.20]           [-3.13]
    S&P Downgrade                             16.31***                                                     11.66***         11.38***
                                                [4.49]                                                       [3.47]            [3.53]
    Fitch Upgrade                                          -6.228*     -6.134*     -0.435      -6.175       -4.103            -4.227
                                                            [-1.86]     [-1.79]    [-0.13]     [-1.65]      [-1.40]           [-1.41]
    Fitch Downgrade                                       13.97***    10.31***      0.662     14.95***       6.467              3.32
                                                             [3.04]      [2.63]     [0.26]      [2.89]       [1.44]            [0.82]
    Fitch Upgrade, Breaks Tie                                           -3.222                 -5.122                         -0.185
                                                                        [-0.38]                [-0.65]                        [-0.02]
    Fitch Downgrade, Breaks                                            44.20**                 38.69*                        40.55**
    Tie                                                                  [2.16]                 [1.92]                         [1.98]
    Continued on next page
    Table IA.V – continued from previous page

                                   (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)        (7)          (8)
    Fitch Could Break Tie                                            -4.869*                  -3.611                 -5.081*
                                                                      [-1.85]                 [-1.42]                 [-1.94]
    Lagged Credit Spread        -0.266***   -0.268***   -0.264***   -0.263***   -0.419***   -0.223***   -0.271***   -0.270***
    Change                        [-9.24]     [-9.14]     [-8.95]     [-8.91]    [-22.09]     [-6.67]     [-9.38]     [-9.32]

    Sample                         All         All         All         All        ≤A-       ≥BBB+          All         All
    N                            16,889      16,889      16,889      16,889       8,535      8,354       16,889      16,889
    Adj. R2                       0.204       0.207       0.202       0.206       0.269       0.23        0.212       0.214
    N. issuers                     343         343         343         343         107        276          343         343
    F -test Fup=Fdown                                    0.05%       0.16%       79.00%      0.09%       5.19%       14.00%
    (p-value)
    F -test Fup,tie=Fdown,tie                                        3.25%                   4.44%
    (p-value)




7
                                                             Table IA.VI
                                Credit Spread Regressions on Fitch Rating Additions, Pre-Crisis Sample

    Using quarterly panel data between 2002 and 2007Q2, we regress changes in credit spreads for AAA to B- rated bonds that are rated
    by Moody’s and S&P on rating additions from Fitch, the relative ranking of those additions and whether additions happened at the
    IG boundary, interactions with uncertainty measures and changes in bond and firm characteristics plus time fixed effects. Fitch Added,
    Better, Fitch Added, Equal and Fitch Added, Worse are dummies indicating whether a Fitch rating has been added that is respectively
    better than, equal to and worse than the average rating by Moody’s and S&P. Fitch Added, Makes IG and Fitch Added, Denies IG are
    dummies that indicate whether the added Fitch rating makes the issue qualify for IG or not, conditional on Moody’s and S&P ratings
    being on opposite sides of the boundary. See Table IA.V for descriptions of bond and firm level control variables. t-statistics are in
    brackets (using robust standard errors clustered by issuer in all columns except column 5, which uses double clustering by both issuer
    and time). *, ** and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively. ’F -test FAdded,IG=FAdded,HY (p-value)’ is
    the p-value of the F -test of Fitch Added, Makes IG and Fitch Added, Makes HY being equal. The sample is all issues rated by both
    Moody’s and S&P with their average rating better or equal to B-, except in column 4, where their average rating is between BBB+
    and BB-.

                                     (1)        (2)         (3)            (4)           (5)         (6)                  (7)
    Fitch Added                    0.0133
                                   [0.00]




8
    Fitch Added, Better                       -7.003       -6.641        -2.535         -6.641      -7.365               -6.903
                                              [-0.97]      [-0.91]       [-0.39]        [-0.83]     [-1.01]              [-0.95]
    Fitch Added, Equal                        5.256*      5.021*        11.94**        5.021**       2.798               4.947*
                                               [1.84]       [1.76]        [2.11]         [2.03]      [0.94]               [1.80]
    Fitch Added, Worse                       -0.00141     -0.0856         17.21        -0.0856      -0.466               -0.187
                                              [-0.00]      [-0.01]        [0.86]        [-0.01]     [-0.04]              [-0.02]
    Fitch Added, Makes IG                                 -20.28*       -20.13*        -20.28*
                                                           [-1.65]       [-1.70]        [-1.70]
    Fitch Added, Makes HY                                   30.46         27.03          30.46
                                                            [1.45]        [1.28]         [1.35]
    At IG boundary                                         -1.259        -1.149         -1.259
                                                           [-0.46]       [-0.45]        [-0.46]
    Fitch Added, Equal *                                                                            1280.3
           Analyst Dispersion                                                                       [0.99]
    Continued on next page
    Table IA.VI – continued from previous page

                                   (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)
    Analyst Dispersion                                                                         184.8
                                                                                               [1.51]
    Fitch Added, Equal *                                                                                     0.602
            Rating Dispersion                                                                                [0.10]
    S&P and Moodys Disagree                                                                                 -0.686
                                                                                                            [-1.24]
    Lagged Credit Spread        -0.276***   -0.277***   -0.277***    -0.243***    -0.277***   -0.279***   -0.277***
    Change                       [-11.99]    [-12.02]    [-12.01]      [-7.62]      [-6.84]    [-12.18]    [-11.99]

    Sample                         All         All         All      BBB+ to BB-      All         All         All
    Double Clustering              No          No          No            No          Yes         No          No
    N                            24,557      24,557      24,557        9,751       24,557      24,650      24,557
    Adj. R2                       0.205       0.206       0.206        0.224        0.206       0.207       0.206
    N. issuers                     605         605         605          404                      608         605
    F -test                                              3.24%         4.59%       8.93%




9
    FAdded,IG=FAdded,HY
    (p-value)
                                                                Table IA.VII
                                               Logistic Regressions for Having a Fitch Rating

     Logit regressions of having a Fitch rating on rating category dummies based on average Moody’s and S&P (MSP) ratings, measures
     for uncertainty as Analyst Dispersion (standard deviation of analyst earning forecasts normalized per dollar share value), Dummy S&P
     and Moody’s Disagree or Notches of MSP Rating Dispersion (absolute value of the notches difference between Moody’s and S&P),
     and F Could Break Tie and F Could Push A- are dummies indicating whether the Moody’s and S&P ratings are on opposite sides of
     the IG-HY and A- boundaries respectively. All specifications further include industry fixed effects. In column (6) and (7) issues are
     removed after, respectively, their first year and first quarter after being rated by Fitch. Other controls that are included but not shown
     are the firm Beta, Leverage, PPE / Assets, R&D Expenses / Assets, ROA, Log of Offering Amount, Maturity Left and Maturity Left
     Squared and Redeemable (see Table IA.V for descriptions). Quarterly data for 2000-2008 are used, and the sample consists of all
     issues with both Moody’s and S&P ratings that are on average rated B- or better. Marginal effects are reported, and t-statistics are
     in brackets (using robust standard errors clustered by issuer). *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1%
     level, respectively. Pseudo R2 refers to McFadden (1973) pseudo R2 .

                                      (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)                     (7)
     MSP Rating A+ to A-           0.418***                 0.417***    0.420***     0.414***     0.216**                 0.0985**
                                     [3.97]                   [3.93]      [3.98]       [3.95]       [2.36]                  [2.02]
     MSP Rating BBB+ to            0.401***                 0.397***    0.386***     0.395***     0.191***                0.0726**




10
     BBB-
                                     [4.31]                   [4.21]      [4.08]       [4.24]      [2.69]                  [2.26]
     MSP Rating BB+ to BB-         0.299***                 0.291***    0.290***     0.289***      0.243*                   0.123
                                     [6.70]                   [6.25]      [6.12]       [6.23]      [1.96]                  [1.60]
     MSP Rating B+ to B-           0.266***                 0.266***    0.267***     0.263***       0.223                   0.111
                                     [6.13]                   [6.09]      [6.19]       [5.96]      [1.60]                  [1.30]
     Fitch Could Break Tie                     0.144***     0.117***                  0.103**      0.092                   0.0369
                                                 [3.99]       [3.18]                   [2.51]      [1.60]                  [1.17]
     Fitch Could Pull A                         0.0649       0.0328                   0.00998      0.0282                  0.0226
                                                 [1.31]       [0.60]                   [0.17]      [0.63]                  [0.96]
     Avg MSP BB+                                                        0.0952**
                                                                          [2.39]
     Avg MSP BBB-                                                       0.0790**
                                                                          [2.24]
     Notches of MSP Rating                                                           -0.00204
     Dispersion                                                                       [-0.07]
     Continued on next page
     Table IA.VII – continued from previous page

                                    (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)       (5)           (6)          (7)
     S&P and Moodys Disagree     -0.0305     -0.0309      -0.0426      -0.0333                  -0.0347      -0.022
                                  [-0.69]     [-0.62]      [-0.87]      [-0.74]                  [-1.10]     [-1.60]
     Analyst Dispersion            0.835       0.728        0.855        0.816       0.903        0.337      0.0652
                                   [0.96]      [0.84]       [0.96]       [0.98]      [0.97]       [1.21]      [1.29]
     Idiosyncratic Volatility   -5.432***   -5.334***   -5.397***    -5.513***    -5.388***    -2.103**      -0.182
                                  [-4.67]     [-4.80]      [-4.70]      [-4.75]     [-4.68]      [-1.98]     [-0.56]
     Log of Total Assets        0.177***    0.151***     0.177***     0.179***    0.178***    0.0766***    0.0195***
                                   [8.86]      [5.64]       [8.82]       [8.90]      [8.87]       [5.87]      [5.36]

     Time Limit after Fitch        No          No          No           No           No        1 Year      1 Quarter
     Addition
     N                          104,435     104,435      104,435      104,435     104,435      27,550       32,135
     Pseudo R2                   0.223       0.174        0.224        0.225       0.223       0.163        0.098
     N. issuers                   818         818          818          818         818         639          683




11
                                       Table IA.VIII
          Logistic Regressions for Having a Fitch Rating with Double Clustering

Logit regressions of having a Fitch rating on rating category dummies based on average Moody’s and
S&P (MSP) ratings, measures for uncertainty as Analyst Dispersion (standard deviation of analyst
earning forecasts normalized per dollar share value), Dummy S&P and Moody’s Disagree or Notches
of MSP Rating Dispersion (absolute value of the notches difference between Moody’s and S&P), and F
Could Break Tie and F Could Push A- are dummies indicating whether the Moody’s and S&P ratings
are on opposite sides of the IG-HY and A- boundaries respectively. All specifications further include
industry fixed effects. Other controls that are included but not shown are the firm Beta, Leverage, PPE
/ Assets, R&D Expenses / Assets, ROA, Log of Offering Amount, Maturity Left and Maturity Left
Squared and Redeemable (see Table IA.V for descriptions). Quarterly data for 2000-2008 are used, and
the sample consists of all issues with both Moody’s and S&P ratings that are on average rated B- or
better. Only coefficient estimates are reported, and t-statistics are in brackets using robust standard
errors clustered by issuer in Column (1) and standard errors clustered by issuer and time in Column
(2). *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively. Double
clustered standard errors are calculated using the Stata code available on Mitchel Petersen’s website.

                                                               (1)         (2)
                      MSP Rating A+ to A-                   2.411***   2.411***
                                                              [3.76]     [3.69]
                      MSP Rating BBB+ to BBB-               2.440***   2.440***
                                                              [3.84]     [3.74]
                      MSP Rating BB+ to BB-                 2.645***   2.645***
                                                              [4.00]     [3.92]
                      MSP Rating B+ to B-                   2.472***   2.472***
                                                              [3.45]     [3.39]
                      Fitch Could Break Tie                 0.705***   0.705***
                                                              [2.61]     [2.66]
                      Fitch Could Pull A                      0.172      0.172
                                                              [0.58]     [0.59]
                      Notches of MSP Rating Dispersion       -0.213     -0.213
                                                             [-0.87]    [-0.89]
                      Analyst Dispersion                      4.331      4.331
                                                              [0.96]     [0.82]

                      Industry FE                             yes         yes
                      Double clustering                       no          yes
                      N                                     104,435     104,435
                      pseudo R2                              0.224
                      N. issuers                              818




                                                  12
                                                           Table IA.IX
                                   Change in Credit Spreads and Rating Changes, verification tests

     Using quarterly panel data between 2002 and 2008, we regress changes in credit spreads for AAA to B- rated bonds that are rated
     by all three CRAs on rating up- and downgrades for all three CRAs, changes in bond and firm characteristics, dummies for boundary
     effects and time fixed effects. Up- and downgrades are coded as dummies indicating whether each of the three CRAs upgraded or
     downgraded its rating. These firm and bond controls are included but not shown (all in changes): Leverage, liquidation/intrinsic value
     (PPE/total assets), R&D expenses (divided by total assets), ROA (return on assets), Stdev (daily idiosyncratic equity volatility),
     Historical Equity Beta (half year daily corrected for Bid-Ask-bounces), Log Total Assets (firm size, book value) and Log Offering
     Size (issue size), Redeemable (dummy for callability), Duration and Convexity. Fitch Upgrade, Breaks Tie, Moody’s Upgrade, Breaks
     Tie and S&P Upgrade, Breaks Tie are a dummies indicating that the respective CRA upgrade made the issue qualify for IG, while
     Fitch Downgrade, breaks no tie anymore, Moody’s Downgrade, breaks no tie anymore and S&P Downgrade, breaks no tie anymore
     are dummies indicating that a downgrade by the respective CRA made the issue lose its IG qualification. Fitch Could Break Tie,
     Moody’s Could Break Tie and S&P Could Break Tie are a dummies indicating that the ratings by the other CRAs are on opposite
     sides of the IG-HY boundary. Columns (3) and (4) are restricted to issues rated A- or better by Moody’s and S&P, whereas columns
     (5) and (6) are restricted to issues rated BBB+ or worse by Moody’s and S&P. t-statistics are in brackets (using robust standard
     errors clustered by issuer; N. issuer gives the number of issuers). *, ** and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level,
     respectively. ’F -test Mup=Mdown (p-value)’ and ’F -test SPup=SPdown (p-value)’ give the p-values for the test on the coefficients on
     Moody’s Upgrade and Moody’s Downgrade being equal and the test on the coefficients on S&P Upgrade and S&P Downgrade being




13
     equal respectively. Similarly ’F -test Mup,tie=Mdown,tie (p-value)’ and ’F -test SPup,tie=SPdown,tie (p-value)’ give the p-values for
     the test of the coefficients on Moody’s Upgraded, Breaks Tie and Moody’s Downgraded, Breaks Tie being equal and the test of the
     coefficients on S&P Upgraded, Breaks Tie and S&P Downgraded, Breaks Tie being equal respectively.

                                      (1)       (2)          (3)       (4)           (5)       (6)         (7)          (8)          (9)
     Moody’s upgrade              -4.463*                -5.414**               -8.704***               -2.493       -2.418       -2.587
                                   [-1.90]                [-2.34]                 [-3.18]               [-1.13]      [-1.13]      [-1.17]
     Moody’s downgrade           14.06***                9.149**                 18.55***              7.378**      7.032*       8.239**
                                    [4.09]                 [2.22]                  [3.97]                [2.07]       [1.89]       [2.41]
     S&P upgrade                              -4.977*               -10.41***                -4.846     -4.321       -3.701       -3.833
                                               [-1.84]                [-2.64]                [-1.65]    [-1.62]      [-1.37]      [-1.40]
     S&P downgrade                           16.63***                  4.094                20.43***   18.70***    13.13***     12.95***
                                                [4.39]                 [1.06]                 [4.76]     [4.21]       [3.52]       [3.50]
     Fitch upgrade                                                                                      -4.948      -5.207*       -4.086
                                                                                                        [-1.64]      [-1.72]      [-1.36]
     Fitch downgrade                                                                                     4.631        4.779          4.2
                                                                                                         [0.80]       [0.84]       [0.71]
     Continued on next page
     Table IA.IX – continued from previous page

                                   (1)        (2)        (3)     (4)      (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)           (9)
     Fitch upgraded and breaks                                                                                       -8.796
                            tie                                                                                      [-0.62]
     Fitch downgraded and                                                                                             4.181
         breaks no tie anymore                                                                                        [0.21]
     Fitch could break tie                                                                                          10.27**
                                                                                                                      [2.08]
     Moody’s upgraded and         -2.479                                 3.764                -0.728                  1.183
                     breaks tie   [-0.37]                                [0.58]               [-0.12]                 [0.21]
     Moody’s downgraded and        1.052                                -2.068                -1.156                 -18.97
        breaks no tie anymore      [0.04]                               [-0.08]               [-0.04]                [-0.70]
     Moody’s could break tie       2.818                                -0.792                 2.661                 -6.331
                                   [0.74]                               [-0.26]                [0.71]                [-1.38]
     S&P upgraded and breaks                 -14.25*                                -10.03               -13.21*      -12.1
                          tie                 [-1.82]                               [-1.57]               [-1.73]    [-1.58]
     S&P downgraded and                     40.15***                              36.08***              39.51***    40.53***
        breaks no tie anymore                  [2.98]                                [2.92]                [2.84]     [2.61]




14
     S&P could break tie                    11.87***                               8.468**              12.14***     7.797*
                                               [2.61]                                [2.13]                [2.64]     [1.66]
     Time FE                       Yes          Yes      Yes     Yes      Yes         Yes      Yes          Yes        Yes
     rated by All 3                Yes          Yes      Yes     Yes      Yes         Yes      Yes          Yes        Yes
     Range                         All          All      ≤A-     ≤A-    ≥BBB+     ≥BBB+        All          All        All
     N                            24282       24282     11330   11330    12952      12952     24282       24282      24282
     adj. R2                      0.531        0.537    0.451   0.451    0.602       0.608    0.534        0.537      0.538
     N. issuer                     380          380      117     117      313         313      380          380        380
     F -test Mup=Mdown (p-          0                   0.008              0                  0.015
     val)
     F -test                      0.897                                  0.833                0.987
     Mup,tie=Mdown,tie
     (p-val)
     F -test SPup=SPdown (p-                   0                0.008                0                     0
     val)
     Continued on next page
     Table IA.IX – continued from previous page

                               (1)      (2)       (3)   (4)   (5)    (6)    (7)    (8)    (9)
     F -test                             0                          0.001         0.001
     SPup,tie=SPdown,tie
     (p-val)




15
