NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TECHNOLOGICAL GROWTH AND ASSET PRICING
Nicolae B. Gârleanu
Stavros Panageas
Jianfeng Yu
Working Paper 15340
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15340

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2009

We would like to thank Andy Abel, Ricardo Caballero, Adlai Fischer, Tano Santos, Mungo Wilson,
Motohiro Yogo, Lu Zhang and participants of seminars and conferences at Wharton, the Swedish School
of Economics (Hagen), the Helsinki School of Economics GSF, the University of Cyprus, the Athens
University of Economics and Business, the University of Piraeus, the Frontiers of Finance 2006, CICF
2008, the NBER 2005 EFG Summer Institute, the NBER 2006 Chicago Asset Pricing meeting, Western
Finance Association 2006, SED 2006 and the Studienzentrum Gerzensee 2006 for very helpful discussions
and comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Nicolae B. Gârleanu, Stavros Panageas, and Jianfeng Yu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Technological Growth and Asset Pricing
Nicolae B. Gârleanu, Stavros Panageas, and Jianfeng Yu
NBER Working Paper No. 15340
September 2009
JEL No. E22,G12
ABSTRACT
In this paper we study the implications of general-purpose technological growth for asset prices. The
model features two types of shocks: "small", frequent, and disembodied shocks to productivity and
"large" technological innovations, which are embodied into new vintages of the capital stock. While
the former affect the economy on impact, the latter affect the economy with lags, since firms need
to first adopt the new technologies through investment. The process of adoption leads to cycles in
asset valuations and risk premia as firms convert the growth options associated with the new technologies
into assets in place. This process can help provide a unified, investment-based view of some well documented
phenomena such as the asset-valuation patterns around major technological innovations, the countercyclical
behavior of returns, the lead-lag relationship between the stock market and output, and the increasing
patterns of consumption-return correlations over longer horizons.

Nicolae B. Gârleanu
Haas School of Business
F628
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
garleanu@haas.berkeley.edu
Stavros Panageas
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL, 60637
and NBER
stavros.panageas@chicagobooth.edu

Jianfeng Yu
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South, Suite 3-122
Minneapolis, MN 55455
jianfeng@umn.edu

1

Introduction

Economic historians frequently associate waves of economic activity with the arrival of major technological innovations. The profound changes to manufacturing during the industrial
revolution, the expanding network of railroads in the late nineteenth century, electrification,
telephony, television, and the internet during the course of the last century are only a small
number of well-known examples of a general pattern whereby a new technology arrives, gets
slowly adopted and eventually permeates and alters all aspects of production and distribution. Naturally, these technological waves impact numerous markets, and especially asset
markets, which reflect anticipations of future growth and facilitate the flow of capital towards
innovative activity. The impact of technological waves on asset prices is the focus of this
paper.
We build a tractable general-equilibrium model within which we characterize the behavior
of asset prices throughout the technology-adoption cycle. We argue that the anticipatory
nature of asset prices together with the slow deployment of technological innovations generate
the joint properties of returns, output, and consumption documented in the data. We believe
that the new mechanisms highlighted by our model can complement and improve on the
explanatory power of existing endowment-based theories of return time variation.
Our main point of departure from previous work on asset pricing is that we explicitly
allow for the joint presence of two types of technological shocks. The first type of shocks
are the usual productivity shocks that are routinely assumed in the production-based assetpricing literature. These shocks are technology “neutral” or “disembodied”, in the sense that
they affect the productivity of the entire capital stock irrespective of its vintage. However,
this type of shocks do not fundamentally alter the technology used to produce consumption
goods. The second type of shocks correspond to (infrequent) arrivals of major technological
or organizational innovations, like automobiles, the internet, etc. These shocks do not affect
the economy on impact, but only after firms have invested in new vintages of the capital
stock that “embody” the technological improvements.
The investment in new capital vintages is assumed to involve a fixed (labor) cost that
1

is irreversible. Firms choose the optimal time to invest in the new capital vintages, which
leads to an endogenous lag between the arrival of embodied technological shocks and their
eventual effects on output and consumption. This process of technological adoption generates
endogenous persistence and investment-driven cycles, even though all shocks in the model
arrive in an unpredictable i.i.d. fashion.
The link between the macroeconomy and asset pricing in our model revolves around the
idea that growth options of firms exhibit a “life cycle” as technologies diffuse. On impact
of a major technological shock, growth options emerge in the prices of all securities. These
growth options are riskier than assets in place, and hence tend to increase the volatility of
equity prices and the risk premia in the economy. In the initial phases of the technological
cycle (i.e., when consumption is below its stochastic trend line) expected returns in the stock
market are therefore high, simply because most growth options have not yet been exercised.
As time passes, firms start converting growth options into assets in place, hence reducing
the risk premium on their stock.
We argue that this investment-driven time variation in expected returns provides a natural mechanism to explain slow and countercyclical movements in expected returns (high
expected returns when consumption is below its stochastic trend and vice versa). More importantly, the current model provides a unified theory for some additional patterns of the
joint time-series evolution of returns and consumption in the data that can be challenging for
some leading endowment-based models.1 Specifically, the model can account for a) the fact
that returns lead rather than lag output and consumption and b) the robust pattern that
correlations between consumption and returns are weak at short horizons (over a quarter)
and become stronger over longer horizons (over 1-3 years). In the model, these additional
patterns emerge naturally, since major technological innovations produce consumption gains
with a lag, but affect asset valuations immediately. This delayed reaction of consumption
1

See Yu (2007) for a discussion of the difficulties of existing endowment-based models to account for some

of these facts. See also Backus et al. (2008) for further evidence on the lead-lag relationship between excess
returns and macroeconomic aggregates.

2

helps explain empirical observations a) and b) above. Finally, the tractability of the model
allows a joint discussion of the time-series and cross-sectional patterns of returns. We show
that the model is consistent with both aggregate time-series and cross-sectional patterns
(such as the size and the value premium) of returns in general equilibrium.2
The paper is related to several strands of the literature. The paper by Carlson et al.
(2004) is the most closely related to ours. Carlson et al. (2004) develop the intuition that the
exercise of growth options can lead to variation in expected returns in a partial-equilibrium
setting. In our paper, a similar mechanism operates in general equilibrium. By making consumption and returns jointly endogenous we are able to discuss a richer set of implications
for asset pricing, such as short- and long-run correlations between consumption and returns,
lead-lag relationships, aggregate time-series implications for consumption, investment, and
returns, etc. Gomes et al. (2003) also analyze a general-equilibrium production-based model
and examine the time series and cross sectional properties of returns, as we do. The two
most significant differences between their set-up and ours are a) the distinction between
embodied and disembodied aggregate technological shocks,3 and b) the presence of an optimal timing decision concerning the exercise of growth options.4 Since all shocks in Gomes
et al. (2003) are disembodied productivity shocks, they affect the economy on impact and
afterwards their effects dissipate. Our model differentiates between technological shocks
that affect the economy on impact (disembodied shocks) and shocks that affect the econ2

See Santos and Veronesi (2008) for a discussion of the tensions faced by leading endowment-based general

equilibrium models in matching simultaneously time-series and cross-sectional aspects of return predictability.
3
More generally, the literature on production-based asset-pricing routinely abstracts from this distinction.
For contributions to this literature, see Cochrane (1996), Jermann (1998), Berk et al. (1999), Berk et al.
(2004), Kogan (2004), Kaltenbrunner and Lochstoer (2006), Gomes et al. (2003), Carlson et al. (2004),
Zhang (2005), Cooper (2006), Gourio (2004), Zhang (2005), and Gala (2006) among others. Papanikolaou
(2007) draws a distinction between productivity shocks and investment specific shocks, but does not discuss
embodied shocks or different capital vintages.
4
Gomes et al. (2003) follow the seminal paper by Berk et al. (1999) and assume that options arrive in an
i.i.d. fashion across firms and have a “take it or leave it” nature. By contrast, in our model all firms have
discretion over the timing of their investment.

3

omy with a lag (embodied shocks). The result is a distinctive set of implications for the
joint time-series properties of returns and macroeconomic aggregates (lead-lag relationships,
correlation patterns, etc.) and the mechanism that produces return countercyclicality. A
further implication is that in Gomes et al. (2003) cycles are driven by a trend-stationary
productivity process, which implies a trend-stationary consumption process. In our model,
all exogenous shocks follow random walks, while cycles emerge endogenously as the result of
the economy’s adoption of new technological vintages. As a result, consumption preserves a
strong random-walk component, which is a salient feature of consumption in the data.
The theoretical literature on expected-return time variation is also related to this paper.
We do not attempt to summarize this literature here; instead we refer to Cochrane (2005)
for an overview. A leading approach to explaining the time variation and predictability of
(expected) returns is to assume countercyclical risk aversion at the level of the “representative” consumer. As Yu (2007) shows, the strengthening of consumption-return correlations
with the horizon,5 as well as the fact that stock-market returns tend to lead consumption
and output growth, present challenges for single-shock, pure-endowment economies with
countercyclical risk aversion. Our approach shows how the interplay of multiple shocks in
an investment-based framework can address these issues. An alternative approach in the
literature, pioneered by Bansal and Yaron (2004), considers endowment economies with predictable consumption growth and Epstein-Zin-Weil preferences. As Yu (2007) and Backus
et al. (2008) show, this type of models can capture the lead-lag relationships between consumption and returns, assuming that consumption volatility is stochastic and appropriately
anticipates consumption growth. The present investment-driven approach provides an alternative to explaining these facts with i.i.d. shocks, thus circumventing the need to perform
the potentially difficult task of estimating stochastic volatility in consumption and the extent
to which it anticipates consumption growth.
Motivated by the events of the late nineties, Pastor and Veronesi (2009) connect the
arrival of technological growth with the “bubble”-type behavior of asset prices around these
5

See also Daniel and Marshall (1999) on this issue.

4

events.6 Our model produces similar patterns. However, the focus of the two papers and the
mechanisms are different. Our mechanism uses the endogenous exercise of growth options
to produce variations in expected returns. Moreover, by considering recurrent arrivals of
technological innovations we can discuss implications of the model for the joint stationary
distributions of excess returns and macroeconomic aggregates and link technological growth
with well documented time-series and cross-sectional patterns of returns.
There is a large literature in macroeconomics and economic growth that analyzes innovation, dissemination of new technologies, and the impact of the arrival of new capital
vintages.7 In contrast to our paper, this literature concentrates on innovation decisions in a
deterministic environment, rather than the pricing of risk in a stochastic environment.
A technical contribution of our work is that it provides a tractable solution to a generalequilibrium model in which the micro-decisions are “lumpy” and exhibit optimal-stopping
features.8 In recent work, aspects of this model have been used by Obreja and Telmer
(2008) to study long run variations’s in Tobin’s q and by Iraola and Santos (2009) to study
links between news about innovations, the macroeconomy, and asset prices. Hsu (2009)
studies empirically the link between the arrival of technological innovations and aggregate
risk premia.
The structure of the paper is as follows: Section 2 presents the model and Section 3
the resulting equilibrium allocations. Section 4 presents the qualitative and quantitative
implications of the model. Section 5 concludes. All proofs are given in the Appendix.
6

Other papers that have analyzed the recent upswing in prices include Pastor and Veronesi (2004) and

Jermann and Quadrini (2007).
7
A small sample of papers includes Jovanovic and MacDonald (1994), Jovanovic and Rousseau (2003),
Greenwood and Jovanovic (1999), Atkeson and Kehoe (1999), and Helpman (1998).
8
The micro decision of the firm has a similar structure to the partial-equilibrium model of Abel and
Eberly (2005). Just as firms in that paper adapt to the technological frontier at an optimally chosen time,
firms in our framework decide on the optimal time to plant new trees. Moreover, by assuming cross sectional
heterogeneity only at the beginning of an epoch, we can aggregate over firms in a much simpler way than the
existing literature. For other analytically tractable approaches to aggregation see also Gomes et al. (2003),
Caballero and Pindyck (1996), and Novy-Marx (2003).

5

2
2.1

Model
Trees, firms, and technological epochs

There exists a continuum of firms indexed by j ∈ [0, 1], which produce consumption goods.
Each firm owns a collection of trees that have been planted in different technological epochs,
and its total earnings are simply the sum of the earnings produced by the trees it owns.
In turn, each tree produces earnings that are the product of three components: a) a timeinvariant tree-specific component, b) a time-varying aggregate-productivity component, and
c) a vintage-specific component, which is common across all trees of the same technological
epoch. To introduce notation, let YN,i,t denote the earnings stream of tree i at time t that
was planted in the technological epoch N ∈ (−∞, +∞). In particular, assume the functional
form
YN,i,t = ζ(i)θt AN .

(1)

The first term, ζ(i), is a positive, strictly decreasing function, mapping the interval [0, 1]
to R+ . ζ(i) is time invariant and captures a tree-specific effect. The second term, θt , is the
common productivity shock and evolves as a geometric Brownian Motion:
dθt
= µdt + σdBt ,
θt

(2)

where µ > 0 and σ > 0 are constants and Bt is a standard Brownian Motion. The term AN
captures a vintage-specific effect, which is common to all trees that are planted in epoch N.
We make two assumptions about the evolution of AN . First, AN +1 ≥ AN , so that vintages
of trees planted in epoch N + 1 are more productive than their predecessors (all else equal).
Second, the ratio AN +1 /AN is increasing in the extent of technological adoption that took
place in epoch N. Specifically, letting KN,t ∈ [0, 1] denote the mass of trees that were planted
in epoch N by time t, and τN +1 the time of arrival of epoch N + 1, we postulate the following
dynamics for AN +1 :

Z
AN +1 = AN 1 +

0

KN,τN+1


ζ (i) di .

(3)
6

Equation (3) reflects a standard assumption in the endogenous growth theory that is
sometimes referred to as “standing on the shoulders of giants”. The act of planting new
trees produces knowledge and stimulates further innovation in future epochs.9 Accordingly,
the rate of increase between AN +1 and AN depends on the investment activity in period N.10
Technological epochs arrive exogenously at the Poisson rate λ > 0. Throughout, we denote
the arrival time of epoch N as τN . Once a new epoch arrives, the index N becomes N + 1,
and every firm gains the option to plant a single tree of the new vintage at a time of its
choosing.
Firm heterogeneity is introduced as follows: Once epoch N arrives, each firm j draws a
random number ij,N from a uniform distribution on [0, 1]. This number informs the firm
of the type of tree that it can plant in the new epoch N. In particular a firm that drew
the number ij,N can plant a tree with tree-specific productivity ζ(ij,N ). These numbers are
drawn in an i.i.d. fashion across epochs. To simplify the setup, we assume that once an
epoch changes, the firm loses the option to plant a tree that corresponds to any previous11
9

For some background on the “standing on the shoulders of giants” assumption, see e.g. the seminal paper

of Romer (1990) who assumes that the arrival rate of new blueprints depends on the level of past blueprints.
For a textbook treatment, see Jones (1997). Scotchmer (1991) contains a number of concrete examples of the
positive effects of past innovation on new innovation ranging from the cotton gin to techniques of inserting
genes into bacteria.
10
From an asset pricing perspective, an advantage of the specification (3) is that it mitigates the predictability of consumption growth. For example, in a previous version of the model where the ratio of
AN +1 /AN is equal to a constant, the consumption cycles that are implied by the model are more persistent
than under specification (3). Since consumption growth is not very predictable in the data, the specification
(3) is advantageous.
11
The assumption that a firm can plant a tree corresponding only to the current epoch can be relaxed (assuming that a firm can plant one tree each epoch), if we modify equation (3) to AN +1 =


R KN,τN +1
AN Ā 1 + 0
ζ (i) di , where Ā ≥ ζ(0)
ζ(1) . Under this alternative assumption, for any firm j and any
epoch N , we obtain AN +1 ζ(ij,N +1 ) ≥ AN +1 ζ(1) ≥ AN Āζ(1) ≥ AN ζ(0) ≥ AN ζ(ij,N ). Assuming that it
costs the same to plant a tree of vintage N + 1 or of vintage n ∈ (−∞, N ], firm j would never find it optimal
to plant a tree of a previous vintage. However, this model modification adds complexity without any extra
insights, and we avoid it for parsimony.

7

epoch. It can only plant a tree corresponding to the technology of the current epoch. Let
Xj,t =

X

An ζ(ij,n )1{eχn,j =1},

(4)

n=1...N

where N denotes the technological epoch at time t and 1{eχn,j =1} is an indicator function
equal to 1 if firm j decided to plant a tree in technological epoch n and 0 otherwise. A firm’s
total earnings are then given by Yj,t = Xj,tθt .
Any given firm determines the time at which it plants a tree in an optimal manner.
Planting a tree at time t requires a fixed cost of qt . This cost represents payments that
need to be given to workers who will plant these trees and will be determined in general
equilibrium. To keep with the usual assumptions of a Lucas tree economy, we assume that
the company finances these fixed payments by issuing new equity.12
Assuming complete markets, the firm’s objective is to maximize shareholder value. Since
the productivity index ij,N is i.i.d. across epochs, there is no linkage between the decision
to plant a tree in this epoch and any future epochs. Thus, the option to plant a tree can be
studied in isolation in each epoch.
The optimization problem of firm j in epoch N amounts to choosing the stopping time
τ that maximizes shareholder value. This amounts to solving the optimal stopping problem




Z ∞
Hτ
Hs
o
θs ds −
qτ
,
(5)
PN,j,t ≡ sup Et 1{τ <τN+1 } AN ζ(ij,N )
Ht
Ht
τ
τ
where Hs is the (endogenously determined) stochastic discount factor, τN +1 is the random
o
time at which the next epoch arrives, and PN,j,t
denotes the value of the (real) option of

planting a new tree in epoch N.
Given the setup, a firm’s price consists of three components: a) the value of assets in
place, b) the value of the growth option in the current technological epoch, and c) the value
of the growth options in all subsequent epochs. Letting
 Z ∞

Hs
A
Pj,t ≡ Xj,t Et
θs ds
Ht
t
12

(6)

This assumption is inessential, since the completeness of markets (which we assume shortly) ensures that

the Modigliani-Miller theorem holds.

8

denote the value of assets in place and
!
∞
X
H
τn o
f
PN,t
≡ Et
Pn,j,τn
H
t
n=N +1

(7)

the value of all future growth options, the price of firm j, assuming it has not planted a tree
(yet) in technological epoch N, is
f
A
o
PN,j,t = Pj,t
+ PN,j,t
+ PN,t
.

(8)

Naturally, for a firm that has planted a tree in the current technological epoch there is no

f
o
A
longer a current epoch option PN,j,t
= 0 and hence its value is given by PN,j,t = Pj,t
+ PN,t
.

2.2

Aggregation

Since the firms described in Section 2.1 produce consumption goods, the total consumption
in the economy at time t is given by the production of all firms:
Z 1

Z 1
Ct =
Yt (j)dj =
Xj,t dj θt ,
0

(9)

0

with Xj,t defined in (4). Before proceeding, it is useful to define F (x) ≡

Rx
0

ζ(i)di. Since ζ(·)

is positive and declining, we obtain Fx ≥ 0, Fxx < 0, so that F (x) has two key properties of
a production function, namely it is increasing and concave. Assuming that firms with more
productive trees always plant their trees before firms with less productive trees (we show
later that this is indeed the case), and using the dynamics of AN (equation (3)) and the
definition of KN,t gives13
Ct = AN θt [1 + F (KN,t )] .
13

To see this note that
Z 1
Z
X
Xj,t dj =
An
0

n≤N −1

=

X

n≤N −1

The term

P

(10)

Kn,τn+1

ζ(i)di + AN

0

(An+1 − An ) + AN

Z

KN,t

ζ(i)di

0

Z

KN,t

ζ(i)di

0

(An+1 − An ) = AN (1 − limn→−∞ (An /AN )) converges to AN (assuming a strictly posi

RK
R1
RK
tive probability that 0 n,t ζ(i)di > 0 for all n). Hence 0 Xj,t dj = AN 1 + 0 N,t ζ(i)di .
n≤N −1

9

Aggregate output of consumption goods is thus the product of two terms: (a) the nonstationary stochastic trend AN θt , which captures the joint effects of technological progress
due to the arrival of epochs (AN ) and neutral aggregate productivity growth (θt ), and (b)
the component [1 + F (KN,t )], which captures the contribution of technological adoption in
the current epoch and is a stationary, cyclical component, as we show in the next section.

2.3

Markets

The value of all (positive-supply) assets is given by the total value of the stock market:
Z 1
PN,t =
PN,j,tdj.
(11)
0

In additional to shares in all firms, zero-net-supply zero-coupon bonds of arbitrary maturities are available for trade. We assume that markets are complete.14 Accordingly, the
search for equilibrium prices can be reduced to the search for a stochastic discount factor Ht ,
which will coincide with the marginal utility of consumption for the representative agent.
(See Karatzas and Shreve (1998), Chapter 4.)

2.4

Consumer-workers and preferences

The economy is populated by a continuum of identical consumers-workers that can be aggregated into a single re presentative agent. The representative agent owns all the firms in
the economy, and is also the (competitive) provider of labor services.
We shall use a preference specification introduced by Abel (1990), which generalizes
standard constant relative risk aversion to allow for some degree of external habit formation. Specifically, letting ct denote the representative agent’s consumption, Ct the aggregate
14

In particular, market completeness requires the existence of markets where agents can trade securities

(in zero net supply) that promise to pay 1 unit of the numeraire when technological round N arrives. These
markets are redundant in general equilibrium, since agents are able to create dynamic portfolios of stocks
and bonds that produce the same payoff as these claims. However, it is easiest to assume their existence in
order to guarantee ex-ante that markets are complete.

10

consumption, and MtC = maxs≤t {Cs } the running maximum of aggregate consumption, the
agent’s utility is given by

C

U ct , Mt

1
=
1−γ

"

ct
MtC

1−α

cαt

#1−γ

, where α ∈ [0, 1].

(12)

This utility specification nests standard constant relative risk aversion preferences (when
α = 1) and the preferences considered by Abel (1999) and Chan and Kogan (2002) (when
α = 0) as special cases. Allowing for external habit formation is not crucial for the qualitative
implications of the model. However, it is useful for calibration purposes, since it (a) allows
matching the low level of interest rates and the high equity premium in the data and b)
mitigates the reaction of interest rates to an acceleration of anticipated consumption growth
caused by the arrival of a new technological epoch.15 Importantly, unlike the specification
in Campbell and Cochrane (1999), the specification (12) implies a constant relative risk
aversion. Even though a certain degree of time varying risk aversion could be introduced
into our framework16 , the property of constant relative risk aversion in specification (12) helps
us illustrate more clearly the new economic mechanisms that drive our results. Finally, we
specify the external habit level as the running maximum of past consumption in order to
obtain closed form solutions.17
The representative agent is also the sole provider of labor services. Purely for simplicity,
15

To see why, let ct1 and ct2 denote the consumption of the representative agent at two dates t1 and

t2 , where t1 < t2 and let ̟ =

d ln(ct2 /ct1 )
|
C
C
d ln(Uc1 /Uc2 ) d ln(ct2 /ct1 )=d ln(Mt2 /Mt1 )

denote the intertemporal elasticity of

substitution with respect to a change in ct2 /ct1 that is accompanied by an equal change in MtC2 /MtC1 . Using
(12) to compute ̟ yields ̟ =
preferences. In this case ̟ =

1
γ+(γ−1)(α−1) .
1
γ

When α = 1, the representative agent has standard CRRA

and we obtain the familiar result that the intertemporal elasticity of

substitution is simply equal to the inverse of the risk-aversion parameter. At the opposite extreme α = 0
and ̟ = 1. Hence, when α 6= 1, these preferences exhibit a higher intertemporal elasticity of substitution
with respect to variations in the growth rate of an agent’s consumption that are accompanied by equal
changes to the running maximum of aggregate consumption.
16
This could be done by either building time varying risk aversion in the preferences of the representative
agent as in Campbell and Cochrane (1999) or by assuming investor heterogeneity as in Chan and Kogan
(2002) or Gârleanu and Panageas (2007).
17
As most habit level specifications already proposed in the literature, it has the attractive property that it

11

we assume that work is not directly useful in the production of consumption goods, but it
is useful in the production of investment goods, i.e., trees.18 To keep with the Lucas “tree”
analogy, we shall therefore refer to workers as “gardeners” who plant the new trees, and we
also assume (for parsimony) that planting new trees requires exclusively labor.
Gardeners have a disutility of effort for planting new trees and need to be compensated
accordingly. Planting a tree creates a fixed disutility of Uc (s)η(s) per tree planted. Hence,
the representative agent’s utility function is given by
Z ∞

Z ∞
−ρ(s−t)
C
−ρ(s−t)
C
max Et
e
U(cs , Ms )ds −
e
Uc (cs , Ms )η(s)dls ,
Cs ,dls

t

(13)

t

where ρ > 0 is the subjective discount factor and dl(s) ≥ 0 denotes the increments in the
number of trees that the representative consumer / gardener has planted.
This utility specification for the representative agent captures the fact that labor services
are sunk in this model, i.e., the effort of planting a tree cannot be reversed. (Furthermore,
since η (s) can be an arbitrary adapted process, there is no loss in generality from specifying
the disutility of labor (per tree planted) as Uc (cs , MsC )η(s).) The specification (13) implies
that ηt can be interpreted as a reservation wage, above which the supply of labor services is
perfectly elastic.19 To see this, let VW denote the derivative of the gardener’s value function
with respect to wealth. A gardener has an incentive to plant a tree if and only if
qt VW ≥ ηt Uc .

(14)

Imposing the envelope condition,20 we obtain VW = Uc . Using this fact inside (14) implies
is “cointegrated” with aggregate consumption in the sense that the difference between log(Ct ) and log(MtC )
is stationary.
18
The idea of modeling the consumption- and the investment-goods sectors of the economy separately is
standard in endogenous-growth models. For a nice application see, e.g., Rebelo (1991), and for a finance
application see Papanikolaou (2007).
19
We note in passing that our specification of the disutility of labor is similar to the form advocated by
Greenwood et al. (1988), since it isolates any intertemporal considerations and makes the leisure-consumption
choice operate exclusively on the intratermporal margin.
20
The envelope condition follows directly from the first order equations associated with the Bellman
equation (see, e.g., Øksendal (2003), Chapter 11).

12

that another tree is planted only as long as qt ≥ ηt . Since there is a continuum of gardeners,
perfect competition among them drives the price of planting a tree to21
qt = ηt .

(15)

The consumer maximizes (13) over consumption plans in a complete market:
Z ∞

Z ∞
−ρ(s−t)
C
−ρ(s−t)
C
max Et
e
U(cs , Ms )ds −
e
Uc (cs , Ms )ηs dls
cs ,dls

t

(16)

t

subject to
 Z 1
Z ∞

Z ∞
Hs
Hs
cs ds ≤
PN,j,t dj + Et
qs dls .
Et
Ht
Ht
0
t
t

(17)

To close the model we need to make some functional form assumptions about ηt and ζ(i).
We choose ηt with three goals in mind. The first goal is to reproduce (within the model) the
facts documented in King et al. (1988). Specifically, in the data wages are non-stationary
and labor income is cointegrated with total output. Furthermore, the hours worked are
stationary. As King et al. (1988) have shown, cointegration of labor income and aggregate
output can only obtain in equilibrium if the marginal disutility of an additional unit of work
is proportional to (or, more generally, co-integrated with) Uc × ct . Under this assumption
income and substitution effects on labor supply cancel, the hours supplied are stationary, and
labor income is co-integrated with aggregate consumption. In our framework the marginal
disutility of an additional unit of work is given by Uc (t)ηt , so that the King et al. (1988)
21

Throughout we speak of a “representative” consumer-worker to expedite the presentation. Since the

production of a new tree requires an indivisible amount of labor, we are implicitly following Rogerson (1988),
who allows for labor-supply lotteries as one of the tradable contingent claims. Accordingly, even if firms
choose a worker randomly to plant a tree, trading between workers allows them to share that risk. We refer to
Rogerson (1988) for details. We note that in our setup, one can justify the concept of a representative agent
even without labor-supply lotteries, by assuming that the planting of each tree is a divisible task amongst
workers. Specifically, if a) planting a single tree takes a continuum of tasks v ∈ [0, 1], b) each worker incurs
a disutility of effort ηt Uc per-task performed, and c) any worker can perform any set of tasks in perfect
competition, then allocating tasks equally across workers would allocate the proceeds from planting a tree
equally across the continuum of workers even in the absence of labor-supply lotteries.

13

restrictions on preferences require that ηt and ct share the same common trend, namely
AN θt . The second goal is to ensure that in equilibrium ηt grows between epochs, which
seems plausible, assuming that trees of later vintages embody more complex ideas. The
third goal is to keep the disutility of planting a tree, Uc (t)ηt , independent of the number of
trees (KN,t ) planted in epoch N. This goal is motivated partly by parsimony and partly by
the significant technical simplifications it allows. The process for ηt that achieves the three
goals above is
ηt = ηMτcN (1 + F (KN,t ))ν ,

(18)

where η > 0, ν ≡ γ − (γ − 1) (1 − α) , and N = max{n | τn ≤ t}. A final functional-form
specification that facilitates closed-form solutions is
ζ(i) = bp (1 + bi)p−1 , i ∈ [0, 1],

(19)

where b > 0 and p ∈ [0, 1] are constants that control the level and the curvature of ζ(i).

2.5

Equilibrium

The equilibrium definition is standard. It requires that all markets clear and all actions be
optimal given prices.
Definition 1 A competitive equilibrium is a set of stochastic processes hct , Ct , Kn,t , Ht , dlt , qt i
such that
a) ct and dlt solve the optimization problem (16) subject to (17).
b) Firms determine the optimal time to plant a tree by solving the optimization problem
(5).
c) The consumption-good market clears:
Z 1
ct = C t =
Yt (j)dj
for all t ≥ 0,
0

where Ct denotes aggregate consumption,
and Kn,t is given by
Z 1
Kn,t =
χ
en,j,tdj,

R1
0

(20)
Yt (j)dj is given by the right-hand side of (10),

(21)

0

14

where χ
en,j,t is an indicator that takes the value 1 if firm j has planted a tree in epoch n by

time t and 0 otherwise.

d) The investment-goods market clears for all n, t :
dlt = dKn,t .

(22)

e) The markets for all assets clear.
If one could calculate the optimal processes Kn,t , then the optimal consumption process
would be given immediately by (20) and (10), which would in turn determine the equilibrium
stochastic discount factor,
Ht = e−ρt Uc .

(23)

The key challenge in determining an equilibrium is that the stochastic discount factor
(23) and the optimal investment process must be determined jointly.

3

Equilibrium Allocations and Technological Cycles

3.1

Investment decisions by firms

To start, it will be convenient to define Mt as the running maximum of θt :
Mt ≡ max θs .

(24)

s≤t

Subject to some technical assumptions, proposition 2 in the Appendix shows that there exists
∗
a constant Ξ∗ > 0 such that firm j in round N finds it optimal to plant a tree at time τj,N

given by
∗
τj,N



Ξ∗ (1 + F (iN,j ))ν
θt
=
inf
≥
.
t:
τN ≤t<τN+1
MτN
ζ(iN,j )

(25)

Since F (iN,j ) is increasing in iN,j , ζ(iN,j ) is decreasing in iN,j , and ν > 0, an implication
of equation (25) is that firms with more productive trees always plant their trees before firms
with less productive trees: the opportunity cost of waiting is larger for the former.
15

log Ct

0

t

(" ,
) %"
inf 't : t *
$
"& M - N + 0! "#

Figure 1: Response of log Ct to an increase in N
A second implication of policy (25) is that no firm finds it optimal to plant a tree when
t = τN (i.e., right at the beginning of the epoch), as long as22
Ξ∗
> 1,
ζ(0)

(26)

which we shall assume throughout.
A third and economically important implication of (25) is that in equilibrium there
is comovement between the optimal investment decisions of firms. Conditional on
reaching the relevant investment threshold

Ξ∗
ζ(0)

θt
M τN

for the first firm, a number of other firms

with ζ(ij,N ) ≈ ζ(0) also find it optimal to invest in close temporal proximity.23 Figure 1
gives a visual impression of this fact by plotting the impulse response function of an increase
in N (i.e., the arrival of a new epoch) on consumption.
As can be seen, in the short run consumption is unaffected, as all firms are waiting to
invest. Eventually, however, the firms with the most profitable firms start investing, and
hence the most productive investment opportunities are depleted early on. This leaves less
attractive investment opportunities unexploited and hence a moderation in the anticipated
growth rate of the economy going forward. This delayed reaction of the economy to a major
technological shock is consistent with recent findings in the macroeconomic literature (see,
22

This condition is sufficient to induce waiting because of (25) and

θt
MτN

=

θτN
MτN

≤ 1 at the beginning of

epoch N . Hence all firms (even the most productive one) are “below” their investment thresholds.
23
This is simply because ζ(i) is a continuous function of i and θt is a continuous function of time.

16

e.g., Vigfusson (2004) and references therein).

3.2

Aggregate consumption and endogenous cycles

Taking logs on both sides of equation (10) gives
log(Ct ) = log(θt ) + log(AN ) + xt ,

(27)

where xt is equal to
xt = log (1 + F (KN,t )) .

(28)

Letting
mt ≡ Mt /MτN ,
aggregating across the optimal investment policies implied by (25), and using the expression
for ζ(i) in equation (19) leads to the following closed-form expression24 for KN,t :
! # )
(
"
1

 1−p+νp
1
1 bp
mt
,0 ,1 .
−
KN,t = K (mt ) = min max
b Ξ∗
b

(29)

Since the duration between epochs is an exponentially distributed i.i.d. variable, mt and,
consequently, KN,t and xt are stationary processes. Hence, even though the increments to
the exogenous productivity shocks θt and the epoch index N are i.i.d., the model produces
endogenous investment-driven cycles, given by xt in equation (28).
Figure 2 illustrates the decomposition of log consumption into its components. Letting
E(xt ) denote the unconditional expectation of xt , Figure 2 shows that xt − E(xt ) can be
thought of as a measure of the distance between actual output and its stochastic trend. The
figure illustrates how the arrival of a new epoch makes AN jump upwards, consistent with
equation (3). In the short run, this jump in the stochastic trend line is not reflected in the
level of consumption, since consumption itself does not jump. However, as time passes and
24

To see why, observe that the first time that θt /MτN crosses Ξ∗ /ζ(iN,j ) is also the first time that mt

crosses Ξ∗ /ζ(iN,j ).

17

firms start to invest, the consumption growth rate increases as the most profitable firms
exploit their investment opportunities, and slowly decays thereafter. At some point, a new
epoch arrives, and this cycle repeats itself.
Figure 2 helps explain the strong negative correlation (−0.9) between shocks to trend
and shocks to the cyclical component of consumption, which has been documented in the
data by Morley et al. (2002). They interpret this negative correlation as an indication that
the economy absorbs permanent innovations with a lag. Our model supports this conclusion:
As Figure 2 shows, the arrival of a new epoch implies that the stochastic trend line in the
economy jumps up instantaneously. However, the level of consumption remains unchanged.
Since (by definition) the cycle is the difference between level and trend, this means that the
cyclical component exhibits an offsetting negative jump.25

3.3

Equilibrium stochastic discount factor

Differentiating U(ct , MtC ) with respect to ct , and recognizing that ct = Ct , equation (23)
implies the following expression for the stochastic discount factor:

(1−γ)(1−α)
Ct
−ρt −γ+(γ−1)(1−α)
.
Ht = e Ct
MtC

(30)

Because firms follow threshold policies and AN and KN,t are non-decreasing, in equilibrium
we obtain Ct /MtC = θt /Mt .26 Furthermore, the explicit expression for KN,t implies that
 (1−γ)(1−α)
θt
−γ+(γ−1)(1−α)
−ρt
Ht = e [AN θt (1 + F (K(mt )))]
.
(31)
Mt
Equation (31) together with equation (29) provide an explicit expression for the stochastic
discount factor, in terms of the exogenous shocks to the model. Proposition 3 in the appendix
25

Of course, as time passes, positive shocks to the trend θt make firms invest, and hence translate into

positive cyclical shocks, mitigating the negative correlation.
26
Since both KN,t and AN are non-decreasing processes we obtain the inequality MtC = maxs≤t Cs ≤
AN Mt (1 + F (KN,t )). The threshold form of the optimal investment policies in equation (25) implies that
KN,s increases only when θs = Ms . Therefore, there always exist some time s∗ ≤ t such that Cs∗ =
AN θs∗ (1 + F (KN,s∗ )) = AN Ms∗ (1 + F (KN,s∗ )). Combining this last observation with the upper bound
MtC ≤ AN Mt (1 + F (KN,t )) implies that MtC = AN Mt (1 + F (KN,t )), and hence Ct /MtC = θt /Mt .

18

log(Ct ), log( An ) ! log( t )

log(Ct )
log(1 ! F ( K N !1," N !2 ))

log( An ) ! log( t ) ! E ( xt )

log(1 ! F ( K N ," N !1 ))

t
N

N !1

N !2

xt
E (x)

t

0

xt % log(Ct ) & #log( An ) ! log( t )$

Figure 2: Decomposition into trend log(θt ) + log (An ) + E(x) and cycle xt − E(x). The figure
plots consumption for a path with dBt = 0 and Kn,τn+1 > 0.
uses this explicit expression to obtain closed form expressions for individual firm prices.

4

Qualitative and Quantitative Implications

In this section we discuss the qualitative implications of the model and illustrate its quantitative ones. We proceed by explaining how we calibrate the model, and in subsequent
subsections discuss the cyclical properties of expected returns, the correlation patterns between excess return and consumption growth, excess-return predictability, and cross-sectional

19

µ

0.012

γ

9

b

0.8

σ

0.030

ρ

0.012

p

0.6

λ

0.1

α

0.1

η

22.6

Table 1: Parameters used for the calibration
implications.

4.1

Calibration

Before presenting some of the quantitative implications of the paper, we discuss here how
we chose the model parameters for the simulations. Table 1 presents our choice of the 9
parameters for the baseline calibration exercise. There are three parameters that are related
to the distribution of the exogenous shocks (µ, σ, and λ), four parameters that pertain to
preferences (ρ, γ, α, and η), and two parameters (p and b) that control the function ζ(i),
i.e., the the degree of heterogeneity across trees that can be planted in a given epoch. We
choose µ to match the contribution of (neutral) total factor productivity to aggregate growth.
Hulten (1992) computes that number to be 1.17%, which motivates our choice of µ = 0.012.
The parameter σ controls the volatility of consumption. We set it to σ = 0.03, in order to
match the volatility of time-integrated consumption data.27 The parameters λ, p, b, and η
control the growth contribution of the quality and quantity increase in trees (capital goods),
the speed of adoption of new trees, and the time variation in consumption growth rates. We
follow Comin and Gertler (2006), who estimate the frequency of technology-driven “mediumrun” cycles and set λ = 0.1. The parameters b and η control (respectively) the contribution
of new capital vintages to aggregate growth per epoch and the time it takes until firms
start planting trees. As a result they control the total consumption growth rate and the
cyclical effects of technology adoption. We choose these parameters to approximately match
a) the total consumption growth rate in the data and b) the autocorrelation properties
27

As is well understood, time integration makes the volatility of time-integrated consumption data lower

than the instantaneous volatility of consumption.

20

of consumption. Finally, the parameter p controls the curvature of the function ζ(i) and
hence the acceleration in consumption growth once firms start adopting new technologies.
To measure this acceleration in growth due to adoption of a new technology, we use the
difference in consumption growth rates between 1980-1994 and 1995-2000, which is about
1.1%. We choose p to approximately match such a difference in growth rates between the
initial stages of the epoch (when no firm invests) and the latter stages of the epoch (when
firms start investing). In terms of the preference parameters ρ, γ, and α we choose ρ and
α so as to a) match the low level of real interest rates in the data and b) obtain plausible
degrees of intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES) with respect to changes in an agent’s
consumption that are accompanied by changes in the aggregate habit level. Specifically, as
we explain in footnote 15, γ + (γ − 1)(α − 1) provides a measure of the inverse of the IES
with respect to changes in an agent’s consumption that are accompanied by changes in
the aggregate habit level. With α = 0.1, the implied IES with respect to such shocks is
about 0.55, well within the reasonable range of values estimated in the literature (see, e.g.,
Attanasio and Vissing-Jorgensen (2003)). Finally, we choose γ = 9, which is sufficient to
match the average equity premium.
Table 2 compares the model’s performance to some unconditional moments in the data.
The overall performance of the model in terms of unconditional time-series moments is
comparable to the pure-endowment models of external habit formation, such as Abel (1990)
and Chan and Kogan (2002). We note that the model manages to reproduce unconditional
asset-pricing moments despite the presence of investment, which typically deepens the usual
asset-pricing puzzles28 . The reason is the presence of habit formation (see Jermann (1998)
for a discussion), and also the fact that consumption and investment goods are produced
with different technologies. This latter property of the model makes it impossible to mitigate
the effects of bad productivity shocks on consumption by simply running down the capital
28

For instance, Kaltenbrunner and Lochstoer (2006) show that it is challenging (with general Epstein-Zin-

Weil preferences) to match both the return volatility and the equity premium, if one also insists on the fact
that productivity should exhibit a strong random walk component.

21

Data

Model

Mean of consumption growth

0.017a

0.016

Volatility of consumption growth

0.033a

0.027

Mean of 1-year zero coupon yield

0.029a

0.010

Volatility of 1-year zero coupon yield

0.03a

0.060

Mean of Equity Premium (logarithmic returns)

0.039a

0.041

Volatility of Equity Premium

0.18a

0.176

Table 2: Unconditional moments of the model and the data (annualized rates). All data are from
the long sample (1871-2005) in Campbell and Cochrane (1999), with the exception of the volatility
of the 1-year zero coupon yield which is from Chan and Kogan (2002). The unconditional moments
for the model are computed from a Monte Carlo Simulation involving 12000 years of data, dropping
the initial 1000 to ensure that initial quantities are drawn from their stationary distribution. The
time increment dt is chosen to be 1/60. From the simulated paths we time aggregate consumption
and dividends and obtain quarterly series for consumption growth, dividend growth, returns and
interest rates, which we then convert to annualized rates.

stock (as in the standard production-based model) and hence raises the riskiness of stocks
and the equity premium.
Table 3 shows that the quarterly consumption autocorrelations implied by the model are
about as large as in the data. Consistent with the data, the autocorrelations implied by the
model are small and decay rapidly. The intuition for this finding is that only a small fraction
of the variability of consumption comes from the cyclical component xt .

4.2

Expected returns over the course of a technological epoch

Having studied the properties of aggregate consumption in the model, we now turn to a
discussion of the model implications for asset returns, which are the main focus of this
paper. In this subsection we start by explaining how the model can reproduce (qualitatively)
a pattern of high expected returns at the early stages of a technological adoption cycle,

22

Quarter

1

2

3

4

Data

0.35

0.20

0.23

0.06

Model

0.32

0.07

0.03

0.02

Table 3: Quarterly consumption autocorrelations - data and model. The consumption data are per
capita real consumption expenditures on nondurables and services (1952-2008). Source: St. Louis
FED (FRED Database). Simulated data are time-integrated over a quarter.

followed by an investment-driven boom and low subsequent returns. The three subsections
that follow assess the implications of this expected return time-variation from a quantitative
perspective.
The price of a firm, given by equation (8), consists of three components: 1) the value of
assets in place, 2) the value of growth options in the current technological epoch, and 3) the
value of growth options in all subsequent technological epochs.
In analogy to an individual firm, the value of the aggregate stock market can be decomposed into the values of assets in place, of current-epoch options, and of future-epoch
options. Such a decomposition shows that the relative weight of growth options is countercyclical at the aggregate. When the current level of consumption is below its stochastic
trend (i.e., the cycle component xt is below its unconditional mean), there are a large number of unexploited investment opportunities for firms. Accordingly, the relative weight of
growth options is high. In contrast, when consumption is above its trend level, several of the
most profitable investment opportunities have been exploited, and the relative importance
of growth options is small at the aggregate.
Growth options command a higher expected return than assets in place. Intuitively, a
growth option can be viewed as a call option where the underlying is an asset in place. Since
a call option is a levered position on the underlying claim, it commands a higher expected
return than that claim29 . Since the expected excess return on the market is a weighted
29

This basic intuition has been emphasized by Carlson et al. (2004) and Carlson et al. (2006) in a partial

equilibrium setting.

23

average30 of the excess returns of assets in place and growth options (current and future),
the counter-cyclicality of the relative importance of growth options implies the countercyclicality of excess returns.
An additional implication of our analysis concerns the lead-lag relationship between investment in new trees and excess returns at the aggregate. Once the first firm invests, several
other firms with productivity close to the most productive firm will follow in close succession.
Since this investment-driven boom signifies the exercise of the most profitable growth options, it coincides with a decline in the expected excess returns going forward. This negative
relation between investment and future excess returns has been documented in the empirical
literature (see, e.g., Lamont (2000)).
To summarize, our model implies a theory for the countercyclical behavior of aggregate
returns that is driven by the composition of growth options and assets in place in the firm’s
value and is linked to the investment decisions of firms. In the next subsection we examine
some empirical implications of this investment-based view of predictability.

4.3

The correlation between consumption and returns

Besides providing a theory for the countercyclicality of expected returns, the investmentbased view of return predictability helps explain two additional salient patterns in the data:
a) the correlation between excess return and consumption growth increases with the horizon
and b) excess returns lead aggregate growth.
Table 4 illustrates the first pattern in the data. The correlation between consumption
growth and (excess) returns in the data is 1.76 times higher for 3-year intervals than for
quarterly intervals. Specifically, it increases from 0.17 to 0.3 as one moves from quarterly
to 3-year intervals. As Daniel and Marshall (1999) document, this is a manifestation of a
more general phenomenon: the correlation between consumption growth and excess returns
increases at lower frequencies. The second row of table 4 illustrates this finding. Applying a
Baxter and King (1999) filter to isolate cycles that last less than 1.5 years (high frequency
30

The weights are given by the fractions of stock market value that are due to each of the three components.

24

Correlations

Data

Model

corr. cons. growth and returns (3-year-intervals)
corr. cons. growth and returns (quarterly)
Bandpass filtered returns and consumption (low frequency)
Bandpass filtered returns and consumption (high frequency)

1.76

1.63

2.93

2.60

0.45

0.48

4×10−4

0

Lead-Lag Relationships
p-value (Consumption does not Granger-cause returns)
p-value (Excess returns do not Granger-cause consumption)

Table 4: Correlations between consumption growth and excess returns and lead-lag relationships.
Consumption data include the full post WWII sample on non-durables and services as provided
by the St. Louis FED, and returns are value weighted CRSP returns. The first row reports the
ratio of excess-return and consumption correlation over 3-year intervals divided by the respective
correlation over a quarter. The second row reports the ratio of correlation between excess return
and consumption at low frequencies divided by the respective correlation at high frequencies. We
computed this ratio by using the Baxter and King (1999) filter to isolate “high frequencies” (swings
smaller than 1.5 years) and “low frequencies” (swings between 1.5 and 8 years) in both consumption
and excess returns, and computed the respective correlations. (See Daniel and Marshall (1999) for
details.) The third and fourth rows contain the results of standard Granger-causality tests (using
2 autoregressive lags and quarterly data.)

movements) and cycles that last between 1.5 and 8 years (low-frequency movements), we
find that the low-frequency correlation (0.44) is almost 3 times as high as the high-frequency
correlation (0.15).
As Yu (2007) shows, this increasing correlation between consumption and excess returns at longer horizons/lower frequencies presents a challenge for leading single-shock,
endowment-based asset pricing models that derive return predictability exclusively from
time variation in risk aversion. (See, e.g., Campbell and Cochrane (1999).) Such models typically produce the opposite pattern (higher correlations at shorter horizons / higher

25

frequencies).31
The present model helps address this limitation by introducing two types of technological
shocks. Shocks to θt affect both consumption and returns on impact. However, the arrival
of technological epochs produces different reactions in consumption and returns in the short
run and in the long run. In the short run, the arrival of a new epoch raises expected
returns, as the new growth options raise the riskiness of the stock market. However, average
consumption growth declines in the short run, since the old growth options become obsolete
and it is not profitable to plant the new vintages yet. It is only after the passage of some
time that the new technology boosts consumption growth. The interplay of these two shocks
helps explain why consumption is weakly correlated with returns in the short run, whereas
the correlation becomes stronger in the long run.
Table 4 illustrates these effects, by comparing correlations in the data with the equivalent
correlations in simulated data. Similar to the data, the model is able to reproduce the
increase in correlation as one moves to longer horizons (lower frequencies).32
The model can also provide an explanation for the fact that asset returns tend to lead
aggregate growth rates, consistent with the data. This fact is illustrated in the last two
rows of table 4, which show that the data reject the hypothesis that excess returns do not
Granger-cause consumption, but do not reject the reverse (namely that consumption does
31

Intuitively, the reason is that such models impose a negative correlation between excess returns and a

smooth average of past consumption. This negative correlation attenuates the correlation between consumption and excess returns at low frequencies, since the moving average of past consumption acts as a low-pass
filter that isolates low-frequency movements in consumption.
32
Even though not important for our analysis, we note that the model produces higher correlations between
consumption and excess returns compared to the data. For instance the quarterly correlation between
consumption and excess returns in the model is 0.55, while the high-frequency correlation is 0.33. (The
respective numbers in the data are 0.17 and 0.15.) This is driven by the fact that the only mechanism that
separates consumption and dividends inside the model is the presence of investment. Adding labor as an
additional factor of production for consumption goods and a countercyclical labor share (as in Gârleanu and
Panageas (2007)) or allowing entry of new firms (as in Gârleanu et al. (2009)) are simple ways to reduce
these correlations, but we do not pursue them here for parsimony.

26

not Granger-cause returns). Yu (2007) and Backus et al. (2008) provide further evidence
on these lead-lag patterns, and Yu (2007) shows that this pattern presents a challenge for
some leading, single-shock, pure-endowment based models. Our model can reproduce these
patterns in the data for a simple reason: Slightly before the onset of new-technology adoption,
expected returns are high, since the aggregate amount of outstanding growth options is large.
As time passes, and θt grows, firms start planting trees and consumption growth accelerates.
Therefore, high (expected) asset returns anticipate an acceleration of consumption growth.
We conclude this subsection by noting that our analysis does not deny the importance
of other mechanisms for return time variation (such as time varying risk aversion), nor does
our model preclude their inclusion into our framework. Our analysis simply illustrates the
benefits from augmenting the commonly used, single-shock, pure-endowment asset pricing
models to allow for both embodied and disembodied shocks in an investment framework.

4.4

P/D Predictability

We conclude the discussion of the time-series properties of returns by performing the usual
predictability regressions of aggregate excess returns on the aggregate log P/D ratio. Table
5 tabulates the results of these regressions, and compares them to the data. Because of
well documented small-sample issues in return-predictability regressions, we simulate one
thousand independent samples of 100-year-long paths of artificial data. We run predictability
regressions for each of these samples and report the average coefficient along with a 95%
distribution band. We then compare these simulations to the equivalent point estimates in
the data.
The coefficients in the simulations have the right sign, but are about one third of their
empirical counterparts. Most of the empirical point estimates, however, are within the 95%
distribution band according to the model.
It is useful to relate our results to Chan and Kogan (2002), who study an endowment
economy with preferences similar to equation (12) and show that in the absence of riskaversion heterogeneity, the (log) P/D ratio predicts excess returns with a positive rather
27

P/D Predictive Ability
Data

Model

Horizon(years)

Coefficient

R-square

Coefficent

R-square

1

-0.120

0.040

-0.051

0.005

(-0.363, 0.049)

(0.000, 0.112)

-0.105

0.013

(-0.431, 0.108)

(0.000, 0.100)

-0.156

0.017

(-0.500, 0.152)

(0.000, 0.114)

-0.208

0.022

(-0.720, 0.225)

(0.000, 0.172)

-0.247

0.023

(-0.894, 0.279)

(0.000, 0.240)

2

3

5

7

-0.300

-0.350

-0.640

-0.730

0.100

0.110

0.230

0.250

Table 5: Results of predictive Regressions. Excess returns in the aggregate stock market between t
and t + T for T = 1, 2, 3, 5, 7 are regressed on the P/D ratio at time t. A constant is included but
not reported. The data column is from Chan and Kogan (2002). The simulations were performed by
drawing 1000 time series of a length equal to 100 years. We report the means of these simulations
next to the respective point estimates in the data. The numbers in parentheses are the 95%
confidence interval of the estimates obtained in the simulations.

than a negative sign33 . Indeed, in the absence of investment, our model would share the
same features as the model of Chan and Kogan (2002) with homogenous risk aversion;
specifically, increases in the surplus ratio

Ct
MtC

=

θt
Mt

would raise both the P/D ratio and

excess returns. With investment, however, increases in consumption also impact the relative
importance of aggregate growth options. In particular, during the onset of a cycle this
weight increases and hence expected excess returns increase. Simultaneously, anticipations
of increased consumption growth raise interest rates and lower P/D ratios.34 Once real33
34

This leads Chan and Kogan (2002) to consider a model with agents that have heterogenous risk aversion.
As we show in footnote 15, the magnitude of the interest rate reaction depends on the value of α. That

28

options start being exercised, on the other hand, the economy experiences a combination
of increased investment, higher P/D ratios (due to lower interest rates) and lower expected
excess returns. Thus, the presence of investment counteracts the effect identified by Chan
and Kogan (2002), and allows the model to match the negative relationship between (log)
P/D ratios and expected excess returns.
In results that we do not report here to save space, we also ran regressions similar to
Duffee (2005). He finds a negative relation between conditional excess returns and the
conditional covariance of consumption and excess returns (as predicted by the stock price to
consumption ratio and other instruments) over quarterly horizons. Using the stock price to
consumption ratio as an instrument, we found similar results over quarterly horizons, even
though in our model return predictability is driven by time variation in the instantaneous
covariance between consumption growth and excess returns. The reason is that the true
conditional covariances and the true conditional returns are unobserved; hence one needs to
use imperfect and persistent instruments over a short sample to predict time variation in
returns, and conditional covariances, which can attenuate or reverse the true link between
the two quantities.

4.5

Cross-sectional implications

The expected-return patterns that we have described so far are more pronounced for the
firms that can plant the most productive trees, i.e., the firms that are likely to profit most
from the new technology. Specifically, for firms whose value is comprised mostly of growth
options, the model predicts a pattern of high expected returns up to the time of investment
followed by a discontinuous drop in expected returns as growth options are converted into
assets in place. This return pattern has been derived in a partial equilibrium setting by
Carlson et al. (2004) and continues to manifest itself in our general-equilibrium framework.
footnote also shows that the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is always bounded below one in our
model, so that the decline in the P/D ratio due to increased discount rates is stronger than the increase in
the P/D ratio due to anticipations of increased dividend growth.

29

This observation has implications for two well-documented patterns in the cross section
of expected returns: the size premium and the value premium.
To see why the model is able to produce a size premium, it is easiest to consider a firm
j that has a higher market value of equity (size) than firm j ′ , so that PN,j,t > PN,j ′,t . To
simplify the analysis, assume further that both of these firms have exercised their growth
o
o
option in the current epoch, so that PN,j,t
= PN,j
′ ,t = 0. Since the future growth options

are the same for both firms, the relative importance of growth options for firm j must be
smaller, and hence firm j must therefore have a lower expected return. Hence, assuming
that one could safely ignore current epoch growth options,35 a sorting of companies based
on size would produce a size premium.
The model is also consistent with the value premium. This may seem counterintuitive
at first, since one would expect that firms with a high market-to-book ratio should have a
substantial fraction of their value tied up in growth options, and hence should be riskier. The
resolution of the puzzle is similar to Gomes et al. (2003). Specifically, trees are heterogenous
in the model, and accordingly the market-to-book ratio of a given firm reflects primarily the
average productivity of its existing trees.
The easiest way to see how tree heterogeneity helps account for the value premium is
to consider two firms j and j ′ that have planted a tree in every single epoch, including the
current one. As a result, the two firms have identical book values and identical growth
options. However, suppose that firm j has always been “luckier” than firm j ′ in terms of the
productivity of the trees it has had the opportunity to plant. Then the market value of firm
j will be higher than the market value of firm j ′ , because the value of its assets in place is
higher. The growth options of the two firms are identical, and hence the total value of firm j
is larger than the total value of firm j ′ , and firm j has a smaller fraction of its value tied up
35

The presence of current epoch growth options distorts the perfect ranking of expected returns implied

by size. Intuitively, high market values may be associated with a valuable current-period growth option (in
which case expected returns should be high) instead of numerous assets in place (in which case expected
returns should be low). For the calibrations that we consider, however, we find that current-epoch growth
options are not quantitatively important enough to affect the size effect.

30

in growth options. Accordingly, firm j has a lower expected return than firm j ′ . Since the
book values of the two firms are identical, firm j has a lower book-to-market ratio than firm
j ′ . This is consistent with the well known fact that firms with a low book-to-market ratio
have a low expected return (the value premium).36
Even though not at the core of our analysis, we note that the model is also consistent with
additional cross-sectional properties of the data. Thus, since high-size (and high-growth)
firms typically have trees with higher productivity on average, the model is consistent with
the empirical evidence reported in Fama and French (1995) that sorting on size and value
produces predictability for a firm’s profitability (earnings-to-book ratio). The model is also
consistent with the evidence that small firms tend to grow faster than large firms.37 Finally,
the model also predicts that firms with a low book-to-market ratio (high Tobin’s q) tend
to exhibit stronger investment activity (as measured by the growth in the book value of
assets). The intuition for this is simple: A high Tobin’s q (low book to market) reflects a)
the productivity of existing trees, but also b) the magnitude of growth options compared
to the current capital stock of the firm. The first component drives expected returns down
as we showed above, but is irrelevant for predicting the growth rate in the capital stock.
However, the second component predicts the growth in the capital stock. The interplay of
these two forces can help explain the joint presence of a value premium along with a weak
positive correlation between Tobin’s q and the investment-to-capital ratio.
Table 6 reports results on the cross sectional predictability of returns. In order to match
more accurately the cross-sectional distribution of size and book-to-market dispersion, we
introduced idiosyncratic (disembodied) tree-specific shocks. To motivate such shocks, we
note that so far we have made the assumption that technology is fully embodied in the new
36

Of course, the presence of current-period growth options distorts the ranking of expected returns implied

by the above argument. As we show below, in a calibrated version of the model this distortion is not powerful
enough to substantially affect the value effect.
37
The reason is mean reversion: In expectation all firms have the same book value of trees (after detrending by AτN θt ) in the long run. Hence firms who are below that stationary value at a given time can be
expected to grow faster and vice versa.

31

Portfolios formed on Size (Stationary Distribution)
Deciles

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

log(Size) – Data

-2.45

-1.36

-0.82

-0.40

0.00

0.40

0.82

1.34

1.99

3.51

log(Size) – Sim.

-2.04

-1.28

-0.79

-0.39

0.00

0.38

0.77

1.16

1.72

3.61

Returns(Size) – Data 13.91 11.72 11.63 11.07 10.53 10.44 9.88

9.13

8.53

7.00

Returns(Size) – Sim.

6.17

5.77

5.63

7.96

6.55

5.79

5.72

5.79

5.85

6.00

Portfolios formed on book to market (Stationary Distribution)
Deciles

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

log(BM) – Data

-1.47

-0.88

-0.59

-0.38

-0.20

-0.03

0.14

0.34

0.60

1.22

log(BM) – Sim.

-2.94

-1.68

-0.98

-0.47

-0.04

0.32

0.66

1.03

1.52

2.50

Returns(BM) – Data

6.65

7.86

8.05

7.73

8.53

9.01

9.21 11.05 12.00 12.67

Returns(BM) – Sim.

5.71

5.77

5.77

5.87

6.04

6.28

6.19

6.15

6.30

7.17

Table 6: Portfolios sorted by size and book to market – model and data. The data are from
the website of Kenneth French. Time period: 1927-2009. Average returns per decile are based
on monthly data, which are converted to annualized rates. We subtract 3.09% from all returns
to account for the average CPI inflation between 1927 and 2009. The median (log) firm size is
normalized to zero.

trees. However, in reality new technological paradigms also affect the internal organization
of firms, their marketing practices, and, potentially the way existing technologies are used
in the production process. Hence, the arrival of a new epoch may affect the profitability
of existing trees. To account for this possibility, we allowed for the presence of tree-specific
shocks Z(i, t), so that the time-t output of tree i ∈ [0, 1] that is planted at time s in epoch
N is given by AN ζ(i)Z(i, t)θt . The shock Z(i, t) is equal to one at the time s that the tree
is planted — i.e., Z(i, s) = 1 — thereafter stays constant within each epoch — i.e., Z(i, t) =
Z(i, τN ), t ∈ [τN , τn+1 ) — and jumps between epochs so that Z(i, τN +1 ) = Z(i, τN )u(i, τN +1 ),
where u(i, τN +1 ) is i.i.d. across trees and epochs, distributed lognormally with mean 1 and
2
variance σu(τ
, and independent of all other shocks in the model.
N+1 )

32

By their construction, the idiosyncratic shocks Z(i, t) do not affect a firm’s optimal stopping problem, the stochastic discount factor, or any other aggregate quantity. Hence, they
do not affect any of the conclusions of the paper so far. They simply add more variability to
the stationary cross-sectional distribution of size and book-to-market ratios, so as to allow
matching these distributions more accurately. With this goal in mind, we choose the variance
σu(τN+1 ) = 2, thus approximately matching the deciles of each of the two distributions.38 Table 6 shows that returns sorted by book-to-market and size replicate the qualitative patterns
in the data. The magnitudes, however, are smaller.
Having illustrated that our model is consistent with some well documented cross-sectional
asset-pricing puzzles, we would also like to make it clear that its parsimonious structure and
focus on one mechanism has its limitations. One such limitation is that, in calibrations,
sorting on one of the two effects (size or value) drives out the other. This is linked to the
fact that within the model only one source of risk is reflected in the stochastic discount factor.
Therefore, as long as one of the two sorting procedures leads to a satisfactory ranking of the
conditional betas, the other sorting procedure adds little.39 Gârleanu et al. (2009) propose
a model in which the stochastic discount factor rewards multiple sources of risk because of a
lack of intergenerational risk sharing and rivalry between technological innovations. Within
such a model value and size premia could potentially be obtained as independent effects, but
such an extension is beyond the scope of the current paper.
38

2
A technical condition to ensure stationarity of the cross sectional size distribution is limN →∞ σu(τ
=
N +1 )

0. In the simulations we enforce this condition by simply assuming that the idiosyncratic shocks have
constant variance σu2 for M epochs after the tree is planted and zero variance thereafter. We chose σu2 and
M as free parameters to match as closely as possible the 20 cross sectional moments of the size and the book
to market distribution. Specifically, we choose σu = 2 and M = 2.
39
In this connection we also note that (unconditional) market beta cannot explain the dispersion in excess
returns, since they do not generate sufficient conditional-beta variation.

33

5

Conclusion

We proposed a model of technological change that posits, in addition to the usual small,
embodied shocks, major disembodied ones that affect output only following new investment.
Whereas it takes a while for the investment in the new technologies to become viable and thus
translate into higher output, asset prices react immediately to their emergence, giving rise to
the type of lead-lag relationship between returns and consumption that has been documented
in the data. Related, the correlations between returns and consumption growth increase with
the horizon, also as in the data. During the early stages of the adoption cycle consumption
growth is low, while excess returns, driven by the relatively numerous real options, are high;
the pattern reverses once investment increases the growth rate of consumption and the ratio
between the values of assets in place and growth options. This investment-driven countercyclicality of discount rates can also generate the positive predictability of excess returns by
the aggregate P/D ratio and is also consistent with such cross-sectional phenomena as the
value and size premia.
This investment-based approach to expected-return time variation is distinct from existing endowment-based approaches that build on either countercyclical risk aversion or
stochastic consumption volatility that anticipates long-run consumption growth. Besides
providing an intuitive mechanism for expected-return variability, the investment-based approach is consistent with a host of joint time-series properties of returns and consumption;
it also is parsimonious, since it assumes that all underlying shocks are i.i.d.. Finally, it helps
explain the ability of investment to predict returns both in the time series40 and the cross
section.41
Our goal in this paper was to isolate the mechanism that links adoption of new technologies and return time variation. In order to facilitate exposition, we intentionally suppressed
other channels that could also lead to return time variation within our framework. We recognize, however, that combining our setup with, for instance, some degree of time-varying risk
40
41

See, e.g., Lamont (2000) and Hsu (2009).
See, e.g., Titman et al. (2004).

34

aversion or Epstein-Zin-Weil preferences could help further strengthen the model’s ability to
explain asset-pricing data. The latter extension seems particularly promising in our framework because disembodied shocks that affect the economy with a lag are a natural source
of “long-run risk”, i.e., low-frequency consumption-growth predictability. Because such an
extension does not allow closed-form solutions and introduces a series of new insights and
issues, we leave it for future work.

35

A

Appendix

A.1

Propositions and Proofs

In this appendix we prove that there exists an appropriate constant Ξ = Ξ∗ such that if a firm
perceives the equilibrium process for KN,t to be given by (29) and the stochastic discount factor to
be given by (31) then that firm will optimally plant a tree the first time that θt reaches the threshold
value given by equation (25). We also provide closed-form expressions for the equilibrium value of
any firm j in round N at time t.
We start by defining some constants and functions that appear repeatedly in the proof. Specifically, let constants γ1 , and γ1∗ be defined as
r


2 2
µ − σ2
+ 2σ 2 (ρ + λ) − µ −
γ1 ≡
σ2
r



γ1∗

µ−

≡

σ2
2

2

+ 2σ 2 ρ − µ −

σ2
2

σ2
2



> 0,

> 0,

σ2

and the constants β1 and β2 as
β1 ≡
β2 ≡

1
2

ρ + λ − µ (1 − γ) + γ (1 − γ) σ2
−νp
− ν − γ1 < 0,
1 − p + νp

,

We assume that β1 > 0. Furthermore, let the functions g1 (x) , and g̃1 (x) , be given by
g1 (x) ≡ β2 + γ1 + γ + x,
α (1 − γ) p
g̃1 (x) ≡
+ (γ − 1) (1 − α) + x,
1 − p + νp
the functions g2 (x) and g̃2 (x) be defined as
g2 (x) ≡
g̃2 (x) ≡

(γ − 1) (1 − α) + x
g1 (x)
+
,
αγ − α + γ1
1 + β2
(γ − 1) (1 − α) + x
g̃1 (x)
+
,
p
αγ − α + γ1
1 + β2 + 1−p+νp

and g3 (x) be given by
g3 (x) ≡

λ
(ρ + λ) +

σ2
2

(γ + x) (1 − γ − x) − µ (1 − γ − x)

A useful first result is contained in the following Lemma.

36

.

Lemma 1 Fix a constant Ξ ≥ bp and suppose that KN,t is given by

KN,t = K



Mt
MτN




 h 
 
i 1
bp

Mt 1−p+νp


−1  
 Ξ M τN
= min max 
, 0 , 1 ,


b



−γ+(γ−1)(1−α)

Ct is given by Ct = θt Xτn (1 + bKN,t )p , and Ht is given by Ht = e−ρt Ct
Define mt ≡

Mt
M τN

, and also let

(32)


θt
Mt

(1−γ)(1−α)

.

t

"

#
 α(γ−1)+γ1
h
i
(γ − 1) (1 − α) + x
bp
g4 (x) ≡ g3 (x)
+
g2 (x) (1 + b)(1−p+νp)(1+β2 ) − 1 ,
α (γ − 1) + γ1
Ξ
"
#
 α(γ−1)+γ1
h
i
(γ − 1) (1 − α) + x
bp
(1−p+νp)(1+β2 )+p
+
g̃2 (x) (1 + b)
−1 .
g̃4 (x) ≡ g3 (x)
α (γ − 1) + γ1
Ξ
Furthermore, let the constants α1 and m∗ de defined as
"
#
 α(γ−1)+γ1
h
i
(γ − 1) (1 − α)
bp
(1−p+νp)(1+β2 )
α1 =
+
g2 (0) (1 + b)
− 1 β1 ,
α (γ − 1) + γ1
Ξ
Ξ
(1 + b)1−p+νp ,
bp

m∗ =

and the constants ∆1 and ∆2 be given by
∆1 = −

β1
1−λβ1 g4 (0)
,
g4 (1 − γ − γ1∗ )

α1 +

(33)

β1
.
1 − λβ1

∆2 =

(34)

We assume throughout that ∆1 > 0. Finally, let χt denote the following conditional expectation:
χt ≡ Et
Then χt = χ
χ



θt
M t , mt





Z

∞
t

θt
M t , mt

e−ρ(s−t)



Cs
Ct

−ν

Ms
θs
Mt
θt

!(γ−1)(1−α)


, where

θs
ds.
θt

(35)


 γ−1+γ1 

α(γ−1)+γ1


(γ−1)(1−α)
(1−p+νp)(1+β2 )
bpmt
θt
= ∆2 1 + Mt
g2 (0) (1 + b)
−1
Ξ
α(γ−1)+γ1 +




α(γ−1)+γ1

α(γ−1)+γ1∗
bpmt


 γ+γ1∗ −1 
 γ1 −γ1∗
×
− α(γ−1)+γ1 +


Ξ
θt
θt
h
i 
+∆1 Mt
1 + Mt





g2 (1 − γ − γ1∗ ) (1 + b)(1−p+νp)(1+β2 ) − 1

37

when mt ≤

Ξ
bp ,





χ

θt
M t , mt

=




−(1+β2 )
 γ−1+γ1 
g1 (0)
(1−p+νp)(1+β2 )
bpmt
θt
∆2 1 + M
+
(1
+
b)
g
(0)
−
2
1+β2
Ξ
t





−(1+β2 )
g1 (1−γ−γ1∗ )
bpmt

 γ+γ1∗ −1 
 γ1 −γ1∗
+
×
−
1+β2
Ξ
θt
θt


+∆1 M
1
+
Mt
t

(1 + b)(1−p+νp)(1+β2 ) g2 (1 − γ − γ1∗ ) 

Ξ
when bp
≤ mt ≤ m∗ , and finally



 γ−1+γ1
θt
θt
χ
, mt = ∆ 2 1 + M
t
Mt

(γ−1)(1−α)
α(γ−1)+γ1



+ ∆1

when mt ≥ m∗ .



θt
Mt

−(1−γ−γ1∗ ) 
1−

α(γ−1)+γ1∗
α(γ−1)+γ1



Mt
θt

γ1∗ −γ1 

To save space we only give a sketch of the argument. As a first step,

Proof of Lemma 1.


τn
let Z M
be given as
θτ
n

Z

Z



M τn
θ τn





Z

Mτn
θτn



≡ Eτn

Z

∞

e−ρ(s−τn )

τn



Cs
Cτn





Ms
θs

(γ−1)(1−α)

M τn
θ τn

(γ−1)(1−α)

θs
ds.
θτn

satisfies the recursive relationship



Mτn
θτn



= Eτn

Z

τn+1

e−ρ(s−τn )

τn



Let ωt ≡

−ν

θt
θ τn


+Eτn e−ρ(τn+1 −τn )




Cs
Cτn

−ν

Cτn+1
Cτn





ξ (ωt , mt ) ≡ Et

= Et

Z

τn+1
t
τn+1
t

e−ρ(s−t)



Cs
Cτn

−ν

M

−ν





Ms
θs

(γ−1)(1−α)

M τn
θ τn

θs
(γ−1)(1−α) θ ds

τn+1

θτn+1



and let ξ (ωt , mt ) be defined as
Z

Ms
θs

M τn
θ τn

(γ−1)(1−α)

(γ−1)(1−α)

(γ−1)(1−α)

M τn
θ τn

θs
(γ−1)(1−α) θ ds



θτn+1
θτn



Z







Mτn+1 
.
θτn+1

τn

(γ−1)(1−α)

e−ρ(s−t) (1 + F (K (mt )))−ν ωt1−γ mt

(36)

τn

ds,

(37)

where the second line follows the definitions of ωt and mt and from Ct = θt Xτn (1 + F (K (mt ))).
To provide a closed form solution for ξ (ωt , mt ) we solve the ordinary differential equation (ODE)
σ2 2
(γ−1)(1−α)
ω ξωω + µωξω − (ρ + λ) ξ + (1 + F (K (mt )))−ν ωt1−γ mt
=0
2

38

(38)

subject to the boundary conditions



Mτn
ξm
mt , mt = 0, lim
ωt →0
θτn

ξ (ωt , mt )
−α(γ−1)

(1 + F (K (mt )))−ν mt



ωt
mt

1−γ < ∞.

(39)

By the results in Heinricher and Stockbridge (1991), a continuously differentiable function (in ωt )
that solves (38) and (39) is the solution to (37).42 The function that solves (38) subject to (39) is
given by

 1−γ
−α(γ−1) ωt

β1 m t


mt






α(γ−1)+γ1


(γ−1)(1−α)
bpmt



γ1 +γ−1

+

θ
ω
α(γ−1)+γ1
Ξ

τn t
Ξ

 ;

h

×
1
+
mt ≤ bp

Mτn mt

(1−p+νp)(1+β2 ]




×g
(0)
(1
+
b)
−
1
2

−νp
 1−p+νp
 1−γ

ξ (ωt , mt ) =
−α(γ−1) bpmt
ωt

β1 m t

Ξ
mt








−(1+β2 )
h
i

γ1 +γ−1

θτn ωt
(1−p+νp)(1+β2 )
g1 (0)
bpmt

Ξ
∗

×
1
+
−
+
(1
+
b)
g
(0)
;
m
∈
,
m
2
t

Mτn mt
1+β2
Ξ
bp




 1−γ 

γ1 +γ−1


−νp ωt
θ ω
(γ−1)(1−α)

 β1 m−α(γ−1)
(1 + b)
1 + Mττn mtt
;
mt ≥ m∗ ,
t
mt
α(γ−1)+γ1
n

(40)

which can be verified by direct substitution into (38) and (39).
We next take a number δ ≥ 1 − γ − γ1 , and compute the function Φ (ωt , mt ; δ) , defined as
Φ (ωt , mt ; δ)



≡ Et e−ρ(τn+1 −t)

=



Mτn
θτn

δ



Cτn+1
Cτn

−ν

M

τn+1

θτn+1



M τn
θ τn

(γ−1)(1−α)

(γ−1)(1−α)



θτn+1
θτn



Mτn+1
θτn+1

δ



(41)




· B (ωt , mt , δ) ,

(42)

where



−ν
(γ−1)(1−α)+δ 1−γ−δ
−ρ(τn+1 −t)
B (ωt , mt ; δ) ≡ Et e
(1 + F (K(mτ − )))
mτ −
ωτ −
.
n+1

42

n+1

n+1

A sketch of the argument follows: Apply Ito’s Lemma to e−(ρ+λ)t ξ (ωt mt ) to obtain
 2

Z T


σ 2
E e−(ρ+λ)(T −t) ξ (ωT , mT ) − ξ (ωt .mt ) = E
e−(ρ+λ)(s−t)
ω ξωω + µωξω − (ρ + λ) ξ ds
2
t



Z T
Mτn
−(ρ+λ)(s−t)
+E
e
ξm
ms , ms dms ,
θτ n
t

where the second line of the above display uses the fact that mt increases whenever θt = Mt , i.e., whenever


M
ωt = θττn mt . Now, let T → ∞, and use (38) together with (39) to arrive at (37).
n

39

The last line of equation (41) follows from the definitions of ωt and mt and from Ct = θt Xτn (1 + F (K (mt ))).
The expressions mτ −

n+1

and ωτ −

n+1

denote the values of mt and ωt at the end of epoch n (i.e., an

“instant” before the epoch changes).
To determine the expression for B (ωt , mt ; δ), we repeat the same argument as for V (ωt , mt ) .
Specifically, B (ωt , mt ) satisfies the ODE
σ2 2
(γ−1)(1−α)+δ 1−γ−δ
ω Bωω + µωBω − (ρ + λ) B + (1 + F (K (mt )))−ν mt
ωt
=0
2
subject to the boundary conditions,



Mτn
B (ωt , mt ; δ)
Bm
mt , mt = 0, lim
< ∞.
ωt →0
θτn
ωt1−γ−δ

(43)

(44)

It can be verified by direct substitution that the solution to (43) and (44) is given by

 1−γ−δ
−α(γ−1)

ωt

g3 (δ) m
mt


t





α(γ−1)+γ1 




(γ−1)(1−α)+δ
bpm
t



1−γ−γ1 −δ




Ξ

Mτn mt
α(γ−1)+γ1 +
Ξ

h
i
×
1
+
; mt ≤ bp



θ τn ω t

(1−p+νp)(1+β2 )






×g2 (δ) (1 + b)
−1



−νp






1−γ−δ

−α(γ−1)
 g3 (δ) bpmt 1−p+νp ωt
mt
Ξ
mt



B (ωt , mt ; δ) =

−(1+β2 )

g1 (δ)
bpmt





1−γ−γ
−δ
− 1+β2 +
1

Ξ
 × 1 + Mτn mt

 ; mt ∈ [ Ξ , m∗ ]


θ τn ω t
bp


 
× (1 + b)(1−p+νp)(1+β2 ) g2 (δ) 



 1−γ−δ


−α(γ−1)
−νp ωt

(δ)
(1
+
b)
mt
g

3
mt





1−γ−γ1 −δ 


(γ−1)(1−α)+δ Mτn mt

;
mt ≥ m∗ .
 × 1 + α(γ−1)+γ1
θτ ω t
n

(45)

Hence, at the beginning of epoch, ωt = 1 and mt = 1, and therefore


Mτn 1−γ−γ1 −δ
B (1, 1; δ) = g3 (δ) + g4 (δ)
.
θτn

(46)

where the function g3 (δ) and g4 (δ) are given in the statement of the Lemma. Combining (46) with
(42), it follows that

Mτn 1−γ−γ1
.
(47)
θτn


τn
To complete the computation of Z M
, we employ a “guess and verify” approach. We first
θ τn


M τn
guess that Z θτ
can be written as
n




Mτn
Mτn δ1
Z
= ∆1
+ ∆2
(48)
θτn
θτn
Φ (1, 1; δ) = g3 (δ)



Mτn
θτn

δ

+ g4 (δ)



40

for some appropriate constants δ1 , ∆1 , and ∆2 . Using (48) inside the recursive equation (37), recalling that at the beginning of the epoch ωτn = 1, mτn = 1, and using the definition of Φ (ωτn , mτn ; δ)
(equation [41]), we obtain



Mτn δ1
+ ∆2
(49)
∆1
θτn
= ξ (ωτn , mτn ) + ∆1 Φ (ωτn , mτn ; δ1 ) + ∆2 Φ (ωτn , mτn ; 0)
"
#






Mτn δ1
Mτn 1−γ−γ1
Mτn 1−γ−γ1
= β1 + α1
+ ∆1 g3 (δ1 )
+ g4 (δ1 )
θτn
θτn
θτn
"

1−γ−γ1 #
Mτn
+∆2 g3 (0) + g4 (0)
θτn




Mτn 1−γ−γ1
Mτn δ1
= [β1 + ∆2 g3 (0)] + [α1 + ∆1 g4 (δ1 ) + ∆2 g4 (0)]
+ ∆1 g3 (δ1 )
.
θτn
θτn
Conjecture (48) is true if the coefficients on the left- and the right-hand sides of (49) match.
Matching free-term coefficients, i.e., setting
∆2 = β1 + ∆2 g3 (0) = β1 + ∆2 λβ1 ,
gives ∆2 as in (34). The value δ1 = 1 − γ − γ1∗ follows from equating the coefficients of



M τn
θ τn

δ1

:

∆1 = ∆1 g3 (δ1 ).
Finally, the term that pre-multiplies



M τn
θ τn

1−γ−γ1

needs to equal zero,

0 = α1 + ∆1 g4 (δ1 ) + ∆2 g4 (0),


τn
which leads to ∆1 as in (33). This completes the computation of Z M
.
θ τn


τn
Having determined Z M
, we observe next that χt in equation (35) can be written as
θτ
n

χ



θt
, mt
Mt





= Et 

Z

τn+1

e−ρ(s−t)

t




+Et e−ρ(τn+1 −t)





Cs
Ct

−ν

Cτn+1
Ct

−ν

41

Ms
θs
Mt
θt

!(γ−1)(1−α)

 Mτ


n+1

θτn+1
Mt
θt


θs 
ds
θt

(γ−1)(1−α)




θτn+1 
×Z
θt



Mτn+1
θτn+1



,

which implies that


θt
χ
, mt
Mt
=



Cτn
Ct

+



−ν

Cτn
Ct



M τn
θ τn



−ν



(γ−1)(1−α)

θτn

(γ−1)(1−α) θ × Et 
t
Mt
θt



M τn
θ τn



Z

τn+1

e−ρ(s−t)

t



Cs
Cτn

−ν

(γ−1)(1−α)




Ms
θs
M τn
θ τn

θτn
(γ−1)(1−α) θ
t
Mt

(γ−1)(1−α)


θs 
ds
θτn

θt




(γ−1)(1−α)


−ν Mτn+1

θ
Cτn+1
θτn+1 

 τn+1 
×Et e−ρ(τn+1 −t)
×
M τn

C
θτn
τn

θ τn

∆1



Mτn+1
θτn+1

δ1



+ ∆2


!


Therefore,

χ



θt
, mt
Mt



=



Cτn
Ct

+



−ν

Cτn
Ct



M τn
θ τn



−ν

Mt
θt



(γ−1)(1−α)

(γ−1)(1−α)

M τn
θ τn



Mt
θt

θτn
· ξ (ωt , mt )
θt

(γ−1)(1−α)

(γ−1)(1−α)




.

(50)

θτn
[∆1 Φ (ωt , mt ; δ1 ) + ∆2 Φ (ωt , mt ; 0)] .
θt

Plugging the expressions for ξ (ωt , mt ) and Φ (ωt , mt ; δ1 ) into equation (50) and simplifying


θt
the resulting expression we arrive at the expression for χ M
,
m
t given in the statement of the
t
Lemma.

Corollary 1 The value of assets in place for firm j is given by


θt
A
Pj,t = Xj,t θt · χ
, mt .
Mt
Proof of Corollary 1. Combine the definition of χ and (6).
With this Lemma we are now in a position to discuss the solution to the firm’s optimization
problem. The option to plant a tree in epoch N does not affect the option to plant a tree in any
subsequent epoch.
The individual firm takes the processes for new trees (KN,t ) and consumption (Ct ), and hence
the stochastic discount factor Ht and the costs of planting a tree (equation (18)), as given. For

42

the remainder of the proof we consider a firm that expects KN,t to behave as in (32). Such a firm
solves the problem
"

J (θt , Mt ) = sup Et 1{τ <τN+1 } e−ρ(τ −t)
τ

ζ(iN,j )G (θτ , Mτ ) − ηMτN Xτ−ν
θ −ν
N τ



Mτ
θτ

(γ−1)(1−α) !#
(51)

with G (θt , Mt ) defined as
Z
G (θt , Mt ) ≡ Et

∞
t

e−ρ(s−τ ) Cs−γ MsC

= [XτN (1 + F (K(mt )))]

−ν

(γ−1)(1−α)

α(1−γ)
θt



θs ds

Mt
θt

(γ−1)(1−α)

·χ




θt
, mt .
Mt

(52)

Hence, the firm’s optimization problem is
J (θt , Mt )
=





α(1−γ)



(γ−1)(1−α)

Mτ
ζ(iN,j ) [XτN (1 + F (K(mt )))]−ν θτ
θτ

−ρ(τ −t) 
sup Et 1{τ <τN +1} e
 (γ−1)(1−α)

τ
τ
−ηMτN Xτ−ν
θτ−ν M
N
θτ

(53)
 
θτ
·χ M
, mτ 
τ
 .


To solve the optimization problem inside the square brackets we proceed in two steps. First,
we derive the optimal policy in a heuristic way by constraining attention to the class of “trigger
strategies.” Such strategies assume that the firm invests the first time that θt (and hence Mt )
crosses an (optimally determined) threshold θ̄. Formally, the stopping times associated with these
strategies are given by
τθ̄ = inf{s ≥ t : θs ≥ θ̄}.

(54)

Additionally, we assume that the optimal θ̄ lies in the interval

h

Ξ
∗
bp MτN , m MτN

i

.43 We let Θ denote

the class of such trigger strategies. We do not attempt to justify ex-ante why the optimal strategy
should lie in this class. Instead, in a second step, we verify the optimality of these strategies via a
standard verification theorem for optimal stopping (Proposition 2).
43

This implies that equation (32) simplifies to

KN,t =

h

bp
Ξ



Mt
MτN

1
i 1−p+νp

b

−1
.

43

To start, let Ṽ (θt , Mt ) denote the value function for τθ̄ ∈ Θ:
Ṽ (θt , Mt )





α(1−γ)

 M (γ−1)(1−α)

θ̄
ζ(iN,j ) [XτN (1 + F (K(mt )))]−ν θτθ̄
θτθ̄

−ρ(τθ̄ −t) 
≡ sup Et 1{τ <τN +1} e
 M (γ−1)(1−α)

τ
τθ̄ ∈Θ
θ̄
−ηMτN Xτ−ν
θτ−ν
N
θτ
θ̄
τ

·χ



θτθ̄
Mτθ̄

, mτθ̄

(55)
 

θ̄

We first observe that τθ̄ ∈ Θ implies that θτθ̄ = Mτθ and also 1 + F (K(mt )) = [1 + bK(mt )]p =
h  i p
1−p+νp
bp
. Furthermore by Øksendal (2003), p. 210-211 we obtain
Ξ mt
h

−ρ(τθ̄ −t)

Et 1{τ <τN+1 } e

i

=



θt
θ̄

γ1


 .

.

Accordingly, letting
#
νp


 
β 2 "


 1−p+νp
θ̄
θ̄
θ̄
θ̄
bpθ̄
ζ(iN,j )χ 1,
ϕ
≡
−η
,
MτN
MτN
MτN
MτN
ΞMτN
equation (55) can be re-written as
Ṽ (θt , Mt ) =



bp
Ξ



−νp
1−p+νp

By the assumption τθ̄ ∈ Θ,

ϕ



θ̄
MτN



=



θ̄
MτN

−



β2 +1

θ̄
MτN

Ξ
bp

1 γ1
Mτα(1−γ)−γ
θt Xτ−ν
×
N
N

h
Ξ
MτN ,m∗ MτN
θ̄∈ bp

ϕ
i



θ̄
MτN



.

(56)

≤ mτθ̄ ≤ m∗ and hence Lemma 1 implies that

ζ(iN,j )










∆2 1 −


1−

g1 (0)
1+β2

+

g1 (1−γ−γ1∗ )
1+β2

+

νp
β2 
 1−p+νp
bpθ̄
.
η
ΞMτN

Assuming an interior solution and setting ϕ′


sup

νp
1−p+νp



θ̄
M τN





bpθ̄
ΞMτN



bpθ̄
ΞMτN

−(1+β2 )

−(1+β2 )

(1−p+νp)(1+β2 )

(1 + b)

g2 (1 − γ − γ1∗ )

= 0, we obtain

 
 νp
1−p+νp
bpθ̄
+ β2 η ΞMτ

θ̄
N
=
.
MτN
ζ(iN,j ) [(1 + β2 − g1 (0)) ∆2 + (1 + β2 − g1 (1 − γ − γ1∗ )) ∆1 ]
Notice that policy (57) has the same form as policy (25), which is given by

 νp
1−p+νp
bpθ̄
ν
Ξ ΞMτ
Ξ (1 + F (iN,j ))
θ̄
N
=
=
.
MτN
ζ(iN,j )
ζ(iN,j )
Combining (57) with (58) implies that


νp
η β2 + 1−p+νp
Ξ=
.
∆2 (1 + β2 − g1 (0)) + ∆1 (1 + β2 − g1 (1 − γ − γ1∗ ))

44

(1−p+νp)(1+β2 )

(1 + b)


g2 (0) + ∆1 ×

(57)

(58)

(59)











Notice that ∆1 is a function of Ξ, although other parameters are independent of Ξ. Hence, equation
(59) is a non-linear equation in Ξ. We shall denote the solution to this equation as Ξ∗ and assume
that parameters are such44 that Ξ∗ ≥ bp.
Now note that if all other firms follow trigger strategies of the form (57) with Ξ = Ξ∗ , then the
resulting process for Kt is given by (32) with Ξ = Ξ∗ , confirming the conjecture of firm j about the
behaviour of KN,t . Assuming that the optimal stopping policy of any firm j lies in the interior of
the “trigger” class Θ, firm j behaves optimally by following policy (58) evaluated at Ξ = Ξ∗ .
The next proposition shows that, if all firms j ′ 6= j follow policies of the form (58) with Ξ = Ξ∗ ,
then the optimal stopping strategy for firm j (across all possible stopping strategies) indeed takes
the form (58). We use the notation x ∧ y for min (x, y) and x ∨ y for max (x, y).
2

Proposition 2 Assume φ ≡ ρ + λ + µγ − (γ + 1) γ σ2 > 0 and γ + γ1 > 1. Let Ξ∗ denote the
solution to (59), K (mt ) be given by (32) with Ξ = Ξ∗ , and G (θt , Mt ) by (52). Define θ̄ (Mt ) as
the solution to the equation
 γ1 "

(1−γ)(1−α) #

1
θ̄
−ν −ν
θ̄ (Mt ) = arg max
ζ(iN,j )G θ̄, Mt ∨ θ̄ − ηMτN θ̄ XτN
∧1
.
Mt
θ̄
θ̄

(60)

Then it is optimal for firm j in epoch N to plant a tree the first time that θt ≥ θ̄ (Mt ).
Proof of Proposition 2.

The marginal firm solves the optimal stopping problem specified

by (51). For any C 1 function f : R → R that is twice-differentiable a.e. define the infinitesimal
operator A (f ) ≡

σ2 2
2 θ fθθ

+ µθfθ − (ρ + λ) f . Next, note that Lemma 1 implies that the function

G (θt , Mt ) can be written as
(γ−1)(1−α)

G (θt , Mt ) = [XτN (1 + F (Kt ))]−ν Mt
"
#

 ∗
1 γ+γ1 −1
γ1∗
1−γ
γ1
× ∆2 θ t + ∆1 θ t
+ Const (mt ) · θt
Mt

(61)

where Const depends on mt but is independent of θt . Since A (θtγ1 ) = 0, it is straightforward to
check that
−ν

AG (θt , Mt ) = − [XτN (1 + F (Kt ))]
44




1
γ1∗
−α(γ−1)−γ1∗
1−γ
(γ−1)(1−α)
θ
(Mt )
+ λ∆1 θt Mt
. (62)
1 − β1 λ t

This can be achieved by assuming a large enough value for η.

45

Furthermore, by the construction of G (θt , Mt ) (see Lemma 1) we also obtain
GM (Mt , Mt ) = 0.

(63)

With these observations, let θ̄ (Mt ) be defined as in equation (60) and define the “candidate” value
function V (θt , Mt ) as
V (θt , Mt ) =



θt
θ̄

γ1 "

(1−γ)(1−α) #

θ̄
ζ(iN,j )G θ̄, Mt ∨ θ̄ − ηMτN θ̄ −ν Xτ−ν
∧1
N
Mt

(64)

whenever θt ≤ θ̄ (Mt ) and
V (θt , Mt ) = ζ(iN,j )G (θt , Mt ) −

ηMτN θt−ν Xτ−ν
N



θt
Mt

(1−γ)(1−α)

(65)

whenever θt > θ̄ (Mt ) . In what follows we show the following four properties of the function
V (θt , Mt ):

θt (1−γ)(1−α)
V (θt , Mt ) ≥ ζ(iN,j )G (θt , Mt ) −
,
Mt
V (θt , Mt ) is continuously differentiable in θt ,
ηMτN θt−ν Xτ−ν
N



(66)
(67)

VM (θt , Mt ) ≤ 0 for θt = Mt ,

(68)

AV (θt , Mt ) ≤ 0 .

(69)

Property (66) is immediate for θt ≥ θ̄(Mt ), and for θt ≤ θ̄(Mt ) it follows from
ζ(iN,j )G (θt , Mt ) −

ηMτN θt−ν Xτ−ν
N



θt
Mt

(1−γ)(1−α)

=

(1−γ)(1−α)
θt
= ζ(iN,j )G (θt , Mt ∨ θt ) −
∧1
Mt
 γ1 "

(1−γ)(1−α) #
θt
θt
−ν −ν
=
ζ(iN,j )G (θt , Mt ∨ θt ) − ηMτN θt XτN
∧1
θt
Mt
(1−γ)(1−α) #
 γ1 "


1
θ̄
γ1
−ν −ν
≤ θt max
ζ(iN,j )G θ̄, Mt ∨ θ̄ − ηMτN θ̄ XτN
∧1
Mt
θ̄
θ
ηMτN θt−ν Xτ−ν
N



= V (θt , Mt ) .

To show property (67) consider first the case θt ≤ θ(Mt ). Differentiating (64) gives
∂V
1
= γ1 V (θt , Mt ) ,
∂θ
θt

(70)

46

which is a continuous function. Furthermore, when θt → θ(Mt ), we obtain:
∂V (θt , Mt )
(71)
∂θt
θt →θ(Mt )
"
#

(1−γ)(1−α)



θ̄
(M
γ1
)
−ν
t
=
θ̄ (Mt )
∧1
ηMτN .
ζ(iN,j )G θ̄ (Mt ) , Mt ∨ θ̄ (Mt ) − Xτ−ν
N
Mt
θ̄ (Mt )
lim

Turning next to the case where θt > θ̄ (Mt ), direct differentiation of (65) shows that the partial
derivative of V (θt , Mt ) with respect to θt is a continuous function, whose value at θt = θ̄ (Mt ) is
given by
∂V (θt , Mt )
∂θ
θt →θ(Mt )

(72)

lim





= ζ(iN,j )Gθ θ̄ (Mt ) , Mt + γ θ̄ (Mt )

−ν

1
θ̄ (Mt )



Mt
θ̄ (Mt )

(γ−1)(1−α)

ηXτ−ν
MτN .
N

To establish (67), we need to show that the “left” hand side derivative (equation [71]) and the
“right” hand side derivative (equation [72]) coincide. Note that this statement is meaningful only
when θ̄ (Mt ) ≤ Mt , for otherwise θt ≤ Mt < θ̄(Mt ). Then the necessary condition for optimality
(first order condition) of equation (60) implies that:
#
 γ1 "

(γ−1)(1−α)

1
1
−ν Mt
−ν
0 =
ηX MτN
ζ(iN,j )Gθ θ̄, Mt − (−γ) θ̄
θ̄
θ̄
θ̄ τN
#
 γ1 "

(γ−1)(1−α)

1
1
−ν Mt
−ν
ζ(iN,j )G θ̄, Mt − θ̄
ηXτN MτN
−γ1
(73)
θ̄
θ̄
θ̄
 γ1
Dividing both sides of equation (73) by θ̄1
, we obtain that the right hand side of equation (71)

and the right hand side of equation (72) are identical, so that

∂V (θt ,Mt )
∂θ

is continuous at θt = θ (Mt ) .

To establish (68), consider two cases. When Mt ≥ θ (Mt ) , then whenever θt = Mt , equation
(65) along with (63) leads to
VM (Mt , Mt ) = ζ(iN,j )GM (Mt , Mt ) − (γ − 1) (1

(γ−1)(1−α)−γ
− α) Mt

= −η (γ − 1) (1 − α) Mt−ν−1 MτN ≤ 0.



Mt
Mt

(γ−1)(1−α)

When Mt ≤ θ̄ (Mt ) , Mt ∨ θ̄ = θ and hence whenever θt = Mt , V (θt , Mt ) is given by
 γ1 h
i

θt
· ζ(iN,j )G θ̄, θ̄ − θ̄ (γ−1)(1−α)−γ ηXτ(γ−1)(1−α)−γ
M
τN ,
N
θ̄
which is independent of Mt . Hence, VM (Mt , Mt ) = 0.

47

MτN
η
Mt

To show property (69), we start by noting that when θt < θ̄ (Mt ), V (θt , Mt ) is given by (64).
Hence A (V ) = 0, since A (θ γ1 ) = 0. When θt ≥ θ̄ (Mt ), V (θt , Mt ) is given by (65). Using (62) we
obtain
AV

=

Xτ(γ−1)(1−α)−γ
N
"



Mt
θt

(γ−1)(1−α)

−α(γ−1)−1

θt

−ν

× φηMτN − ζ(iN,j ) [1 + F (Kt )]

(74)

1
+ λ∆1
1 − λβ1

θt



Mt
θt

1−γ−γ1∗ !#

.

Hence, we only need to show that the term inside square brackets in (74) is non-positive for
θt ≥ θ̄ (Mt ) . This amounts to showing that
φηMτN [(1 + F (Kt ))]ν
≤ θt ·
ζ(iN,j )

1
+ λ∆1
1 − λβ1



Mt
θt

1−γ−γ1∗ !

.

(75)

Since the right hand side of (75) is increasing in θt , and θt ≥ θ̄ (Mt ) it suffices to show that

1−γ−γ1∗ !
φηMτN [1 + F (K (Mt ))]ν
1
Mt
≤ θ̄ (Mt )
+ λ∆1
.
(76)
ζ(iN,j )
1 − λβ1
θ̄ (Mt )
Since Mt ≥ θt ≥ θ̄ (Mt ) , equation (73) can be re-written as



(1−γ)(1−α)


1
1 −ν θ̄
0 = ζ(iN,j ) −γ1 G θ̄, Mt + Gθ θ̄, Mt + γ1 θ̄
ηXτ−ν
MτN
N
M
θ̄
θ̄
t

(1−γ)(1−α)
1 −ν θ̄
+γ θ̄
ηXτ−ν
MτN .
N
Mt
θ̄

(77)

By (61),



1
−γ1 G θ̄, Mt + Gθ θ̄, Mt
(78)
θ̄
(γ−1)(1−α)
= [XτN (1 + F (Kt ))]−ν Mt
×
"

γ+γ1∗ −1

γ+γ1∗ −1 #
1
1
∗
∗
−γ1 ∆2 θ̄ −γ − γ1 ∆1 θ̄ γ1 −1
+ ∆2 (1 − γ) θ̄ −γ + γ1∗ ∆1 θ̄ γ1 −1
.
Mt
Mt
Combining equations (77) and (78) and simplifying yields
θ̄ (Mt ) =

φηMτN (1 + F (K (Mt )))ν
ζ(iN,j )

φ



(γ1 + γ)
(γ+γ1 −1)
1−λβ β

+ ∆1 (γ1 −

γ1∗ )



Mt
θ̄(Mt )

Hence, to show equation (76), we only need to verify that


1−γ−γ1∗ 
Mt
1
(γ1 + γ) 1−λβ1 + λ∆1 θ̄(M )
t
φηMτN (1 + F (Kt ))ν


1−γ−γ1∗ 
ζ(iN,j )
(γ+γ1 −1)
Mt
∗
φ
1−λβ β1 + ∆1 (γ1 − γ1 ) θ̄(M )
t

ν

≥

φηMτN [1 + F (K (Mt ))]
.
ζ(iN,j )

48

1−γ−γ1∗  .

To this end, we only need to show

1−γ−γ1∗

1−γ−γ1∗
Mt
Mt
γ1 + γ
γ + γ1 − 1
+λ∆1 (γ1 + γ)
≥ φβ1
+φ∆1 (γ1 − γ1∗ )
. (79)
1 − λβ1
1 − λβ1
θ̄ (Mt )
θ̄ (Mt )
Define γ2 as

γ2 ≡

r
−
µ−

σ2
2

2


+ 2σ 2 (ρ + λ) − µ −

σ2
2

σ2



< 0.

Then,
2 (ρ + λ)
2

σ
2
−2 µ − σ2

γ1 γ2 = −
γ1 + γ2 =

σ2

.

Hence,


σ2
σ2
φ = − (γ + 1) γ
− µγ − ρ − λ = − (γ1 + γ) (γ + γ2 ) > 0,
2
2

(80)

which implies that γ + γ2 < 0 (recall that by assumption φ > 0). Direct algebra gives
β1 φ =

γ + γ2
γ + γ1
γ1 + γ
×
≤
.
γ + γ2 − 1 γ + γ1 − 1
γ + γ1 − 1

Consequently,
γ1 + γ
γ + γ1 − 1
≥ φβ1
.
1 − λβ1
1 − λβ1

(81)

Therefore, to show inequality (79), equation (81) implies that we only need to show
∗
∗




Mt 1−γ−γ1
Mt 1−γ−γ1
λ∆1 (γ1 + γ)
≥ φ∆1 (γ1 − γ1∗ )
,
θ̄
θ̄
which is equivalent to showing that λ (γ1 + γ) ≥ φ (γ1 − γ1∗ ). Direct algebra shows that
2λ
= (γ1∗ − γ2 ) (γ1 − γ1∗ ) .
σ2

(82)

By (80) and (82),
σ2
(γ1 + γ) (γ1∗ − γ2 ) (γ1 − γ1∗ )
2
φ
= −
(γ ∗ − γ2 ) (γ1 − γ1∗ ) .
γ + γ2 1

λ (γ1 + γ) =

49

(83)

Furthermore,
(γ1∗ − γ2 ) ≥ − (γ + γ2 ) ,

(84)

since γ1∗ + γ ≥ 0. Given that γ1 > γ1∗ and γ + γ2 < 0, (84) and (83) yield the desired conclusion,
namely λ (γ1 + γ) ≥ φ (γ1 − γ1∗ ) . This completes the proof of (69).
The rest of the proof follows steps similar to Øksendal (2003), Chapter 9. For completeness we
give a brief sketch omitting technical details. Take any stopping time τ and apply Ito’s Lemma to
e−(ρ+λ)t V (θt , Mt ) to obtain
Ee−(ρ+λ)(τ −t) V (θτ , Mτ ) − V (θt , Mt ) = Et

Z

τ

0

+Et

Z

e−(ρ+λ)(s−t) AV (θs , Ms ) ds +
τ

(85)

e−(ρ+λ)(s−t) VM (Ms , Ms ) dMs .

t

Re-arranging (85) and using (66)-(69) yields
V (θt , Mt ) ≥ Ee−(ρ+λ)(τ −t) V (θτ , Mτ )
"

≥ Ee−(ρ+λ)(τ −t) ζ(iN,j )G (θτ , Mτ ) − ηMτN [θτ ]−ν Xτ−ν
N



θτ
Mτ

(1−γ)(1−α) #

.

Since τ is arbitrary, V (θt , Mt ) provides an upper bound to the value function for all feasible policies.
Furthermore, this bound is attainable if the firm plants a tree the first time that θt = θ̄ (Mt ) . Hence
V (θt , Mt ) is the value function for firm j in round N and planting a tree once θt = θ̄ (Mt ) is optimal.

Proposition 2 shows that if firms perceive the equilibrium stochastic discount factor to be
given by (31), then it is optimal for them to plant a tree according to equation (25). Furthermore,
Corollary 1 gives the equilibrium value of assets in place for firm j in round N at time t. To complete
the determination of the value of a firm, the following proposition provides the equilibrium value
of “current epoch” growth options and “future epoch” growth options.
Proposition 3 Let K(mt ) be given by (32) with Ξ = Ξ∗ . Then, the price of firm j in technological
epoch N is given by (8) where the asset in place PtA is given by


θt
A
Pj,t = Xj,t θt χ
, mt ,
Mt

50

(86)

the current “epoch” growth option at time t for firm j is




θt γ1 +γ−1 Mt γ1 +α(γ−1)
o
PN,j,t = XτN θt
(1 + F (K (mt )))ν
Mt
MτN
  −νp −β2


bp 1−p+νp
∗ ind
×
Ξ
C
(i
)
1
−
1
N,j
{e
χN,j =1} ,
op
Ξ∗

(87)

ind (i
where the constant Cop
N,j ) is given by



ind
Cop
(iN,j ) = (1 + biN,j )(1−p+νp)β2 +νp 

νp
1− 1−p+νp
+ (1
1+β2
(1−p+νp)(1+β2 )

− Ξη∗
× (1 + b)

+ bij,N )−(1−p+νp)(1+β2 )

[∆2 g2 (0) + ∆1 g2 (1 − γ −

γ1∗ )]



.

˜ 1 as
Finally, define the constants Cop and ∆


(1+b)p −1
[1−p+νp](1+β2 )
  −νp −β2
∗
(1 + b)
[∆2 g2 (0) + ∆1 g2 (1 − γ − γ1 )]
bp 1−p+νp
bp

∗


Cop =
Ξ

νp
,
[1−p+νp]β2 +νp+1
1−
Ξ∗
1−p+νp
(1+b)
−1
− Ξη∗
1+β2
b([1−p+νp]β2 +νp+1)
˜1 = −
∆

Cop
.
g̃4 (1 − γ − γ1∗ )

Then the value of all “future epoch” growth options is given by
f
PN,t

=

(88)





α(γ−1)+γ1
∗

t

 γ+γ1∗ −1 
 γ1 −γ1∗ − α(γ−1)+γ1 + bpm

×
∗

α(γ−1)+γ1
Ξ∗
θt
θt




h
i
1
+
; mt ≤ Ξbp

Mt
M
t




g̃2 (1 − γ − γ1∗ ) (1 + b)(1−p+νp)(1+β2 )+p − 1







p



−(1+β2 )− 1−p+νp
−g̃1 (1−γ−γ1∗ )
t
 γ+γ1∗ −1 
 γ1 −γ1∗
h
i
˜ 1 X t θt
∆
+ bpm
× 
p
∗
1+β
+
Ξ
θ
θ
2
t
t

 ; mt ∈ Ξ ∗ , m∗
1−p+νp

1
+

Mt
Mt
bp



(1−p+νp)(1+β2 )+p


(1 + b)
g̃2 (1 − γ − γ1∗ )





 γ+γ1∗ −1
 γ1 −γ1∗


α−αγ−γ1∗
θt

 θt
1−
;
mt ≥ m∗ .
Mt

α−αγ−γ1

Mt

Proof. The proof of (86) is given in Corollary 1. The proof of (87) follows upon computing
expression (64) explicitly. The proof of equation (88) follows similar steps to that of Lemma 1 and
is omitted to save space.

51

References
Abel, A. B. (1990). Asset prices under habit formation and catching up with the joneses. American
Economic Review 80 (2), 38–42.
Abel, A. B. (1999). Risk premia and term premia in general equilibrium. Journal of Monetary
Economics 43 (1), 3 – 33.
Abel, A. B. and J. C. Eberly (2005). Investment, valuation, and growth options. mimeo. The
Wharton School and Kellogg School of Management.
Atkeson, A. and P. J. Kehoe (1999). Models of energy use: Putty-putty versus putty-clay. American
Economic Review 89 (4), 1028–1043.
Attanasio, O. P. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2003). Stock market participation, intertemporal substitution and risk aversion. American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 93, 383–91.
Backus, D. K., B. R. Routledge, and S. E. Zin (2008). The cyclical component of u.s. asset returns.
Working Paper, NYU Stern and Tepper School of Business.
Bansal, R. and A. Yaron (2004). Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
puzzles. Journal of Finance 59 (4), 1481–1509.
Baxter, M. and R. G. King (1999). Measuring business cycles: Approximate band-pass filters for
economic time series. Review of Economics and Statistics 81 (4), 575–593.
Berk, J. B., R. C. Green, and V. Naik (1999). Optimal investment, growth options, and security
returns. Journal of Finance 54 (5), 1553–1607.
Berk, J. B., R. C. Green, and V. Naik (2004). Valuation and return dynamics of new ventures.
Review of Financial Studies 17 (1), 1–35.
Caballero, R. J. and R. S. Pindyck (1996). Uncertainty, investment, and industry evolution. International Economic Review 37 (3), 641–662.
Campbell, J. Y. and J. H. Cochrane (1999). By force of habit: A consumption-based explanation
of aggregate stock market behavior. Journal of Political Economy 107 (2), 205–251.

52

Carlson, M., A. Fisher, and R. Giammarino (2004). Corporate investment and asset price dynamics:
Implications for the cross section of returns. Journal of Finance 59 (6), 2577–2603.
Carlson, M., A. Fisher, and R. Giammarino (2006). Corporate investment and asset price dynamics:
Implications for seo event studies and long-run performance. Journal of Finance 61 (3), 1009 –
1034.
Chan, Y. L. and L. Kogan (2002). Catching up with the joneses: Heterogeneous preferences and
the dynamics of asset prices. Journal of Political Economy 110 (6), 1255–1285.
Cochrane, J. H. (1996). A cross-sectional test of an investment-based asset pricing model. Journal
of Political Economy 104 (3), 572–621.
Cochrane, J. H. (2005). Asset pricing. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Comin, D. and M. Gertler (2006). Medium-term business cycles. American Economic Review 96 (3),
523.
Cooper, I. (2006). Asset pricing implications of non-convex adjustment costs and irreversibility of
investment. Journal of Finance 61 (1), 139–170.
Daniel, K. D. and D. A. Marshall (1999). Consumption based modeling of long horizon returns.
mimeo. Northwestern University.
Duffee, G. R. (2005). Time-variation in the covariance between stock returns and consumption
growth. Journal of Finance 60 (4), 1673–1712.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1995). Size and book-to-market factors in earnings and returns.
Journal of Finance 50 (1), 131–155.
Gala, V. D. (2006). Investment and returns. PhD Dissertation, University of Chicago GSB.
Gârleanu, N., L. Kogan, and S. Panageas (2009). The demographics of innovation and asset returns.
Working paper, Berkeely-Haas, MIT-Sloan and Chicago-Booth.

53

Gârleanu, N. and S. Panageas (2007). Young, old, conservative and bold: The implications of
heterogeneity and finite lives for asset pricing. Working Paper, Berkeley Haas, and Chicago
Booth.
Gomes, J., L. Kogan, and L. Zhang (2003). Equilibrium cross section of returns. Journal of Political
Economy 111 (4), 693–732.
Gourio, F. (2004). Operating leverage, stock market cyclicality, and the cross-section of returns.
Working Paper, Chicago GSB.
Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and G. W. Huffman (1988). Investment, capacity utilization, and the
real business cycle. American Economic Review 78 (3), 402–417.
Greenwood, J. and B. Jovanovic (1999). The information-technology revolution and the stock
market. American Economic Review 89 (2), 116–122.
Heinricher, A. C. and R. H. Stockbridge (1991). Optimal control of the running max. SIAM J.
Control Optim. 29 (4), 936–953.
Helpman, E. (1998). General purpose technologies and economic growth. Cambridge and London:
MIT Press.
Hsu, P.-H. (2009). Technological innovations and aggregate risk premiums. Forthcoming, Journal
of Financial Economics.
Hulten, C. R. (1992). Growth accounting when technical change is embodied in capital. American
Economic Review 82 (4), 964–980.
Iraola, M. A. and M. S. Santos (2009). Long-term asset price volatility and macroeconomic fluctuations. Working paper, July 2009, University of Miami and ITAM.
Jermann, U. and V. Quadrini (2007). Stock market boom and the productivity gains of the 1990s.
Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (2), 413–32.
Jermann, U. J. (1998).

Asset pricing in production economies.

nomics 41 (2), 257–275.

54

Journal of Monetary Eco-

Jones, C. I. (1997). Introduction to Economic Growth (First Edition ed.). New York and London:
W.W. Norton.
Jovanovic, B. and G. M. MacDonald (1994). The life cycle of a competitive industry. Journal of
Political Economy 102 (2), 322–347.
Jovanovic, B. and P. L. Rousseau (2003). Two technological revolutions. Journal of the European
Economic Association 1 (2-3), 419–428.
Kaltenbrunner, G. and L. A. Lochstoer (2006). Long run risk through consumption smoothing.
mimeo. London Business School.
Karatzas, I. and S. E. Shreve (1998). Methods of mathematical finance, Volume 39. Springer-Verlag.
King, R. G., C. I. Plosser, and S. T. Rebelo (1988). Production, growth and business cycles: I. the
basic neoclassical model. Journal of Monetary Economics 21 (2/3), 195 – 232.
Kogan, L. (2004). Asset prices and real investment. Journal of Financial Economics 73 (3), 411–
431.
Lamont, O. A. (2000). Investment plans and stock returns. Journal of Finance 55 (6), 2719–2745.
Morley, J. C., C. R. Nelson, and E. Zivot (2002). Why are beveridge-nelson and unobserved
component decompositions so different? mimeo. University of Washington.
Novy-Marx, R. (2003). An equilibrium model of investment under uncertainty. mimeo. Chicago
Booth.
Obreja, I. and C. Telmer (2008). Accounting for low-frequency variation in tobins q. Working
Paper, December 2008, Leeds School of Business and Tepper School of Business.
Øksendal, B. (2003). Stochastic differential equations. Springer-Verlag.
Papanikolaou, D. (2007). Investment-specific technology shocks and asset prices. mimeo. MIT,
Sloan School.

55

Pastor, L. and P. Veronesi (2004). Was there a nasdaq bubble in the late 1990s?

Journal of

Financial Economics 81, 61–100.
Pastor, L. and P. Veronesi (2009). Technological revolutions and stock prices. American Economic
Review 99, 1451–1483.
Rebelo, S. (1991). Long-run policy analysis and long-run growth. Journal of Political Economy 99 (3), 500–521.
Rogerson, R. (1988).

Indivisible labor, lotteries and equilibrium.

Journal of Monetary Eco-

nomics 21 (1), 3 – 16.
Romer, P. M. (1990). Endogenous technological change. Journal of Political Economy 98 (5),
71–102.
Santos, T. and P. Veronesi (2008). Habit formation, the cross section of stock returns and the
cash-flow risk puzzle. Working Paper, Columbia GSB and Chicago Booth.
Scotchmer, S. (1991). Standing on the shoulders of giants: Cumulative research and the patent
law. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 5 (1), 29–41.
Titman, S., J. K. Wei, and F. Xie (2004). Capital investments and stock returns. Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39, 677–700.
Vigfusson, R. J. (2004). The delayed response to a technology shock. a flexible price explanation.
Working paper, The Federal Reserve Board.
Yu, J. (2007). The long and the short of asset prices: Using long run consumption-return correlations to test asset pricing models. mimeo. The Wharton School.
Zhang, L. (2005). The value premium. Journal of Finance 60 (1), 67–103.

56

