NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SPATIAL DEVELOPMENT
Klaus Desmet
Esteban Rossi-Hansberg
Working Paper 15349
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15349

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2009

We thank Satyajit Chatterjee, Elhanan Helpman, Robert Helsley, Gianmarco Ottaviano, Diego Puga,
Steve Redding and various seminar participants for useful comments. Financial support from the Sloan
Foundation, the European Commission (EFIGE 225343), the Comunidad de Madrid (PROCIUDAD-CM),
and the Spanish Ministry of Science (ECO2008-01300) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Klaus Desmet and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Spatial Development
Klaus Desmet and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg
NBER Working Paper No. 15349
September 2009, Revised April 2010
JEL No. E32,O11,O18,O33,R12
ABSTRACT
We present a theory of spatial development. Manufacturing and services firms located in a continuous
geographic area choose each period how much to innovate. Firms trade subject to transport costs and
technology diffuses spatially across locations. The result is a spatial endogenous growth theory that
can shed light on the link between the evolution of economic activity over time and space. We apply
the model to study the evolution of the U.S. economy in the last few decades and find that the model
can generate the reduction in the employment share in manufacturing, the increase in service productivity
starting in the second part of the 1990s, the increase in the value and dispersion of land rents in the
same period, as well as several other spatial and temporal patterns.
Klaus Desmet
Department of Economics
Universidad Carlos III
28903 Getafe (Madrid)
SPAIN
klaus.desmet@uc3m.es
Esteban Rossi-Hansberg
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
erossi@princeton.edu

Spatial Development
Klaus Desmet

Esteban Rossi-Hansberg

Universidad Carlos III

Princeton University

April 27, 2010

Abstract
We present a theory of spatial development. Manufacturing and services …rms located in a continuous geographic area choose each period how much to innovate. Firms
trade subject to transport costs and technology di¤uses spatially across locations. The
result is a spatial endogenous growth theory that can shed light on the link between
the evolution of economic activity over time and space. We apply the model to study
the evolution of the U.S. economy in the last few decades and …nd that the model can
generate the reduction in the employment share in manufacturing, the increase in service productivity starting in the second part of the 1990s, the increase in the value and
dispersion of land rents in the same period, as well as several other spatial and temporal
patterns.

1. INTRODUCTION
Economic development varies widely across space. It is a common observation, as stated
in the 2009 World Development Report, that the location of people is the best predictor
of their income. This is clearly true when we move across countries, but there is also
signi…cant variation within countries. In the U.S., employment concentration and value
added vary dramatically across space, and so does the rate of growth (see, e.g., Desmet
We thank Satyajit Chatterjee, Elhanan Helpman, Robert Helsley, Gianmarco Ottaviano, Diego Puga,
Steve Redding and various seminar participants for useful comments. Financial support from the Sloan
Foundation, the European Commission (EFIGE 225343), the Comunidad de Madrid (PROCIUDAD-CM),
and the Spanish Ministry of Science (ECO2008-01300) is gratefully acknowledged.

1

and Rossi-Hansberg, 2009). Even though a casual look at the spatial landscape makes
these observations seem almost trivial, there has been little work incorporating space, and
the economic structure implied by space, into modern endogenous growth theories. This
paper addresses this shortcoming by presenting a dynamic theory of spatial development
and contrasting its predictions with evidence on the spatial evolution of the U.S. in the last
few decades.
The theory we present has four main components. First, it includes a continuum of locations where …rms produce in one of two industries: manufacturing and services. Production
requires labor and land, with technologies being constant returns to scale in these two
inputs. Since the amount of land at a given location is …xed, the actual technology experienced at a location exhibits decreasing returns to scale. This constitutes a congestion force.
Land and labor are the only two factors of production. We allow for local technological
innovation by …rms. In a broad sense, local technological innovation could be interpreted
not only as improving …rm technology, but also as adding to the local capital stock or the
local infrastructure.
Second, …rms can trade goods and services by incurring iceberg transport costs. Given
these costs, national goods markets in both sectors clear in equilibrium. Labor is freely
mobile and workers can relocate every period before technological innovations are realized.
Thus, in a given period, all workers obtain a common utility in equilibrium.
Third, …rms can invest to improve their technology. They can buy a probability of drawing a proportional shift in their technology from a given distribution. We assume that wages
and land rents are determined before innovations are realized and that …rms face …nancial
constraints that prevent them from incurring negative operating pro…ts. Technology diffusion, together with these assumptions, implies that the bene…ts from innovation last for
only one period. As a result, the technology investment decision maximizes current pro…ts.
The more workers in a location, the more a potential innovation can be exploited in the
current period, and thus the greater the incentives to invest in innovation. Therefore, the
model exhibits a local scale e¤ect in innovation, implying that …rms in more dense locations
innovate more.
2

Fourth, technology di¤uses spatially. Locations close to others with a more advanced
technology get access to a spatially discounted version of that technology through di¤usion.
Firms in each location will produce using the best technology they have access to, whether
through invention or di¤usion.
We contrast the theory to U.S. macroeconomic and spatial data for the period 1980-2005.
A well known fact is that the employment share in manufacturing has declined over time
and, correspondingly, the employment share in services has increased. This shift has been
accompanied by a decline in the relative price of manufactured goods (see, e.g., Buera and
Kaboski, 2007). Ngai and Pissarides (2007) show that a faster increase in manufacturing
productivity, relative to service productivity, together with CES preferences and an elasticity of substitution less than one, can yield these e¤ects. Our model starts o¤ with a similar
mechanism. Initial conditions are such that in the beginning …rms specializing in manufacturing are more productive, and so have a larger scale and innovate more. This implies a
reduction in the manufacturing share and a drop in the relative price of manufactured goods,
just as in Ngai and Pissarides (2007). Where we di¤er is that in our model this reallocation
of employment toward services at some point endogenously accelerates innovation in some
locations specializing in services. From then onward service productivity increases together
with manufacturing productivity, ultimately leading to a fairly constant growth path in
both industries and the economy. This is consistent with the evidence on manufacturing
and service productivity in Triplett and Bosworth (2004), who document an acceleration in
service productivity growth starting around 1995, while manufacturing productivity keeps
growing at around 2% per year throughout.1 Our model also generates a corresponding
increase in land rents around that period, a prediction that is very clearly present in the
data. Real wage growth exhibits a similar pattern, which is likewise corroborated by the
data.
1

Table A-4 in Triplett and Bosworth (2004) shows that growth in value added per worker in goodsproducing sectors went from 2.11% between 1987 and 1995 to 1.94% between 1995 and 2001. In contrast, in
service-producing sectors the growth rate went from 0.78% to 2.49%. If we focus only on the contribution of
TFP, the di¤erence is smaller but still there: growth in TFP went from 0.75% to 1.29% in goods-producing
sectors and from 0.41% to 1.41% in service-producing sectors.

3

With respect to the spatial dimension, the theory predicts that, initially, when service
productivity is about stagnant, manufacturing is more concentrated than services.2 Once
the service sector starts innovating, concentration in the service sector increases in terms of
both employment and productivity, implying a positive link between employment density,
innovation and productivity growth. These e¤ects are accompanied by an increase in the
dispersion of land rents. These theoretical predictions are borne out in the data: over the
last decades the service sector has become more concentrated, in terms of both employment
and productivity, making it look increasingly similar to manufacturing along this spatial
dimension. This is consistent with the evidence in Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2009), who
compare spatial growth in two di¤erent time periods, 1980-2000 and 1900-1920, and …nd
that service growth at the end of the 20th century looked very similar to manufacturing
growth at the beginning of the 20th century. Both industries, in very di¤erent time periods,
exhibited increasing concentration in medium-size locations.3
Since our theory incorporates both a time and a space dimension, it provides a link
between the location decision of agents and their decision to innovate. Two parameters
that govern this link are transport costs and the elasticity of substitution. Even though
increases in transport cost lead to the standard static losses familiar from trade models,
they also lead to dynamic gains by generating denser areas that, together with the scale
e¤ect in innovation, lead to faster growth.
Decreasing the elasticity of substitution between manufacturing and services implies that
agents can substitute less and therefore prefer to be closer to areas specializing in the sector
in which they do not work. This puts a break on the emergence of large clusters, as such
clusters would increase the average distance to locations that specialize in the other sector.
The result is more dispersion and therefore less innovation. However, lowering the elasticity
of substitution also implies that agents in manufacturing areas, where the relative price of
2

See Murata (2008) for an analysis of the structural transformation from agriculture to manufacturing
within a New Economic Geography framework. However, in contrast to our work, in that paper there are
no dynamics, there is no innovation and space consists of only two regions. Instead, the driving force behind
the structural transformation is an exogenous decline in transportation costs.
3
However, Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2009) do not link their …ndings to the structural transformation
and to other macroeconomic variables, which is the main focus of this paper.

4

services is high, consume a greater share of their income on services. This increases the
scale of service producers located close-by, thus leading to more innovation. The result is a
non-monotonic pattern in the e¤ects of the elasticity of substitution on location and growth.
The …rst e¤ect dominates for high values of the elasticity of substitution whereas the second
e¤ect dominates for lower values. To our knowledge, these spatial-dynamic e¤ects are novel.
The existing literature on spatial dynamic models is fairly small. There is a successful
literature in trade that has focused on dynamic models with two or more countries (see,
among others, Grossman and Helpman, 1991, Eaton and Kortum, 1999, Young 1991, and
Ventura, 1997).4 The main di¤erence with our work is that in these models there is no
geography in the sense that locations are not ordered in space. In fact, most of these papers
do not even introduce transport costs, let alone geography. In contrast, we introduce a
continuum of locations on a line. Locations are therefore ordered geographically, and both
transport costs and technology di¤usion are a¤ected by distance.
Incorporating a continuum of locations into a dynamic framework is a complicated task
for two reasons: it increases the dimensionality of the problem by requiring agents to
understand the distribution of economic activity over time and over space, and clearing
goods and factor markets is complex because prices depend on trade and mobility patterns
at all locations. These two di¢ culties make spatial dynamic models intractable, and the
only way forward is to simplify the problem. A set of recent papers, such as Quah (2002),
Boucekkine et al. (2009), and Brock and Xepapadeas (2008a,b), introduce a continuum of
locations with geography and simplify the problem by assuming that each point in space
is isolated, except for spatial spillovers or di¤usion. By abstracting from transport costs,
national goods markets, and factor mobility, they save the need to calculate price functions
across locations over time. By imposing enough structure, they are able to mathematically
characterize some aspects of social optima or equilibrium allocations, though they fall short
of proposing a complete solution. In addition, they are unable to connect to the data, since
the simplifying assumptions do not yield empirical predictions that are rich enough.
4
See also Baldwin and Martin (2004) for a survey of similar work within the ‘New Economic geography’
model.

5

In contrast, our main goal is to propose a theoretical framework that can be used to study
the spatial evolution of the U.S. economy over the last decades. To do so, it is crucial to
have a model that is rich enough to capture a variety of spatial patterns of the economy.
In order to deal with the complexity of forward-looking agents in a spatial context, the
previous papers had to sacri…ce many of the relevant spatial interactions. Another way
around this problem, and the one we will follow, is to impose enough structure — through
the mobility of factors and the land and …rm ownership structure— that …rms do not care to
take the future equilibrium allocation path into account when making decisions, given that
they do not a¤ect the returns of their current decisions. As for the problem of clearing factor
and goods markets in a framework with a continuum of locations, we follow the method
in Rossi-Hansberg (2005) that consists of clearing markets sequentially. These assumptions
are key to making a rich structure solvable and computable.
In Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2009) we use a similar methodology to study the dynamics of manufacturing and service growth across U.S. counties in the 20th century. Although
that model also analyzes the link between innovation and spatial growth, our current paper
is di¤erent in two ways. First, we explicitly model innovation as the outcome of a pro…tmaximizing problem and, in that sense, provide micro-foundations for why certain locations
innovate more than others. Second, in Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2009) innovation in
a given sector gets jump-started exogenously, thus making its timing ad hoc and independent of what is happening in the other sector. In our current paper innovation starts o¤
endogenously as explained above.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model. Section
3 presents the data we use to empirically explore the theoretical predictions, carries out
numerical simulations of the model, and discusses the link between our results and the
data. Section 3 also analyzes the novel spatial e¤ects that result from changes in transport
costs and the elasticity of substitution. Section 4 concludes.

6

2. THE MODEL
The economy consists of land and agents located in the closed interval [0; 1] : Throughout
we refer to a location as a point in this interval, and we let the density of land at each
location ` be equal to one. Hence, the total mass of land in the economy is also equal to
one. The total number of agents is given by L; and each of them is endowed with one unit
of time each period. Agents are in…nitely lived.
2.1 Preferences
Agents live where they work and they derive utility from the consumption of two goods:
manufactures and services. Every period labor is freely mobile across locations and sectors.
Agents supply their unit of time inelastically in the labor market. They order consumption
bundles according to an instantaneous utility function U (cM ; cS ) with standard properties,
where ci denotes consumption of good i 2 fM; Sg. The utility function U ( ) is homogeneous of degree one. Agents hold a diversi…ed portfolio of land and …rms in all locations.5
Goods are non-storable, and there is no other savings technology apart from land and …rm
ownership. The problem of an agent at a particular location ` is given by6
max 1 E

fci (`;t)g0

s:t:

w (`; t) +

1
X

t

U (cM (`; t) ; cS (`; t))

(1)

t=0

R(t) +
L

(t)

= pM (`; t) cM (`; t) + pS (`; t) cS (`; t)

for all t and `:
where pi (`; t) denotes the price of good i, w (`; t) denotes the wage at location ` and time
t, and R (t) and

(t) denote total land rents and total …rm pro…ts per unit of land. Given

that agents hold a diversi…ed portfolio of land and …rms in all locations, R(t)=L and
5

(t)=L

Since U ( ) is constant returns to scale, agents are not risk averse. If they were, they would like to hold
this diversi…ed portfolio to insure themselves against idiosyncratic local shocks.
6
Since we assume labor mobility, utility levels will equalize across space each period and so we can study
the optimization problem of an agent as if she were to stay in the same location forever.

7

represent the per agent dividend from land and …rm ownership. The …rst-order conditions
of this problem yield Ui (cM (`; t) ; cS (`; t)) =

(`; t) pi (`; t), for all i 2 fM; Sg, where Ui ( )

is the marginal utility of consuming good i and

(`; t) is a location- and time-speci…c

Lagrange multiplier. Denote by U (pM (`; t); pS (`; t); w(`; t) + R(t) +

(t) =L) the indirect

utility function of an agent at location `.
Free labor mobility in each period guarantees that
U pM (`; t); pS (`; t); w(`; t) + R(t) +

(t) =L = u (t) ; for all t and ` 2 [0; 1] ;

(2)

where u (t) is determined in equilibrium. In the numerical examples in the next section we
will use a CES speci…cation
U (cM ; cS ) = (hM cM + hS cS )1=
with elasticity of substitution 1=(1

(3)

) < 1.

We assume that each period labor can move, but only before innovation and production
take place. As we specify below, …rms will invest in innovation, and the realization of
these innovations will be random. But because …rms are small, there will be no aggregate
uncertainty. Rational expectations then imply that workers correctly anticipate prices and
aggregate pro…ts. In addition, wages and rents will be determined when workers move, and
thus before innovation occurs. Hence, at the time of their location decisions, workers either
observe or correctly anticipate all the variables they need for calculating their utility levels
at all locations. Therefore, mobility guarantees that utility levels equalize across locations
each period.
2.2 Technology
Firms specialize in one sector. The inputs of production are land and labor. Each …rm
requires one unit of land to produce, so in each location there is one …rm. Production of a
…rm in location ` at time t, if it produces in the manufacturing sector, is given by
M (LM (`; t)) = ZM (`; t) LM (`; t) ;
8

and, similarly, if it produces services, its production is
S (LS (`; t)) = ZS (`; t) LS (`; t) ;
where Zi (`; t) is the technology level and Li (`; t) is the amount of labor used at location
` and time t in sector i. In the following sections we will describe the determination of
technology. For now, we just point out that …rms will decide whether and how much to
invest in innovation, and that the realizations of local innovations are random.
Firms compete for workers and land at the time when workers can move across locations,
which happens before innovations are realized and output is produced. In addition, …rms
face …nancial constraints: they cannot incur negative operating pro…ts (i.e., pro…ts before
deducting the cost of innovation).7 This obliges …rms to choose their inputs and compete
for workers and land as if the technology they will use for production is the one before
innovations are realized. The reason is simple: any other behavior would give negative
operating pro…ts were they to be unlucky and not draw any improvement in technology.
Hence, the problem of a …rm in sector i 2 fM; Sg at location ` is given by
max pi (`; t) Zi (`; t) Li (`; t)

Li (`;t)

where

w (`; t) Li (`; t) ;

(4)

2 f ; g and Zi (`; t) refers to the technology before innovations are realized. To

solve the above problem, …rms must be able to anticipate prices. Since innovations are local,
and counties are small, there is no aggregate uncertainty, so that rational expectations will
ensure that this is indeed the case.
^ i (`; t), the maximum per unit land rent that
If we denote the optimal …rm choice by L
…rms in sector i are willing to pay, the bid rent, is then given by
^ i (`; t)
Ri (`; t) = pi (`; t) Zi (`; t) L

^ i (`; t) ;
w (`; t) L

(5)

which guarantees that if the level of productivity stays at Zi (`; t) after the innovation process
^ i (`; t)
the operating pro…ts equal zero, pi (`; t) Zi (`; t) L

^ i (`; t)
w (`; t) L

R (`; t) = 0. If

the innovation process leads to higher productivity, …rms will make positive pro…ts, since
the number of workers, wages, and land rents will not adjust until next period.
7

Firms will be able to …nance innovation with intertemporal loans from shareholders, as described below.

9

2.3 Di¤usion and Timing
Technology di¤uses between time periods. This di¤usion is assumed to be local and to
decline exponentially with distance. In particular, if Z (r; t
in location r in period t

1) was the technology used

1, in the next period, t; location ` has access to (but does not

necessarily need to use) technology
e

j` rj

Zi (r; t

1) :

Hence, before the innovation decision in period t, location ` has access to
Zi (`; t) = max e
r2[0;1]

j` rj

Zi (r; t

1)

(6)

which of course includes its own technology of the previous period. This type of di¤usion
is the only exogenous source of agglomeration in the model.8
The timing of the problem is key. Figure 1 illustrates the assumed timing.

Late Period t-1:

Early Period t:

Mid Period t:

Late Period t:

Late Period t:

Production with Z(l,t-1)

Diffusion leads to Z(l ,t)

L moves, w(l,t)
and R(l,t) are set

Innovation leads to new
Z(l,t)

Production with new
Z(l,t)

Figure 1: Timing
During the night, between periods t

1 and t, technology di¤uses locally as described

above. This leads to a level of technology Zi (`; t), given by (6), in the morning. Labor then
moves according to this technology, and the wage and land rents are determined using this
technology, as explained above. After labor moves, …rms may decide to try to improve their
technology by investing in innovation. The level of technology a …rm uses in production
in period t is then either the one it woke up with or the improved technology, provided it
invested in innovation and was successful doing so.
8

As we describe below, there is an endogenous source of agglomeration that results from trade. Locations
that experience high relative prices of a given good are more likely to form clusters specialized in the
production of that good.

10

To reiterate, we are assuming that the number of people in location `, denoted by L (`; t),
reacts to Zi (`; t) and adjusts before innovation is realized. That is, labor moves in the middle
of the period, so that innovation has no contemporaneous e¤ect on labor mobility, wages
and rents (an implication of the …nancial constraints faced by …rms). Given that agents hold
a diversi…ed portfolio of land and …rms in all locations, given that wages are determined
before any possible innovation, and given that the absence of aggregate uncertainty implies
that agents correctly anticipate prices, there is no need for agents to build expectations
about future innovations in di¤erent locations when deciding where to reside.
2.4 Idea Generation
A …rm can decide to buy a probability

1 of innovating at cost

industry i. This implies that with probability
probability (1

( ) in a particular

the …rm obtains an innovation and with

) its technology is not a¤ected by the investment in innovation.9

A …rm that obtains the chance to innovate draws a technology multiplier zi from a Pareto
distribution (with lower bound 1), leading to an improved technology level, zi Zi (`; t), where
Pr [z < zi ] =

a

1
z

:

Thus, conditional on innovation and a technology at the beginning of the period Zi , the
expected technology is
E (Zi (`; t) jZi ; Innovation) =

a
a

1

Zi for a > 1:

(7)

The expected technology for a given , not conditional on innovating but conditional on
Zi , is
E (Zi (`; t) jZi ) =

a
a

1

+ (1

) Zi =

+a 1
a 1

Zi :

The innovation draws are i.i.d. across time, but not across space. Conditional on an
innovation, let s (`; `0 ) denotes the correlation in the realizations of zi (`) and zi (`0 ). We
9

Instead we could assume that …rms buy a realization of a Poisson distribution for a number of opportunities to innovate. In this case, we need to calculate the expectation of the maximum draw out of N
realizations, which is distributed Fréchet, as discussed in Eaton and Kortum (2002).

11

assume that s (`; `0 ) is non-negative, continuous, symmetric, and
lim0 s `; `0 = 1 and/or lim0 s `; `0 = 1.
`#`

`"`

Hence, innovation draws are spatially correlated, and …rms that are located arbitrarily close
to each other obtain exactly the same innovations. This is important since, given di¤usion,
absent any spatial correlation, an in…nite number of i.i.d. draws from a distribution with
unbounded support would imply in…nite productivity in all locations. In what follows, we
assume that s (`; `0 ) declines fast enough with the distance between ` and `0 such that the
law of large numbers still guarantees that there is no aggregate uncertainty.
2.5 Innovation Decisions
Firms choose innovation probabilities to maximize the present discounted value of pro…ts.
However, the pro…ts …rms obtain from innovating last for only one period, since next period
workers can move, and wages and rents are determined anew. Nevertheless, a …rm’s current
innovation decision could in principle a¤ect its future scale, and thus change its gains
from future innovations. However, as we prove below, this will not be the case because
today’s innovations di¤use by tomorrow, so that a …rm’s scale will also be determined by
the innovations of neighboring locations: an externality. Then, continuity in the di¤usion
process and the spatial correlation in innovation realizations guarantee that a …rm’s own
decisions do not a¤ect the expected technology it wakes up with tomorrow, and thus do not
change its future innovation decisions. The next proposition formalizes this logic.

Proposition 1 A …rm’s optimal dynamic innovation decisions maximize current period
pro…ts. That is,

i (`; t)

is chosen so as to maximize the …rm’s period t pro…ts only.

Proof. The objective function of a …rm in a given location ` at time t0 is given by
"1
X
1
i (`; t) + a
^ i (`; t)
max 1 Et0
Zi (`; t) pi (`; t) L
a 1
f i (`;t)gt
0
t=t
0

^ i (`; t)
w (`; t) L
12

R (`; t)

(

i (`; t))

i

;

given Zi (`; t0 ). Because every period, once labor moves and wages are determined, the
pro…ts of …rms before innovation are set to zero,
^ i (`; t)
Zi (`; t) pi (`; t) L

^ i (`; t)
w (`; t) L

the problem above can be simpli…ed to
"1
X
i (`; t)
max 1 Et0
a
1
f i (`;t)gt
0
t=t

R (`; t) = 0;

^ i (`; t)
Zi (`; t) pi (`; t) L

(

i (`; t))

0

=

f

i (`; t0 )

max 1

a

i (`;t)gt0

+Et0

"

1

1
X

^ i (`; t0 )
Zi (`; t0 ) pi (`; t0 ) L

i (`; t)

a

t=t0 +1

1

^ i (`; t)
Zi (`; t) pi (`; t) L

(

#

(8)

i (`; t0 ))

(

i (`; t))

#

Note that the last term in (8) is independent of the decision in t0 except for its dependence
on the technology early in period t0 +1; Zi (`; t0 +1). However, this technology is independent
of the choice

i (`; t0 ).

To prove this, …rst note that by (6) technology at the beginning of

^ i (`; t) and Ri (`; t). Furthermore, a location is small
the period is continuous in `, and so is L
so it does not change pi (`; t). Since lim`!`0 s (`; `0 ) = 1 from above or below, (6) implies
that if
` = arg max e
r2[0;1]

j` rj

Zi (r; t0 )

there exists an `0 arbitrarily close to ` such that
`0 = arg max e
r2[0;1]

j` rj

Zi (r; t0 ) :

Hence,
Zi (`; t0 + 1) = Zi `0 ; t0
and so innovation decisions in ` do not determine Zi (`; t0 + 1), which implies that the last
term in (8) does not depend on

i (`; t0 ).

Hence, to determine

i (`; t0 ),

maximizing (8) is

equivalent to solving
max

i (`;t0 )

=

max

i (`;t0 )

i (`; t0 )

a

^ i (`; t0 )
Zi (`; t0 ) pi (`; t0 ) L
( i (`; t0 ))
1
1
i (`; t0 ) + a
^ i (`; t0 )
Zi (`; t0 ) pi (`; t0 ) L
a 1

^ i (`; t0 )
w (`; t0 ) L

R (`; t0 )
13

(

i (`; t0 ))

which denotes current expected pro…ts.
The previous proposition implies that the innovation problem of a …rm, given factor prices
and the amount of labor, is given by
max
i

i

+a 1
a 1

^ i (`; t)
Zi (`; t) pi (`; t) L

^ i (`; t)
w (`; t) L

R (`; t)

( i)

(9)

Given that the spatial distribution of workers, as well as wages and rents, are determined in
^ i (`; t) + R (`; t) as given, so that maximizing pro…ts, or revenue
advance, …rms take w (`; t) L
net of the investment costs, is equivalent.
0

Suppose the innovation cost satis…es

00

( ) > 0; and

( )

0: A ready example would

be
( )=

1

+

1
2

for

1

2

> 0;

(10)

which we use in the numerical examples below. The advantage of this cost function is that
it has an asymptote at 1. This prevents us from dealing with corner solutions at 1. The
FOC is then given by

i

2 (a

1)
^ i (`; t)
Zi (`; t) pi (`; t) L

(`; t) = 1

!1
2

:

(11)

Then

i (`; t)

=

8
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:

0

if

(

i

i (`;t)
^
(a 1) Zi (`; t) pi (`; t) Li (`; t)

(`; t))

and/or

i

(`; t)

0
:

i

(`; t)

if

(

i

(`; t)) <

(12)

i (`;t)
^
(a 1) Zi (`; t) pi (`; t) Li (`; t)

and

i

(`; t) > 0

Note that a few results are immediate from these equations. First, investment in innovation is weakly increasing in …rm’s revenues, so

i (`; t)

^ i (`; t) .
is increasing in Zi (`; t) pi (`; t) L

This scale e¤ect is consistent with the evidence presented by Carlino et al. (2007). They
show that in the U.S. a doubling of employment density leads to a 20% increase in patents
per capita.
14

Second, …rms …nance innovations with their expected pro…ts. This implies that some
periods they may spend more than the realized gains and make negative pro…ts on their
innovations, while some other periods they make positive pro…ts. The randomness averages
out over locations, so that agents obtain positive dividends each period, and are thus willing
to …nance these streams of innovations. In that sense, …rms face …nancial constraints when
hiring factors, but not when making innovation decisions. The rationale for this asymmetry
is that owners want to constrain …rms from competing away all the expected pro…ts from
innovation when competing for factors.
In all numerical exercises we make

( ) proportional to wages in each location. Hence,

if an economy grows (and therefore wages increase), the cost of investment in innovation
grows accordingly. Then, the model is such that –with enough locations so that the law of
large numbers applies– the economy converges to a balanced growth path. Of course, for
a …nite number of locations, there will be ‡uctuations around this balanced growth path,
even in the long run. In contrast, individual locations’employment, specialization, trade,
etc. will keep changing over time.
2.6 Land, Goods, and Labor Markets
Goods are costly to transport. For simplicity we assume iceberg transportation costs that
are identical in manufacturing and services. This is without loss of generality given that
the equilibrium depends only on the sum of transport costs in both industries. If one unit
of any of the goods is transported from ` to r, only e

j` rj

units of the good arrive in r.

Since the technology to transport goods is freely available, the price of good i produced in
location ` and consumed in location r has to satisfy
pi (r; t) = e

j` rj

pi (`; t) :

(13)

Land is assigned to a …rm in the industry that values it the most. Hence, land rents are
such that
R (`; t) = max fRM (`; t) ; RS (`; t)g :
Denote by

i (`)

2 f0; 1g the fraction of land at location ` used in the production of good
15

i. If R (`; t) = Ri (`; t) then
let

M

i (`; t)

= 1. To break ties, when RM (`; t) = RS (`; t), we

(`; t) = 1. Once again, note that competition for land determines land rents before

technological innovations are realized, as discussed above.
In order to guarantee equilibrium in product markets, we need to take into account that
some of the goods are lost in transportation. To do this, let Hi (`; t) denote the stock of
excess supply of product i between locations 0 and `. De…ne Hi (`; t) by Hi (0; t) = 0 and
by the di¤erential equation
@Hi (`; t)
=
@`

i (`; t) xi (`; t)

ci (`; t)

X

^

i (`; t) Li (`; t)

i

^ M (`; t)
where xM (`; t) = M L

(

M

!

jHi (`; t)j ;

^ S (`; t)
(`; t)) and xS (`; t) = S L

(

(14)

S

(`; t))

denote the equilibrium production of good i at location ` per unit of land net of technology
investment costs. That is, at each location we add to the stock of excess supply the amount
of good i produced and we subtract the consumption of good i by all residents of `. We
then need to adjust for the fact that if Hi (`; t) is positive and we increase `, we have to
ship the stock of excess supply a longer distance. This implies a cost in terms of goods and
services given by . The equilibrium conditions in the goods markets are then Hi (1; t) = 0
for all i. Given the lack of aggregate uncertainty and the fact that there are national goods
markets that clear, under rational expectations all agents anticipate the behavior of prices
correctly.
In equilibrium, labor markets clear. Given free mobility, we have to guarantee that the
total amount of labor demanded in the economy is equal to the total supply L before
technological innovations are realized. The labor market equilibrium condition is therefore
Z 1X
^
(15)
i (`; t) Li (`; t) d` = L:
0

i

2.7 De…nition of Equilibrium
^ i ; i ; Hi ; pi ; Ri ; w; Zi ;
An equilibrium in this economy is a set of real functions (ci ; L
locations ` 2 [0; 1] and time t = 1; :::, for i 2 fM; Sg ; such that:
Agents choose consumption, ci ; by solving the problem in (1).
16

i)

of

^ i satisfy (2).
Agents locate optimally, so w, pi , Ri and L
^ i ; that
Firms maximize pro…ts by choosing the number of workers per unit of land, L
solves (4), and by choosing the land bid rent, Ri , that solves (5).
Land is assigned to the industry that values it the most, so if max fRM (`; t) ; RS (`; t)g =
Ri (`; t), then

i (`; t)

= 1:

Goods markets clear, so Hi is given by (14) and Hi (1) = 0:
The labor market clears, so
Investment in innovation

i

i

^ i satisfy (15).
and L

satis…es (12).

Technology Zi satis…es the innovation process that leads to (7) and the di¤usion
process given by (6).
3. EVIDENCE AND MODEL PREDICTIONS
We now proceed to solving the model numerically and to contrast the equilibrium allocation with the data. To do so, we need to propose values for all of the parameters in the
model. These are based on the evolution of the U.S. economy over the period 1980-2005.
3.1 Evidence
Although many of the stylized facts will appear familiar from the literature on the structural transformation (see, e.g., Ngai and Pissarides, 2007, and Buera and Kaboski, 2007),
we will also emphasize two less well-known aspects. First, in the last …fteen years, compared to the 1980s, many of those familiar stylized facts have undergone signi…cant changes.
Second, we will present evidence on the spatial dimension, an aspect generally ignored in
this literature.
It is well known that employment has been moving out of goods and into services,10 as
10

In the empirical section we distinguish between ‘goods’and ‘services’(where ‘goods’is the aggregation of
manufacturing, construction and mining) because this is the typical distinction in many of the data sources,
such as the Industry Economic Accounts of the BEA. In the rest of the paper, we refer to the two sectors of
interest as ‘manufacturing’and ‘services.’

17

can be seen in Figure 2.1 (where the extension .1 in the …gure’s name refers to the upper
panel and the extension .2 to the lower panel).11 The start of this shift dates back to the
1930s and has continued to the present day. However, since the mid 1990s this shift has
clearly been slowing down. In fact, between 1980 and 1995 the share of service employment
increased by about 10 percentage points but only by 4 percentage points between 1995 and
2005. This change in employment shares has been accompanied by a decrease in the price
of goods, relative to services. As shown in Figure 2.2., this decline was pronounced in the
1980s and early 1990s, but since then has been slowing down, with even a slight reversal in
recent years.
The mid 1990s also marks a breakpoint for wages. Figure 3.1 shows how real hourly wages
of production workers started to increase signi…cantly around 1995, after two decades of
decline.12 This timing also coincides with the evolution of land and housing prices. Figure
3.2 shows sharp increases in the real values of land and housing post-1995, following a fairly
stable pattern throughout the 1980s and the early 1990s. Of course, part of this dramatic
increase is disappearing as a result of the current housing crisis, but it remains to be seen
whether values will return to their pre-1995 levels in real terms.13
The dynamics in our theory are the result of innovations that translate into higher local
productivity. We use value added per worker as the empirical counterpart to productivity
given that local technology can also be interpreted as local capital or infrastructure. Figure
4.1 shows how in the 1980s services productivity growth, as measured by value added per
worker, was falling behind that of goods, a phenomenon that goes back in time and was
described by Baumol (1967), who argued that it was inherently more di¢ cult to innovate
in services than in goods. That same widening gap is also apparent in Figure 4.2, which
reports the log of value added per worker in both goods and services. Since the mid 90s
services productivity growth has clearly been catching up and, on some accounts, may even
have surpassed productivity growth in the goods-producing sector (Triplett and Bosworth,
11

Figure 2 to 11 are included at the end of the paper.
For purposes of comparison with the numerical section, to obtain real wages we de‡ate by the services
price index used in the Industry Economic Accounts of the BEA.
13
Once again, we de‡ate by the services price index used in the Industry Economic Accounts of the BEA.
12

18

2004).

1980

1995

2005

1980

1995

2005

Log Employment Density

Log Employment Density

(net of local consumption)

Difference 70-30
Goods
Services

1.677
1.340

1.634
1.462

1.632
1.510

Difference 70-30
Goods
Services

1.723
1.396

1.650
1.993

1.666
2.186

Standard deviation
Goods
Services

1.764
1.548

1.740
1.613

1.695
1.635

Standard deviation
Goods
Services

1.731
1.548

1.676
1.613

1.636
1.635

Log Earnings per Worker

Log Earnings per Worker
(net of local consumption)

Difference 70-30
Goods
Services

0.296
0.153

0.294
0.191

0.325
0.224

Difference 70-30
Goods
Services

0.328
0.164

0.261
0.261

0.274
0.314

Standard deviation
Goods
Services

0.273
0.159

0.298
0.207

0.335
0.252

Standard deviation
Goods
Services

0.283
0.173

0.269
0.254

0.282
0.312

Source: REIS, Bureau of Economic Analysis

Table 1: Distribution of Employment Density and Productivity
As for the spatial dimension, the goods sector has become more dispersed in terms of
employment density, whereas the service sector has become more concentrated over time.
Using U.S. county data, Table 1 shows the evolution of the standard deviation of log employment in both sectors between 1980 and 2005 (as well as the log di¤erence between the
70th and 30th percentiles). For goods, the tightening distribution implies that counties are
becoming more alike in terms of employment density. In contrast, for services the distribution is widening, implying that service employment is becoming more concentrated in
space. Note also that services started o¤ being more dispersed than goods, and therefore
the two distributions are becoming more similar. The increased spatial concentration in
services also shows up when analyzing labor productivity, as measured by earnings per
worker. Table 1 shows how the distribution of earnings per worker in the industrial sector
did not change much over time. In contrast, in the service sector earnings per worker have
become more unequal across counties, as re‡ected by the widening distribution. As with
employment, sectoral di¤erences have become mitigated over time.
19

Given that in our theory locations fully specialize, whereas in the data they do not, we
redo our exercise, after making the data more comparable to the theory. For each county we
adjust the earnings in each sector to what they would be were the county fully specialized.
Take a county that is a net exporter of goods. We compute the consumption of goods
implied by the amount of services the county produces and subtract this amount from the
total earnings of goods. To obtain the consumption of goods implied by the production of
services, we use the aggregate ratio of spending on goods relative to spending on services
from the U.S. economy and multiply this by services earnings. This gives us a measure of
adjusted goods earnings were the county fully specialized in the production of goods. We
do a parallel calculation for net service exporters. Obtaining a similarly adjusted measure
for sectoral employment at the county level is straightforward: we just take the adjusted
sectoral earnings and compute the implied sectoral employment. As can be seen in the
right-hand side of Table 1, the results are essentially unchanged. Services start o¤ spatially
more dispersed than goods and, over time, become increasingly concentrated. Depending
on the exact measure, services either converge or overtake goods in terms of the degree of
spatial concentration.
3.2 Numerical Results
The basic message we obtain from the evidence presented above is that between 1980 and
1995 productivity in goods, relative to services, was growing fast, relative prices of goods
were declining, and employment in the goods-producing sectors was steadily falling. During
that same period, service productivity growth was low, and real land rents and wages did not
exhibit signi…cant changes. Then, around 1995, land prices and wages started to increase
in real terms and so did service productivity growth. Changes in employment shares and in
the relative price of goods also slowed down or stopped altogether. This was accompanied
by services becoming geographically more concentrated, making it more similar to goods in
terms of its spatial distribution.
The model is rich enough to match all of these features of the evolution of the U.S.

20

economy over the last 25 years, at least qualitatively and sometimes quantitatively. We
now choose the parameters of the model and present a numerical exercise that can be
compared to the data in the previous subsection.
To compute the model we need to specify initial productivity functions for both manufacturing and services. We let ZS ( ; 0) = 1 and ZM ( ; 0) = 0:8 + 0:4`: The key characteristic
of the initial productivity functions is that service productivity is initially larger than that
of manufacturing for locations close to the left border, whereas manufacturing productivity
is larger than that of services close to the right border. Furthermore, the locations with the
highest manufacturing productivity (namely, the right border) have a 20% larger productivity than the locations with the highest service productivity. These initial productivity
functions imply that if all other parameters are identical between sectors, innovation always
happens earlier in manufacturing than in services and always in the locations close to the
right border.
We also need to impose spatial correlation in the innovation draws. We assume that
space is divided in ‘counties’of identical size, which are connected intervals in [0; 1]. Within
the county all …rms obtain identical innovation draws, while outside the county draws are
i.i.d. To make the simulations computationally feasible, we divide the unit interval into 500
‘counties’.
The elasticity of substitution between manufacturing and services, 1=(1

); is important

for the results. A key mechanism in the model is that as productivity in one sector increases,
relative to the other sector, the relative price of output in that sector decreases and so does
its employment share. For this to happen, the elasticity of substitution between goods
and services must be less than 1. This is consistent with empirical estimates. Stockman
and Tesar (1995), for example, estimate it to be 0.44 for a set of 30 countries. Given this
evidence, we set

=

1:5, so the elasticity of substitution is 1=(1

) = 0:4:

The elasticity of substitution is also important for the incentives to innovate in di¤erent
sectors. With an elasticity below 1, when a sector’s relative productivity increases and
employment in that sector declines, the increase in employment in the other sector increases
the incentives for innovation in that slow-growing sector. Eventually, enough people switch
21

to the slow-growing sector for innovation to start there. In that sense, the economy selfregulates. Indeed, as more people move out of the fast-growing sector, thus tending to lower
overall growth, the other sector starts innovating as well, thus tending to increase overall
growth. As we show in the examples, the aggregate trend converges to a balanced growth
path (apart from small random ‡uctuations). Given the importance of the elasticity of
substitution, in later exercises we study the e¤ect of changes in its value.
Using data from the BEA, Herrendorf and Valentinyi (2007) estimate labor shares in both
sectors to be slightly above 0:6, so we set the share of labor in both sectors to

=

=

0:6: Figure 2.1 shows that by 1980 the share of total employment in services was already
substantially above that in manufacturing. To capture this, we set 1:4 = hS > hM = 0:6,
which generates an initial employment share in services of around 60%; roughly as in the
data.
The timing is important. We let the model run for 50 periods and compare its predictions
to the 25 years of data we have presented, so that a model period amounts to half a year.
Throughout we let

= 0:95, although this parameter plays a limited roll in our results

given that all decisions are essentially static.
We simulate using the cost function in equation (10). We set

2

=

1

> 0, so there

are no …xed costs of investment in innovation. The intensity of innovation is then governed
by two parameters: the cost parameter,

2,

and the shape parameter of the Pareto distri-

bution, a, from which we obtain the productivity draws. Both parameters have a similar
e¤ect. Increasing

2

leads to a higher cost, and increasing a gives a Pareto distribution with

a thinner tail, so that both e¤ects yield less innovation. We let

2

= 0:002054 and a = 43:4;

which results in aggregate productivity growth of around 3% per period in manufacturing
and around 2% per period in services. This parameter con…guration also implies an acceleration of services productivity growth around period 30, which in the data is interpreted
as 1995 (15 years after 1980 and 2 periods per year). Once service innovation reaches full
speed, its productivity growth rate is about the same as that of manufacturing, namely, 3%
per period.
Aggregate productivity growth rates and therefore changes in employment shares are
22

also determined by technological di¤usion. We set the exponential decline of the di¤usion
of technology, , equal to 25. This results in employment shares in services that rise from
0:6 to 0:73, an increase of 13% for the 25-year period, as in the data.
We set the transport cost parameter

= 0:008. This level of transport costs in gen-

eral yields two main specialization areas: one for services and one for manufacturing. In
particular, a cluster of service employment forms endogenously close to the manufacturing
cluster. Other areas to the left of that cluster also specialize in services but produce much
less. The formation of this cluster and its location, as well as the timing of the innovation
in services, can vary signi…cantly with the transport cost parameters. We study the e¤ect
of transport costs in more detail below. Of course, through the timing of the innovation
in services, this parameter partially governs the magnitude of the decrease in the relative
goods prices. In the model the manufacturing price falls by about 60%, more than the 40%
observed in the data. Nevertheless we choose this parameterization because the timing is
closer to the data, even if it yields a price decline that is somewhat too large.
3.2.1 An Equilibrium Outcome.—
The result of a numerical realization of the model is presented in Figure 5.14 For all
numerical simulations we present similar graphs, consisting of nine subplots. We denote
subplots using 3 digits (e.g., 5.2.1) where the …rst digit denotes the number of the …gure
and the other two the corresponding row and column. In all …gures services are plotted in
red and manufacturing in blue.
Figure 5.1.1 presents the coe¢ cient of variation of log employment (the dashed curve)
and log value added (the solid curve) across counties in both industries.15 The distribution
of employment and value added vary in a parallel fashion. Of course, the coe¢ cient of
variation of value added is higher, since it includes employment, productivity and price
14

We present examples of particular realizations of the innovation process. However, given the relatively
large number of locations, results vary little for di¤erent realizations if we preserve the same parameter
values.
15
Throughout we exclude from this calculation all locations that have never innovated in the service sector
as they make the coe¢ cient of variation grow faster and the e¤ects are harder to see. None of our conclusions
are altered if we include all locations.

23

dispersion. Initially manufacturing is innovating more, as re‡ected by the higher values
for the coe¢ cient of variation. Recall that a greater coe¢ cient of variation points to a
more disperse distribution, which means economic activity is spatially more concentrated.16
Over time, as in the data, the service sector catches up with the manufacturing sector and
surpasses it. Both sectors become more concentrated in space as in some of the measures
in Table 1. The main feature of the data that the model is able to replicate is that the
distribution of employment across counties is becoming more similar between manufacturing
and services, with services becoming geographically more concentrated.
Figure 5.1.2 presents aggregate productivity calculated in two di¤erent ways. The solid
curves present aggregate productivity as
R1

Agg1 Zi (t) = R 0
1

xi (`; t)

i (`; t) d`

^ i (`; t)
L

i (`; t) d`

;

(16)

the dashed curves present an alternative statistic, namely,
R1
xi (`; t) i (`; t) d`
;
Agg2 Zi (t) = R 0
1 ^
L
(`;
t)
(`;
t)
d`
i
i
0

(17)

0

where xi denotes output in sector i. Given that there are decreasing returns to scale in labor
at each location, it is not clear which one of them is preferred. Agg1 Zi (t) is the equivalent
of a Solow residual, but a shift in Agg2 Zi (t) increases aggregate output by exactly the
same amount. Note how, as time passes, we …rst observe the catching up of services in
terms of aggregate productivity, but both manufacturing and services grow eventually at a
roughly constant rate that is common to both sectors (up to the local random realizations
that average out in space, but not fully since we have 500 counties). It is the process of
shifting employment to the sector that innovates less that equates productivity growth in
both sectors asymptotically, thus putting the economy on a balanced growth path.
Figure 5.1.3 presents the stock of excess supply, HM (`; t). Each curve represents excess
supply in a di¤erent time period, HM (:; t). In this simulation, lower curves coincide with
16

Indeed, a tightly concentrated distribution implies that all counties are the same, so that economic
activity is equally dispersed across space. In contrast, a widely dispersed distribution means that counties
are very di¤erent, with economic activity concentrating in some areas and by-passing others.

24

later periods. A curve declines when locations specialize in services and it grows when
locations specialize in manufacturing. It is a good way of tracking changes in specialization
over space. A parameter that is key in determining the number of areas of specialization
is the di¤usion parameter . An increase in

implies that di¤usion dies out fast and so

locations bene…t little from it. To see this, Figure 6 presents a simulation with

= 50.

Compared to Figure 5.1.3, we can see in Figure 6.1.3 that the slope of the stock of excess
supply changes sign many times, indicating several switches in land-use specialization. The
reason is clear: when di¤usion is very local, being close (but not extremely close) to other
regions producing the same good does not provide any advantage.
Figure 5.2.1 presents the value of land over time. It shows the value of the diversi…ed
portfolio of land held by all agents, as well as the value of land specialized in each sector.
Note from the …gure how the value of manufacturing land decreases as technology in manufacturing improves faster than service technology. This happens because the decline in
the value of manufactured goods more than compensates for the increase in productivity.
The value of service land, on the other hand, increases throughout. Once innovation in the
service sector accelerates, both the value of the portfolio of land and manufacturing land
rents start increasing much faster, since both sectors are now competing for the same land
close to each other. This is very clear in the U.S. data presented in Figure 3.2, and the
timing coincides with the increase in service productivity shown in Figure 4.1. Note that
both in the model and in the data we de‡ate by the price of service goods.
Figure 5.2.2 exhibits the price of manufactured goods relative to services. The initial
increase in manufacturing productivity, together with an elasticity of substitution less than
1, implies that the relative price of manufactured goods declines over time. Once service
productivity accelerates, the price stabilizes and declines much slower. The pattern is very
close to the one we present in Figure 2.2 for the U.S. economy, although, as discussed, the
magnitude of the decline is somewhat larger than the one observed.
We present the evolution of utility and wages in Figure 5.2.3. Note that wages do not
increase signi…cantly until service productivity starts growing. This is again consistent with
the evidence in Figure 3.1, where wage growth in terms of service goods increases dramat25

ically starting around 1995. Utility grows throughout, since productivity growth in any
industry always increases welfare independently of the relative price and labor reallocation
e¤ects. There is also an acceleration in utility growth, but it is smaller than the one for
wages.
Figure 5.3.1 shows employment shares in both sectors. Since there is no unemployment
in this economy, one is the mirror image of the other. We chose parameter values to match
the change in shares, so it is not surprising that this …gure looks similar to Figure 2.1.
Finally, Figures 5.3.2 and 5.3.3 present the evolution of productivity over time and space.
Since this is a three-dimensional object, we present colored contour plots. Dark blue areas
represent low productivity, and lighter blue, followed by yellow and red areas, represent
higher productivity levels. These …gures are helpful in identifying the areas in which innovation is happening and how clusters of innovation are created and destroyed over time. As
can be seen in the graphs, manufacturing productivity starts increasing immediately, and
all innovation occurs in locations to the right (the top part in the graphs). In contrast,
initially innovation in services happens only in very few locations, namely, the ones closest
to the manufacturing cluster. Over time, as the employment share in services increases and
di¤usion takes hold, the set of regions that innovate grows, increasing the size of the service
cluster. Regions to the left of the service cluster (the bottom part in the graphs) are not
innovating but are specialized in services. Figure 5.1.3 is useful for assessing the relative
magnitude of the production of all regions and therefore the pattern of specialization. This
is consistent with the evidence presented in Table 1 that shows how the standard deviation
of productivity across regions (in terms of earnings per worker) in both sectors increases
throughout our time span.
Figures 6 and 7 present a comparative statics exercise when we vary the rate of decline of
technology di¤usion. A large value of

implies that technological di¤usion dies out faster in

space. The benchmark parameterization uses a value of
with

= 50 and

= 10: With

= 25; and we present simulations

= 50 we obtain less aggregate growth in both sectors. This

is particularly evident for the service sector, as can be seen in Figure 6.3.3. It is also clear
from Figure 6.1.3 that since technology is very local in this case, specialization switches
26

many times in space. In contrast, when we make

= 10 in Figure 7, di¤usion is widespread

and there are only two clusters, with substantially more innovation and productivity growth
over time. The parameter

is related to our de…nition of a period. Letting the economy

run for many more periods results in more di¤usion even if

is high because di¤usion

compounds over time.
3.2.2 Robustness of Numerical Results.—
In the previous subsection we showed results for particular realizations of the paths of
random innovation shocks . This obviously raises the question whether di¤erent realizations
of these shocks would lead to qualitatively di¤erent outcomes. In other words, it is important
to understand which part of the patterns we observe can be explained by the randomness of
a particular realization. To explore this issue, Figure 8 shows the average of the distribution
of outcomes of 100 realizations of the model using the benchmark parameterization of Figure
5.17 Except for the two …gures showing the evolution of productivity over time and space,
all …gures also include the minimum and the maximum outcomes at each point in time over
the 100 realizations.
When looking at the pictures showing average time trends (all but the last two), the
patterns look both qualitatively and quantitatively similar to the ones in the particular
realization of Figure 5. The only di¤erence is that, as expected, the patterns look smoother,
as the randomness across realizations is averaged out. Note, however, that the di¤erence
between the minimum and the maximum across realizations increases with time. Given that
our model generates path dependence through the local scale e¤ect, the initial randomness
–that more or less averages out in the early periods– tends to get reinforced over time,
thus increasing di¤erences across realizations in later periods. In the case of the evolution
of average productivity, Figure 8.1.2 shows that the di¤erence between the minimum and
the maximum is greater in services than in manufacturing. This can be explained by the
17

Note that Figure 8.1.3 is not shown because averaging the stock of excess supply at each location for
each time period across the 100 realizations would be hard to interpret. In addition, to increase visibility,
Figure 8.1.1 only shows the coe¢ cient of variation of employment and Figure 8.1.2 only shows aggregate
productivity based on (16).

27

randomness in the timing of when innovation jump-starts in the service sector.
The last two pictures show the average productivity in manufacturing and services across
time and space. Compared to the particular realization of the innovation shocks shown
in Figure 5, we now see general areas of high productivity in the respective sectors, but
we are no longer able to distinguish particular clusters within those general areas. This
indicates that in each realization clusters appear, but where exactly they appear within
those areas is random and so averaged out and not perceivable in Figures 8.3.2 and 8.3.3.
Two features still survive though: the increase in manufacturing innovation as one moves
right, and the co-location of innovation in both sectors. The former re‡ects the persistence
of initial conditions through scale e¤ects, whereas the latter re‡ects the incentive of services
to locate close to consumers.
The fact that clusters disappear through averaging out makes us lose some relevant information. In as far as reality is also the outcome of a particular realization, we do not
necessarily want peaks and valleys to average out when analyzing the predictions of the
model. This, together with the …nding that average time trends do not di¤er qualitatively
across realizations, suggests that there is some value in analyzing particular realizations. In
the rest of the paper we therefore limit ourselves to a particular realization of the model.
3.3 The Role of Space
A natural question to ask in the context of our theory is: what is the nature of the
additional insights it provides relative to standard growth theories because it incorporates
the distribution of economic activity in space? One dimension that neither standard growth
theory nor standard new economic geography models can analyze is how the dynamics
of innovation across sectors a¤ects the dispersion of land prices in space. In addition,
modeling the location of economic activity in space adds economic e¤ects that can overturn
the standard reasoning behind the e¤ect of particular parameters. This is the case for
transport costs, , and the elasticity of substitution, 1= (1
detailed discussion of each of these themes.

28

). We now turn to a more

3.3.1 Land Rents.—
As discussed before, average land rents in our benchmark calibration start to increase
around period 30, coinciding with the acceleration in innovation in the service sector. Indeed, once both sectors innovate, they compete for land close to each other, driving up its
value. This …nding suggests that the observed increase in land rents in the data may be
related to the structural transformation, and in particular, to the take-o¤ of the service
industry. In addition to looking at average land rents, having a spatial model with many
locations also allows us to analyze the predicted evolution in the distribution of land rents,
and compare it to the data.
Figure 9 shows the predicted distributions of land rents for the benchmark calibration at
two points in time: just before the service sector starts to innovate in earnest (period 30,
in yellow) and at the end of the simulation (period 50, in red).18 To avoid being subject
to the randomness of a particular realization, the two distributions in Figure 9 are generated by non-parametrically estimating the predicted density functions of 100 realizations
of the benchmark parameterization. For each realization, the predicted density function is
obtained by dividing the relevant part of the real line into 100 bins. The dots in the …gures
correspond to the predicted density in each bin for all 100 realizations.19
A number of features stand out. First, the dispersion in land rents clearly increases between period 30 and period 50 (the standard deviation of land rents increases on average
for the 100 realizations from 0.53 to 1.20). As services start innovating, they become more
concentrated, and thus more unevenly spread across space. The di¤erence between more
desirable and less desirable locations increases, implying more dispersion in land rents. This
evolution is further enhanced by the co-location of manufacturing and service clusters. Sec18

The distribution excludes the locations that have never innovated, which are mostly specialized in
services. Since these correspond to very low employment density locations, one can interpret them as being
not urbanized. Excluding them allows us to compare the distributions with a sample of urban land rents,
as we do below.
19
The dots that coincide with the horizontal axis represent bins that are empty. Because of the …nite
number of locations, there is an area just above the horizontal axis without dots. Indeed, as soon as there
is one location in a given bin, it will have a density bounded away from zero. Given that the support of the
density function increases between periods 30 and 50, the minimum strictly positive density is smaller in
period 50 (the red dots) than in period 30 (the yellow dots).

29

ond, though slightly harder to see, the two-sector nature of our model generates a bi-modal
distribution, with the more rightward mode mostly representing locations specialized in
services and the more leftward mode corresponding to locations mostly specialized in manufacturing. The intuition for this result is as follows. Initially, when innovation in the service
sector is nascent, service producers already have an incentive to concentrate in locations
close to the manufacturing clusters, because of the proximity to consumers. As a result,
when innovation takes o¤ in services, it will do so in the vicinity of dense manufacturing
areas, turning them into the most expensive locations. Although some manufacturing areas
— those located close to the right border — initially escape this increased competition for
land, the forces of co-location are such that over time land values in both sectors become
more equal, as re‡ected in the left mode becoming smaller and eventually disappearing (if
we let the model run for many more periods).
The predicted rise in the dispersion of land prices across space is consistent with what
happened in the U.S. between 1995 and 2005. Using data from Davis and Palumbo (2007),
Figure 10 plots the distribution of land values (in logs) across 40 MSAs in 1995 (period 30
in the model) and 2005 (period 50 in the model). Note that these data re‡ect residential
land values, and are thus unable to capture di¤erences in the evolution of the value of land
in function of its use. This may explain why the observed distributions are uni-modal for
both years. In any case, the overall picture is consistent with the predictions of the model:
the dispersion in land values increased signi…cantly between 1995 and 2005. The model is
therefore able to capture not only the rise in land values since the mid 1990s, but also the
increased dispersion. It also o¤ers an explanation for why this happened: the take-o¤ of
innovation in the service sector led to greater competition for land.
3.3.1 Transport Costs.—
In our theory transport costs have the standard negative e¤ect on static welfare that
is familiar from trade models. Higher transport costs imply that more goods are lost in
transportation and agents obtain fewer gains from specialization. But here higher transport
costs also imply that it is more important to produce in areas close to locations where the

30

other sector is producing. So if transport costs are relatively high and one sector is already
somewhat clustered (like the manufacturing sector in our benchmark case presented in
Figure 5), economic activity in the other sector will cluster around it. In the example, the
reason is that relative prices of manufactured goods will rise faster as we move away from
manufacturing clusters (goods have to be transported and are therefore more expensive).
Hence, the service-producing locations close to manufacturing areas have a larger scale,
which results in more incentives to innovate. This is evident in Figure 5.3.3. Note also that
once innovation starts in one location, it increases productivity in other close-by regions and
therefore leads to even more innovation in the cluster. So di¤usion, although not necessary
to obtain this e¤ect, reinforces it.
The next proposition proves this positive e¤ect of higher transport costs on innovation
for an initial condition in which the industry is stagnant.

Proposition 2 Given any level of transport costs , suppose aggregate productivity in industry i is stagnant in some period t. Then, an increase in the level of transport costs, ,
weakly increases aggregate productivity growth in industry i at time t:
Proof. Let
m` =

` : lim
0

` %`

i (`; t)

6= lim
0

` &`

i (`; t)

denote the locations in which specialization changes from one industry to the other. Take
` 2 m` and `0 such that

0
i (` ; t)

= 1 and ` = arg min fjl

`0 j for l 2 m` g. Let p (`0 ; t) =

pi (`0 ; t) =pj (`0 ; t) for j 6= i. Then either @p (`0 ; t) =@ > 0 for j`
(since p (`0 ; t) decreases at a rate of 2 with j`
such that

0
i (` ; t)

`0 j < B for some B > 0

`0 j by (13)), or @p (`0 ; t) =@ < 0 for all `0

= 1: In the latter case innovation in industry i is una¤ected by . Thus,

the rest of the proof assumes we are in the former case. Note that since R=L is constant
across locations, labor mobility (equation (2)) implies that w (`0 ; t) =pj (`0 ; t) increases less
than p (`0 ; t) for j`

`0 j < B (since workers can substitute away from the expensive good).

Thus, (4) implies that Li (`0 ; t) increases for j`
as a function of Zi ( ; t

`0 j < B, since Zi (`0 ; t) is predetermined

1) by (6). The result is that Zi (`0 ; t) pi (`0 ; t) Li (`0 ; t) decreases
31

with j`

`0 j and is increasing in

is increasing in
in

for j`

`0 j < B. Hence, max`0 Zi (`0 ; t) pi (`0 ; t) Li (`0 ; t)

. Equations (11) and (12) then imply that max`

: Note that min`0 Zi (`0 ; t) pi (`0 ; t) Li (`0 ; t) is decreasing in

i (`; t)

is increasing

and that equation (11)

is concave in Zi (`0 ; t) pi (`0 ; t) Li (`0 ; t) . However, since innovation is bounded below by
zero,
i (`; t)

i (`; t)

0, and we start from a situation where no region is innovating, namely

= 0 all `, proving that the max`

i (`; t)

is weakly increasing in

is su¢ cient to

show that aggregate productivity in industry i is weakly increasing in . For a growing
industry this is not necessarily the case, since (11) is concave in Zi (`0 ; t) pi (`0 ; t) Li (`0 ; t)
and so reductions in the price of good i in some locations may lead to declines in

i (`; t)

that lead to aggregate declines in productivity.
An immediate corollary of this proposition is that, if one of the industries is growing, productivity growth in the stagnant industry jump-starts earlier the higher are transport costs.
Recall that innovation takes o¤ when aggregate productivity growth in the other industry
shifts enough labor to the stagnant sector. With higher transport costs, the increasing labor
share of the stagnant sector will be more densely clustered, leading it to jump-start earlier.
Following the logic above, were we to increase

from the benchmark value of 0:008;

we would increase the density of the service cluster, leading to higher growth, wages and
welfare. Qualitatively, the …gures look similar to Figure 5 so we do not present them here.
It is easier to see the e¤ect of trade costs when we make transport costs lower. We therefore
present two additional simulations with lower transport costs,

= 0:005 and

= 0:001:

Consistent with the argument above, we expect to see less innovation. In Figure 11, where
= 0:005, innovation in the service sector is less concentrated in space, since being farther
away from the areas specialized in manufacturing is less costly. More important, there
is absolutely no innovation in services for the …rst 29 periods. Lowering

even more to

0:001, as we do in Figure 12, spreads service employment even more as prices depend less
on location. Now innovation happens only in period 40, and when it does, it happens in
virtually all locations. As before, the lower transport costs imply lower wages and welfare.
In contrast to standard economic geography models, the static losses from higher trans-

32

port costs are outweighed by the higher incentives to innovate in certain areas. The result is
that growth and overall welfare are higher when transport costs are higher. Recall that the
textbook two-region two-sector economic geography model with labor mobility concludes
that higher transport costs lead to more dispersion (Krugman, 1991; Puga, 1999). The
argument runs as follows: if transport costs are high enough and some factors are immobile, the cost of having to trade between the two regions ceases to compensate for the gains
from agglomeration, so that it becomes bene…cial for both regions to produce both goods.
In as far as concentration of economic activity is related to economic growth, this implies
a negative relation between transport costs and economic growth (Baldwin and Martin,
2004).
Whereas in those models higher transport costs lead to more dispersion, in our model they
lead to more concentration. As argued by Helpman (1997), the key di¤erence is that in our
model, as in Helpman’s, both goods face transport costs. This implies that larger transport
costs induce services to locate closer to manufacturing. This leads to services becoming less
dense in areas far away from manufacturing and more dense in areas closer to manufacturing.
The increase in the scale of production then leads to more innovation in service regions that
locate close to manufacturing. In contrast to standard economic geography models, the
co-location of both sectors thus generates the emergence of a service cluster close to the
manufacturing cluster. This co-location is facilitated in a world with many regions. Of
course, in principle another possibility would be for manufacturing to disperse and locate
closer to services, thus implying less concentration. This does not happen because the
initial cluster of manufacturing gets reinforced over time through innovation and di¤usion,
a force absent in Helpman (1997). In other words, innovation and di¤usion imply that there
are more incentives for services to concentrate and form a cluster close to manufacturing
than for manufacturing to disperse and locate close to services. The …nding that higher
transportation costs lead to more innovation, growth and welfare is an example in which
having a rich spatial dimension leads to some novel economic e¤ects.
The result that higher transport costs can lead to higher welfare can best be understood
through a “second best” argument. In our model, the pro…ts from innovation only last
33

for one period. After that, pro…ts get arbitraged away because workers can relocate and
technology di¤uses. This implies an externality, since …rms do not get the full bene…ts
from innovating. Higher transport costs bring the economy closer to its social optimum
by increasing clustering and innovation, but come at the cost of losing resources. The
optimal policy would be to introduce patents. However, because of the local scale e¤ect
in innovation, optimal patents would have to depend on time and location. Given its high
information content, such a “…rst best” policy is probably infeasible.
3.3.2 Elasticity of Substitution
From standard aggregate logic we would expect a lower elasticity of substitution to lead
to faster innovation in services. The reason is simple: as the elasticity of substitution drops,
the initially higher productivity growth in manufacturing moves a larger share of the labor
force into services, implying higher service density and faster growth.
However, the e¤ect of changes in the elasticity of substitution has an important spatial
component. The main logic is that changes in the elasticity of substitution change the
willingness of agents to substitute services for manufactured goods and, therefore, their
decision to locate in space. If the elasticity of substitution is low, agents are not willing to
substitute consumption across sectors and so, given positive transport costs, care more about
locating near areas that specialize in a di¤erent sector. This prevents the emergence of large
service clusters, since those would increase the average distance to close-by manufacturing
areas. Instead, many smaller service-producing areas locate across manufacturing areas.
This lowers the scale of service-producing regions, implying less innovation in services.
There is another economic force that acts in the opposite direction. As we lower the
elasticity of substitution, workers in manufacturing areas consume a higher share of their
income in services the higher the price of services. Hence, locations specialized in services
and close to areas that are specialized in manufacturing achieve a larger scale and therefore
innovate more.
The result of these di¤erent e¤ects leads to a non-monotonic relation between the elastic-

34

ity of substitution and innovation. Starting from our benchmark value of 0.4, if we lower the
elasticity of substitution to 0.33, innovation in services declines dramatically. We present
these results in Figure 13. Innovation in services starts only in period 38 and is all close to
manufacturing. Figure 13.1.3 shows how now we have several switches in specialization as
we move across space.
If we lower the elasticity of substitution further to 0:25, we also obtain dispersed location
of services close to manufacturing areas, but innovation starts in period 28 and is overall
stronger. We present these results in Figure 14.20 As with transport costs, this logic carries
through for a wide range of parameterizations. In sum, the negative e¤ect dominates for
high values of the elasticity of substitution and the positive one for low values. This nonmonotonicity is the result of the relocation motivated by the change in preferences, in
combination with our innovation process. Once again, this result is unique to a spatialdynamic setup.
4. CONCLUSION
In this paper we have presented a spatial dynamic growth theory in which …rms choose
how much to invest in innovation (if at all). To deal with the intractability of dynamic spatial
frameworks, we have proposed a theory where labor is mobile, ownership of land and …rms
is diversi…ed, and innovation shocks are spatially correlated and di¤use over time. These
features yields a computable dynamic spatial theory which is rich enough to capture many of
the macroeconomic and spatial stylized facts of the U.S. economy. We …nd that employment
relocation is crucial in balancing innovation across sectors. As innovation in one sector
increases relative to the other sector, employment shifts from the more innovative to the
less innovative sector. Relative prices imply that this labor locates close to manufacturing
clusters, thereby increasing the incentives for innovation in the lagging sector, especially in
those locations close to the innovative sector’s clusters. These e¤ects balance the value of
sectors in the economy and lead to a balanced growth path in which aggregate growth in
20

Elasticities of substitution larger than the standard case lead to a larger, but similar-looking, cluster in
manufacturing, so we omit the graphs.

35

the economy eventually stabilizes.
A stable aggregate path hides important employment reallocation across space. As the
economy grows, local clusters emerge and disappear. The pattern of clusters is related to
the costs of innovation, the spatial scope of di¤usion, transport costs and the elasticity
of substitution, as we document numerically. For the latter two, incorporating the space
and time dimensions overturns the standard logic of their e¤ects familiar from trade and
growth models. We argue that this process of innovation and employment reallocation helps
rationalize many observed phenomena in the U.S. during the last few decades. Applying
our theory to other time periods or countries could, perhaps, lead to a better understanding
of both the theory and the evolution of economic activity in other contexts.
In calibrating the model, we have found that some of its quantitative implications are
hard to reconcile with the data. In particular, in our benchmark calibration targeting the
change in employment shares over time leads to a reduction in the relative price of goods
that is somewhat too large. The model also generates too much innovation and therefore
aggregate productivity grows faster than in the data. This is especially the case if we want
to target the timing of innovation. Exploring other speci…cations of preferences (such as
non-homotheticities as in Buera and Kaboski, 2007) or innovation costs may yield a better
…t, although we believe, it would obscure some of the spatial-dynamic economic forces we
uncover. We therefore leave this exploration for future research.

36

REFERENCES
[1] Baldwin, R. E. and Martin, P., 2004. “Agglomeration and Regional Growth,” in: J. V.
Henderson & J. F. Thisse (eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, 4, 26712711.
[2] Baumol, W.J., 1967. “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of Urban
Crisis,” American Economic Review, 57, 415-426.
[3] Boucekkine, R., Camacho, C., and Zou, B., 2009. “Bridging the Gap Between Growth Theory and the New Economic Geography: The Spatial Ramsey Model,” Macroeconomic
Dynamics, 13, 20-45.
[4] Brock, W. and Xepapadeas, A., 2008a. “Di¤usion-Induced Instability and Pattern Formation in In…nite Horizon Recursive Optimal Control,” Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control, 32, 2745-2787.
[5] Brock, W. and Xepapadeas, A., 2008b. “Pattern Formation, Spatial Externalities and Regulation in Coupled Economic-Ecological Systems,” MPRA Paper 9105, University of
Munich.
[6] Buera, F. and Kaboski, J.P., 2007. “The Rise of the Service Economy,” working paper,
UCLA.
[7] Carlino, G., Chatterjee, S. and Hunt, R., 2007. “Urban Density and the Rate of Invention,”
Journal of Urban Economics, 61, 389-419.
[8] Davis, M. and Heathcote, J., 2007. “The Price and Quantity of Residential Land in the
United States,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 2595-2620.
[9] Davis, M.A. and Palumbo, M.G., 2007, “The Price of Residential Land in Large US Cities,”
Journal of Urban Economics, 63, 352-384; data located at Land and Property Values
in the U.S., Lincoln Institute of Land Policy http://www.lincolninst.edu/resources/.

37

[10] Desmet, K. and E. Rossi-Hansberg, 2009. “Spatial Growth and Industry Age,” Journal of
Economic Theory, 144, 2477-2502.
[11] Eaton, J. and Kortum, S., 1999. “International Technology Di¤usion: Theory and Measurement,” International Economic Review, 40, 537-570.
[12] Eaton, J. and Kortum, S., 2002. “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica, 70,
1741-1779.
[13] Grossman, G. and E. Helpman, 1991. Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy, Cambridge MA: The MIT Press.
[14] Helpman, E., 1997. “The Size of Regions,” in: D. Pines, E. Sadka, and I. Zilcha, I. (eds.),
Topics in Public Economics: Theoretical and Applied Analysis, Cambridge University
Press: Cambridge.
[15] Herrendorf, B. and Valentinyi, A., 2007. “Measuring Factor Income Shares at the Sector
Level - A Primer,” CEPR Discussion Papers 6271, C.E.P.R.
[16] Krugman, P., 1991. “Increasing Returns and Economic Geography,” Journal of Political
Economy, 99, 483-499.
[17] Murata, Y., 2008. “Engel’s law, Petty’s law, and Agglomeration”, Journal of Development
Economics, 87, 161-177.
[18] Ngai, R.L. and Pissarides, C.A., 2007. “Structural Change in a Multisector Model of
Growth,” American Economic Review, 97, 429-443.
[19] Puga, D., 1999. “The Rise and Fall of Regional Inequalities,” European Economic Review,
43, 303-334.
[20] Quah, D., 2002. “Spatial Agglomeration Dynamics,” American Economic Review, 92, 247252.
[21] Rossi-Hansberg, E., 2005. “A Spatial Theory of Trade,” American Economic Review, 95,
1464-1491.
38

[22] Stockman, A. and Tesar, L., 1995. “Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country Model of the
Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements,”American Economic Review,
85, 168-185.
[23] Triplett, J.E. and Bosworth, B.P., 2004. Productivity in the U.S. Services Sector, The Brookings Institution: Washington, D.C.
[24] Ventura, J., 1997. “Growth and Interdependence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112,
57-84.
[25] World Bank, 2009, “Reshaping Economic geography,” World Development Report, The
World Bank, Washington, D.C.
[26] Young, A., 1991. “Learning by Doing and the Dynamic E¤ects of International Trade,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106, 369-405.

39

Employment Shares
0.8

Goods Share

Services Share

0.6

0.4

0.2
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Year

Source: Industry Economic Accounts, BEA

Prices of Goods Relative to Services (1980=1)
1.0

Relative Price (goods/services)

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6
1980

1985

Source: Industry Economic Accounts, BEA

1990

1995

2000

Year

Figure 2: Employment Shares and Relative Prices

40

2005

Real Hourly Earnings of Production Workers (1980=1)
1.05

Real Hourly Earnings

1.00

0.95

0.90
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2000

2005

Year

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics

Real Housing and Land Price Index (1980=1)

2.3

Real Housing Price Index
Real Price Index Residential Land

2.0

1.7

1.4

1.1

0.8
1980

1985

Source: Shiller, http://www.irrationalexuberance.com/
Davis and Heathcote (2007)

1990

1995

Year

Figure 3: Wages, Land Prices, and Housing Prices

41

Growth Value Added per Worker
0.07

0.05

0.03

0.01

-0.01

Growth VA per Worker (Goods)
Growth VA per Worker (Services)
-0.03

Growth VA per worker Goods (4th degree polynomial)
Growth VA per Worker Services (4th degree polynomial)

-0.05
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2000

2005

Year

Source: Industry Economic Accounts, BEA

Value Added per Worker (Logs, 1980=1)
Goods Value Added per Worker
Services Value Added per Worker
1.13

1.08

1.03

0.98
1980

1985

1990

Source: Industry Economic Accounts, BEA

1995

Year

Figure 4: Value Added per Worker

42

5

0.2

1.5

0

1

-5

0.1

0.05

0

ES

0.15

M

2

Agg. ZM (blue) and ZS(red)

CV of M (blue) and S (red) Value Added and Employment (--)

0.25

0.5

-10

0

-15

-0.5
0

10

20

30

40

50

-20
0

10

20

Time

40

50

0

100

200
300
Location

400

500

0

10

20

40

50

Time

2.6

1

-1.6

0.9

-1.8

Logs of Ubar (green), Avg. w (black)

2.4
2.2
0.8

2
1.8
Avg. pM

logs of RM (blue), RS (red) and Rbar (green)

30

1.6
1.4
1.2

0.7
0.6
0.5

1
0.4

-2
-2.2
-2.4
-2.6
-2.8

0.8
-3
0

10

20

30

40

50

0

10

20

Time

30

40

50

Time

30
Time

log(ZM)

log(ZS)

0.75

500

500

0.7

450

450

0.65

400

400

0.6

350

350

0.55

300

300

2

0.5

Location

Location

M (blue) and S (red) labor share

1.8

250

1.6
1.4
1.2

250

1

0.45

200

200

0.8

0.4

150

150

0.6

0.35

100

100

0.4

0.3

50

50

0.2

0.25
0

10

20

30
Time

40

50

10

20

30
Time

40

50

10

20 30
Time

Figure 5: Simulation Results for Benchmark Parameterization

43

40

50

1.6

2

1.4

0

1.2

0.1

0.05

-4

0.8
M

0.15

-2
1

0.6

ES

0.2
Agg. ZM (blue) and ZS(red)

CV of M (blue) and S (red) Value Added and Employment (--)

0.25

0.4

-8

0.2
-10
0
-12

-0.2
0

-0.4
0

10

20

30

40

50

-14
0

10

20

Time

30

40

50

0

100

200
300
Location

400

500

0

10

20

40

50

Time

2.2

1

-2
-2.1

2
1.8

Logs of Ubar (green), Avg. w (black)

0.9
0.8

1.6
Avg. pM

logs of RM (blue), RS (red) and Rbar (green)

-6

1.4

0.7
0.6

1.2
0.5

1

0.4

0.8

-2.2
-2.3
-2.4
-2.5
-2.6
-2.7
-2.8
-2.9
-3

0

10

20

30

40

50

0

10

20

Time

30

40

50

Time

log(ZM)

log(ZS)

500

500

0.7

450

450

1.6

0.65

400

400

1.4

0.6

350

350

1.2

0.55

300

300

0.5

Location

0.75

Location

M (blue) and S (red) labor share

30
Time

250

1

250
0.8

0.45

200

200

0.4

150

150

0.35

100

100

0.3

50

50

0.6
0.4
0.2

0.25

0
0

10

20

30
Time

40

50

10

20

30
Time

40

50

Figure 6: Fast Declining Di¤usion ( = 50)

44

10

20 30
Time

40

50

3

0.4

5
0

2.5

0.35

-5

0.25
0.2
0.15

-10
1.5
M

0.3

2

ES

Agg. ZM (blue) and ZS(red)

CV of M (blue) and S (red) Value Added and Employment (--)

0.45

1

-20
-25

0.5

0.1

-30
0

0.05
0

-35

-0.5
0

10

20

30

40

50

-40
0

10

20

Time

30

40

50

0

100

200
300
Location

400

500

0

10

20

40

50

Time

4

0.95

-0.5

0.9
Logs of Ubar (green), Avg. w (black)

3.5
0.85
3

0.8
0.75

2.5

Avg. pM

logs of RM (blue), RS (red) and Rbar (green)

-15

2

0.7
0.65
0.6

1.5

0.55
1

-1

-1.5

-2

-2.5

0.5
0.5

0.45
0

10

20

30

40

50

-3
0

10

20

Time

30

40

50

Time

log(ZM)
0.7

log(ZS)

500

500

450

450

400

400

350

350

300

300

2.5

0.55
0.5
0.45

Location

0.6

Location

M (blue) and S (red) labor share

0.65

30
Time

250

2

1.5
250

200

200

150

150

100

100

50

50

1

0.4
0.35

0

10

20

30
Time

40

50

10

20

30
Time

40

50

Figure 7: Slow Declining Di¤usion ( = 10)

45

0.5

10

20 30
Time

40

50

CV of M (blue) and S (red) Employment

0.35

1.4
1.2

0.3
Agg. ZM (blue) and ZS(red)

1
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0.05

-0.2

0

-0.4
0

10

20

30

40

50

0

10

20

Time

40

50

1

-1.2

0.9

-1.4
Logs of Ubar (green), Avg. w (black)

3

2.5
0.8
0.7

2
Avg. pM

logs of RM (blue), RS (red) and Rbar (green)

30
Time

1.5

0.6
0.5
0.4

1
0.3
0.5
10

20

30

40

50

-1.8
-2
-2.2
-2.4
-2.6
-2.8

0.2
0

-1.6

-3
0

10

20

Time

30

40

50

0

10

30

40

50

Time

log(ZM)

log(ZS)

500

500

0.7

450

450

1.6

0.65

400

400

1.4

0.6

350

350

0.55

300

300

0.5

Location

0.75

Location

M (blue) and S (red) labor share

20

Time

250

1.2
1

250
0.8

0.45

200

200

0.4

150

150

0.35

100

100

0.3

50

50

0.6
0.4
0.2

0.25
0

10

20

30
Time

40

50

10

20

30
Time

40

50

10

20

30
Time

40

50

Figure 8: Mean, Max., and Min. over 100 Realizations for Benchmark Parameterization

46

Figure 9: Evolution of Model’s Land Rent Distribution (Benchmark Parameterization)

0.5

Density of Land Values in 1995
Density of Land Values in 2005
0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0
8.0

9.0

Source: Davis and Palumbo (2007)

10.0

11.0

12.0

13.0

14.0

Log Land Values

Figure 10: The Evolution of the Land Value Distribution across MSA’s in the Data

47

2

2
0

1.5

0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02

-2
-4

1
M

0.07

ES

0.08
Agg. ZM (blue) and ZS(red)

CV of M (blue) and S (red) Value Added and Employment (--)

0.1
0.09

0.5

-8
-10

0
-12

0.01
0

-0.5
0

10

20

30

40

50

-14
0

10

20

Time

30

40

50

1

2.2

Logs of Ubar (green), Avg. w (black)

0.8
1.8
0.7
Avg. pM

1.6
1.4
1.2

0.6
0.5

1
0.4
0.8
0.3

0.6
0.4

400

500

30

40

50

0

10

20

40

50

-2.2
-2.3
-2.4
-2.5
-2.6
-2.7
-2.8
-2.9

0.2
20

200
300
Location

-2

0.9

10

100

-2.1

2

0

0

Time

2.4
logs of RM (blue), RS (red) and Rbar (green)

-6

-3
0

10

20

Time

30

40

50

Time

log(ZM)
0.9

30
Time

log(ZS)

500

500

450

450

400

400

350

350

300

300

2
1.8
1.6

0.7

0.5
0.4

Location

1.4
0.6

Location

M (blue) and S (red) labor share

0.8

250

1.2

250

1

200

200

150

150

0.6

100

100

0.4

50

50

0.2

0.8

0.3
0.2

0
0

10

20

30
Time

40

50

10

20

30
Time

40

50

Figure 11: Low Transport Costs ( = 0:005)

48

10

20 30
Time

40

50

2

2

0.09

0
1.5

0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02

-2
-4

1
M

0.07

ES

0.08
Agg. ZM (blue) and ZS(red)

CV of M (blue) and S (red) Value Added and Employment (--)

0.1

0.5

-8
-10

0
-12

0.01
0

-0.5
0

10

20

30

40

50

-14
0

10

20

Time

30

40

50

1

2.2

Logs of Ubar (green), Avg. w (black)

2
0.8
0.7
Avg. pM

1.6
1.4
1.2

0.6
0.5

1
0.4
0.8
0.3

0.6
0.4

400

500

30

40

50

0

10

20

40

50

-2.2
-2.3
-2.4
-2.5
-2.6
-2.7
-2.8
-2.9

0.2
20

200
300
Location

-2.1

1.8

10

100

-2

0.9

0

0

Time

2.4
logs of RM (blue), RS (red) and Rbar (green)

-6

-3
0

10

20

Time

30

40

50

Time

log(ZM)
0.9

30
Time

log(ZS)

500

500

450

450

400

400

350

350

300

300

2
1.8

0.6
0.5
0.4

Location

0.7

Location

M (blue) and S (red) labor share

0.8

250

1.6
1.4
1.2

250

1

200

200

0.8

150

150

0.6

100

100

0.4

50

50

0.2

0.3
0.2

0
0

10

20

30
Time

40

50

10

20

30
Time

40

50

10

Figure 12: Very Low Transport Costs ( = 0:001)

49

20 30
Time

40

50

2

5

0.08
1.5

0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02

0
1
M

0.06

ES

0.07
Agg. ZM (blue) and ZS(red)

CV of M (blue) and S (red) Value Added and Employment (--)

0.09

0.5
-5
0

0.01
0

-0.5
0

10

20

30

40

50

-10
0

10

20

40

50

1

-2.2

1.8

0.9

-2.3

1.6

0.8

1.4

0.7

1.2
1

0.6
0.5

0.8

0.4

0.6

0.3

0.4

0.2

0.2

Logs of Ubar (green), Avg. w (black)

2

10

20

100

200
300
Location

400

500

30

40

50

0

10

20

40

50

-2.4
-2.5
-2.6
-2.7
-2.8
-2.9

0.1
0

0

Time

Avg. pM

logs of RM (blue), RS (red) and Rbar (green)

Time

30

-3
0

10

20

Time

30

40

50

Time

log(ZM)
0.9

log(ZS)

500

500

450

450

400

400

350

350

300

300

2

0.6
0.5
0.4

Location

0.7

Location

M (blue) and S (red) labor share

0.8

30
Time

250

1.5

250
1

200

200

150

150

100

100

50

50

0.3
0.2

0.5

0.1

0
0

10

20

30
Time

40

50

10

20

30
Time

40

50

Figure 13: Low Elasticity of Substitution ( =

50

10

2)

20 30
Time

40

50

2

0.1

4

2

1.5

0.08

0.06

0.04

0
1
ESM

Agg. ZM (blue) and ZS(red)

CV of M (blue) and S (red) Value Added and Employment (--)

0.12

0.5
-4
0

0.02

0

-6

-0.5
0

10

20

30

40

50

-8
0

10

20

Time

40

50

1

-1.9

0.9

-2
Logs of Ubar (green), Avg. w (black)

2.2
2

0.8
1.8
0.7

1.6
Avg. pM

logs of RM (blue), RS (red) and Rbar (green)

30

1.4
1.2

0.6
0.5

1
0.4
0.8
0.3

0.6
0.4
20

100

200
300
Location

400

500

30

40

50

0

10

20

40

50

-2.1
-2.2
-2.3
-2.4
-2.5
-2.6
-2.7

0.2
10

0

Time

2.4

0

-2

-2.8
0

10

20

Time

30

40

50

Time

log(ZM)
0.9

30
Time

log(ZS)

500

500

450

450

400

400

350

350

300

300

2
1.8
1.6

0.7

0.5
0.4

Location

1.4
0.6

Location

M (blue) and S (red) labor share

0.8

250

1.2

250

1

200

200

150

150

0.6

100

100

0.4

50

50

0.2

0.8

0.3
0.2

0
0

10

20

30
Time

40

50

10

20

30
Time

40

50

10

Figure 14: Very Low Elasticity of Substitution ( =

51

20 30
Time

3)

40

50

