NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GROWTH ACCOUNTING
Charles R. Hulten
Working Paper 15341
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15341

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2009

Paper prepared for the Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Bronwyn H. Hall and Nathan Rosenberg
(eds.), Elsevier-North Holland, in process. I would like to thank the many people that commented
on earlier drafts: Susanto Basu, Erwin Diewert, John Haltiwanger, Janet Hao, Michael Harper, Jonathan
Haskell, Anders Isaksson, Dale Jorgenson, and Paul Schreyer. Remaining errors and interpretations
are solely my responsibility. JEL No. O47, E01. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Charles R. Hulten. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Growth Accounting
Charles R. Hulten
NBER Working Paper No. 15341
September 2009
JEL No. E01,O47
ABSTRACT
Incomes per capita have grown dramatically over the past two centuries, but the increase has been
unevenly spread across time and across the world. Growth accounting is the principal quantitative
tool for understanding this phenomenon, and for assessing the prospects for further increases in living
standards. This paper sets out the general growth accounting model, with its methods and assumptions,
and traces its evolution from a simple index-number technique that decomposes economic growth
into capital-deepening and productivity components, to a more complex account of the growth process.
In the more complex account, capital and productivity interact, both are endogenous, and quality change
in inputs and output matters. New developments in micro-level productivity analysis are also reviewed,
and the long-standing question of net versus gross output as the appropriate indicator of economic
growth is addressed.

Charles R. Hulten
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
Room 3105, Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
hulten@econ.umd.edu

GROWTH ACCOUNTING1
I. Introduction
World income per capita increased from $651 in 1820 to $5,145 in 1992,
according to estimates by Maddison (1995). Though spectacular compared to the
negligible 15 percent gain during the preceding three centuries, this eight fold increase
was not shared uniformly. Income per capita in Western Europe and its offshoots grew
by a factor of 15, while the rest of the world experienced only a six-fold increase. This
general pattern continues to this day, with some notable exceptions in Asia. The
unevenness of the growth experience is also evident within specific countries over time.
Output per hour in the U.S. private business sector grew at a robust annual rate of 3.3
percent from 1948 to 1973, then slowed to 1.6 percent per year between 1973 and
1995, and then picked up to 2.6 percent from 1995 to 2007 (U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics Multifactor Productivity Program).
This review builds on, and expands, my 2001 survey of the topic. As with any survey, space
considerations limit the material than can be covered and choices have been made with which others
may quibble. A survey of the growth accounting field is particularly hard because of the nature of the
field, which aims to provide a summary measure of the determinants of economic growth and therefore
links a large number of other research areas. For example, the econometric side of productivity analysis
has largely been omitted, and will be touched upon only in so far as it affects growth accounting. The
same is true of growth theory, and the reader may wish to consult the general treatment of that subject by
Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995) and many of the articles in the Handbook of Economic Growth. Other
areas, like the economics of R&D, the measurement of service sector output, the information technology
revolution, and the determinants of the productivity slowdown of the 1970s and 1980s, do not get the full
attention they would deserve in a longer treatise. Perhaps the greatest omission is my decision to focus
on growth accounting in an economy that is closed to international trade. This choice is made because of
the great complexity that trade adds to the problem, and not because international income flows are
unimportant. The ultimate problem is that the proper treatment of trade flows requires a different national
income accounting structure than the ones currently in place (see, for an example of the complexity
involved, Reinsdorf and Slaughter (2006)). The interested reader is also referred to the important paper
by Diewert and Morrison (1986).

1

Like its 2001 predecessor, this survey is a somewhat personal view of the field, stressing its core
technical evolution rather than specific applications or numerical estimates (different theories give
different numbers). The reader is directed to the surveys by Barro (1999), Griliches (1996, 2000),
Jorgenson (2005), and the OECD manual on productivity measurement, for other recent treatments of the
subject. Anyone wishing to delve further into the history of the field will be rewarded by reading Solow
(1988), Maddison (1987), Jorgenson, Gollop, and Fraumeni (1987), Brown (1966), and Nadiri (1970).

1

Income per capita and the closely related output per worker are key determinants
of national living standards, and the field of growth accounting evolved as an attempt to
explain these historical patterns. It grew out of the convergence of national income
accounting and growth theory, and, in its simplest national income form, it is a rather
straightforward exercise in which the growth rate of real GDP per capita is decomposed
into separate capital formation and productivity effects.2 The unevenness of growth
rates over time and across countries can then be traced to these two general sources,
providing insights into the nature of the growth process.
This is the simple story of growth analysis. A more complex tale has emerged
over time as data and computing power have improved, and economic theory has
evolved. In the process, growth accounting has itself changed, and this evolution is the
story told in this chapter. The essay is organized into three main sections: Section II
devoted to the basic growth accounting framework; Section III covering the
measurement of the key variables; and Section IV devoted the last to a critique of the
growth accounting method. Several cross-cutting themes resurface throughout these
sections: the role of economic theory in determining the appropriate form of the growth
account and the related index number problem, and the issue of ‘path independence.’
Other issues also appear in multiple contexts: the question of whether capital formation
and innovation can be treated as separate phenomena, the distinction between product
and process innovation and the associated problem of output and input quality change,
and the basic issue of whether growth accounting is supposed to measure changes in
2

As with many ideas in economics, the dichotomy appears in a rudimentary form in Adam Smith.
Kendrick starts his seminal work on U.S. productivity growth with the following lines from Smith: “The
annual produce of the land and labour of any nation can be increased in its value by no other means, but
by increasing either the number of its productive labourers, or the productive powers of those labourers
who had before been employed …“ (quoted from Kendrick (1961), page 3).

2

consumer welfare or changes in the supply-side constraints of an economy. Answers to
these questions, however imperfect given the current state of the art, help illuminate the
nature and boundaries of the growth accounting method and the interpretation of the
results.
II. The Growth Accounting Model
A. The Basic Aggregate Model
1. Origins. Growth accounts are a natural byproduct of the basic national accounting
identity which relates the aggregate value of the final goods and services produced in a
country (gross domestic product (GDP)) to the total value of the labor and capital used
to produce the output (gross domestic income (GDI)). Using more or less standard
notation for output, labor and capital, and the corresponding prices, the accounting
identity takes the following form:
(1)

p t Q t = wt L t + c t K t .

The simplicity of this formulation conceals the complexity and effort actually involved in
measuring and reconciling GDP and GDI, and the development of these estimates is
one of the great achievements of economic science. Though measures of national
income can be traced back to the late 17th century, the development of comprehensive
national accounts is a relatively recent event and reflects the conceptual efforts of
Simon Kuznets, Richard Stone, Richard Ruggles, and many others (Kendrick (1995)).3

It is noteworthy that a group of economists, statisticians, and national accountants came together in the
later 1930s to form the Conference on Research in Income and Wealth, with Simon Kuznets as the first
chairman and Milton Friedman as secretary. The CRIW provided a forum in which many of the
conceptual issues involved in setting up a national account were discussed. The conference proceedings
were published in the volumes of the Studies in Income and Wealth Series, and they provide a valuable
insight into the complexity of the national accounting undertaking (many of the issues on the table then

3

3

The U.S. national income accounts date from 1947, while the United Nation’s System of
National Accounts was published in 1953.
The study of economic growth requires estimates of GDP and GDI that control
for price inflation. Most accounts therefore provide estimates of GDP in constant prices,
but a parallel adding-up identity between real GDP and real GDI is only possible for the
base (comparison) year in which all prices are normalized to one. If there is a change in
the efficiency with which inputs are used, the real GDP identity cannot hold in
subsequent years (if the same quantity of input produces ever more output, valuing
output at fixed prices will break the identity). An additional term is needed to account for
this possibility, which, in the simplest case takes the form
(2)

p 0Q t = T t [ w0 Lt + c0 K t ] .

Rearranging this expression shows that the variable Tt is a scalar index that can be
interpreted as the level of real output per unit of total input. The equation is also a
rudimentary form of a growth account, since real output is decomposed into a real input
effect [w0Lt + c0Kt] and a productivity effect Tt. The index Tt calculated in this way is a
residual that sweeps in many things, a feature that led Abramovitz (1956) to bestow on
it the title “a measure of our ignorance.”
This form of the proto-growth accounting model is based on simple linear index
numbers and is very close to the underlying data. The formulation is largely
atheoretical, except for the theory implicit in the assumptions that statisticians use in
their measurement procedures. This atheoretical approach can be justified by an

are still there, in one form or another). The CRIW continues its work, and the conference proceedings
now run to almost seventy volumes.

4

appeal to the axiomatic index number theory, that is, by the kind of rules and “tests”
advocated by Irving Fisher (1927) and his followers.
However, the simplicity achieved by imposing a minimum of economic structure
comes at a substantial cost. Why is a linear index number formulation desirable? What
types of technical change are envisioned for the index Tt? What variables are
appropriately included in the growth account and in what form? Without some
theoretical foundation, there are no firm criteria for constructing any type of growth
account. There is little help, in this regard, from axiomatic index numbers other than a
set of “reasonable” (though somewhat arbitrary) “tests” and rules. It was against this
backdrop that the 1957 paper by Robert Solow made its seminal contribution.

2. The Solow Residual. The seminal paper by Solow (1957) provided the economic
structure missing from the axiomatic approach (Griliches (1996)). Rather than
appealing to some implicit production function to interpret the index Tt, his model starts
with an explicit function and derives the implied index. This involves several
assumptions: that there is a stable functional relation between inputs and output at the
economy-wide level of aggregation; that this function has neoclassical smoothness and
curvature properties, that inputs are paid the value of their marginal product, that the
function exhibits constant returns to scale, and that technical change has the Hicks’neutral form:
(3)

Qt = At F(Kt,Lt) .

5

The variable At plays the same conceptual role as the index Tt, that is, as a measure of
output per unit input, but it now has an explicit interpretation as a shift in the production
function. Changes in output due to growth in inputs are interpreted as movements
along the function F(Kt,Lt).
Tt is an index number while At is a parameter of the production function. What
Solow did was to show how to measure At as an index number, that is, using
observable prices and quantities alone without imposing the assumptions needed for
econometric analysis.4 The first step in this derivation is to express the production
function in growth rate form.

(4)

Q& t
∂Q K t K& t ∂Q Lt L& t A& t
=
+
+
.
∂K Qt K t ∂L Qt Lt At
Qt

The dots denote time derivatives, so the corresponding ratios are rates of change. This
form indicates that the rate of growth of output equals the growth rates of capital and
labor, weighted by their output elasticities, plus the growth rate of the Hicksian shift
parameter. These elasticities are equivalent to income shares sKt and sLt when inputs
are paid the value of their marginal products (∂Q/∂K = c/p; ∂Q/∂L = w/p), giving

(5)

Rt =

Q& t K K& t L L& t A& t
-s t
-s t =
.
Qt
Kt
L t At

The left-hand part of the equation defines the “residual” of Rt as the growth rate of
output not explained by the share-weighted growth rates of the inputs (the residual is

4

Solow was not the first to suggest estimating a production function with a time index. Tinbergen (1942)
is usually credited with this advance (see, for example, Griliches (1996, 2000)). Solow’s great
contribution was to show how the time effect could be estimated directly from the data on prices and
quantities presented in national income and product accounts.

6

also called “total factor productivity” (TFP) and “multifactor productivity” (MFP)).5 The
second equality shows that the residual equals the growth rate of the Hicksian efficiency
parameter At. The residual can therefore be interpreted as the shift in the underlying
production function and the weighted growth rates of capital and labor as movements
along the function.6
Though linked to an underlying production function, the residual itself is a pure
index number because it is based on prices and quantities alone (actually, (5) is a form
of the Divisia index). By implication, the shift in the function can be measured without
actually having to know its exact form. The trick, here, is that the slope of the
production function along the growth path of the economy is measured by real factor
prices (MQ/MK = c/p; MQ/ML = w/p). The price paid for this generality is that the estimates
are “local” to the path actually followed by the economy and may therefore depend on
the path, as we will see in the following section.7

5

Multifactor productivity (MFP) is the name given to the Solow residual in the BLS productivity program,
replacing the term ‘total factor productivity” (TFP) used in the earlier literature, and both terms continue in
use (usually interchangeably). The “F” in both terms refers to the factor inputs K and L, and the “M” and
“T” distinguish MFP/TFP from the single productivity indexes Q/L and Q/K (labor and capital productivity).
The “M” is perhaps preferable to the “T” simply because the latter presumes that all the relevant K and L
are counted, which is typically not the case. A problem also arises at the industry level of analysis, where
inputs of energy, materials and purchased services are also used to produce output. “Multi-input
productivity” (MIP) would be a more accurate term in this situation, but to avoid confusion, we will
continue to use “MFP” in this paper.
6

Under constant returns to scale, the residual (5) can equally be written as the growth rate of labor
productivity (Q/L) less the growth rate of the capital/labor ratio (K/L), weighted by capital’s income share,
since the shares sum to one in this case.
7

The shift parameter A in the Hicksian production function might also be estimated using econometric
techniques. The result would be “global,” in the sense that the estimated parameters would reveal the
structure of production throughout the entire production space, not just along the growth path through the
space. Choosing between the index number and the econometric approach depends on the choice of the
biases that one is prepared to accept. Fortunately, this choice need not be made, since both approaches
can be used on the same data (much of which come in the form of index numbers).

7

The implicit link between growth accounting and the aggregate production
function has another implication: it places constraints on the variables included in the
analysis.8 This implication was drawn out by Jorgenson and Griliches (1967), who
established the modern form of growth accounting (the form underpinning the empirical
estimates of the BLS and the EU KLEMS productivity programs, and the recent OECD
manual on productivity analysis). In the strict production function interpretation, real
output is based on the number of units actually produced, and, by implication, it should
be measured gross of depreciation.9 However, capital stocks should be measured net
of physical depreciation but the price of capital services should include depreciation
cost. Jorgenson and Griliches also incorporated the educational dimension of labor
input into growth analysis. These advances virtually define modern growth accounting,
but it should be emphasized that they were controversial in their day -- witness the
exchange between Denison (1972) and Jorgenson and Griliches (1972).

3. The Potential Function Theorem. The Solow-Jorgenson-Griliches model is familiar
to most students of economic growth. This model establishes sufficient conditions for
deriving the Divisia index (5) from the production function (3). The question of
necessary conditions is rather less familiar: if you start from Solow’s Divisia index in (5),

8

The production function (3) is the basis for the Solow-Jorgenson-Griliches residual, and under the
maintained hypotheses of the model, constant returns to scale and perfect competition, the basic
accounting identity (1) can be derived from (3) using Euler’s Theorem on homogeneous functions. Thus,
the variables in the production function appear, ipso facto, in the accounting identity. Christensen and
Jorgenson (1969, 1970) develop this idea into a detailed income and wealth accounting framework, and
Jorgenson and Landefeld (2006) develop it into a “Blueprint for Expanded and Integrated U.S. Accounts.”
9

The net versus gross output debate involves a conceptual issue about the aims of growth accounting
(production versus welfare), and thus goes beyond a technical question about economic measurement. It
will be discussed in greater detain in Section IV.

8

is there an underlying production function to which it corresponds, and is the solution
necessarily unique?
The answer is “not necessarily” (Hulten (1973)). Because the residual is a
differential equation involving continuous growth rates between two points, finding a
solution involves line integration. This, in turn, requires the existence of a vector-valued
“potential” function, Φ(X) whose gradient is φ = ∇Φ , to serve as an integrating factor.
Line integration of φ over the path Γ followed by the vector X over the time interval [0,T]
gives Φ.10 Applied to growth accounting, the φ corresponds to the differential equation
in (4), and the Γ to the path of inputs and output over time. The solution Φ is related to
the production function, and the gradient LΦ is related to the marginal products of the
inputs. Intuitively speaking, the production function (or bits and pieces of the production
function) serves as the potential function for integrating the Solow residual back to the
original production function.11
Growth accounting deals with index numbers (its defining characteristic), and the
property of uniqueness is important. If the economy starts at the point X0 and ends at
XT, uniqueness requires that the path Γ followed by the X during intervening years
should not affect the final value. In this situation, the index is said to be “path
independent”. The property of path independence is not guaranteed merely by the

10

A more complete account is given in Hulten (1973, 2007). See also Richter (1966) for the invariance
property of the Divisia index.
11

It is important to emphasize that the application of potential function theory to growth accounting is not
limited to production functions. In some variants of the problem, a factor price frontier or cost function is
the appropriate potential function (see below). Moreover, there is no reason to exclude the use of utility
functions as a possible integrating factor (Hulten (2001)). Indeed, in some versions of growth theory,
utility and production functions are tangent along the growth path, implying that the Solow residual could
be interpreted in both output and welfare terms (an idea developed in Basu and Fernald (2002)).

9

existence of the potential function Φ, it must also be homothetic or linearly
homogenous, depending on the application (Hulten (1973), Samuelson-Swamy
(1974)).12
These results imply that the Solow conditions -- the existence of an aggregate
production function, competitive price, and constant returns --- are both sufficient and
necessary for growth accounting. Together, they imply that some underlying economic
structure is needed in order to “solve” the growth accounting equation (5), and,
moreover, that whatever belongs in the production function belongs in the growth
account, and vice versa. This establishes boundaries for the Solow growth accounting
exercise, and it has a more general implication for the construction of index numbers:
stringing together an arbitrary set of variables in an index number format without some
underlying conceptual rationale does not necessary result in a valid economic index.13
This is the basic difference between economic index numbers and axiomatic indexes.

12

An index number is a one-dimensional indicator of an underlying phenomenon. While the data may
allow an index number to be computed, the usefulness of the index is compromised if more than one
possible value is associated with the same value of the underlying variable(s). The a priori assumption
that the index is a reliable indicator carries with it the implicit assumption of uniqueness, and thus path
independence. This condition may not be true, for there are many circumstances in which path
dependence is an inherent attribute of the underlying production function (e.g., non-Hicksian technical
change, non-separability of the production into capital or labor subaggregates). In some cases, like
Harrod-neutral technical change, a correction can be made if the analyst has a priori information about
the nature of the problem. In other cases, the analyst must use more complex econometric techniques or
simply live with the suspicion of non-uniqueness.
13

It is sometimes tempting to put together a list of disparate variables in order to inform some interesting
issue. The attempt to construct an index of technological innovation is an example: elements like the
number of patents issued, the number of engineers employed or in training, lists of citations to scientific
research, and real R&D expenditures are all plausible elements of such an index. These elements can
be arithmetically combined into a single number, but without a potential function to guide the construction
of the index, how is the analyst to know which variables to include in the index, what form they should
enter, and what weight they should be given? The intuitive approach to this problem risks doublecounting and potentially confuses inputs and outputs. At a minimum, imposing a potential function on the
problem forces the analyst to think about the nature of the innovation process (and its determinants) in a
sufficiently precise way that the resulting index numbers have a meaningful interpretation.

10

4. Relaxing Some of the Assumptions. Potential function analysis has other
implications for measurement. First, there is no particular reason to assume a priori that
the shift in the production function has the Hicks’-neutral form. In Solow (1956) and
Cass (1965)-Koopmans (1965) models of steady-state growth, technical change is
assumed to have the Harrod-neutral form, i.e., Qt = F(atLt,Kt) where at is now the shift
parameter. This form of the production function no longer provides the necessary
potential function for the Solow MFP residual in equation (5). It does, however, serve
as a potential function for a variant of the MFP residual in which the original Rt is divided
by labor’s income share: Rt/sLt. A similar result holds for purely capital-augmenting
technical change, but not for the more general factor augmenting model Qt = F(atLt,btKt),
except in the case in which the production function has the Cobb-Douglas form.
The assumption of constant returns to scale can also be weakened. Suppose
that the production function in (3), Qt = AtF(Lt,Kt), is not restricted to the case of constant
returns to scale, but also allows for the possibility of increasing or decreasing returns.
Suppose, also, that it is possible to obtain an independent estimate of the user cost, c*t,
that is equal the value of the marginal product of capital. In this situation, GDI is
wtLt+c*tKt, and is not equal to GDP. If a new set of cost shares, sK*t = c*tKt / [wtLt+c*tKt]
and sL*t = w*tLt / [wtLt+c*tKt ], are calculated and used in the residual equation (5), the
resulting residual R*t is a path independent Divisia index of the growth rate of At. In
other words, the equalities in equation (5) hold under non-constant retunes to scale, but
at the price of violating the GDP/GDI identity.
Potential function theory also plays a useful role in determining the appropriate
way to aggregate across various types of labor and capital. The labor variable in the

11

production function, Lt, is based on the assumption that labor is a homogenous input
whose wage reflects the value of its marginal productivity. If there are N categories of
workers, the original L& t / Lt must be expanded to allow for the heterogeneity. One way
is to expand the Divisia index to allow separately for the hours worked (Hi,t) by each of
the different categories, weighted by the relative share in the total wage bill:
(6)

L& t =
Lt

N

wi,t H i,t H& i,t
.
i
i,t H i,t H i,t

∑Σ w
i=1

For this index to be path independent, the production function must be weakly
separable into a sub-function of the N types of labor alone: i.e., that the function Qt =
AtF(H1,t,…, HN,t,Kt) must be expressible as Qt = AtF(L(H1,t,…, HN,t),Kt). This separability
restriction requires that the marginal rate of substitution between each pair of elements
in L(H1,t,…, HN,t) is independent of the level of all variables outside the sub-function (in
this formulation, the level of Kt). This is a very restrictive condition, but if it holds,
L(H1,t,…, HN,t) serves as the potential function for the labor index (6). A parallel result
holds when different types of capital (or any other heterogeneous input) is combined
into a single index (Hulten (1973)).
The separability of the production function also plays a role in sorting out the
debate over the appropriate measure of output: net versus gross output at the
aggregate level of economic activity, and the question of when real value added can be
used as a measure of output at the industry level. Each is a question of the existence of
the requisite potential function and will be taken up in a subsequent section.

12

5. Discrete Time Analysis. The theory of growth accounting reviewed in the preceding
sections is formulated in terms of continuous time paths. This facilitates the use of
mathematical analysis, but is not directly relevant for real-world national and financial
accounting data, which are collected and reported in discrete-time increments (years,
quarters, etc.). The continuous-time model can, however, be operationalized using
discrete approximations (Trivedi (1981)). The Tornqvist (1936) index is perhaps the
leading example:

(7)

K
L
+ K
+ L
Q
ln[ At ]=ln[ t ] -[ s t s t -1 ] ln[ K t ] -[ s t s t -1 ] ln[ L t ]
2
2
Q t -1
L t -1
At -1
K t -1

Here the continuous-time growth rates of the variables in (5) are replaced with the
difference from one period to the next in the natural logarithms of the discrete-time
variables, and the continuous shares by the corresponding average income shares.
There is no particular economic rationale for choosing this, or any other,
mathematical approximation procedure. The critical step forward was made by Diewert
(1976), whose path-breaking paper established the economic basis for the discrete-time
form (7) with his theory of exact and superlative index numbers. Diewert showed that
the Tornqvist index is an exact index when there exists an underlying production
function of the translog form of Christensen et. al. (1973). By analogy to continuoustime theory, the translog function plays the role of the potential function for the discretetime Tornqvist index (which is analogous to continuous-time for of the residual (5)). As
in continuous time, the production function supplies the underlying economic structure
for judging the accuracy of competing index numbers and for interpreting the index.

13

Moreover, because the translog form is a second order approximation to a more general
production function, the Tornqvist index (7) is said to be “superlative” as well as exact.
Diewert’s theory of exact and superlative index numbers is, however, more than
just a rationale for the Tornquist/translog discrete-time approximation to the Divisia
formulation. It provides an alternative way to approach growth accounting that is more
focused on the index numbers than the underlying structure of production. In Diewert
and Morrison (1986), the underlying structure is represented by the feasible set St,
which contains the output vectors y that can be produced from the primary input vector
x given the state of technology in each time period.14 GDP is, as before, the value of
output at market prices p, or p⋅y. This is equal to GDI, w⋅x, where w is the vector of input
prices. A maximum GDP function is defined as gt(p,x) ≡ max y {p⋅y : (y,x) ε St}, which is
a tangent line (supporting hyperplane) to the technology set St. A shift in the technology
set holding inputs constant is thus a shift in the maximum GDP function:
(7’)

τ(p,x,t) ≡ gt(p,x)/gt−1(p,x).

The index τ(p,x,t), and its variants, are a measure of MFP, and are closely related to the
Solow-Jorgenson-Griliches-BLS formulation (5). However, this approach shifts the
focus from the structure of production to the index number problem of measuring gt(p,x)
and τ(p,x,t). The emphasis now is on flexible approximations as opposed to the
retrieval of the technology parameters of St. A range of issues can be handled in the
index-number approach, like separability, but problems of uniqueness in characterizing
the underlying technology remain. From an operational standpoint, however, the

14

I am indebted to Erwin Diewert for his input to the formulation of this section.

14

computation of MFP estimates is not much affected (both approaches use the
Tornquist-translog method), though the interpretation may be. For more on this strand
of literature, see Diewert (1978), Diewert and Morrison (1986), Kohli (1990), and
Morrison and Diewert (1990).

6. Level Comparisons. Traditional growth accounting evolved largely as an explanation
of one country’s growth rates over time. The analysis can also be used to explain why
growth rates differ across countries, but a look at the growth rates alone can be
misleading. Countries with relatively high rates of productivity growth may also have
relatively low levels when compared to the richest countries of the world (China and
India are recent examples). Indeed, high growth rates may even be associated with a
low starting point, a process known as ‘convergence’ or ‘catching-up’.
There is no reason why the growth analyst should have to choose between a
comparison of levels versus growth rates, since both can generally be calculated from
the same set of data. However, an additional difficulty arises when estimating the
relative level of productivity across countries. For any individual country, the level of
MFP is a pure index number with a value of one in the base-year of the analysis (the
year in which price indexes are also normalized to one). If applied to a collection of
individual countries, each would have the same level of MFP in the base year. This is a
severe limitation, since cross-national differences in the level MFP in any given base
year are a potential cause of the income gap noted in the introduction.
This issue was resolved by Jorgenson and Nishimizu (1978) who developed a
cross-country Divisia/Tornqvist index of comparative productivity levels. However, this

15

solution depends on which country is selected as the basis for comparison, and the
result was generalized by Caves, Christensen, and Diewert (1982) to permit a countryinvariant comparison. In this formulation, the levels of output and input for each country
are expressed as logarithmic deviations from the corresponding average value across
all countries, and the relative inputs are weighted with averaged income shares:

L

K

(8)

L+
K+
Q
ln[ ADi ] = ln[ Di ] - [ s i s ] ln[ KDi ] - [ s i s ] ln[ LDi ]
2
2
Q
A
K
L

Time subscripts have been omitted for clarity of exposition, the superscript D refers to
the Divisia cross-country index, and the bar over the shares is an all-country average.
Intuitively, this equation indicates that the gap between a country’s MFP and the Ncountry average depends on the gap between the corresponding output and shareweighted inputs. By rearranging terms, the gap between output per worker in each
country, Qi/Li, and the average level, QD/ LD, can be calculated.
Cross-national productivity comparisons also encounter a units-of-measurement
problem. National accounting data are typically denominated in the currency units of
each country, and have to be converted to a common price for a comparison with other
countries to be meaningful. Official currency exchange rates are a poor choice for this
conversion, since they may reflect non-market administrative or political decisions. The
International Comparison Program seeks to correct for this potential bias by making
direct price comparisons of similar items across countries (146 in the most recent 2005
ICP round). The result is a set of Purchasing Power Parity price indexes suitable for

16

income and productivity comparisons.15 The switch to PPPs can have major
consequences: according to Deaton and Heston (2008), world GDP in 2005 was
$54,975 billion under the new 2005 ICP estimates compared to $44,306 billion when
world GDP is valued in dollars using official exchange rates.16

7. Price Duality. Traditional growth accounting links the quantity of output to the
quantities of the inputs via the aggregate production. The emphasis on input and output
quantities is warranted because it is ultimately the quantity of consumption (current and
future) that determines the standard of living. However, the story of growth accounting
can also be told using prices under the assumptions of the Solow-Jorgenson-Griliches
model. Jorgenson-Griliches show that differentiation of the basic GDP/GDI identity,
equation (1), gives the following equation.

(9)

&
Q& t K K& t L L& t
p&
&
&
-s t
-s t
= - t + s K t c t + s L t wt = At .
Qt
pt
ct
wt At
Kt
Lt

This result indicates that the residual estimate of the parameter of interest, A& / A , can
equally be obtained from the growth rates of prices or quantities. Put differently, a
growth account based on quantities implies a parallel and equivalent growth account
based on prices.

15

This view of the PPP is not universally held. Bosworth and Collins (2003) argue that national prices
provide a better measure of the relative value of capital goods.
16

Deaton and Heston also issue a “health” warning about using the ICP price data. The changes
introduced in 2005 caused a substantial downward revision in world GDP relative to the methods of the
previous round, which had put world GDP at $59,712 billion (significantly greater than new $54,975 billion
estimate). The downward revision was particular large for the high-growth economies of China and India,
both of which saw their GDP in dollar terms revised downward by around 40 percent. A change of this
magnitude is a reminder about the evolving nature of international comparisons, even in a “gold standard”
program like the ICP, which is one of the major achievements of economic data collection.

17

Quantity-based estimates of the residual are interpreted as a shift in the
production function, but what is the interpretation of the price-based growth estimates?
Intuitively, the answer is that under the conditions under which the production function
Qt = AtF(Lt,Kt) serves as a potential function -- constant returns to scale, strict quasiconcavity, Hicks’-neutrality, and marginal productivity pricing -- there is an associated
“factor price frontier” that has the form: pt = (At)-1 Q(wt,ct).17 This is the “price dual” to
the production function, serves as the potential function for integrating the price-based
form of the residual in (9).
The work of Hsieh (2002) illustrates one practical consequence of the dual
approach. In some cases, developing countries for example, price data may be more
reliable than published quantity estimates, so that the price side may lead to a more
accurate growth account. This was the idea implemented by Hsieh in his critique of the
papers of Young (1992,1995).18
The price side of growth analysis is also the ‘port of entry’ for introducing
changes in product quality into growth accounting. The best example is the Hall (1968)
model of quality improvements in capital goods. This seminal paper showed how
capital-embodied technical progress could be incorporated into the price dual and how it
could be measured using the hedonic price approach. This is an important subject by
itself and will be discussed in subsequent sections, including the one that follows.
17

The productive efficiency term enters the price dual in inverse form because an improvement in
productive efficiency reduces output cost for a given level of input prices, and output price equals
marginal (and average) cost. Because of the linear homogeneity property, the price dual can also be
expressed as a relation between the level of MFP and real factor prices: At = Q[(wt/pt),(ct/pt)]. This form
emphasizes the role of productive efficiency in increasing the real return to the factor inputs.
18

It is important to emphasize, here, that a sources-of-growth table constructed using prices does not
give different results than a table based on the quantity approach constructed from the same data set. It
is the use of a different, and presumably more accurate, set of prices that makes the difference, and this
implies a different set of quantity estimates.

18

8. Product Quality. The productivity residual has thus far been associated with a shift
in the production function, inviting the view that it is due to improvements in the
efficiency of the production process. Process-oriented technical change is certainly an
important source of growth, but it is not the only source. Technical change also results
in a profusion of new or substantially improved consumer and producer goods, and in
many industries, this is just as important as process innovation (if not more). Mandel
(2006) underscores this point with this comment “Where the gizmo is made is
immaterial to its popularity. It is great design, technical innovation, and savvy marketing
that have helped Apple Computer sell more than 40 million iPods.” In other words, it is
product development, not production per se, that counts here.
Bringing product quality into the sources of growth framework is more easily said
than done. Differences in quality are often hard to detect, as Adam Smith observed in
the early days of the Industrial Revolution: "Quality ... is so very disputable a matter,
that I look upon all information of this kind as somewhat uncertain (page 195)." All
solutions are likely to involve assumptions and approximations, and the solution most
commonly used in growth accounting assumes that the arrival of a superior good in the
market place is equivalent to having more units of its inferior predecessor. This “better
is more” approach involves measuring the price differential between inferior and
superior varieties to infer the corresponding “quantity” difference attributed to the new
good.
Several methods are available for measuring the price differential. When there is
a reliable overlap between the prices of the old and new goods, the gap can be

19

measured directly, and when this is not possible, the gap can be forecasted using price
hedonic techniques.19 Once prices have been adjusted for quality change, that is the Pt
converted to quality-based price Pet, the efficiency-adjusted quantity Qet is defined
implicitly from the equation Vt = PtQt = PetQet, as Qet = Vt/Pet. Since quality change is
usually associated with product improvements due to technical change, the qualityadjusted Pet. is less than Pt, and the quality-adjusted quantity Qet is larger than its
counterpart, and “better” becomes “more.”
In this case, the quality-adjusted Qet will grow more rapidly than Qt and will
therefore give a different pattern of output growth to be explained by the growth
accounting decompositions. What exactly does this mean for the Solow residual? The
residual can now be computed in two ways: with and without the quality adjustment to
output, and some simple algebra yields the following relation between the
corresponding residuals:

(10)

A&te
Ate

p& te
&
p&
= At + [ t − e ] .
p t pt
At

Multiple outputs can be accommodated by weighting the individual price terms in (10)
by the corresponding output shares.20
19

Price hedonics is too a large topic to cover in a survey focused on growth accounting. However, a few
general comments are in order. In the price hedonic model, a good is thought of as a bundle of
underlying “characteristics,” like the number of bathrooms and square footage of a house, or the
processor speed and storage capacity of a computer. A change in the quality of a good is thought of as
an increase in one or more characteristics, and the difference between superior and inferior varieties is
defined in terms of the differences in the component characteristics. Regression analysis establishes the
implicit price of each characteristic, and these prices can be used to put a price on the quality gap (how
much of the price increase is due to quality change and how much to pure price inflation). This method
was used by BEA to adjust the observed price changes of computers (Cole et. al. (1986), Cartwright
(1986)). The hedonic method and its alternatives are discussed in greater detail in Triplett (1990, 1987).

20

The term in square brackets in (10) reflects the fact that “better” has been converted to “more” via the
price differential. Because the quality-corrected quantity grows at a more rapid rate than uncorrected
quantity, the quality-corrected price grows at a slower rate than uncorrected price. The term in brackets
thus makes a positive contribution to generalized productivity growth (it’s a reflection of the “more”).

20

This formulation can be interpreted as a decomposition of the quality-corrected
rate of productivity change, on the left-hand side of the equation, to process-driven
productivity growth (the ability to produce more units of the good from given inputs) and
quality-driven productivity growth (the price correction for quality change) on the righthand side. Unfortunately, the latter is rarely made explicit in growth accounting data, so
this formulation is largely notional at this point.

IIB. Industry Growth Accounting

The GDP of the macro economy reflects the economic activity of the component
industries and firms that make up the total economy. Some attention should therefore
be given to how these components evolve and how their growth relates to the growth of
the economy as a whole. There are two general ways of approaching this problem, one
that proceeds from the top down, and another that proceeds from the bottom up, as in
much of the recent work on micro-productivity data sets.
1. Disaggregation from the Top Down
a. Aggregate GDP is conceptually the sum of the contributions of each industry,
adjusted for imports and exports. One way of moving from the top down is therefore to
disaggregate the total back into its industry components and (in principle) continue all
the way down to the shop floor. This is the so-called “unpeeling the onion” approach. A
separate Solow residual could be calculated at each step along the way, and the
However, the quality change effect need not be positive. Companies may cut costs by reducing the
quality of their products, through cheaper materials, a lesser degree of “workmanship,” or reductions in
ancillary features. In this situation, the quality factor acts as a drag on productivity.

21

individual residuals linked back to the grand total. This is a conceptually straightforward process if real value added were the only measure of output at each level of
disaggregation. Unfortunately, it is not, because some firms make goods and services
that are inputs to the production functions of other companies. These intermediate
goods are both an input and an output of the economy, and this complicates the way
the industry or firm-level residuals are linked to economy-wide measures of productivity.
The problem becomes apparent when examining how GDP and GDI are related
at different levels of aggregation. On the GDP side of the aggregate accounting
identity, aggregate output is the sum of deliveries to final demand from each sector, Di,t,
while on the GDI side, it is the sum of sectoral value added. The basic national
accounting identity (1) can be expanded to show this detail:
(1’)

GDPt = Ei pi,tDi,t = Ei wi,tL i,t + EI ci,tK i,t = GDIt .

Intermediate inputs and outputs do not appear in aggregate GDP/GDI, because their
totals are offsetting. However, this is not the case at lower levels of aggregation where
there is no reason that the purchase of intermediate inputs from one set of industries
should exactly match the value of the intermediate outputs delivered to another set of
industries. This is reflected in the industry (or company) accounting identity:
(11)

pi,tQi,t = pi,tDi,t + Ej pi,tMi,j,t = wi,tL i,t + ci,tK i,t + Ej pj,tMj,i,t .

The value of industry gross output sums to an amount that exceeds GDP, and total
input cost exceeds GDI. Moreover, since the terms involving intermediate goods in (11)
do not necessarily cancel, deliveries to final demand (pi,tDi,t ) generally do not equal to

22

industry value added (wi,tL i,t + ci,tK i,t) -- a point that sometimes gets lost when real
value added is used as a measure of sectoral output.
The difference in these accounting identities reflects differences in the underlying
structure of production. The constant returns technology that corresponds to the
sectoral accounting identity (11) implies, via Euler’s Theorem, a production function in
which output is produced by a list of inputs that includes intermediate goods. The
Hicks'-neutral form of this function is
(12)

Qi,t = Ai,t Fi(Li,t,K i,t,M1,i,t, … ,MN,i,t) .

Proceeding as before with the aggregate model, the industry version of the Solow
residual is then

Q& i ,t

.

&
&
M
- s K i ,t - siL,t L i ,t − ∑ j s Mj ,i ,t
(13) R i ,t =
Q i ,t
K i ,t
Li ,t
M
K
i ,t

j ,i ,t
j ,i ,t

&
= Ai ,t ,
Ai ,t

for which (12) serves as the requisite potential function. The share-weights used in (13)
are based on the value of industry gross output, not value added, and thus have a
larger denominator that the share-weights in the aggregate Solow residual (5). The socalled “KLEMS” model is the most common form of (13), in which the list of intermediate
goods includes energy, material, and purchased services, in addition to capital and
labor.

b. How do the industry MFP residuals, Ri,t, map into the aggregate MFP residual, given
the difference in scope of output and the corresponding difference in the share-weights?

23

Domar (1961) resolves this problem in the following way. Suppose that there are two
industries, one that makes an intermediate good, Mt = AM,tFM(LM,t,K M,t), and another that
makes a final good, using labor, capital and the intermediate good as an input, Dt =
AD,tFD(LD,t,KD,t,Mt). If both functions have the multiplicative Cobb-Douglas form, the first
can be substituted into the latter to eliminate the intermediate good from the final
demand function, which then becomes a quasi-aggregate production function. In this
altered form, the Solow MFP residual (5) can be computed, but it is now the sum of two
components: the growth rate of AD,t and the growth rate of AM,t weighted by the output
elasticity of M in the production of D. This result shows that efficiency gains in the
production of intermediate goods affect overall MFP, even though intermediate goods
cancel out in the aggregate.
What happens when there is more than one final-demand producing industry,
when multiple industries produce deliveries to both intermediate and final demand?
Domar proposes a weighting scheme in which aggregate MFP is the weighted sum of
the individual industry residuals, where the weights are equal to the value of industry
gross output divided by total value across industries of deliveries to final demand.
These weights sum to a quantity greater than one (recall equation (11), here), allowing
for the leveraging effects of intermediate inputs on MFP.
Each element in the Domar MFP index has the usual Solow interpretation as a
shift in an industry production function. But what interpretation can be given to the
weighted average of the industry shifts, given that the Solow aggregate production
function generally does not exist in this situation? What is the relevant potential function
for the aggregate index? The production possibility frontier (PPF) is the natural choice

24

for this role, since it is the basic supply-side constraint of an economy in which each
sector has it own production function (11). The PPF is defined implicitly as

(14)

S(D1,t, … ,DN,t;Kt,L t:A1,t, …, AN,t) ;

The growth in the vector of real final demands can be decomposed into the contribution
of the growth in aggregate inputs, on the one hand, and the growth in sectoral
technology indexes, on the other. Hulten (1978) develops an aggregate index of MFP
based on the latter, RtPPF, and shows that the shift in the PPF is equal to the weighted
sum of the sectoral rates of MFP change, where the weights are those proposed by
Domar:
N

(15)

PPF
t

R

=

∑Σ
i=1

p i,t Q i,t A& i,t A& t
≠ .
At
i p i,t D i,t Ai,t

In this formulation of the multi-sector MFP problem, the PPF (14) serves as a potential
function for (15), but there is no guarantee of path independence. In general, RtPPF is
not equal to the aggregate Solow residual obtained by imposing an aggregate
production function like (5) across sectors.

c. The problem with the gross output approach is that growth results are not invariant to
the degree of vertical integration in an industry. If a company merges with a supplier,
what was counted as an intermediate flow becomes an internal flow and disappears.
Another problem arises from a lack of reliable and timely input-output data on the price

25

and quantity of the intermediate flows among industries. Problems with the
measurement of intermediate goods imply problems with industry final demand as well.
One popular solution is to abandon the gross output approach and work with
value-added data instead. Industry value added excludes intermediate flows and
therefore does not vary with the degree of vertical integration. Indeed, it has the
property that it sums to GDP/GPI. On the other hand, industry value added, in current
or constant prices, is basically a measure of primary input (the industry’s contribution to
GDI), and as we have already seen from the accounting identity (11), it does not
necessarily equal industry final demand. Still, because of measurement problems, the
growth accountant may opt to use real value-added as an indicator of industry output.
The first step in this direction is to derive a price index with which to deflate nominal
value added. This is often done using a “double deflation” technique in which the value
of intermediate inputs is subtracted from the value of gross output in both current and
constant prices to get an implicit deflator for the difference (which is value added). A
Divisia procedure based on equation (13) can also be used, and is in fact
recommended, since the next step is to modify (13) to derive the industry value-added
residual:
.

(16)

v
i ,t

R

&
&
V
= i ,t - viK,t K i ,t - viL,t L i ,t ,
V i ,t
Li ,t
K i ,t

where Vi,t is industry real value added and viK,t and viK,t are the relative shares of capital
and labor in Vi,t. Though calculated on a different basis than the gross output residual,

26

(15), the value-added residual Riv,t is equal to that residual divided by the value-added
share of the value of gross output: Ri,t/( si,Kt + siL,t ).21
The valued added-weighted average of the industry Riv,t sums to RtPPF , implying
that the two approaches arrive at the same aggregate result via different paths.
However, this nice aggregation property is deceptive. The problem lies at the industry
level, where potential function theory implies that, in general, the industry residuals Ri,t
and Riv,t cannot simultaneously be an exact index of the shift in the industry production
function (12), Ai,t. Which is correct? That honor goes to Ri,t when the technical change
augments intermediate inputs as well as labor and capital, that is, if the efficiency term
Ai,t multiplies all inputs as in (12). In that case, what does Riv,t measure? That index is
“exact” for a restricted form of (12) in which the production function is separable into a
value-added sub-aggregate and in which technical change augments only capital and
labor:
(12’)

Qi,t = Fi(ai,tV(Li,t,K i,t),M1,i,t, … ,MN,i,t) .

If this is the correct specification of technology, then Riv,t is the appropriate form of the
MFP residual because it gets at the variable of interest, which now is ai,t. Thus, from a
theoretical standpoint, the choice between the value-added or gross-output approach to
industry growth accounting comes down to a question of which specification of technical
change is thought to be the more compelling. The value-added approach generally
21

The analogy with Hicks’ versus Harrod-neutral specifications of the aggregate production function is
worth noting here. In the former, technical change augments both capital and labor, but it augments only
labor in the latter. In the gross-output industry specification, technical change augments capital, labor,
and intermediate inputs, while in the value-added approach, it augments only capital and labor. In both
cases, the respective residuals are linked by an algebraic expression involving input shares.

27

loses this contest, since it implies (improbably) that efficiency-enhancing improvements
in technology exclude materials and energy.
2. Disaggregation from the Bottom Up
Much of the recent growth in the field of productivity analysis has been generated by the
development of panel data sets like the Longitudinal Research Database of the U.S.
Census (Bartelsman and Doms (2000)), Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001)). The
LRD data set contains establishment-level data on inputs and outputs at a highly
disaggregated level of industry detail. These data permit a close-in look at the growth
dynamics of units in which the production actually occurs, and their uses go beyond
growth accounting (the study of job loss and creation, for example). The panel nature of
the data inclines the analysis more towards the econometric branch of productivity
analysis, but growth accounting has also been greatly enriched by the capacity to study
the effects of the entry and exit of establishments.
Industry MFP change has several sources in the bottoms-up approach: within
establishment change in technology or organization, changes in the shares of
incumbent establishments, and, discontinuous share changes due to entry and exit to
and from the industry. One goal of industry-level growth accounting has been to
incorporate this richness of detail into the analysis, and one index that captures at least
some of these effects was developed by Baily-Hulten-Campbell (1992). This index has
several forms, but for purposes of this review, we will focus on one in which the top-

28

down residual RtPPF in (15) is generalized to include terms associated with the change in
the shares.22
These shift-share terms allow for an increase in aggregate productivity even
when industry (establishment) productivity is unchanged, if resources are transferred
from lower to higher productivity units. However, Petrin and Levinsohn (2005, 2008)
argue the assumptions used to derive RtPPF in (15) -- constant returns, perfect
competition, and costless and immediate adjustments -- imply that the shift-share
terms should be zero. Intuitively, this occurs because output price equals the same
marginal cost for all firms within an industry, and competitive pricing insures that there
are no marginal efficiency gains from transferring resources from one industry (or firm)
to another. In this case, RtBHC and RtPPF are the same. However, the literature finds that
reallocation effects do matter empirically, implying a disconnect between the two
formulations.
The disconnect between the top-down and bottom-up approaches is illustrated in
Figure 1, based on Basu and Fernald (2002). This diagram shows the production
possibility frontier of a two-good economy as it evolves over time. The economy is
located initially at the point B on the PPF bb, the point of utility maximization, and over
time, the PPF expands outward along the path EE to the PPF aa and the optimal point
A. The shift along EE is due to two factors: the growth in aggregate capital and labor,
and the growth in MFP in the sectoral production function for goods X and Y.

22

This is but one form of the BHC index. A fuller account is given in Foster et, al (2001), who provide an
extensive discussion of the BHC index and other approaches. See, also, Petrin and Levinsohn (2005,
2008).

29

Y

a

b

C
!

E
!A

!
D
!B
E

b

a

X

Figure 1
The aggregate measure RtPPF from (15) is the weighted sum of the latter, measured
along the ray EE. There are no reallocation effects along this path. Thus, for
reallocation effects to matter, the growth path of the economy must be located
somewhere other than along EE.
Foster et. al. (2001) identify several reasons why this may happen: adjustment
costs and diffusion lags in technology transmission, monopolistic pricing, and resource
distorting policies (e.g., taxes and regulations). Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson
(2008) highlight the role of price dispersion and product differentiation as a source of the
reallocation. These distortionary effects push the economy off the optimal expansion
path EE, to say, a path through points like C and D. At C, there is a distortion in output
prices that results in too much of good Y and too little of X, but keeps the economy on
the maximal PPF. A distortion in the use of inputs can also drive the PPF inward, back
to the PPF bb, to, say, the point D. Growth of the economy can then occur through
changes in the distortion (reallocation) or because the efficient frontier shifts. This is the

30

basis for the Basu-Fernald distinction between aggregate productivity and aggregate
technology. 23
Reallocation effects are an important addition to the original Solow-JorgensonGriliches paradigm. However, there is potentially an issue of consistency. The
individual industry or establishment MFP estimates that make up the direct-growth part
of the decomposition are typically computed under the assumptions of the Solow
residual, which envision distortion-free markets and efficient allocation. On the other
hand, the reallocation model is based on the existence of distortions and frictions across
industries. The level of industry aggregation is to some extent arbitrary (often
determined by data availability), and it is not always clear why the factors that distort the
allocation of resources should operate at one level of aggregation but not another.

23

The PPF reflects the efficient operation of the component industry production functions. In a two
sector model with given amounts of total labor and capital, the PPF is the locus of efficient input
allocations in an appropriately drawn Edgeworth box. These give the output combinations at which the
isoquants of the two technologies are tangent. Along the locus of tangencies, relative factor prices are
the same in both industries. A distortion in these factor prices will tend to result in a point (like D in Figure
1) off the PPF at which the isoquants cross. Removing all input price distortions increase aggregate
output by restoring the economy to the maximal PPF. This is the idea behind the reallocation effects
estimated of Jorgenson et. al. (2007).
Modeling reallocation as a shift in the interior distorted PPF to the frontier is intuitively appealing, but the
existence of the frontier as a stable concave function may require strong assumptions about separability,
particularly in the presence of intermediate inputs produced in other industries (Basu and Fernald (2002)).
Moreover, a sub-optimal PPF may also be due to the inefficiency in the industry technology itself (a
suboptimal value of the Hicksian shift term “A” in the production function Q = AF(L,K)). Bloom and Van
Reenan (2006), for example, have found a wide variation in management efficiency across companies
and countries. The voluminous literature on cross-national differences in economic growth is also
focused on this source of inefficiency. The large difference in output per worker between emergingmarket and OECD economies is widely attributed to cultural, institutional, and environmental barriers to
attaining the best practice technology frontier (see Bosworth and Collins (2003) and Hulten and Isaksson
(2007) for recent reviews), and possibly to the lumpiness of infrastructure capital. Growth accounting
comparisons suggest that effective PPF in many low income countries may be below the best-practice
PPF by as much as a one-to-five ratio. Frontier estimation is another one way to get at this sort of
problem, but is beyond the scope of this paper (see, for example, Fare et. al. (1994)).

31

3. The Company-Establishment Problem
Any analysis of industry productivity must also confront the company versus
establishment problem. Many large companies have diversified product mixes (autos
and auto insurance, pharmaceutical drugs and home care products, jet engines and
refrigerators, etc.). These diverse products are often made in different “establishments”
within the company, and it makes sense, from the production function perspective, to
group similar establishments across companies when defining an industry.
However, something gets lost in this approach. The company, as a whole, is the
legal and organizational entity that manages the various production establishments, as
well as non-production activities like research and development, marketing, and finance.
The latter are treated as overhead costs by accountants and fixed costs by economists,
but they are activities that are essential for the ongoing success of a company.
Unfortunately, there is no good way of attributing many of these costs to individual
production establishments within the company -- they belong to the company as an
entire business entity and, like any joint product, they cannot be uniquely partitioned.24
On the other hand, to treat them as a separate establishment of their own is to miss the
role they play in defining the overall business model and administrative functioning of
the company (the Coase-Penrose firm is more than the sum of its parts). To exclude
the product development and management activities of the firm entirely is to miss the

24

In the case of the larger establishments with a company, some part of the “overhead” may actually be
assigned to the establishment. But, there are establishments within establishments, and at some point
this devolution stops.

32

vital synergies that determine much of the dynamism of the company as a whole and
the changes observed at the establishment level.25
Technical change exacerbates the industrial classification problem. If
establishments are grouped according to similarity of their products, product innovation
may force a reclassification, as with computing devices which used to be mechanical
machines and were classified accordingly, but now they are electrical. New
management and production processes may also lead to changes in the composition of
a company’s establishments, as in the financial services industry. Care must therefore
be taken when interpreting industry-level growth accounting estimates over long spans
of time.26
III. The Individual Sources of Growth

The Koopmans (1947) injunction against measurement without theory has greatly
influenced the evolution of growth accounting theory, from its national accounting
origins through Solow, Jorgenson and Griliches, and beyond. The theoretical
foundations are well-developed, and now the problem lies in the opposite direction:
theory without measurement. In his 1994 Presidential Address to the American

25

It is worth noting, here, that European accounting practice is more oriented to the company as the
basis for industry classification, though problems still exist. This helps with the overhead cost problem,
but comes at the cost of combining operating units with different products and technologies.
Unfortunately, there is no one correct approach that addresses all the questions that are asked of the
data.
26

The periodic change in industrial classification is illustrated by the recent adoption of the North
American Industrial Classification System (NAICS), which has replaced the older Standard Industrial
Classification System (SIC). Once a new system is adopted, it is hard (and costly) to extend the newly
reorganized data backward in time for more than a decade or two. This problem tends to be more acute
at lower levels of industry aggregation, where the establishments are more prone to reclassification.

33

Economic Association, Zvi Griliches pointed to the propensity of academic economists
to give priority to the former at the expense of the latter
”We [economists] ourselves do not put enough emphasis on the value of data and data collection in our
training of graduate students and in the reward structure of our profession. It is the preparation skill of the
chef that catches the professional eye, not the quality of the materials in the meal, or the effort that went
into procuring them (page 14).”

Ingredients matter a lot in growth accounting, and inadequate data can have a greater
impact on the results than inadequate theory. Nordhaus (1997, pages 54-55) has
argued “that official price and output data “may miss the most important revolutions in
history,” because they miss the really large (“tectonic”) advances in technology. Part of
the blame belongs to theory because, as Griliches also observed, “... it is not
reasonable for us to expect the government to produce statistics in areas where
concepts are mushy and where there is little professional agreement on what is to be
measured and how (page 14).” This section is devoted to the principal ingredients of
growth accounting: output, labor, and capital.
A. Output
1. Output is an intuitively simple concept when it is just the “Q” in a textbook production
function. It is often called “widgets,” which is short-hand for a product that can be
measured in neat and tidy physical units. In the real world, however, there is a great
diversity of “widgets”, tangible and intangible, and even within relatively homogeneous
product categories, differences in quality, variety, and location matter. The range of
products in a modern economy is so diverse that it is virtually impossible for the
statistician to capture the full richness of detail. Some degree of sampling and

34

aggregation is necessary before estimates are presented to the public, and this degree
is rather high in the data typically used for growth accounting. In the process, the
growth of real output no longer refers to specific products, but to synthetic constructs
that represent broad groups like autos, pharmaceutical drugs, machine tools, and
houses, where the exact units of measurement are somewhat fuzzy.
One way to attack the heterogeneity problem is from the price side. This is the
strategy for dealing with changes in product quality, and a variant works for within-group
diversity. The total value of sales or revenues for a given product group, is usually
available for products for which there are active markets (e.g., auto sales), and a
measure of average real output can be obtained by deflating product value by an index
of average price. This approach implicitly assumes that there is a synthetic product Qt
whose notional price is Pt and whose value is Vt = PtQt = Ei Pi,tQi,t. The implicit quantity
index is then Qt = Vt/Pt. In the case of the U.S. national accounts, the consumer and
producer price indexes fill this role.27 The units of measurement of Qt are in priceadjusted units of currency, not in numbers of widgets. This ambiguity is not so much of
a problem for most manufactured goods or agricultural commodities, where the
connection between the constant-price quantity index and the underlying physical units
is more intuitive, but it is a greater problem as the growth accountant moves to product
types and sectors at the outer boundaries of accurate measurement.

27

The use of an average price deflator in this context is encouraged by the Law of One Price. The price
of a given item tends to be similar across outlets, whereas the quantities sold vary considerably. In the
U.S. CPI program, agents visit stores and other outlets to observe the prices of representative items in a
range of product groups. They can get many item prices “from the shelf” or the menu, etc., without
having to estimate the associated product sales. One downside of relying on price indexes to back out an
estimate real output is that price estimates are typically made using data sources and methods that differ
from those used to estimate the nominal value of GDP and its components.

35

2. Boundary Issues.28 The data underlying output statistics (e.g., national accounts and
census survey data) are mainly based market-mediated transactions. This forms a
loose boundary between what gets into the accounts and what does not. Since growth
accounting results are sensitive to what gets included, a few remarks about the main
ingredients are warranted.

a. The government sector is usually included in national accounting data, because it is a
large draw on national resources and because the boundary between public and private
sectors is often indistinct. The main measurement problem is that much of the output
originating in the public sector is not distributed through markets (or is distributed at
prices that do not reflect full costs), and there are thus no reliable valuation data.
Moreover, there are a dearth of output price indexes with which to estimate real output
even if the public PtQt were available. As a result, the growth rate of real output is
typically inferred from the growth rate of input, with productivity change assumed to be
zero. For this reason, some growth analyses omit the public sector and focus only on
the market sectors of the economy.

b. The household sector presents an even greater problem for growth accounting. Not
only is most of the sector’s output not sold in markets, but here is also little reliable data
on the value of inputs (the recent American Time Use Survey is an attempt to get at this

28

The question of what to include in a national account has been debated since the beginning of the
national accounting movement. There is currently a good deal of interest in the topic, generated, in part,
by an increased concern about the environment, as well as a renewed focus on health and education
issues. The papers by Nordhaus (2006) and Abraham and Mackie (2006) provide recent surveys of
many of the central issues.

36

problem for the U.S.). The household sector is therefore (largely) excluded from
national accounting data. According to estimates by Landefeld and McCulla (2000), the
household production of consumption goods in the U.S. national accounts was 43
percent of 1946 GDP, falling to 24 percent in 1997.
Not only does the exclusion of most household output affect the level of
measured GDP, it also changes the growth picture as well. For example, the shift in
female labor force participation from the household sector to the market and
government sectors is an important source of growth in measured labor input in the
latter, but much of the reallocation is portrayed in the GDP statistics as a net expansion.
Moreover, the household sector is where much of the investment in human capital
occurs via the opportunity cost of time (Jorgenson and Fraumeni (1989, 1992)). Growth
accounts that focus only on the market and near-market segments of an economy may
thus present a distorted picture of the true sources of growth of the economy. A variant
of this problem arises in countries with a large non-market component to their
economies, and in countries with significant “informal” markets.

c. The service-producing sectors. There are data on the value of product transacted for
these sectors, but here it is the real product that is notoriously hard to measure
(Griliches (1994) refers to this part of the economy as the “unmeasurable sectors”). The
heart of the problem is the lack of clarity on just what is meant by a “unit” of service
output. Should a service be measured as a unit produced by its supplier, or as the
‘outcome’ obtained by the recipient? Doctors typically sell expertise, not health
outcomes, because the latter depends on the initial condition of the patient and the

37

extent to which advice or treatment is followed. Education is similar, since the
production of human capital involves student and family inputs as well as formal
schooling. Indeed, many, if not most, services involve some form of contingent
outcome that drives a wedge between the resource cost of the service and the value
ultimately captured by the consumer. Sorting out the P’s and Q’s is hard if there is no
clear idea of what a unit of Q actually is.29

4. R&D and other Business Intangibles. Until very recently, expenditures for
intangibles like R&D were treated as intermediate goods and not counted as part of
GDP or GDI. This treatment was due, in part, to the fact that business intangibles are
largely produced and used within firms, without any market transaction to provide a
dollar metric of the volume produced, and without any visible real product to measure.
However, as previously noted, expenditures for R&D, marketing, and worker training are
the source of much of the product and process innovation that drive the future
profitability and productivity of companies. These expenditures usually operate with
lags (often with long lags), and the benefits spill out over a number of years, and they
are thus more appropriately seen as capital investments than intermediate goods.
Various aspects of this omission have received a fair amount of attention in
recent years. 30 Nakamura (1999, 2001) was the first to develop comprehensive

29

There is quite a large literature on the problem of measuring service sector output, stimulated, in part,
by Baumol’s (1967) hypothesis that the labor intensity of that sector makes productivity gains inherently
harder to achieve. This possibility, along with the difficulty in measuring service sector output, was a
leading explanation of the U.S. productivity slowdown of the 1970s and 1980s (Griliches (1994)).
However, the recent productivity boom in the service sector, associated with the IT revolution, puts these
explanations in a different light (Triplett and Bosworth (2003)).
30
Lev (2001), Blair and Wallman (2001), and Sichel (2007) provide overviews of the economic and
accounting issues involved in capitalizing intangibles. For the links to technology, and information
technology in particular, see Basu et. al (2004) and Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2005).

38

expenditure estimates and Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2005, 2006)) the first to
incorporate intangibles into a growth accounting framework (Sichel (2007)). This line of
research finds that intangible investments by U.S. companies have grown rapidly in
recent decades and are now larger than investment in plant and equipment (adding
around 10% or more to GDP if fully counted), and that the sources-of-growth accounts
for U.S are rather different when intangibles are included as both inputs and outputs of
the non-farm business sector. The BEA has launched a program to include scientific
R&D investments in U.S. GDP as a satellite account to the main national accounts
(Robbins and Moylan (2007)), and the BLS plans to incorporate these estimates into
their productivity estimates.
B. Labor Input.
1. Labor services. The flow of labor services is generally seen as the appropriate
concept of labor input for the production function framework of growth accounting and
hours worked as a reasonable measure of the flow. However, hours paid or
employment are often the only available measures.31 Other complications include the
likelihood that some labor input and compensation are misclassified as the capital
income of sole proprietors, and that unpaid family workers and other undocumented
workers go uncounted. Accounting for fringe benefits and equity participation (e.g.,
stock options) also poses problems for measurement. Finally, some workers (e.g.,

31

A supplementary form of growth accounting is available when there are data on both hours paid (H)
and employment (L). In this case, the growth rate of output (Q) can be decomposed into the growth rate
of output per worker (Q/L) and the growth rate of hours per worker (and further when hours worked are
also available). This sort of decomposition is often of interest in cross-national comparisons, as, for
example, studies that examine the recent growth experience of the EU countries and the U.S. (Van Ark
et. al (2008)).

39

managers) are essentially quasi-fixed inputs whose direct impact on production does
not vary with the flow of output.
.
2. Labor Composition. In the production-function approach, different types of labor
input should be grouped according to differences in their marginal products. In
analytical terms, if there are N types (cohorts) of labor, the production function would
contain a separate variable for each type: Q t = A tF(Kt,H1,t, … ,HN,t), where Hi,t is the
number of hours worked in the ith cohort. Following Jorgenson and Griliches (1967), a
Divisia index of labor input can be computed by weighting growth rates of the Hi,t with
their shares of total labor income. This index is decomposed into two parts, the first
equal to the growth rate of total hours across all cohorts, Hi,t, = EI Hi,t, and the second a
compositional term which measures the weighted contribution of each cohort’s hours to
the growth of total hours:

(17)

L& t = H& t +
Ht
Lt

N

&
&
wi,t H i,t
[ H i,t - H t ] .
H i,t H t
i
i,t H i,t

∑Σ w
i=1

The compositional part of (17) is sometimes called the “labor quality” effect, because it
is positive when the composition of the labor force shifts toward cohorts with higher
wages, which are assumed to equal the corresponding value of marginal products (an
assumption that is frequently challenged). The compositional effect is zero when wages
are equal or when there is no relative shift in the make-up of the work force.
The index (17) is path independent when the production function is separable,
i.e. Q t = AtF(Kt,L(H1,t, … ,HN,t,)), in which case there is a well-defined labor aggregate of
the form L(H1,t, … ,HN,t) to act as the potential function. This is a strong assumption,

40

since it requires the marginal rate of technical substitution between different types of
labor (e.g., skilled versus unskilled) does not depend on the amount of capital available.
A parallel formulation applies to the existence of a capital subaggregate.
The labor cohorts are typically constructed using such characteristics as
education, age, gender, and age (or experience). Because of the multiplicity of
dimensions and the resulting large number of cohorts, much of the cohort data has to
be estimated using techniques like the method of bi-proportional matrices. This
imputation introduces an additional source of measurement error into the growth
account, but the benefits from this formulation are substantial, since the empirical
studies that use this method tend to show a large positive contribution of increased
educational attainment to economic growth.
C. Capital input.
1. Owner-utilized Capital. In a world in which the flow of input services from capital is
priced in an active rental market, the formation of the Divisia index of the capital
aggregate would be almost as straight-forward as the labor counterpart (17).
Unfortunately for the statistician, the measurement problem is greatly complicated by
the fact that most capital is owner-operated and some of it (intangibles) is ownerproduced as well. As a result, there are no market transactions for this type of capital,
so the price of capital services must be imputed using indirect methods. The absence
of market data also means that the quantity of capital services must be imputed. The
imputation procedures in common use are discussed in some detail in the following

41

subsections, because of their importance to practical growth accounting and because
there are still areas of controversy.32

2. The “perpetual inventory method”. Capital is both an input and an output of the
production process. It is also a durable good (by definition) in which there may be
different vintages of past investment goods in operation at any point in time. Together,
these characteristics suggest an aggregate production function like Qt = Ct + It =
AtF(Lt,It, … ,It-T), with T being the age in which the oldest vintage is removed from
service, and Ct the amount of output used for consumption. This is an extension of the
Solow production function of the preceding sections, which is based on the stock of
capital, Kt, rather than on its component vector (It, … ,It-T). The problem for growth
accounting is to connect the two. One possibility is to work directly with the vector form
and interpret the results in the stock context. There is, however, a problem: while the
price and quantity of new investment goods is readily observable, the price and quantity
of the older vintages is not so easily obtained. The other way to proceed is to convert
the vector (It, … ,It-T) into the implied stock Kt. This is the rationale for the perpetual
inventory method. 33
The perpetual inventory stock of capital is the sum of current and past investment
goods, weighted by the productive efficiency of those investments:

32

General treatments of the capital measurement problem can be found in Diewert (1980), Hulten
(1990), and the recent OECD manual.

33

Capital stock can also be estimated directly from historical book value accounting data, but this is
problematic because of the difficulty in adjusting for price level changes, and because somewhat arbitrary
methods of depreciating capital are often used. Moreover, book value data are usually presented at a
highly aggregated level of asset detail, and the shift in the composition of capital is also of interest to
growth accountants.

42

(18)

K t = Φ0 I t-0 + Φ 1 I t-1 + … + ΦT I t-T .

The weighting index, Φs, is the efficiency of an s-year old asset relative to a new asset,
defined as the ratio of the marginal product of an s-year old asset to the marginal
product of a new asset. The term ΦsI t-s is therefore the amount of investment put in
place s years previously, measured in units of productive efficiency. In this formulation,
K t is the total amount of effective capital denominated in units of new capital, that is, the
equivalent amount of new capital needed to replace the capacity of the actual stock with
its various layers of vintage capital.
The Φs are generally treated as fixed parameters in the perpetual inventory
approach. This is a strong assumption, given that they are the ratios of marginal
products that can vary over time according to economic conditions, and because the
age-efficiency path of an asset will generally depend on intensity of use and
maintenance.34 Since they cannot be observed directly, the Φ’s must be obtained by
indirect procedures. A number of methods have been proposed, but all involve a high

34

The marginal product problem is usually dealt with by assuming strong separability of the production
function, in which case the ratio is invariant to changes in the variables outside the capital aggregate.
The second problem is usually dealt with by assuming that the Φ’s reflect optimal utilization and
maintenance programs that are relatively stable when averaged across individual assets. These
assumptions are used more from necessity than conviction, because the data needed to improve on them
are unobtainable for a wide range of assets. The model of Diewert and Lawrence (2000) permits a more
flexible approach in which different vintages of investment are not assumed to be perfect substitutes,
although this approach gives the same results as the perpetual inventory method when depreciation has
the geometric form.
Another important implication of the exogenous Φ approach is that periods of exceptional retirement are
not allowed for. Exceptional retirements may arise from a natural disaster, a large hurricane or
earthquake, from wars, or from technological sources. The Y2K problem is an example of the latter. As
the millennium year 2000 approached, there was a concern that existing software could not handle the
transition from “99” to “00,” and this triggered a wave of IT purchases to replace older systems. This led
to a parallel wave of retirements not captured by the fixed-life perpetual inventory method. Bartelsman
and Beaulieu (2007) estimate that the failure to account for these Y2K retirements had a small, but
material, effect on measured MFP in the nonfarm private business sector.

43

ratio of assumption to fact. BEA uses a procedure derived from the price-based study
of depreciation rates of Hulten and Wykoff (1981), who apply price-hedonic procedures
to samples of used investment good prices for a variety of assets and find that the
depreciation pattern (and rate) is approximately geometric. Other methods involve
estimation of the average service life, T in (18), combined with assumptions about the
appropriate pattern of efficiency decay (one-hoss shay, hyperbolic, and straight-line are
the common alternatives).
The problem is complicated by a fallacy of composition: each individual asset in
a group of similar assets may follow one Φ pattern based on its own useful life, Ti, but
the average group Φ can have an entirely different pattern when the Ti vary among the
assets in the group (the usual case unless all are retired from service at the same point
in time). This fallacy is strengthened when assets are grouped into broad assets types
(e.g., machine tool, factory buildings), as they must be in order to keep the
measurement problem statistically manageable. But, as the heterogeneity of assets
increases, the group Φ tends toward a convex pattern that is usually well-approximated
by the simple geometric form.
The perpetual inventory model can also accommodate the situation in which the
productivity (“quality”) of new assets improves over time (Hall (1968, 1971)). In this
case, the weighting index of a new asset, Φ0, is allowed to drift upward over time to
reflect the increase in the marginal productivity of new assets due to improvements in
design and technology. In the notation of capital accounting, the index of a new asset in
year t, Φt,0, exceeds that of a new asset in the preceding year, Φt-1,0. The index of
relative efficiency now has two subscripts, one denotes the year and the other the

44

asset’s age: in general, Φt,s. The efficiency profile of any single vintage of asset is
therefore [Φt,0, Φt+1,1, Φt+2,s+2, … , Φt+T,s+T], and the capital stock in year t is made up of
investments from past vintages. Thus:
(18’)

K t = Φt,0 I t-0 + Φt,1 I t-1 + … + Φt,T I t-T .

This form of (18) is also measured in efficiency units based on relative marginal
products. This amended form of the capital accumulation equation is closely related to
Solow’s “jelly” stock of capital that will be discussed in the section on capital-embodied
technical change. The “dual” side of this formulation links the rise in the efficiency of
new asset, Φt,0, to the induced decline in the value of preceding vintages of capital, a
process known as obsolescence.

3. The Price of Capital Services. Once the capital stocks have been estimated, the
unobserved price of capital services can be imputed. For a single type of capital and
labor, the basic GDP/GDI identity can be rearranged to obtain an implicit estimate of the
capital service price: ct = (ptQt - wtLt)/ Kt . This is the reverse of the usual procedure in
which an independent estimate of the price deflator is used to compute quantity. The
difficulty with this solution is the feature that long-lived assets like buildings are lumped
together with short lived goods like autos. Since the shift in the composition of capital is
a potentially important factor influencing economic growth, as with the composition of
labor input, the number of capital goods in the analysis is ideally greater than one.35

35

Indeed, much of the recent literature on growth accounting has focused on the role played by the rapid
growth of information and communications equipment relative to other types of capital (see, for example,
the survey by Oliner and Sichel (2000) and the early contribution by Baily and Gordon (1988))

45

One solution to the composition problem was developed by Jorgenson and
Griliches (1967), based on the path-breaking work by Jorgenson (1963) on the service
price of capital (also called the “user cost” or “rental price”). The investment price of a
capital good (pIt) is assumed to equal the expected present value of the annual service
prices/user costs/rents (ct) generated by the asset over its life. Jorgenson (1963)
showed that an explicit formula for the service price can be obtained by solving the
present value equation for ct, as a function of the rate of return per dollar of investment
(rt), the asset price (pIt), the asset price revaluation (Dt = dpIt/pIt), and the rate of
depreciation (*):
(19)

ct = (rt - Dt + *) pIt .

Taxes were added to the model by Hall and Jorgenson (1967). Estimates of the
individual components on the right-hand side provide an estimate of the user cost,
which is, itself, assumed to equal the value of the marginal product of capital in
competitive equilibrium.
The estimation of each component of the user cost presents its own difficulties
and has its own literature. However, the rate of return component deserves special
mention because of its history and theoretical implications for growth accounting. The
main candidates are to use the endogenous ex post approach developed by Jorgenson
and Griliches (1967), or to use an exogenous ex ante rate of return based on the
finance decision underlying the investment. The former is typically used in empirical
growth accounting because it preserves the adding-up property of the basic GDP/GDI.

46

In this approach, the adding-up property of the GDP/GDI identity is expanded to allow
for multiple types of capital and labor and solved for total income accruing to capital:
(20)

At = ptQt - Ej wj,tL j,t = EI ci,tK i,t .

The formula for the service price of capital can be substituted into this equation, and
solved for rt, under the rather strong assumption that the rate of return is the same for all
assets regardless of risk. In this formulation, rt is simply the residual average rate of
return that insures that GDP equals GDI.
A case can also be made for the alternative procedure of using an independent
ex ante estimate for rates of return in (19) and (20) (for example, Schreyer (2004)).
Under uncertainty, investment decisions are made on the basis of the rate of return
expected (ex ante) at the time that the investment is made, not the return actually
realized ex post. Moreover, investors are likely to apply different ex ante rates
according to the degree of risk associated with each investment. The ex ante approach
thus leads to a user cost that is presumably closer to the price/marginal product linkage
envisioned in the neoclassical theory on which the Jorgensonian capital pricing model is
based. It should also be noted that the ex ante procedure gives an estimate of the
service price that does not presume that the GDP/GDI adding-up condition necessarily
holds, so growth accounting with non-constant returns to scale can be accommodated
(at the expense of the GDP/GDI identity). The ex ante approach is also the important
option when implementing the pricing-duality version of the growth accounting model.

47

The Hsieh-Young debate is a reminder how important the choice can be for growth
accounting. 36

4. Capital utilization. The perpetual inventory method produces a measure of capital
stock, not of capital services. The latter will depend on the intensity of use of the
former, and this will vary over the business cycle and may even show a secular drift
over time as management practices change. To the extent that this stock-flow problem
is ignored, the discrepancies between the two will be suppressed into the MFP residual.
Field (2003) shows how big an impact the utilization problem can have on the observed
pattern of growth.
One way to correct for the stock-flow problem is to introduce an explicit utilization
term into the production function. However, this runs afoul of the pricing problem
associated with unused capacity. It also ignores the fact the some capital is
continuously in service, as with a building that keeps out rain and thieves, or capital for
which the demand is stochastic (telephones).
Berndt and Fuss (1986) offer a different solution. They show that the stock
approach (I.e., one without an explicit utilization adjustment) does, in fact, correct for
variations in capital utilization, at least in the case of a single capital good.37 In this

There are also some important issues with the other elements of the service price formula (19). For
example, during periods of asset price inflation, the service prices imputed under the perfect foresight
assumption implicit in (19) can be negative (an implausible outcome for a variable that proxies for the
marginal product of the underlying capital). Doing away with the perfect foresight assumption ameliorates
this problem, but raises the question of how expectations are formed and how they (along with risk)
should be incorporated into the model.

36

37

When there is more than one type of capital good, a separate Berndt-Fuss utilization correction does
not apply to each type. However, one does apply to the entire collection of capital goods, and when the
production function is separable into a capital subaggregate, the Berndt-Fuss correction applies to the
subaggregate.

48

framework, capital is a Marshallian quasi-fixed input, and the degree of utilization is
determined by the amount of variable input applied to the stock. The correction for this
form of utilization is captured by the ex post service price as computed using the
Jorgenson-Griliches procedure underlying equation (20). But, apart from this implicit
correction, the stock-based perpetual-inventory-method estimates used in growth
accounting are not adjusted for fluctuations in the flow of service over time, and this
introduces a pro-cyclical bias in the estimate of MFP.38 This pro-cyclical pattern makes
it hard to interpret the size and timing of MFP movements, and is one of the reasons
that the U.S. productivity slowdown of the 1970s and the 1980s is still something of a
mystery.

5. Some Final Caveats on Capital. The methods used for imputing the price and
quantity of capital input are strongly neoclassical. Capital is treated as a malleable
homogenous entity in which the different efficiency-adjusted investment goods
produced in different years (vintages) are generally assumed to be perfect substitutes,
and for which markets function smoothly and competitively. These assumptions were a
source of great controversy in the 1950s, and while the controversy has largely
receded, the basic assumption that capital goods of greatly differing characteristics can
be lumped into a single entity and substituted freely against labor must be recognized
as a strong assumption (e.g., it asserts that many workers with abacus’ are equivalent
to one worker with a personal computer). Fisher (1965, 1969) shows just how
restrictive these assumptions really are.

38

The economics of procyclical productivity are discussed in Basu and Fernald (2001).

49

On the other hand, Jorgenson (1966) made the important point that
measurement errors are offsetting along the Golden Rule steady-state growth path,
because capital is, in general, both an input and an output of the economy. The basic
Solow residual in equation (5) can be modified by replacing the growth rate of output,
Qt, with the share-weighted growth rates of its components, consumption, Ct, and
investment, It, and a rearrangement of terms gives:

(21)

Rt = sC t

C& t + [ I I&t - K K& t ] - L L& t = A& t .
s t
s t
st
Ct
L t At
Kt
It

The terms involving capital goods are shown in brackets, and in optimal steady state
growth they are exactly offsetting, because investment and capital stock grow at the
same rate and the corresponding shares are equal. This result “works” because of the
nature of investment. Investment arises from the act of saving, which is the attempt to
shift consumption from the current period to the future, and today’s optimal investment
is tomorrow’s dissaving. However, errors in measurement do matter outside of optimal
growth.

IV. Critique of the Growth Accounting Model
An examination of specific innovations reveals that the arrival of a new technology
involves much more than a simple shift in the production function. Studies of the Corliss
steam engine by Rosenberg and Trajtenberg (2004) and the computer numericallycontrolled machine tools by Bartel, Ichniowski, and Shaw (2007) bear witness to this.
Culture and institutions also determine how much innovation an economy (or company)

50

can achieve (see, for example, Landes (1998), for a recent examination of this point).
No aggregate model can hope to capture all the complexity of the innovation process,
but the growth accounting model does provide something that the detailed studies do
not: a bottom-line metric of the importance of innovation in the process of economywide growth.
The benefits of this generalization come at the cost of accuracy. Some of the
flaws and limitations of the growth accounting model have already been put on display.
There are others, and three issues will be highlighted: whether the contribution of
capital accumulation can be separated from that of technical change; whether the MFP
model should be modified to reflect changes in consumer welfare; and how imperfect
competition affects the interpretation of the standard results.
A. Capital versus Technology: A Clear Division?
The decomposition of the growth rate of output (or output per worker) into its basic
sources, inputs and MFP, is the defining feature of the growth accounting approach.
The two sources arise from different processes: the accumulation of capital per worker
is linked to the propensity to save, while MFP is linked to the accumulation of
knowledge and the propensity to innovate. Under the usual assumptions about the
production function, the former may be subject to diminishing marginal returns while the
latter is not so burdened (although advances of knowledge tend to be sporadic and
come in waves), so sorting out the separate contributions is potentially important for the
question of sustained growth.

51

Unfortunately, the dichotomy between the two effects is not so clearly drawn in
reality. First, R&D expenditures are a form of capital formation, yet they are also the
source of much technical change. Second, there are mutual feedback effects in which
an increase in the MFP residual causes the amount of capital to increase, and the
increase in capital leads to spillovers that increase MFP. And, third, improvements in
technology are often embodied in the design of new capital goods. Each effect has
implications for growth accounting and will be discussed briefly.

1. R&D and its Coinvestments. It is well established that R&D expenditures have a
positive rate of return and that they are the source of much product and process
innovation (see Griliches (2000) for survey) and company valuation (B. Hall (1993)).
Since R&D has a positive marginal product, it is hard to avoid the conclusion that it
deserves to be treated as an input to production, and, in this vein, Griliches (1973)
showed how R&D capital might be incorporated into the growth accounting model on
the input side. R&D as an output in this model appeared in Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel
(2006) (CHS). The definition of output is expanded to include investments in R&D and
other intangibles, Ht, giving Q t = Ct,+It,+Ht = AtF(Lt,Kt,Rt), where Rt is the stock of R&D
input. The corresponding GDP accounting identity is also expanded to include the
value of R&D output; pCtCt+pItIt+pHtHt.39
The growth accounting model that accompanies this expanded production
framework is a variant of the residual in (12). In optimal steady state growth, the R&D
terms cancel and could have been ignored in calculating MFP (the Jorgenson (1966)
39

According to the estimates by CHS, adding a broad list of intangibles (pHtHt) expanded U.S. GDP by
around 10 percent relative to its conventional counterpart in 2003. This list includes brand equity and
organizational capital, in addition to R&D.

52

result in equation (21)), but then so do all the other capital terms. However, while
steady-state growth is a useful theoretical parable, it is not observed in real world data,
where capital terms generally do not cancel. In the CHS study, for example, the effect
of adding intangibles to a growth account of the U.S. non-farm business sector for the
period 1995-2003 is to reduce measured MFP from 1.42 percent to 1.08 percent. In
other words, the intangible capital terms of an expanded version of (21) do not cancel,
and their omission presents a rather different picture of the forces driving growth.
2. R&D Spillovers and Endogenous Growth. Growth accounting formulated in this way
still provides for a dichotomy between capital formation and productivity growth, but the
nature of the dichotomy has changed. It is no longer a story about technology versus
capital formation, but a story about costless advances in technology versus different
types of capital formation, including those that promote technical change. Costless
MFP growth arises from serendipity, inspiration, or the diffusion of technical knowledge
from the originator who bears the development cost to other users. 40
The costless diffusion of knowledge leads to feedbacks effects that are central to
the endogenous growth model of Romer (1986) and Lucas (1988). This model has an
important implication for growth accounting, where diffusion appears as a spillover from
the stock Kt (one that includes R&D and human capital) to the level of MFP and thus
appears as a component of the Solow residual (Barro (1999) and Hulten (2001)). The
R&D spillover is illustrated in the production function Qt = Ae8tL"tK$tK(t :t, where ( is the
40

Kendrick (1980) observes that “Informal inventive and innovative activity, including the myriad small
technological improvements devised by plant managers and workers, was the chief source of
technological progress in the nineteenth century, and is still significant (page 25).” The MFP residual was
a factor in growth before formal R&D programs were invented (as, for example, the case of the Corliss
steam engine noted above), and thus before R&D spillovers.

53

externality associated with K, and " and $ are the direct output elasticities of labor and
capital, the parameter 8 is the autonomous rate of productivity change, and : is an
“Abramovitz” term summarizing the other factors (errors and omissions) that affect
production. There are constant returns to scale to the direct inputs, "+$ =1, so the
overall production function exhibits increasing returns. However, producers do not
capture the externality and are in a constant-returns perfect-competition equilibrium with
respect to K and L, and the GDP/GDI identity thus holds. Under these conditions, the
standard Solow residual calculated as per equation (5) is equal to
•

(5’)

K& t + μ t .
Rt = λ + γ
Kt μt

This makes the Solow residual an endogenous function of capital and adds structure to
the original Solow model (5). However, the presence of the regular “Solow” 8 and the
“Abramovtiz” : in (5’) indicates that the endogenous growth view does not invalidate or
replace growth accounting, it enriches it. Sorting out the relative importance of the
various effects is another matter, since all that growth accounting produces is the
residual Rt.
2. Simultaneity Bias and the Problem of Causality. The Lucas-Romer growth model
makes the residual an endogenous function of the growth in capital. Neoclasssical
growth theory points in the opposite direction: investment is a function of income, and
the growth rate of capital is therefore endogenous and depends, among other factors,
on the rate of technical change. An autonomous increase in the latter (e.g., via 8 in (5’))
will lead to an induced accumulation effect on capital that could plausibly be counted as

54

part of the MFP effect in assessing the importance of technology as a cause of growth.
(Hulten (1975)).
One solution to the capital-endogeneity part of the problem is to use the
Harrodian version of the MFP residual rather than the conventional Solow-Hicks model
(recall that the former is algebraically equal to the latter divided by labor’s share of
income) (see Rymes (1971), Hulten (1975,1979)). The ability to handle capitalendogeneity is, indeed, the rationale for the Harrodian approach and the reason for its
use in neoclassical steady-state growth models. In growth accounting terms, the
Harrodian approach attributes the induced accumulation effect to the Harrodian version
of the MFP residual.41
3. Capital-Embodied Technical Change. A third problem with the simple dichotomy
between technology and capital formation arises when product-oriented technical
change occurs in capital goods. In this case, the rate at which new technology is
introduced depends on the rate of investment, and a clear division between the two as
independent sources of growth is, again, impossible. However, growth accounting can
accommodate capital-embodied technical change, as in the other cases in which the
capital-technology dichotomy is broken.
The potential function in the capital-embodiment model is based on a
specification of production in which each vintage, <, of a capital good has its own
technology: Q< = f<(K<,L<). This formulation allows output and labor to be vintage

It is perhaps worth noting that the Harrodian version of the residual can be computed without actually
having to impose Harrod-neutrality on the problem, though path independence may be a problem in this
case. Hulten and Isaksson (2007) provide a more detailed discussion of this issue, as well as a
comparison of the Harrodian and Hicksian residuals for a panel of high- and low-income countries. See
also the results of Hall and Jones (1999) and Klenow and Rodriguez-Claire (1997).

40

55

specific as well as capital (e.g., the case of computer numerically-controlled machines
tools above). Unfortunately, a model of this generality is usually not empirically feasible
because of its data requirements, since, with a few exceptions, input and output data
are not collected by vintage. This has led to three empirically tractable variations on the
general embodiment model.
The first is Salter (1960), which directly compares plants of different vintages,
and tries to detect embodied technical change via differences in plant productivity. This
experiment is cleanest in cases like electricity generation in which the plant itself is
strongly vintage dependent, but as Gort and Boddy (1967) pointed out, technological
embodiment generally applies to capital that comprises only a fraction of the total capital
stock of a plant, so plant-based studies in most industries may not detect the true size
of the embodiment effect.
The Johannsen (1959) putty-clay framework provides an alternative approach.
Different vintages are treated as though they were different techniques in the putty-clay
mode but, in practice, all putty-clay models are hard to work with, for the same reasons
as the Salter model but also because locking into any technique within the envelope of
choices requires expectations about future technology and prices that must be included
in the model.
The Solow (1960) jelly-capital variant of the capital-embodiment model is the
closest to the growth accounting framework described in this survey. Solow derived a
form of the aggregate production function Q = AF(J,L) from the individual Q< = f<(K<,L<)
by assuming that each has the Cobb-Douglas form, and defining the ‘jelly’ stock of
capital J as the weighted sum of the K<. This formulation of the jelly-stock is essentially

56

the same as the perpetual inventory formulation of the capital stock measurement with
quality change in capital goods, as represented by equation (18’) in which “better”
capital is equivalent to more units of capital.
The link between the product quality literature and embodied technical change is
used in Hulten (1992b) to estimate the capital-embodiment effect in the growth
accounting context.42 The key conceptual issue that surfaces in this work is that there
are actually two versions of the embodiment model that could be used: the pure Solow
model in which embodiment only affects the capital stock but not the output of
investment goods (costless quality change in capital goods), and the Jorgenson (1966)
model in which capital-embodied technical change requires resources to obtain (i.e.,
R&D expenditures). Hulten (1992b) adapts the residual in (21) to accommodate both
views as special cases, by introducing an additional parameter into the term that is zero
for the Solow model and one for the Jorgenson model, but which can be sorted out
empirically.
Some mention should also be made of the distinction between a change in
technology that affects investment via capital-embodiment (the production of “better”
investment goods) and disembodied technical change in the investment-goods
producing sectors that leads to cheaper investment goods of the same quality. Both
phenomena are at work in a modern economy and both are important, but they need to
be kept separate. The picture has become somewhat ambiguous with the paper on
42

Estimates by Gordon (1990) were combined with a variant of the MFP residual in (21) to get at vintage
quality effects in the capital equipment used by the U.S. manufacturing industry. The quality-adjusted
equipment stock was found to grow at a significantly more rapid rate than its unadjusted counterpart (7.28
versus 4.37 percent) over the period 1949-1983, and the contribution of embodiment effects to the MFP
residual was about 20 percent. Wolff (1996) reports a somewhat larger number for the U.S. economy as
a whole, using different techniques, but concludes that his estimates are comparable when put on the
same basis.

57

what Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krussel (1997) term “investment-specific technical
change” and the critical reaction by Oulton (2007).43
B. Production Versus Welfare-Based Growth Accounting
1. The model set out in Section II is built on the assumption that output gross of
depreciation, and the corresponding production function, is the appropriate basis for
growth accounting. However, early contributors, like Denison (1962), based their
estimates on a welfare concept of product in which output is measured net of
depreciation. As Denison puts it: “The proper goal of society and objective of policy
clearly is the maximization of net product, from which this duplication [i.e., the
depreciation of capital] has been eliminated, rather than gross product (1962, page 24).”
The case for net output received a boost from Weitzman (1976), who linked annual
national income (not net output!) to the time-discounted flow of future consumption. The
net concept of output continues to be a viewed as a viable competitor to the traditional
GDP concept (e.g., Sefton and Weale (2006)).

43

There are a number of other important contributions to the embodiment literature that merit a much
longer treatment. There is the Nelson (1964) average-age model, in which output, labor, and technology
are treated as aggregates, but capital enters the aggregate production function as individual vintages, not
as a jelly aggregate. In this formulation, embodiment effects enter via a variable that measures the
average ages of the stock. Variants of this model have subsequently appeared (Wolff (1996)), but they
tend to rely on econometric estimation rather than on pure growth accounting techniques.
Solow et. al. (1966) develop an ingenious vintage model without capital-labor substitution (see also Solow
(1987). Separate fixed-proportion functions, Q = f<(K<,L), are permitted, as are separate capital goods,
and an equilibrium is obtained that is similar to the aggregate solution. The obsolescence and retirement
of older, less-productive, types of capital due to competition from newer, more productive, capital goods is
the mechanism by which technology change takes place. This alternative formulation addresses the
common complaint levied against the neoclassical model (implausible substitution and aggregation
assumptions), and resonates with the mechanisms through which high-technology capital like computers
affect growth. It also leads to the conclusion that the equilibrium age structure of the capital stock will not
change even though superior new capital goods are appearing at a steady rate. See also the papers by
Harper (2007) and Diewert (2009).

58

Since net income is a contemporaneous reflection of the future stream of
consumption and thus of consumer welfare, a concept of output net of depreciation (net
product) seems like a reasonable candidate for use in growth accounting. But what
would such a model look like? How would it compare or coexist with the SolowJorgenson-Griliches gross output model? This issue can be explored by inserting the
terms on the Jorgensonian user cost (19) into the GDP/GDI accounting identity:
(22)

pCtCt + pItIt = wtLt + [(rt - Dt) pItKt + *pItKt].

The terms of the right-hand side of this equation are the components of gross value
added: labor income, the return to capital, and capital depreciation. Net product on the
left-hand side is obtained by subtracting the depreciation term from both sides of the
equation (Hulten (1992a), Hulten and Schreyer (2009)). Under geometric depreciation,
the perpetual inventory equation in (18) can be expressed as )Kt = It - *Kt, with the
result that (22) becomes
(22’)

pCt [Ct + (pIt/pCt) )Kt] = wtLt + (rt - Dt) pItKt.

The right-hand of (22’) is value added net of depreciation, or net income. The term in
square brackets, Nt = Ct + (pIt/pCt) )Kt, is then defined as net real output measured in
consumption units. It is also the concept proposed for a welfare-based MFP residual
based on (22’). But, following the rules of Divisia growth rates, there also needs to be a
potential function in order to obtain an index of the welfare-based MFP index, ANt.
Some form of the utility function is one possibility, but a net production function of the
form Nt = ANt G(Lt,Kt) seems closer to what Denison and others have had in mind. This

59

formulation says that labor and capital produce net units of output, and that the index
ANt is the residual net output not generated by those inputs.
The problems with the net output approach are similar to the problems
encountered in choosing between industry output gross of intermediate goods and
industry gross (of depreciation) value added. 44 This analogy raises a parallel question
of interpretation. Does the interpretation of ANt make intuitive sense? To answer this in
the affirmative is to say that technical change and R&D spillovers augment output only
net of depreciation. That interpretation seems to be highly implausible given the nature
of technology.
Indeed, what is net output as an economic entity, as opposed to net income?
The price and quantity of gross output, Qt, and its price can be observed from market
transactions, but net output Nt and its price cannot because that is not how transactions
are structured.45 Moreover, since capital and intermediate goods are produced within
the economic system, are they too to be treated as net outputs and therefore as net
inputs to production? What does a net input-output table look like?

44

Under one interpretation of net output, the depreciation is really an intermediate good that should be
netted out against gross production just like any other intermediate good. In this view, capital is seen as
a bundle of productive services that are given up bit-by-bit over time as the capital good is used up in
production. The problem is that capital input comes in the form of services, not as bits of the physical
capital stock. Capital services may decline over the life of the asset, and this causes a loss in asset value
but not necessarily in its quantity. The case of the “one-hoss” shay (or “light bulb”) asset is a useful
example. The one-hoss shay retains its full productive capacity to generate services until it is retired from
service, with no part of the physical asset being “used up” along the way and thus no “intermediate good”
to deduct when figuring net product. The one-hoss shay asset does, on the other hand, lose its value over
time as the date of its retirement approaches. This value depreciation is a charge against income, not
against the physical amount of capital, and to equate the two is to commit the Triplett (1996) fallacy
(Hulten and Schreyer (2009)).
45

The output of the auto industry, for example, is observed to be the gross volume of the vehicles that
emerge from the assembly line over a particular span of time (or their constant-price value). Fractions of
autos are nowhere in evidence (the fraction left over after a deduction for depreciation), nor are their net
prices and quantities evident in the show rooms. Subtracting depreciation from the value of the auto
yields a measure of the net income associated with auto production, not the volume of autos produced.

60

An issue also arises when the rate of depreciation is not constant at a geometric
rate * (for example, when the pattern of depreciation has the “one-hoss shay” form).
The geometric case is convenient for this analysis because * is both the rate of
depreciation of the value of existing capital, and equally the rate at which this capital
loses its productive capacity. In the non-geometric case, these two processes follow
different time paths (Jorgenson (1973)), with the result that )Kt … It - *Kt, and the *pItKt
term on the right-hand side of (22) does not cancel out the corresponding term on the
left-hand side (Hulten and Schreyer (2009)). In this situation, net product is different
from net income, raising questions of interpretation and specification.
If net output were the only way to introduce welfare considerations into growth
accounting, the problems might be tolerated (after all, the conventional gross output
residual is not without its own flaws). However, there is another way to bring the
consumption side of the economy into the growth accounts, a way that complements
the existing Solow-Jorgenson-Griliches gross output residual. A consumption-based
residual can be obtained from an analysis similar to that in Weitzman (1976), by
regarding capital as an intertemporal intermediate good (Hulten (1979)). In this
approach, the results of the Domar inter-industry aggregation can be applied to the
intertemporal welfare problem to yield an intertemporal residual that measures the shift
in the intertemporal production possibility frontier. Since the shift is measured along the
utility-maximizing path of the economy, it captures the change in consumption wealth,
and thus welfare, associated with costless technical change.46 Because this new

46

Basu and Fernald (2002) make a similar point in an inter-industry context. They point out that the
shift in the production possibility frontier from the curve bb to aa in Figure 1 can be read as a change in
utility, as the economy makes the transition from one equilibrium point to another.

61

residual is the weighted sum of the standard MFP gross output residuals, where the
weights are equivalent to the Domar weights of inter-industry analysis, the two types of
residual are complements rather than substitutes (indeed, when technical change is
Harrod neutral and constant over time, the two concepts converge). By implication,
there is no need to replace the conventional gross-output MFP residual with one based
on net output in order to capture welfare effects.
2. The dividing line between the supply-side of economic growth and consumer
welfare is complicated further by the fact that product innovation sometimes leads to
goods that are entirely new to the market (the internet is a prime example). New goods
cannot be handled with the hedonic and price-overlap techniques used to adjust output
for changes in quality, because those techniques presume improvements in existing
models. When a new good appears, it typically brings with it an increase in consumer
surplus (see, for example, Hausman (1997)). Ignoring this consumer surplus (the usual
case) may end up understating the true magnitude of efficiency-adjusted output growth,
thus understating the role played by technical change as a source of growth during
periods of rapid innovation.
C. Beyond Perfectly Competitive Markets
The non-parametric (non-econometric) nature of growth accounting is made possible by
the assumption of competitive markets in which prices are equal to marginal cost. In
this case, cost shares are equal to the corresponding output elasticities. This equality
does not hold in non-competitive markets where prices are likely to deviate from
marginal cost. The marginal-cost markup developed by Hall (1988) explores this issue

62

in the context of monopolist competition, as does Basu and Fernald (2002). Some
degree of monopolistic pricing is also an intrinsic part of the product variety and quality
ladder models described in Barro (1999), the Schumpeterian framework in Aghion and
Howitt (1992, 2007), and the models described in Greenwood and Jovanovic (2001).
These (and other) models introduce a degree of complexity and realism that goes
beyond the simple competitive-market framework.
However, the added dose of realism comes at a cost. These models generally
require econometric solutions to get at the complexity of the resulting models (this is
apparent in equation (5’) which captures endogenous growth effects). The econometric
approach may correct for some of the biases in the non-parametric Solow MFP residual,
but it can introduce estimation and specification biases of its own (see, for example,
Nadiri and Prucha (2001)).47 Moreover, an added dose of realism is not the same thing
as realism itself. It has been known for a long time that the conditions under which
capital and technology can be functionally aggregated are extremely unrealistic (again,
Fisher (1965, 1969)).48 There are also many omitted, mismeasured, or unquantifiable
variables that affect growth but are not captured by existing models or are not in the
data needed to test the models. The real world is a very messy place, and fundamental
47

“We note that any misspecification of the underlying technology of the firm will typically lead to
inconsistent estimates of technical change and the determinants of the investment decisions. A simple
illustration of misspecification is the case where the true technology is translog but the hypothesized
model is Cobb-Douglas, or the case where the input adjustments involve considerable time lags but are
ignored, or where the expectation process is not taken into account or not formulated properly” (Nadiri
and Prucha (2001), page 104). The Cobb-Douglas functional form is widely used in macroeconomic
models of economic growth (but typically not in growth accounting)
48

In the first sentence of his 1957 article, Solow leaves no doubt on this point: “ … it takes something
more than a “willing suspension of disbelief” to talk seriously of the aggregate production function.” This
remark applies equally to non-parametric growth accounting and to production function estimation. By
extension, it requires a further leap of faith to believe that adding theoretical bells and whistles to the
aggregate production function will significantly increase the realism of the analysis. The role of the
production function is to organize the data in an internally consistent way, and to serve as a framework for
interpreting the results.

63

technological innovation is often idiosyncratic and episodic (Weinberg (2006)). In this
context, different empirical and theoretical growth models (including the simple growth
accounting model) are better seen as complements that offer different insights into the
growth process rather than as competing descriptions of reality.
V. Conclusion
The Solow residual is now some 50 years old. It has evolved over time and has
become the work horse of empirical growth analysis. As Solow (2001) puts it: “Like my
children, it has aged well, and has produced many grandpapers (page 173).” The
residual is now part of the official statistical repertoire of many countries, through the
productivity program of the U.S. BLS, the newly developed EU-KLEMS productivity data
base, and the program at the OECD. What ever else its flaws may be, fecundity is not
among them.
Because of this success, it seems fitting to end this survey with another remark
made by Robert Solow, this one in his 1987 Nobel Lecture:
“… I would like to remind my colleagues and their readers that every piece of
empirical economics rests on a substructure of background assumptions that are
probably not quite true. For instance, these total-factor-productivity calculations require
not only that market prices can serve as a rough-and-ready approximation of marginal
products, but that aggregation does not hopelessly distort these relationships. Under
those circumstances, robustness should be the supreme econometric virtue, and
overinterpretation the endemic econometric vice. So I would be happy if you were to
accept that [growth accounting results] point to a qualitative truth and give perhaps
some guide to orders of magnitude” Solow (1988), page xxii.
What qualitative truth does growth accounting reveal? This, of course, depends on the
country, the sector, and the time period of the analysis. For the U.S., BLS estimates for
the U.S. private business sector show that output per unit labor grew at an average

64

annual rate of 2.5 percent per year over the period 1948 to 2007. At this rate, the level
of output per worker more than quadrupled, a stellar performance considering the length
of the period involved and the fact that output per worker is one of the key factors that
determine the standard of living. What accounts for this success? BLS estimates
indicate that somewhat more than half (58 percent) of the increase was due to the
growth in MFP and the balance to input growth. Within the latter, there was a shift in
the composition of capital toward information and communication technology (ITC)
equipment.
Growth accounting also reveals that the growth rate of Europe over recent years
was only half that of the U.S. This result comes from the analysis of the EU-KLEMS
data set for the period 1995 to 2005 by van Ark et. al. (2008), which reveals that output
per hour worked in the market economies of the 15 countries in the European Union
grew at an average annual rate of 1.5 percent, while the corresponding rate in the U.S.
was 3.0 percent. Moreover, the drivers of growth were quite different: MFP explained
about one-half of the U.S. growth rate, but only one-fifth of the EU rate. EU growth
relied more heavily on the growth of capital per hour worked, and within capital, more
heavily on non-ITC capital.
These two comparisons, BLS and EU/US, are based on a concept of capital that
excludes intangible assets like R&D, brand equity, and organizational capital. As noted
in Section III, adding these intangibles to the growth account for the U.S. changes the
picture substantially. Corrado, Hulten, Sichel (2006) report that the inclusion of
intangibles increases the growth rates of output per hour in the U.S. non-farm business
sector by 10 percent for the 1995-2003 period. This is a small overall effect, but the role

65

of MFP as a driver of growth changes significantly, moving from 50 percent without
intangibles to 35 percent when they are included. The role of ITC capital is also
diminished, and intangible capital is found to account for more than a quarter of growth.
A similar pattern is found in the U.K. during roughly the same period, though the
contribution of MFP is smaller both with and without intangibles (Haskell and Marrano
(2007)). Fukao et. al. (2007) find that the introduction of intangibles also matters in
Japan’s growth accounts, though tangible capital is by far the most important source of
growth, and the contribution of MFP growth is quite low. As with the EU versus US
comparison, different countries exhibit different patterns of growth.
The same is true of broader cross-national studies that include developing
economies, though problems of data quality and availability make even qualitative
comparisons problematic. Hulten and Isaksson (2007) show that the dichotomy
between MFP and capital formation depends heavily on what assumptions are made
about labor’s share in income: when the labor share as actually reported in the data is
used, MFP has a negative growth rate in the low and middle-income countries of the
world (excluding the rapidly growing Asian Tiger economies); when a common labor
share of two-thirds is imposed on the analysis, MFP growth rates are higher for all
country groups (an average increase of 0.80 percentage points to an average growth
rate of 1.05 percent per year), and only the low-income economies exhibit negative
MFP growth. The main contribution of growth accounting in this situation lies in its
ability to identify a glaring need for better data. Growth accounting is, first and last, a
diagnostic technique that relies more on good data than on high theory.

66

REFERENCES
Abraham, Katharine G., and Christopher Mackie, “A Framework of Nonmarket Accounting,” in A
New Architecture for the U.S. National Accounts, Dale W. Jorgenson, J. Steven Landefeld, and
William D. Nordhaus, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth Number 66, Chicago: Chicago
University Press for the NBER, 2006, 161-192.
Abramovitz, Moses, "Resource and Output Trends in the United States since 1870," American
Economic Review, 46, 2, May 1956, 5-23.
Aghion, Philippe, and Steven N. Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, Volumes 1A and
1B, Handbooks in Economics 22, Elsevier North Holland, Amsterdam, 2005.
Aghion, Phillippe, and Peter Howitt, “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction,”
Econometrica, 60, 1992, 323-351.
Aghion, Phillippe, and Peter Howitt, “Capital, Innovation, and Growth Accounting,” Oxford
Review of Economic Policy, 23, 1, 2007, 79-93.
Baily, Martin N., Charles R. Hulten, and David Campbell, "Productivity Dynamics in
Manufacturing Plants," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics, 1992, 187249.
Baily, Martin N. and Robert J. Gordon, "Measurement Issues, the Slowdown, and the Explosion
of Computer Power," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 1988, 347-420.
Barro, Robert J., “Notes on Growth Accounting,” Journal of Economic Growth, 4, June 1999,
119-137.
Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, Economic Growth, Mc Graw-Hill, New York, 1995.
Bartel, Ann P., Casey Ichniowski, Kathryn L. Shaw, " How Does Information Technology Affect
Productivity? Plant-Level Comparisons of Product Innovation, Process Improvement, and
Worker Skills," Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2007, Vol. 122, No. 4, Pages 17211758.
Bartelsman, Eric J., and J. Joseph Beaulieu, "A Consistent Accounting of U.S. Productivity
Growth," Journal of Economic Literature, 37, September 2000, 569-594.
Bartelsman, Eric J., and Mark Doms, "Understanding Productivity: Lessons from Longitudinal
Microdata," in Hard-to-Measure Goods and Services, Essays in Honor of Zvi Griliches, Ernst R.
Berndt and Charles R. Hulten, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 67, The University of
Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, Chicago, 2007, 449-482.
Basu, Susanto, and John G. Fernald, “Why is Productivity Procyclical? Why Do We Care?” in
New Developments in Productivity Analysis, Charles R. Hulten, Edwin R. Dean, and Michael J.
Harper, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 63, The University of Chicago Press for the
National Bureau of Economic Research, Chicago, 2001, 225-296.

67

Basu, Susanto, and John G. Fernald, “Aggregate Productivity and Aggregate Technology,”
European Economic Review, 46, 2002, 963-991.
Basu, Susanto, John G. Fernald, Nicholas Oulton, and Sylaja Srinivasan, “The Case
of the Missing Productivity Growth: Or, Does Information Technology Explain
Why Productivity Accelerated in the United States but not in the United
Kingdom?” in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 2003, MIT Press, Cambridge, 2004, 9-63.
Baumol, William J., "Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of Urban Crisis,"
Journal of Political Economy, 57, 1967, 415-26.
Berndt, Ernest R. and Melvyn A. Fuss, "Productivity Measurement With Adjustments for
Variations in Capacity Utilization, and Other Forms of Temporary Equilibrium," Journal of
Econometrics, 33, 1986, 7-29.
Blair, Margaret M., and Steven M.H. Wallman, Unseen Wealth: Report of the Brookings Task
Force on Intangibles, Brookings Institution Press, Washington D.C., 2001
Bosworth, Barry P., and Susan M. Collins, "The Empirics of Growth: An Update," Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 2003, 113-206.
Brown, Murray, On the Theory and Measurement of Technical Change, Cambridge University
Press, 1966.
Brynjolfsson, Erik., and Lorin M. Hitt, “Remarks,” In Measuring Capital in the New
Economy, C. Corrado, J. Haltiwanger, and D. Sichel, eds., Studies in Income and
Wealth, Vol. 65. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2005, 567-575.
Cartwright, David W., "Improved Deflation of Purchases of Computers," Survey of Current
Business, 66, 3, March 1986, 7-9.
Cass, David, "Optimum Growth in an Aggregative Model of Capital Accumulation," Review of
Economic Studies, 32, July 1965, 233-240.
Caves, Douglas W., Laurits R. Christensen, and W. Erwin Diewert, "Multilateral Comparisons of
Output, Input, and Productivity Using Superlative Index Numbers" Economic Journal, 92, March
1982a, 73-86.
Christensen, Laurits R., Diane Cummings, and Dale W. Jorgenson, "Relative Productivity
Levels, 1947-1973: An International Comparison," European Economic Review, 16, 1981, 6194.
Christensen, Laurits R. and Dale W. Jorgenson, "The Measurement of U.S. Real Capital Input,
1929 1967," Review of Income and Wealth, 15, December 1969, 293-320.
Christensen, Laurits R. and Dale W. Jorgenson, "U.S. Real Product and Real Factor Input, 1929
1969," Review of Income and Wealth, 16, March 1970, 19-50.
Christensen, Laurits R., Dale W. Jorgenson and Lawrence J. Lau, "Transcendental Logarithmic
Production Frontiers," Review Economics and Statistics, 55, February 1973, 28-45.

68

Cole, Rosanne, Chen, Y.C., Barquin-Stolleman, J.A., Dullberger, E., Helvacian, N., and Hodge,
J.H., "Quality-Adjusted Price Indexes for Computer Processors and Selected Peripheral
Equipment," Survey of Current Business, 66, January 1986, 41-50.
Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel, “Measuring Capital and Technology: An
Expanded Framework.” In Measuring Capital in the New Economy, C. Corrado, J. Haltiwanger,
and D. Sichel, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 65. Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press, 2005, 11-41.
Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel, “Intangible Capital and U.S. Economic
Growth,” Review of Income and Wealth, 55, 3, September 2009, 661-685.
Deaton, Angus, and Alan Heston, “The 2005 ICP Benchmark, PWT and Some Health
Warnings,” unpublished, 2008.
Denison, Edward F., The Sources of Economic Growth in the United States and the Alternatives
Before Us, New York: Committee for Economic Development, 1962.
Denison, Edward F., "Some Major Issues in Productivity Analysis: an Examination of the
Estimates by Jorgenson and Griliches," Survey of Current Business, 49 (5, Part II), 1972, 1-27.
Kohli, Ulrich, “Growth Accounting in the Open Economy: Parametric and Nonparametric
Estimates”, Journal of Economic and Social Measurement 16, 1990, 125-136.
Denison, Edward F., "Explanations of Declining Productivity Growth," Survey of Current
Business, 59, August 1979, 1-24.
Diewert, W. Erwin, "Exact and Superlative Index Numbers," Journal of Econometrics, 4, 1976,
115-145.
Diewert, W. Erwin, "Aggregation Problems in the Measurement of Capital," in Dan Usher, ed.,
The Measurement of Capital, National Bureau of Economic Research, Studies in Income and
Wealth, volume 45, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1980, 433-528.
Diewert, W. Erwin, “Aggregation of Capital over Vintages in a Model of Embodied Technical
Progress”, Journal of Productivity Analysis 32, 2009, 1-19.
Diewert, W. Erwin and Kevin Fox, “The New Economy and an Old Problem: Net versus Gross
Output”; Center for Applied Economic Research Working Paper 2005/02, University of New
South Wales, January 2005.
Diewert, W. Erwin and Denis A. Lawrence, “Progress in Measuring the Price and Quantity of
Capital”, in Econometrics Volume 2: Econometrics and the Cost of Capital: Essays in Honor of
Dale W. Jorgenson, Lawrence J. Lau, ed., Cambridge, The MIT Press, 2000, 273-326.
Diewert, W. Erwin, and Catherine J. Morrison, “Adjusting Output and Productivity Indexes for
Changes in the Terms of Trade,” The Economic Journal, 96, 383, September 1986, 659-679

69

Divisia, F. 1925–6, “L’indice monétaire et al théorie de la monnaie,” Revue D’Economie
Politique 39 (4), 842–64; (5), 980–1008; (6), 1121–51; 40(1), 49–81. Also separately at Paris,
Société Anonyme du Recueil Sirey.
Domar, Evsey D., "On the Measurement of Technical Change," Economic Journal, 71, 1961,
710-729.
Domar, Evsey D., "Total Factor Productivity and the Quality of Capital," Journal of Political
Economy, 71, December 1963, 586-588.
Färe, Rolf, Shawna Grosskopf, Mary Norris, and Zhongyang Zhang, "Productivity Growth,
Technical Progress, and Efficiency Change in Industrialized Countries," American Economic
Review, 84, 1, March 1994, 66-83.
Field, Alexander J., “The Most Technologically Progressive Decade of the Century,” American
Economic Review, 93, 4, September 2003, 1399-1413.
Fisher, Franklin, "Embodied Technical Change and the Existence of an Aggregate Capital
Stock," Review of Economic Studies, 32, 1965, 326-388.
Fisher, Franklin, “The Existence of Aggregate Production Functions.” The Irving Fisher Lecture
at the Econometric Society Meetings, Amsterdam, September 1968; Econometrica, 37, 4,
October 1969, 553–577.
Fisher, Irving, The Making of Index Numbers, Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston and New York, 3rd
ed., 1927.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and C.J. Krizan, ”Aggregate Productivity Growth, Lessons from
Macroeconomic Evidence,” in New Developments in Productivity Analysis, Charles R. Hulten,
Edwin R. Dean, and Michael J. Harper, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 63, The
University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, Chicago, 2001,
303-363.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson, ”Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and
Efficiency: Selection on Productivity of Profitability?” American Economic Review, 98, 1, March
2008, 342-425.
Fukao, Kyoji , Sumio Hamagata, Tsutomu Miyagawa and Konomi Tonogi, “Intangible
Investment in Japan: Measurement and Contribution to Economic Growth,” RIETI Discussion
Paper Series 07-E-034, Tokyo, 2007.
Gordon, Robert J., The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, 1990.
Gort, Michael, and Raford Boddy, “Vintage Effects and the Time Path in Production Relations,”
in The Theory and Empirical Analysis of Production, Murray Brown, ed., Studies in Income and
Wealth, vol. 31, The Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research,
New York and London, 1967, 395-422.

70

Greenwood, Jeremy and Boyan Jovanovic, “Accounting for Growth,” in New Developments in
Productivity Analysis, Charles R. Hulten, Edwin R. Dean, and Michael J. Harper, eds., Studies
in Income and Wealth, vol. 63, The University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of
Economic Research, Chicago, 2001, 179-222.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell, "Long-Run Implications of InvestmentSpecific Technical Change," American Economic Review, 87, 3, June 1997, 342-362.
Griliches, Zvi, "Research Expenditures and Growth Accounting," Science and Technology in
Economic Growth, 1973, reprinted in Zvi Griliches, ed., Technology, Education, and
Productivity, Blackwell, 1988, 249-267.
Griliches, Zvi, “Introduction,” in Output Measurement in the Service Sectors, Zvi Griliches, ed.,
Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 56, The University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau
of Economic Research, Chicago, 1992, 1-22.
Griliches, Zvi, "Productivity, R&D, and the Data Constraint," American Economic Review, 84, 1,
March 1994, 1-23.
Griliches, Zvi, "The Discovery of the Residual: A Historical Note," Journal of Economic
Literature, 34, September 1996, 1324-1330.
Griliches, Zvi, R&D, Education, and Productivity, a Retrospective, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge MA, 2000.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy, MIT
Press, Cambridge Massachusetts, 1991.
Hall, Bronwyn, “The Stock Market’s Valuation of R&D Investment During the 1980’s,”
American Economic Review, 82, 2, May 1993, 259-264.
Hall, Bronwyn H., "New Evidence on the Impacts of R&D," Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, Microeconomics, 1993.
Hall, Robert E., "Technical Change and Capital From the Point of View of the Dual," Review of
Economic Studies, 35, 1968, 34-46.
Hall, Robert E., “The Measurement of Quality Change from Vintage Price Data.” In Price
Indexes and Quality Change, Zvi Griliches, ed., Cambridge MA, Harvard
University Press, 1971, 240-271.
Hall, Robert E., "The Relation Between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry," Journal of
Political Economy, 96, 1988, 921-947.
Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
Per Worker Than Others?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 1, 1999, 83-116.
Hall, Robert E. and Dale W. Jorgenson, "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior," American
Economic Review, 57, 1967, 391-414.

71

Harper, M.J., “Technology and the Theory of Vintage Aggregation”, in Hard-to-Measure Goods
and Services, Essays in Honor of Zvi Griliches, Ernst R. Berndt and Charles R. Hulten, eds.,
Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 67, The University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau
of Economic Research, Chicago, 2007, 99-120.
Harrod, Roy F, Towards a Dynamic Economics, London, Macmillan, 1948.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, “What Explains the Industrial Revolution in East Asia? Evidence from the
Factor Markets, American Economic Review, 92, 3, June 2002, 502-26.
Haskel, Jonathan and Mauro Giorgio Marrano, “How Much Does the UK Invest in Intangible
Assets?” CEPR Discussion Papers, DP6287, London, 2007.
Hausman, Jerry A., "Valuation of New Goods under Perfect and Imperfect Competition," in
Timothy Bresnahan and Robert J. Gordon, eds., The Economics of New Goods, Studies in
Income and Wealth, Volume 58, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau
of Economic Research, 1997, 209-237.
Hulten, Charles R., "Divisia Index Numbers," Econometrica, 41, 1973, 1017-1025. (See also
"The Divisia Index," in The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economic Theory and Doctrine, John
Eatwell, Murray Milgate and Peter Newman, eds., The Macmillan Press, London, 1987, 899900. Revised for the new edition, 2007.)
Hulten, Charles R., "Technical Change and the Reproducibility of Capital," American Economic
Review, 65, 5, December 1975, 956-965.
Hulten, Charles R., "Growth Accounting with Intermediate Inputs," Review of Economic Studies,
45, October 1978, 511-518.
Hulten, Charles R., "On the 'Importance' of Productivity Change," American Economic Review,
69, 1979, 126-136.
Hulten, Charles R, "The Measurement of Capital," in Ernst R. Berndt and Jack E. Triplett, eds.,
Fifty Years of Economic Measurement, Studies in Income and Wealth, Volume 54, Chicago:
Chicago University Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, 1990, 119-152.
Hulten, Charles R., "Accounting for the Wealth of Nations: The Net versus Gross Output
Controversy and its Ramifications," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 94, 1992a
(supplement), S9-S24.
Hulten, Charles R., "Growth Accounting when Technical Change is Embodied in Capital,"
American Economic Review, 82, 4, September 1992b, 964-980.
Hulten, Charles R., "Total Factor Productivity: A Short Biography," in New Developments in
Productivity Analysis, Charles R. Hulten, Edwin R. Dean, and Michael J. Harper, eds., Studies
in Income and Wealth, vol. 63, The University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of
Economic Research, Chicago, 2001, 1-47.
Hulten, Charles R. and Anders Isaksson, “Why Development Levels Differ: The Sources of
Differential Economic Growth in a Panel of High and Low Income Countries,” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper 13469, October 2007.

72

Hulten, Charles R. and Paul Schreyer, “Welfare, Productivity, and Holding Gains,” August 2009,
unpublished.
Hulten, Charles R. and Frank C. Wykoff, "The Estimation of Economic Depreciation Using
Vintage Asset Prices," Journal of Econometrics, 15, 1981, 367-396.
Johannsen, Leif, "Substitution versus Fixed Production Coefficients in the Theory of Economic
Growth: A Synthesis," Econometrica, 27, April 1959, 157-176.
Jorgenson, Dale W., "Capital Theory and Investment Behavior," American Economic Review,
53, 2, May 1963, 247-259.
Jorgenson, Dale W., "The Embodiment Hypothesis," Journal of Political Economy, 74, February
1966, 1-17.
Jorgenson, Dale W., "The Economic Theory of Replacement and Depreciation," in W.
Sellykaerts, ed., Econometrics and Economic Theory, New York: MacMillan 1973.
Jorgenson, Dale W., “Accounting for Growth in the Information Age,” in Philippe Aghion and
Steven N. Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, Volume 1A, Handbooks in Economics
22, Elsevier North Holland, Amsterdam, 2005, 743-815.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Barbara M. Fraumeni, “The Accumulation of Human and Nonhuman
Capital, 1948-84,” in The Measurement of Saving, Investment, and Wealth, Robert E. Lipsey
and Helen Stone Tice, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth Number 52, Chicago, Chicago
University Press for the NBER, 1989,119-152.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Barbara M. Fraumeni , “The Output of the Education Sector.” In Zvi
Griliches, ed., Output Measurement in the Service Sectors, Studies in Income and Wealth,
Number 56, Chicago, Chicago University Press for the NBER, 1992, 303-341.
Jorgenson, Dale W., and J. Steven Landefeld, “Blueprint for Expanded and Integrated U.S.
Accounts,” in A New Architecture for the U.S. National Accounts, Dale W. Jorgenson, J. Steven
Landefeld, and William D. Nordhaus, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth Number 66, Chicago:
Chicago University Press for the NBER, 2006, 13-112.
Jorgenson, Dale W., Frank M. Gollop, and Barbara M. Fraumeni, Productivity and U.S.
Economic Growth, Cambridge, MA, The Harvard University Press, 1987.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Zvi Griliches, "The Explanation of Productivity Change," Review of
Economic Studies, 34, July 1967, 349-83.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Zvi Griliches, "Issues in Growth Accounting: A Reply to Edward F.
Denison," Survey of Current Business, 52, 65-94, 1972.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Mieko Nishimizu, "U.S. and Japanese Economic Growth, 1952 1974:
An International Comparison," Economic Journal, 88, December, 1978, 707-726.
Jorgenson, Dale W., and Kevin J. Stiroh, "Raising the Speed Limit: U.S. Economic Growth in
the Information Age," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 2000.

73

Jorgenson, Dale W., Mun S. Ho, Jon D. Samuels, and Kevin J. Stiroh, “Industry Origins of the
American Productivity Resurgence,” Economic Systems Research, 19, 3, September 2007,
229–252.
Kendrick, John W., Productivity Trends in the United States, New York: National Bureau of
Economic Research, 1961.
Kendrick, John W., “Productivity Trends in the United States,” in Lagging Productivity Growth,
Shlomo Maital and Noah M. Meltz, eds., Ballinger Publishing Company, Cambridge MA, 1980,
9-31.
Kendrick, John W., The New System of National Accounts, ed., Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Boston, 1995.
Klenow, Peter, and Andrés Rodriguez-Clare, “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth Economics:
Has It Gone Too Far?” In National Bureau of Economic Research Macroeconomics Annual
1997, edited by Ben S. Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997, 73103.
Kohli, Ulrich, “Growth Accounting in the Open Economy: Parametric and Nonparametric
Estimates”, Journal of Economic and Social Measurement 16, 1990, 125-136.
Koopmans, Tjalling C., “Measurement Without Theory,” Review of Economic Statistics,
29, 3, August 1947, 161-172.
Koopmans, Tjalling C., "On the Concept of Optimal Economic Growth," Pacifica
Academia Scientiarus, Rome, 1965, 276 279.
Landefeld, J. S. and S. H. McCulla, “Accounting for Nonmarket Household Production Within a
National Accounts Framework”, Review of Income and Wealth, No. 3, Sept. 2000.
Landes, David S., The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some Countries are So Rich and
Some So Poor, W.W. Norton & Company, New York, 1998.
Lev, Baruch, Intangibles: Management, Measurement, and Reporting, Brookings
Institution Press, Washington D.C., 2001
Lucas, Robert E. Jr., "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of Monetary
Economics, 22, 1988, 3-42.
Maddison, Angus, "Growth and Slowdown in Advanced Capitalist Economies: Techniques and
Quantitative Assessment," Journal of Economic Literature, 25, 2, June 1987, 649-698.
Maddison, Angus, Monitoring the World Economy, 1820-1992, Development Centre Studies,
The Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development, Paris, 1995.
Mandel, Michael, “Why The Economy Is a Lot Stronger Than You Think,” Business Week,
February 13, 2006, 62-70.

74

Marrano, Mauro, Giorgia, Haskel, Jonathan, and Gavin Wallis, “What Happened to the
Knowledge Economy? ICT, Intangible Investment and Britain’s Productivity Record Revisited,”
Queen Mary University of London, Working Paper Number 603, June 2007.
Matthews, R.C.O., "'The New View of Investment': Comment," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
78, February 1964, 165-172.
Morrison, Catherine J. and W. Erwin Diewert, “Productivity Growth and Changes in the Terms of
Trade in Japan and the United States”, in Productivity Growth in Japan and the United States,
Charles R. Hulten, ed., Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 53, The University of Chicago Press
for the National Bureau of Economic Research, Chicago, 1990, 201-227.
Nadiri, M. Ishaq, "Some Approaches to the Theory and Measurement of Total Factor
Productivity: A Survey," Journal of Economic Literature, 8, December, 1970, 1137-1177.
Nadiri, M. Ishaq and Ingmar R. Prucha, “Dynamic Factor Demand Models and Productivity
Analysis,” in New Developments in Productivity Analysis, Charles R. Hulten, Edwin R. Dean,
and Michael J. Harper, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 63, The University of Chicago
Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, Chicago, 2001, 103-164.
Nakamura, Leonard, “Intangibles: What Put the New in the New Economy?” Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia Business Review, July/August 1999, 3-16.
Nakamura, Leonard, “What is the US Gross Investment in Intangibles? (At Least) One Trillion
Dollars a Year!” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper No. 01-15, 2001.
National Research Council, At What Price?: Conceptualizing and Measuring Cost-of-Living and
Prices Indexes, Panel on Conceptual, Measurement, and Other Statistical Issues in Developing
Cost-of-Living Indexes, C. Schultze and C. Mackie, eds., Committee on National Statistics,
Washington, D.C., National Academy Press 2002.
Nelson, Richard R., "Aggregate Production Functions and Medium-Range Growth Projections,
American Economic Review, 54, 1964, 575-606.
Nordhaus, William D., "Do Real Output and Real Wage Measures Capture Reality? The History
of Lighting Suggests Not," Timothy Bresnahan and Robert J. Gordon, eds., The Economics of
New Goods, Studies in Income and Wealth, Volume 58, Chicago: University of Chicago Press
for the National Bureau of Economic Research, 1997, 29-66.
Nordhaus, William D., “Principles of National Accounting for Nonmarket Accounts,” in A New
Architecture for the U.S. National Accounts, Dale W. Jorgenson, J. Steven Landefeld, and
William D. Nordhaus, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth Number 66, Chicago: Chicago
University Press for the NBER, 2006, 143-160.
Oliner, Stephen D., and Daniel E. Sichel, "The Resurgence of Growth in the Late 1990s: Is
Information Technology the Story?," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall, 2000.
Oulton, Nicholas, "Investment-Specific Technological Change and Growth Accounting", Journal
of Monetary Economics, 54, 2007, 1290-1299.

75

Petrin, Amil, and James Levinsohn, “Measuring Aggregate Productivity Growth Using Plant
Level Data,” NBER Working Paper 11887, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge
MA., December 2005.
Reinsdorf, Marshall, and Matthew Slaughter, eds., International Trade in Services, Conference
on Research in Income and Wealth Proceedings, 2006.
Richter, Marcel K., "Invariance Axioms and Economic Indexes," Econometrica, 34, 1966, 739755.
Robbins, Carol A., and Carol E. Moylan, “Research and Development Satellite Account Update
Estimates for 1959–2004 New Estimates for Industry, Regional, and International Accounts,”
Survey of Current Business, October 2007, 49-92.
Romer, Paul M., "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth," Journal of Political Economy, 94,
No. 5, 1986, 1002-1037.
Rosenberg, Nathan, and Manuel Trajtenberg, “A General Purpose Technology at Work: The
Corliss Steam Engine in the late 19th Century US,” The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 64,
No. 1, March 2004, 61-99.
Rymes, Thomas K., On Concepts of Capital and Technical Change, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1971.
Salter, W.E.G., Productivity and Technical Change, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1960.
Samuelson, Paul A. and Swamy, S.,” Invariant economic index numbers and canonical duality:
survey and synthesis,” American Economic Review, 64, 4, September 1974, 566–593.
Schreyer, Paul, "Measuring Multi-factor Productivity when Rates of Return are Exogenous"; in
W. Erwin Diewert, Bert M. Balk, Dennis Fixler, Kevin J. Fox and Alice O. Nakamura, eds., Price
and Productivity Measurement Volumes 1 and 2, Trafford Press, 2009.
Schreyer, Paul, Measuring Capital - Revised OECD Manual, OECD, Paris, 2009,available
under http://www.olis.oecd.org/olis/2009doc.nsf/linkTo/std-nad, 2009.
Sefton, J.A., and Martin R. Weale, “The Concept of Income in a General Equilibrium”; Review of
Economic Studies, 73, 2006, 219-249.
Smith, Adam, The Wealth of Nations, Richard D. Irwin, Homewood IL., volume 1, 1963.
Solow, Robert M.,"A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 70, February 1956, 65-94.
Solow, Robert M., "Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function," Review of
Economics and Statistics, 39, August 1957, 312-320.
Solow, Robert M., "Investment and Technical Progress," in K. Arrow, S. Karlin and P. Suppes,
eds., Mathematical Methods in the Social Sciences 1959, Stanford, CA, Stanford University
Press, 1960, 89-104.

76

Solow, Robert M., Growth Theory: An Exposition, Oxford University Press, New York and
Oxford, 1988.
Solow, Robert M., “After “Technical Progress and the Aggregate Production Function”,” in New
Developments in Productivity Analysis, Charles R. Hulten, Edwin R. Dean, and Michael J.
Harper, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 63, The University of Chicago Press for the
National Bureau of Economic Research, Chicago, 2001, 173-178.
Solow, Robert M., James Tobin, C. C. von Weizsacker, and M. Yaari, “Neoclasssical Growth
with Fixed Factor Proportions,” Review of Economic Studies, 33, 2, April 1966, 79-115.
System of National Accounts 1993. Commission of the European Communities, International
Monetary Fund, Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, United Nations,
and World Bank, 1993.
Tinbergen, Jan, "Zur Theorie der Langfirstigen Wirtschaftsentwiicklung," Weltwirtschaftliches
Archiv, 1, Amsterdam, North-Holland Publishing Company, 1942, 511-549.
Tornqvist, L., "The Bank of Finland's Consumption Price Index," Bank of Finland Monthly
Bulletin, 10, 1936, 1-8.
Triplett, Jack E., "Hedonic Functions and Hedonic Indexes," in John Eatwell, Murray Milgate
and Peter Newman, eds., The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, Vol. 2, New York: The
Macmillan Press Limited, 1987, 630-634.
Triplett, Jack E., “Depreciation in Production Analysis and in Income and Wealth Accounts:
Resolution of an old Debate”; Economic Inquiry, 34, ,1996, 93-115.
Triplett, Jack E. And Barry P. Bosworth, “Productivity Measurement Issues in Services
Industries: “Baumol’s Disease” Has Been Cured,” FRBNY Economic Policy Review Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, September 2003.
Triplett, Jack E., and Barry P. Bosworth, Productivity in the U.S. Services Sector. Washington,
D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2004.
Trivedi, P.K., “Some Discrete Approximations to Divisia integral indices,” International Economic
Review, 22, 1, 1981, 71-77.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Trends in Multifactor Productivity, 194881, Bulletin 2178, USGPO, Washington D.C., September 1983.
van Ark, Bart, Mary O’Mahony, and Marcel P. Timmer, “The Productivity Gap between Europe
and the United States: Trends and Causes,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22, 1, Winter
2008, 25–44.
Weinberg, Bruce, “New Ideas about New Ideas,” NBER Reporter, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Spring 2006, 20-23.
Weitzman, Martin L., "On the Welfare Significance of National Product in a Dynamic Economy,"
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90, 1976, 156-162.

77

Wolff, Edward, N., "The Productivity Slowdown: The Culprit At Last? Follow-up on Hulten and
Wolff," American Economic Review, 86, 5, December 1996, 1239-1252.
Young, Alwyn, "A Tale of Two Cities: Factor Accumulation and Technical Change in Hong Kong
and Singapore," in Blanchard, O.J., and S. Fisher, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1992,
MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 13-53.
Young, Alwyn, "The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of the East Asian
Experience," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 3, August 1995, 641-680.

78

