                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 HOW FAR ARE WE FROM THE SLIPPERY SLOPE? THE LAFFER CURVE REVISITED

                                          Mathias Trabandt
                                           Harald Uhlig

                                        Working Paper 15343
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15343


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2009




A number of people and seminar participants provided us with excellent comments, for which we
are grateful, and a complete list would be rather long. Explicitly, we would like to thank Urban Jerman,
Daron Acemoglu, Wouter den Haan, John Cochrane, Robert Hall, Charles Jones, Rick van der Ploeg,
Richard Rogerson, Ivan Werning and an anonymous referee. This research was supported by the NSF
grant SES-0922550. An early draft of this paper has been awarded with the CESifo Prize in Public
Economics 2005. Trabandt is grateful for the hospitality of the ECB and the Deutsche Bundesbank
where parts of this paper were written. The views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility
of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of Sveriges Riksbank, the ECB,
the Deutsche Bundesbank, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Mathias Trabandt and Harald Uhlig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
How Far Are We From The Slippery Slope? The Laffer Curve Revisited
Mathias Trabandt and Harald Uhlig
NBER Working Paper No. 15343
September 2009, Revised April 2011
JEL No. E0,E60,H0

                                            ABSTRACT

We compare Laffer curves for labor and capital taxation for the US, the EU-14 and individual European
countries, using a neoclassical growth model featuring "constant Frisch elasticity" (CFE) preferences.
We provide new tax rate data. The US can increase tax revenues by 30% by raising labor taxes and
by 6% by raising capital income taxes. For the EU-14 we obtain 8% and 1%. Dynamic scoring for
the EU-14 shows that 54% of a labor tax cut and 79% of a capital tax cut are self-financing. The Laffer
curve in consumption taxes does not have a peak. Endogenous growth and human capital accumulation
locates the US and EU-14 close to the peak of the labor tax Laffer curve. We derive conditions under
which household heterogeneity does not matter much for the results. By contrast, transition effects
matter: a permanent surprise increase in capital taxes always raises tax revenues.


Mathias Trabandt
European Central Bank
Kaiserstrasse 29
60311 Frankfurt am Main
GERMANY
and Sveriges Riksbank
Mathias.Trabandt@ecb.int

Harald Uhlig
Dept. of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
huhlig@uchicago.edu
1   Introduction


How do tax revenues and production adjust, if labor or capital income taxes are changed? To
answer this question, we characterize the Laffer curves for labor and capital income taxation
quantitatively for the US, the EU-14 aggregate economy (i.e., excluding Luxembourg) and in-
dividual European countries by comparing the balanced growth paths of a neoclassical growth
model, as tax rates are varied. The government collects distortionary taxes on labor, capital and
consumption and issues debt to finance government consumption, lump-sum transfers and debt
repayments.

We employ a preference specification which is consistent with long-run growth and features a
constant Frisch elasticity of labor supply, originally proposed by King and Rebelo (1999). We call
these CFE (“constant Frisch elasticity”) preferences. We provide a characterization and proof, as
well as explore the implications for the cross elasticity of consumption and labor as emphasized
by Hall (2009). This is an additional and broadly useful contribution.

For the benchmark calibration with a Frisch elasticity of 1 and an intertemporal elasticity of
substitution of 0.5, the US can increase tax revenues by 30% by raising labor taxes and 6%
by raising capital income taxes, while the same numbers for the EU-14 are 8% and 1%. We
furthermore calculate the degree of self-financing of tax cuts and provide a sensitivity analysis for
the parameters. To provide this analysis requires values for the tax rates on labor, capital and
consumption. Following Mendoza et al. (1994), we calculate new data for these tax rates in the
US and individual EU-14 countries for 1995 to 2007 and provide their values: these too should
be useful beyond the question investigated in this paper.

In 1974 Arthur B. Laffer noted during a business dinner that “there are always two tax rates
that yield the same revenues”, see Wanniski (1978). Subsequently, the incentive effects of tax
cuts was given more prominence in political discussions and political practice. We find that there
is a Laffer curve in standard neoclassical growth models with respect to both capital and labor
income taxation. According to our quantitative results, Denmark and Sweden indeed are on the
“wrong” side of the Laffer curve for capital income taxation.




                                                 2
Care needs to be taken in interpreting these results. Maximizing tax revenues is quite different
from from maximizing welfare. The higher the level of distortionary taxes in the model, the
higher are the efficiency losses associated with taxation. If government consumption is not valued
by households or constant, welfare losses increase with the level of taxation in our model. In
an alternative model framework, Braun and Uhlig (2006) demonstrate that increasing taxes and
wasting the resulting tax revenues may even improve welfare. If government consumption is
valued by households and adjusts endogenously with the level of revenues, higher taxes might
increase welfare, depending on the degree of valuation. An explicit welfare analysis is beyond
the scope of this paper and not its point. Rather, our focus is on the impact on government tax
receipt, as a question of considerable practical interest.

Following Mankiw and Weinzierl (2006), we pursue a dynamic scoring exercise. That is, we
analyze by how much a tax cut is self-financing if we take incentive feedback effects into account.
We find that for the US model 32% of a labor tax cut and 51% of a capital tax cut are self-
financing in the steady state. In the EU-14 economy 54% of a labor tax cut and 79% of a capital
tax cut are self-financing.

We show that the fiscal effect is indirect: by cutting capital income taxes, the biggest contribution
to total tax receipts comes from an increase in labor income taxation. We show that lowering the
capital income tax as well as raising the labor income tax results in higher tax revenue in both
the US and the EU-14, i.e. in terms of a “Laffer hill”, both the US and the EU-14 are on the
wrong side of the peak with respect to their capital tax rates. By contrast, the Laffer curve for
consumption taxes does not have a peak and is increasing in the consumption tax throughout,
converging to a positive finite level when consumption tax rates approach infinity. While the
allocation depends on the joint tax wedge created by consumption and labor taxes, the Laffer
curves do not. This turns out to be a matter of “accounting”: since tax revenues are used for
transfers, they are consumption-taxed in turn.

We derive conditions under which household heterogeneity does not affect our results much.
However, transition effects matter: a permanent surprise increase in capital income taxes always
raises tax revenues for the benchmark calibration. Finally, endogenous growth and human capital
accumulation locates the US and EU-14 close to the peak of the labor income tax Laffer curve.


                                                  3
As labor taxes are increased, incentives to enjoy leisure are increased, which in turn decreases
the steady state level of human capital or the growth rate of the economy: tax revenues fall as a
result.

There is a considerable literature on this topic: our contribution differs from the existing results
in several dimensions. Baxter and King (1993) employ a neoclassical growth model with produc-
tive government capital to analyze the effects of fiscal policy. Lindsey (1987) has measured the
response of taxpayers to the US tax cuts from 1982 to 1984 empirically, and has calculated the
degree of self-financing. Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (1997) show that there exists a Laffer curve
in a neoclassical growth model, but focus on endogenous labor taxes to balance the budget, in
contrast to the analysis here. Ireland (1994) shows that there exists a dynamic Laffer curve in an
AK endogenous growth model framework, see also Bruce and Turnovsky (1999) and Novales and
Ruiz (2002). In an overlapping generations framework, Yanagawa and Uhlig (1996) show that
higher capital income taxes may lead to faster growth, in contrast to the conventional economic
wisdom. Flodén and Lindé (2001) contains a Laffer curve analysis. Jonsson and Klein (2003)
calculate the total welfare costs of distortionary taxes including inflation and find Sweden to be
on the slippery slope side of the Laffer curve for several tax instruments.

Our paper is closely related to Prescott (2002, 2004), who raised the issue of the incentive effects of
taxes by comparing the effects of labor taxes on labor supply for the US and European countries.
We broaden that analysis here by including incentive effects of labor and capital income taxes in
a general equilibrium framework with endogenous transfers. His work has been discussed by e.g.
Ljungqvist and Sargent (2007) as well as Alesina et al. (2005).

Like Baxter and King (1993) or McGrattan (1994), we assume that government spending may be
valuable only insofar as it provides utility separably from consumption and leisure.

The paper is organized as follows. We specify the model in section 2 and its parameterization
in section 3. Section 4 discusses our results. Endogenous growth, human capital accumulation,
household heterogeneity and transition issues are considered in section 5. Section 6 concludes.
An online supplementary documentation to this paper provides proofs, material on the CFE
preferences, analytical versions of the Laffer curves, details on the calibration, the tax rate tables,



                                                  4
raw data, comparison of the model to the data and MATLAB programs that can be used to
replicate the results of this paper.


2   The Model


Time is discrete, t = 0, 1, . . . , ∞. The representative household maximizes the discounted sum
of life-time utility subject to an intertemporal budget constraint and a capital flow equation.
Formally,
                                                         ∑
                                                         ∞
                            maxct ,nt ,kt ,xt ,bt   E0         β t [u(ct , nt ) + v(gt )]
                                                         t=0

subject to


                   (1 + τtc )ct + xt + bt = (1 − τtn )wt nt + (1 − τtk )(dt − δ)kt−1

                                                    +δkt−1 + Rtb bt−1 + st + Πt + mt

                                        kt = (1 − δ)kt−1 + xt                                      (1)


where ct , nt , kt , xt , bt , mt denote consumption, hours worked, capital, investment, government
bonds and an exogenous stream of payments. The household takes government consumption gt ,
which provides utility, as given. Further, the household receives wages wt , dividends dt , profits Πt
from the firm and asset payments mt . Moreover, the household obtains interest earnings Rtb and
lump-sum transfers st from the government. The household has to pay consumption taxes τtc ,
labor income taxes τtn and capital income taxes τtk . Note that capital income taxes are levied on
dividends net-of-depreciation as in Prescott (2002, 2004) and in line with Mendoza et al. (1994).

The payments mt are income from an exogenous asset or “tree”. We allow mt to be negative
and thereby allow the asset to be a liability. This feature captures a negative or positive trade
balance, equating mt to net imports, and introduces international trade in a minimalist way.
In the balanced growth path equilibria, this model is therefore consistent with an open-economy
interpretation with source-based capital income taxation, where the rest of the world grows at the
same rate and features households with the same time preferences. The trade balance influences




                                                          5
the reaction of steady state labor to tax changes and therefore the shape of the Laffer curve. It
is beyond the scope of this paper to provide a genuine open economy analysis.

The representative firm maximizes profits


                                  maxkt−1 ,nt   yt − dt kt−1 − wt nt                            (2)


with the Cobb-Douglas production technology,


                                           yt = ξ t kt−1
                                                     θ
                                                         n1−θ
                                                          t                                     (3)


where ξ t denotes the trend of total factor productivity. The government faces the budget con-
straint,
                                    gt + st + Rtb bt−1 = bt + Tt                                (4)

where government tax revenues are given by


                               Tt = τtc ct + τtn wt nt + τtk (dt − δ)kt−1                       (5)


Our goal is to analyze how the equilibrium shifts, as tax rates are shifted. More generally, the tax
rates may be interpreted as wedges as in Chari et al. (2007), and some of the results in this paper
carry over to that more general interpretation. What is special to the tax rate interpretation and
crucial to the analysis in this paper, however, is the link between tax receipts and transfers (or
government spending) via the government budget constraint.

We focus on the comparison of balanced growth paths. We assume that mt = ψ t m̄ where ψ
is the growth factor of aggregate output. Our key assumption is that government debt as well
as government spending do not deviate from their balanced growth pathes, i.e. bt−1 = ψ t b̄ and
gt = ψ t ḡ. When tax rates are shifted, government transfers adjust according to the government
budget constraint (4), rewritten as st = ψ t b̄(ψ − Rtb ) + Tt − ψ t ḡ. As an alternative, we keep
transfers on the balanced growth path and adjust government spending instead.




                                                   6
2.1 The Constant Frisch Elasticity (CFE) preferences

A crucial parameter in our considerations will be the Frisch elasticity of labor supply, φ =
dn w
     | .
dw n ūc
           In order to understand the role of this elasticity most cleanly, it is natural to focus on
preferences which feature a constant Frisch elasticity, regardless of the level of consumption or
labor. Moreover, these preferences need to be consistent with balanced growth. We shall call
preferences with these features “constant Frisch elasticity” preferences or CFE preferences. The
following result has essentially been stated in King and Rebelo (1999), equation (6.7) as well
Shimer (2009), but without a proof. We provide a proof in the appendix.

Proposition 1. Suppose preferences are separable across time with a twice continuously differ-
entiable felicity function u(c, n), which is strictly increasing and concave in c and −n, discounted
a constant rate β, consistent with long-run growth and feature a constant Frisch elasticity of labor
supply φ, and suppose that there is an interior solution to the first-order condition. Then, the
preferences feature a constant intertemporal elasticity of substitution 1/η > 0 and are given by

                                                               1
                                       u(c, n) = log(c) − κn1+ φ                                  (6)


if η = 1 and by
                                      1 ( 1−η (                 1
                                                                  )η   )
                           u(c, n) =     c      1 − κ(1 − η)n1+ φ
                                                                     −1                           (7)
                                     1−η
if η > 0, η ̸= 1, where κ > 0, up to affine transformations. Conversely, this felicity function has
the properties stated above.

Hall (2009) has recently emphasized the importance of the Frisch demand for consumption c =
c(λ, w) and the Frisch labor supply n = n(λ, w), resulting from the usual first-order conditions
and the Lagrange multiplier λ on the budget constraint, see (38) and (39). His work has focussed
attention in particular on the cross-elasticity between consumption and wages. That elasticity is
generally not constant for CFE preferences. In the supplementary documentation, we show that
                                                                  (      )
                                                                       1 (       )−1
               cross-elasticity of consumption wrt wages = (1 + φ) 1 −     α c/y                  (8)
                                                                       η




                                                   7
in our model along the balanced growth path, with α given in (12). The cross-elasticity is positive,
iff η > 1. We also calculate this cross-elasticity to be 0.4 for the US and 0.3 for the EU-14 for
our benchmark calibration φ = 1, η = 2. This is in line with Hall (2009).

As an alternative, we also use the Cobb-Douglas preference specification


                                u(ct , nt ) = σ log(ct ) + (1 − σ) log(1 − nt )                   (9)


as it is an important and widely used benchmark, see e.g. Cooley and Prescott (1995). Here, the
Frisch elasticity is given by   1
                                nt
                                     − 1 and therefore decreases with increasing labor supply.


2.2 Equilibrium

In equilibrium the household chooses plans to maximize its utility, the firm solves its maximization
problem and the government sets policies that satisfy its budget constraint. We summarize key
balanced growth relationships of the model that are necessary for computing Laffer curves. Except
                                                                                                  1
for hours worked, interest rates and taxes all other variables grow at a constant rate ψ = ξ 1−θ .
For CFE preferences, the balanced growth after-tax return on any asset is R̄ = ψ η /β. We assume
throughout that ξ ≥ 1 and that parameters are such that R̄ > 1, but we do not necessarily restrict
β to be less than one. Let k/y denote the balanced growth path value of the capital-output ratio
kt−1 /yt . In the model, it is given by

                                                (                   )−1
                                                      R̄ − 1    δ
                                        k/y =                 +           .                      (10)
                                                    θ(1 − τ ) θ
                                                            k




Labor productivity and the before-tax wage level are given by

                                             yt            θ
                                                = ψ t k/y 1−θ
                                             n̄
                                                           yt
                                             wt = (1 − θ)
                                                           n̄

This provides the familiar result that the balanced growth capital-output ratio and before-tax
wages only depend on policy through the capital income tax τ k , decreasing monotonically, and
depend on preference parameters only via R̄. It also implies that the tax receipts from capital

                                                        8
taxation and labor taxation relative to output are given by these tax rates times a relative-to-
output tax base which only depends on the capital income tax rate.

It remains to solve for the level of equilibrium labor. Let c/y denote the balanced growth path
ratio ct /yt . With the CFE preference specification and along the balanced growth path, the
first-order conditions of the household and the firm imply

                                    (             1
                                                      )−1            1
                                        ηκn̄   1+ φ
                                                            +1−        = α c/y                  (11)
                                                                     η

where                                           (               )(             1
                                                                                   )
                                                      1 + τc         1+        φ
                                        α=                                                      (12)
                                                      1 − τn         1−θ

depends on tax rates, the labor share and the Frisch elasticity of labor supply.


2.3 Characterizing Laffer curves

For the benchmark s−Laffer curves, we vary transfers s̄ and fix government spending ḡ. The
feasibility constraint implies
                                                                     1
                                                 c/y = χ + γ                                    (13)
                                                                     n̄
                                                                          −θ
where χ = 1 − (ψ − 1 + δ) k/y and γ = (m̄ − ḡ) k/y 1−θ . Substituting equation (13) into (11)
therefore yields a one-dimensional nonlinear equation in n̄, which can be solved numerically,
given values for preference parameters, production parameters, tax rates and the levels of b̄, ḡ
and m̄.

Proposition 2. Assume that ḡ ≥ m̄. Then, the solution for n̄ is unique. It is decreasing in τ c
or τ n , with τ k , b̄, ḡ fixed.

The proof follows in a straightforward manner from examining the equations above. In particular,
for constant τ k and τ c , there is a tradeoff as τ n increases: while equilibrium labor and thus the
labor tax base decrease, the fraction taxed from that tax base increases. This tradeoff gives rise
to the Laffer curve.




                                                            9
Similarly, and in the special case ḡ = m̄, n̄ falls with τ k , creating the same Laffer curve tradeoff
for capital income taxation. Generally, the tradeoff for τ k appears to be hard to sign and we shall
rely on numerical calculations instead.

For the alternative g−Laffer curves, we shall fix transfers s̄ and vary spending ḡ. Rewrite the
budget constraint of the household as

                                               χ̃        γ̃    1
                                      c/y =       c
                                                    +       c
                                                                                                    (14)
                                              1+τ     (1 + τ ) n̄

                                                  (         )        (                    )    −θ
where χ̃ = 1 − (ψ − 1 + δ) k/y − τ n (1 − θ) − τ k θ − δ k/y and γ̃ = b̄(R̄ − ψ) + s̄ + m̄ k/y 1−θ
can be calculated, given values for preference parameters, production parameters, tax rates and
the levels of b̄, s̄ and m̄. Note that χ̃ and γ̃ do not depend on τ c .

To see the difference to the case of fixing ḡ, consider a simpler one-period model without capital
and the budget constraint
                                     (1 + τ c )c = (1 − τ n )wn + s.                                (15)

Maximizing growth-consistent preferences, i.e. u(c, n) =      1
                                                             1−η
                                                                   (c1−η v(n) − 1) subject to this budget
constraint, one obtains
                                             v(n)           s
                                  (η − 1)          =1+              .                               (16)
                                              ′
                                            nv (n)     (1 − τ n )wn
If transfers s do not change with τ c , then consumption taxes do not change labor supply. More-
over, if transfers are zero, s = 0, labor taxes do not have an impact either. In both cases, the
substitution effect and the income effect exactly cancel just as they do for an increase in total
factor productivity. This insight generalizes to the model at hand, albeit with some modification.

Proposition 3. Fix s̄, and instead adapt ḡ, as the tax revenues change across balanced growth
equilibria.

   1. There is no impact of consumption tax rates τ c on equilibrium labor. As a consequence, tax
      revenues always increase with increased consumption taxes.
   2. Suppose that 0 = b̄(R̄ − ψ) + s̄ + m̄. Furthermore, suppose that labor taxes and capital taxes
                                             (         )
      are jointly changed, so that τ n = τ k 1 − θδ k/y where the capital-income ratio depends on



                                                   10
      τk per (10). Equivalently, suppose that all income from labor and capital is taxed at the rate
      τn without a deduction for depreciation. Then there is no change of equilibrium labor.


Proof: For the claim regarding consumption taxes, note that the terms (1 + τc ) for c/y in (14)
cancel with the corresponding term in α in equation (11). For the claim regarding τk and τn , note
              (          )
that τ n = τ k 1 − θδ k/y together with (10) implies

                                              (              )
                                                   θ                             θ
                        R̄ − 1 = (1 − τ k )             −δ       = (1 − τ n )         − δ.
                                                  k/y                           k/y

Then either by rewriting the budget constraint with an income tax τn and calculating the
                                                (                             )
consumption-output ratio or with χ̃ = (1 − τ n ) 1 − θ(ψ − 1 + δ)/(R̄ − 1 + δ) as well as γ̃ = 0,
one obtains that the right-hand side in equation (11) and therefore also n̄ remain constant, as
tax rates are changed. •
The above discussion highlights in particular the importance of tax-unaffected income b̄(R̄ − ψ) +
s̄ + m̄ on equilibrium labor. It also highlights an important reason for including the trade balance
in this analysis.

Given n̄, it is then straightforward to calculate total tax revenue as well as government spending.
Conversely, provided with an equilibrium value for n̄, one can use equation (11) combined with
equation (13) to find the value of the preference parameter κ, supporting this equilibrium. A
similar calculation obtains for the Cobb-Douglas preference specification.

In the supplementary documentation to this paper, we provide analytical characterizations and
expressions for Laffer curves. The partial derivatives of total revenues are reasonably tractable.
We recommend to use a software capable of symbolic mathematics for further symbolic manipu-
lations or numerical evaluations.


2.4 Consumption Taxes

We calculate the slope of the s-consumption-tax Laffer curve and find that it approaches zero,
as τc → ∞: we shall leave out the somewhat tedious details. Initially, this may be a surprising




                                                        11
contrast to our calculations below showing a single-peaked s-Laffer curves in labor taxes: since
the tradeoff between consumption and labor is determined by the wedge

                                              1 − τn
                                           ς=        ,
                                              1 + τc

one might have expected these two Laffer curves to map into each other with some suitable
transformation of the abscissa. However, while the allocation is a function of the tax wedge only,
this is not the case for the tax revenues as given by the Laffer curves. This can perhaps best be
appreciated in the simplest case of a one-period model, where agents have preferences given by
log(c) − n, facing the budget constraint (15) with wages w held constant throughout and with
transfers s equal to tax receipts in equilibrium. It is easy to see that labor is equal to the tax
wedge, n = ς = (1 − τ n )/(1 + τ c ), and that c = wn: so, consumption taxes and labor taxes have
the same equilibrium tax base. The two Laffer curves are given by

                                                        1 − τn
                                    L(x) = (τc + τn )          w
                                                        1 + τc

where x = τc or x = τn and they cannot be written in terms of just the tax wedge and wages
alone. As a further simplification, assume w = 1 and consider setting one of the two tax rates to
zero: in that case, one achieves the same labor supply n = ς for τn = 1 − ς and τc = 0 as well as
for τn = 0 and τc = 1/ς. For the first case, i.e., when varying labor taxes, the tax revenues are
ς(1 − ς), and have a peak at ς = n = 0.5. The tax revenues are 1 − ς in the second case of varying
consumption taxes, and are increasing to one, as the tax wedge ς, labor supply and therefore
available resources fall to zero. Transfers approach one, but they are treated as income before
consumption taxes: when the household attempts to consume this transfer income, it has to pay
taxes approaching 100%, so that it is indeed left only with the resources originally produced.

This result is due to the tax treatment of transfer income, and one may wish to view this as a
matter of “accounting”. Indeed, matters change, if the transfers were to be paid in kind, not in
cash or if the agent did not have to pay consumption taxes on them. In that case, the Laffer curve
would only depend on the tax wedge and wages, and would be given by L(ς) = (1 − ς) wn(ς).
In our model with capital and net imports, one would have to likewise exclude all other sources


                                               12
of income from consumption taxes along with the transfers, in order to have the Laffer curves in
consumption taxes coincide with the Laffer curve in labor taxes, when written as a function of
the tax wedge.


3   Calibration and Parameterization


We calibrate the model to annual post-war data of the US and EU-14 economy. An overview of
the calibration is provided in tables 1 and 2.

We use data from the AMECO database of the European Commission, the OECD database, the
Groningen Growth and Development Centre and Conference Board database and the BEA NIPA
database. Mendoza et al. (1994), calculate average effective tax rates from national product and
income accounts for the US. For this paper, we have followed their methodology to calculate tax
rates from 1995 to 2007 for the US and 14 of the EU-15 countries, excluding Luxembourg for data
availability reasons. Our results largely agree with Carey and Rabesona (2004), who have likewise
calculated tax rates from 1975 to 2000. The supplementary documentation to this paper provides
the calculated panel of tax rates for labor, capital and consumption, details on the required tax
rate calculations, the data used, details on the calibration and further discussion.

Our empirical measure of government debt for the US as well as the EU-14 area provided by
the AMECO database is nominal general government consolidated gross debt (excessive deficit
procedure, based on ESA 1995) which we divide by nominal GDP. For the US the gross debt
to GDP ratio is 63% in our sample. As an alternative, we also used 40%, as this is the ratio
of government debt held by the public to GDP in our sample: none of our quantitative results
change noticeably.

Most of the preference parameters are standard. We set parameters such that the household
chooses n̄ = 0.25 in the US baseline calibration. This is consistent with evidence on hours worked
per person aged 15-64 for the US. See the supplementary documentation for details.

For the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, we follow a general consensus for it to be close to
0.5 and therefore set η = 2, as our benchmark choice. The specific value of the Frisch labor supply
elasticity is of central importance for the shape of the Laffer curve. In the case of the alternative

                                                 13
                                                              1−n̄
Cobb-Douglas preferences the Frisch elasticity is given by     n̄
                                                                     and equals 3 when n̄ = 0.25. This
value is in line with e.g. Cooley and Prescott (1995) and Prescott (2002, 2004, 2006), while a
value close to 1 as in Kimball and Shapiro (2008) may be closer to the current consensus view.

We therefore use η = 2 and φ = 1 as the benchmark calibration for the CFE preferences, and use
η = 1 and φ = 3 as alternative calibration and for comparison to a Cobb-Douglas specification.
See the supplementary documentation for a further discussion about the details of the calibration
choices.


3.1   EU-14 Model and individual EU countries

As a benchmark, we keep all other parameters as in the US model, i.e. the parameters char-
acterizing the growth rate as well as production and preferences. As a result, we calculate the
differences between the US and the EU-14 as arising solely from differences in fiscal policy, see
table 3 for the country specific tax rates and GDP ratios. This corresponds to Prescott (2002,
2004) who argues that differences in hours worked between the US and Europe are due to different
level of labor income taxes.

In the supplementary documentation, we provide a comparison of predicted versus actual data
for three key values: equilibrium labor and the capital- and consumption to GDP ratio. Discrep-
ancies remain. While these are surely due to a variety of reasons, in particular e.g. institutional
differences in the implementation of the welfare state, see e.g. Rogerson (2007) or Pissarides and
Ngai (2009), variation in parameters across countries may be one of the causes. For example,
Blanchard (2004) as well as Alesina et al. (2005) argue that differences in preferences as well as
labor market regulations and union policies rather than different fiscal policies are key to under-
standing why hours worked have fallen in Europe compared to the US. To obtain further insight
and to provide a benchmark, we therefore vary parameters across countries in order to obtain
a perfect fit to observations for these three key values plus also the investment to GDP ratio.
We then examine these parameters whether they are in a “plausible range”, compared to the US
calibration. Finally, we investigate how far our results for the impacts of fiscal policy are affected.
It will turn out that the effect is modest, so that our conclusions may be viewed as fairly robust.




                                                  14
More precisely, we use averages of the observations on xt /yt , kt−1 /yt , nt , ct /yt , gt /yt , mt /yt and
tax rates as well as a common choice for ψ, φ, η to solve the equilibrium relationships

                                             xt
                                                 =ψ−1+δ                                                (17)
                                            kt−1

for δ, (10) for θ, (11) for κ and aggregate feasiblity for a measurement error, which we interpret as
mismeasured government consumption (as this will not affect the allocation otherwise), keeping
g/y, m/y and the three tax rates calibrated as in the baseline calculations.

Table 4 provides the list of resulting parameters. Note that we shall need a larger value for κ and
thereby a greater preference for leisure in the EU-14 (in addition to the observed higher labor tax
rates) in order to account for the lower equilibrium labor in Europe. Some of the implications
are perhaps unconvential, however, and if so, this may indicate that alternative reasons are the
source for the cross-country variations. For example, while Ireland is calculated to have one of
the highest preferences for leisure, Greece appears to have one of the lowest.


4   Results


As a first check on the model, we compare the measured and the model-implied sources of tax
revenue, relative to GDP. The precise numbers are available in the supplementary documentation.
Due to the allocational distortions caused by the taxes, there is no a priori reason that these
numbers should coincide. While the models overstate the taxes collected from labor income in
the EU-14, they provide the correct numbers for revenue from capital income taxation, indicating
that the methodology of Mendoza-Razin-Tesar is reasonable capable of delivering the appropriate
tax burden on capital income, despite the difficulties of taxing capital income in practice. Further,
hours worked are overstated while total capital is understated for the EU-14 by the model. With
the parameter variation in table 4, the model will match the data perfectly by construction. This
applies similarly to individual countries. Generally, the numbers are roughly correct in terms of
the order of magnitude, though, so we shall proceed with our analysis.




                                                    15
4.1 Labor Tax Laffer Curves

The Laffer curve for labor income taxation in the US is shown in figure 1. In this experiment,
labor taxes are varied between 0 and 100 percent and all other taxes, parameters and paths for
government spending g, debt b and net imports m are held constant. Note that the CFE and
Cobb-Douglas preferences coincide closely, if the intertemporal elasticity of substitution 1/η and
the Frisch elasticity of labor supply φ are the same at the benchmark steady state. Therefore,
CFE preferences are close enough to the Cobb-Douglas specification, if η = 1, and provide a
growth-consistent generalization, if η ̸= 1.

For marginal rather than dramatic tax changes, the slope of the Laffer curve near the current
data calibration is of interest. The slope is related to the degree of self-financing of a tax cut,
defined as the ratio of additional tax revenues due to general equilibrium incentive effects and
the lost tax revenues at constant economic choices. More formally and precisely, we calculate the
degree of self-financing of a labor tax cut per

                                1 ∂Tt (τ n , τ k , τ c )        1 Tt (τ n + ϵ, τ k , τ c ) − Tt (τ n − ϵ, τ k , τ c )
   self-financing rate = 1 −                             ≈ 1 −
                               wt n̄    ∂τ n                   wt n̄                       2ϵ

where T (τ n , τ k , τ c ) is the function of tax revenues across balanced growth equilbria for different
tax rates, and constant paths for government spending g, debt b and net imports m. This self-
financing rate is a constant along the balanced growth path, i.e. does not depend on t. Likewise,
we calculate the degree of self-financing of a capital tax cut.

We calculate these self-financing rates numerically as indicated by the second expression, with
ϵ set to 0.01 (and tax rates expressed as fractions). If there were no endogenous change of the
allocation due to a tax change, the loss in tax revenue due to a one percentage point reduction
in the tax rate would be wt n̄, and the self-financing rate would calculate to 0. At the peak of
the Laffer curve, the tax revenue would not change at all, and the self-financing rate would be
100%. Indeed, the self-financing rate would become larger than 100% beyond the peak of the
Laffer curve.

For labor taxes, table 5 provides results for the self-financing rate as well as for the location of
the peak of the Laffer curve for our benchmark calibration of the CFE preference parameters,


                                                        16
as well as a sensitivity analysis. The peak of the Laffer curve shifts up and to the right, as η
and φ are decreased. The dependence on η arises due to the nonseparability of preferences in
consumption and leisure. Capital adjusts as labor adjusts across the balanced growth paths. See
also the supplementary documentation for a graphical representation of this sensitivity analysis.

Table 5 also provides results for the EU-14: there is considerably less scope for additional fi-
nancing of government revenue in Europe from raising labor taxes. For our preferred benchmark
calibration with a Frisch elasticity of 1 and an intertemporal elasticity of substitution of 0.5, we
find that the US and the EU-14 are located on the left side of their Laffer curves, but while the US
can increase tax revenues by 30% by raising labor taxes, the EU-14 can raise only an additional
8%.

To gain further insight, the upper panel of figure 2 compares the US and the EU Laffer curve,
benchmarking both Laffer curves to 100% at the average tax rates.

Table 6 as well as the top panel of figure 3 provide insight into the degree of self-financing as well
as the location of the Laffer curve peak for individual countries, when varying them according to
table 4. The results for keeping parameters the same across countries are very similar.

It matters for the thought experiment here, that the additional tax revenues are spent on transfers,
and not on other government spending. For the latter, the substitution effect is mitigated by an
income effect on labor: as a result the Laffer curve becomes steeper with a peak to the right and
above the peak coming from a “labor tax for transfer” Laffer curve, see figue 4.


4.2 Capital Tax Laffer Curves

The lower panel of figure 2 shows the Laffer curve for capital income taxation in the US, comparing
it to the EU-14 and for two different parameter configurations, benchmarking both Laffer curves
to 100% at the average capital tax rates. Numerical results are in table 7. The figure already
shows that the capital income tax Laffer curve is surprisingly invariant to variations of the CFE
parameters. A more detailed comparison figure is available in the supplementary documentation
to this paper. For our preferred benchmark calibration with a Frisch elasticity of 1 and an
intertemporal elasticity of substitution of 0.5, we find that the US and the EU-14 are located on


                                                 17
the left side of their Laffer curves, but the scope for raising tax revenues by raising capital income
taxes are small: they are bound by 6% in the US and by 1% in the EU-14.

The cross-country comparison is in the lower panel of figure 3 and in table 8. Several countries,
e.g. Denmark and Sweden, show a degree of self-financing in excess of 100%: these countries
are on the “slippery side” of the Laffer curve and can actually improve their budgetary situation
by cutting capital taxes, according to our calculations. As one can see, the additional revenues
that can be obtained from an increased capital income taxation are small, once the economy has
converged to the new balanced growth path. The key for capital income are transitional issues
and the taxation of initially given capital: this issue is examined in subsection 5.3.

It is instructive to investigate, why the capital Laffer curve is so flat e.g. in Europe. Figure 7 shows
a decomposition of the overall Laffer curve into its pieces: the reaction of the three tax bases and
the resulting tax receipts. The labor tax base is falling throughout: as the incentives to accumulate
capital are deteriorating, less capital is provided along the balanced growth equilibrium, and
therefore wages fall. The capital tax revenue keeps rising quite far, though. Indeed, even the
capital tax base (θ − δk/y)ȳ keeps rising, as the decline in k/y numerically dominates the effect
of the decline in ȳ. An important lesson to take away is therefore this: if one is interested in
examining the revenue consequences of increased capital taxation, it is actually the consequence
for labor tax revenues which is the “first-order” item to watch. This decomposition and insight
shows the importance of keeping the general equilibrium repercussions in mind when changing
taxes.

Table 9 summarizes the range of results of our sensitivity analysis both for labor taxes as well as
capital taxes for the US and the EU-14 in our benchmark model.

Furthermore, one may be interested in the combined budgetary effect of changing labor and
capital income taxation. This gets closer to the literature of Ramsey optimal taxation, to which
this paper does not seek to make a contribution. But figure 6, providing the contour lines of a
“Laffer hill”, nonetheless may provide some useful insights. As one compares balanced growth
paths, it turns out that revenue is maximized when raising labor taxes but lowering capital taxes:
the peak of the hill is in the lower right hand side corner of that figure. Indeed, many countries



                                                  18
are on the “wrong” side of the “Laffer hill”, i.e. do not feature its peak in the northeast corner
of that plot.


5   Variations


5.1 Endogenous Growth and Human Capital Accumulation

In our analysis, we have emphasized the comparison of long-run steady states. The macroeconomic
literature on long-run phenomena generally emphasizes the importance of endogenous growth, see
e.g. the textbook treatments of Jones (2001), Barro and i Martin (2003) or Acemoglu (2008).
While a variety of engines of growth have been analyzed, the accumulation of human capital
appears to be particularly relevant for our analysis. In that case, labor income taxation actually
amounts to the taxation of a capital stock, and this may potentially have a considerable effects on
our results. While it is beyond the scope of this paper to analyze the many interesting possibilities,
some insight into the issue can be obtained from the following specification incorporating learning-
by-doing as well as schooling, following Lucas (1988) and Uzawa (1965). While first-generation
endogenous growth models have stressed the endogeneity of the overall long-run growth rate,
second-generation growth models have stressed potentially large level effects, without affecting
the long-run growth rate. We shall provide an analysis, encompassing both possibilities.

Consider the following modification to the baseline model. Assume that human capital can be
accumulated by both learning-by-doing as well as schooling. The agent splits total non-leisure
time nt into work-place labor qt nt and schooling time (1 − qt )nt , where 0 ≤ qt ≤ 1. Agents
accumulate human capital according to


                                                          t−1 + (1 − δh )ht−1
                          ht = (Aqt nt + B(1 − qt )nt )ω h1−Ω                                            (18)


where A ≥ 0 and B > A parameterize the effectiveness of learning-by-doing and schooling
respectively and where 0 < δh ≤ 1 is the depreciation rate of human capital. Furthermore,
we let Ω = 0 for the “first-generation” version and Ω = ω for the “second-generation” version
of the model. For the “first-generation” version of the model, production is given by yt =
 θ
kt−1 (ht−1 qt nt )1−θ while it is given by yt = ξ t kt−1
                                                     θ
                                                         (ht−1 qt nt )1−θ for the “second generation” version.

                                                     19
Note that non-leisure time nt is multiplied by human capital ht−1 and the fraction qt devoted to
work-place labor. For both versions, wages are paid per unit of labor and human capital, i.e.
with wt = (1 − θ) ht−1ytqt nt so that the after-tax labor income is given by (1 − τtn )wt ht−1 qt nt .

Consider the problem of a representative household. Let λt be the Lagrange multiplier for the
budget constraint and let µt be the Lagrange multiplier on the human accumulation constraint
(18). We shall analyze the “second generation” case first, as the algebra is somewhat simpler.
                                                                                                          1
Note that µt = µ̄ψ (1−η)t grows with the product of λt = λ̄ψ −ηt and wt = w̄ψ t , where ψ = ξ 1−θ .
The first-order condition with respect to human capital along a balanced growth path can be
written as:
                                                       (1 − τ n )w̄n̄
                                           µ̄ =                        λ̄.                               (19)
                                                  (ψ 1−η /β) − 1 + ωδh
This equation has an intuitive appeal. Essentially, the shadow value of an extra unit of human
capital corresponds to the discounted sum of the additional after-tax wage payments that it
generates for the agent. Further, along a balanced growth path,

                                                  −1/ω
                                       h̄ = δh              (B + (A − B)q̄) n̄                           (20)


The first-order condition with respect to labor along the balanced growth path yields ūn =
(1 − τ n )w̄h̄λ̄ + ωδh µ̄n̄h̄ , where the first term is as in the benchmark model, except for the additional
factor h̄, and the second term due to the consideration of accumulating human capital. With
w̄h̄q̄n̄ = (1 − θ)ȳ and in close similarity to (11), this implies

                                       (              1
                                                          )−1         1
                                           ηκn̄1+ φ             +1−     = α′′ c/y                        (21)
                                                                      η

where                    (            )(          1
                                                      )
                    ′′       1 + τc        1+                                 (ψ 1−η /β) − 1 + ωδh
                                                          ϑ′′ , with ϑ′′ =
                                                  φ
                  α =                                                                              .     (22)
                             1 − τn        1−θ                               (ψ 1−η /β) − 1 + 2ωδh
                                                                                         {           }
                                                                                              B
The Kuhn-Tucker condition for the split qt along the balanced growth path yields q̄ = min 1; B−A ϑ′′
after some algebra, and is independent of tax rates. As a check on the calculations, note that
α′′ = α, if ω = 0, as indeed should be the case. For small values of ω, the “correction” to α is
small too. Perhaps more importantly, note that κ in (11) as well as (21) should be calibrated so


                                                                20
as to yield q̄n̄U S = 0.25. In particular, if η = 1 and noting that the split q̄ of non-leisure time
devoted to work-place labor remains constant, a proportional change in α just leads to a similar
proportional change in κ.

The key impact of taxation then lies in the impact of the level of human capital, per equation
(20): all other equations remain essentially unchanged. Heuristically, as e.g. labor taxes are
increased, non-leisure time is decreased, which in turn leads to a decrease in human capital. This
in turn leads to a loss in tax revenue, compared to the benchmark case of no-human-capital
accumulation. Put differently, the taxation of labor does not impact some intertemporal trade-off
directly, as it appears to be the case for capital taxation, but rather “indirectly” via a level effect,
as human capital is proportional to non-leisure time along the balanced growth path.

The analysis of the “first-generation” case is rather similar. Along the balanced growth path,

                                ht+1
                                     ≡ (B + (A − B)q̄)ω n̄ω + 1 − δh = ψ                               (23)
                                 ht

where this equation now determines the economic growth rate ψ. Note that ht−1 = ψ t h̄, where
we normalize h̄ = 1. Wages per unit of human capital do not grow, so that µt = µ̄ψ −ηt grows
with λt = λ̄ψ −ηt , where ψ is now given by (23). The first order condition with respect to human
capital along a balanced growth path can be written as:

                                                           (1 − τ n )w̄n̄
                                                  µ̄ =                    λ̄                           (24)
                                                              R̄ − ψ

where R̄ = ψ η /β as before, except that ψ is given per (23). The first-order condition with
                                                                           (               )
respect to labor along the balanced growth path yields ūn = (1 − τ n )w̄λ̄ 1 + ω(ψ−1+δ
                                                                                   R̄−ψ
                                                                                        h)
                                                                                             . In close
similarity to (11) and (21), this implies

                                      (             1
                                                         )−1          1
                                          ηκn̄   1+ φ
                                                               +1−      = α′ c/y.                      (25)
                                                                      η

where                   (            )(          1
                                                     )
                            1 + τc        1+                                       R̄ − ψ
                 α′ =                                    ϑ′ , with ϑ′ =
                                                 φ
                                                                                                   .   (26)
                            1 − τn        1−θ                              R̄ − ψ + ω(ψ − 1 + δh )




                                                               21
                                                                   {         }
                                                                        B
The first order condition for the work-school split yields q̄ = min 1; B−A ϑ′ . One therefore
reaches almost the same conclusions as in the “second generation” formulation above, but there
is a minor and a major difference. The minor difference concerns the last factor in (26) compared
to the last factor in (22): they are numerically different. In the case that η = 1, and due
to the necessity to calibrate κ, this does not make a difference. The major difference is the
impact of labor supply on the endogenous growth rate per (23). For example, as the labor tax
rate is changed, this leads to changes in labor supply, thereby to changes in the growth rate,
the steady state return R̄, and therefore to changes in the capital-output ratio per equation
(10) and the consumption-output ratio, influencing in turn the coefficients in the equation for
n̄ and the solution for q̄. This is a fixed point problem, which requires different algebra and
additional analysis. While it may be of some interest to solve these equations and investigate
the resulting numerical changes, it appears rather evident that the impact will be quantitatively
small. First, the effect is truly indirect: except for the impact on the steady state return R̄ (and
the numerical difference in the last factor of (26) vs (22), the analysis is exactly as above in the
“second generation” case. Second and empirically, little evidence has been found that taxation
impacts on the long-run growth rate, see Levine and Renelt (1992). Thus, a sufficiently rich
and appropriately calibrated extension of this “first-generation” version should feature at most
a modest impact on the long-run growth rate in order to be in line with the available empirical
evidence.

We examine the quantitative implications of human capital accumulation for the Laffer curves.
To do so, we apply the same calibration strategy for the initial steady state as before, except
assuming now q̄n̄U S = 0.25. Further, we set ω = 0.5 and δh = δ for simplicity. We set A such that
initial q̄U S = 0.8. In the first generation model, B is set to imply an initial growth rate ψU S = 1.02.
In the second generation model we set B to have hU S = 1 initially. The top panel of figure 7
depicts the labor tax Laffer curve for the US with and without human capital accumulation. It
turns out that the peak moves to the left and the Laffer curve as such shifts down once human
capital accumulation is accounted for. The second generation model predicts larger deviations
from the baseline model without human capital accumulation, than the first-generation version.
Furthermore, while the second-generation version is rather insensitive to η, this is not so for
the first-generation model. Indeed, for η = 1, the labor tax Laffer curve for the first-generation

                                                   22
version actually exceeds the baseline version, and the peak moves to the right. Examination of
the results for the first-generation version with η = 2 reveals, that raising labor taxes results in
a modest fall of real interest rates, inducing households to substantially shift the fraction of non-
leisure time away from work-place labor towards schooling, thereby accelerating human capital
accumulation. Since this effect works only through the shift of long-term interest rates, we judge
it to be implausibly large and lead us to favor the results from the second-generation version over
the first-generation specification. The lower part of figure 7 also recalculates the labor tax Laffer
curve for the EU-14 parameterization. Importantly and interestingly, the EU-14 is literally at the
peak, given the second-generation version.

Figure 8 compares the impact of human capital accumulation on consumption taxes: for illus-
tration, we show consumption tax rates up to the surely unreasonably high level of 500%. As
explained at the end of section 2.4, the allocation depends on the joint tax wedge created by con-
sumption and labor taxes, while the Laffer curves do not: since tax revenues are used for transfers,
which are then consumption-taxed in turn: as a result, the consumption tax Laffer curve keeps
rising throughout. However, the human capital accumulation now has a rather dramatic effect on
the scale of the Laffer curve: the higher tax wedge leads to lower human capital or less growth,
and therefore, resources are lost overall. By contrast, the capital tax Laffer curves move little,
when incorporating human capital accumulation in the model: their graphs are available in the
supplementary documentation to this paper.

These results show that human capital accumulation is likely to have an important impact on
tax revenues and the Laffer curve, especially for labor income taxes: for η = 2 as well as other
reasonable parameters, current labor tax rates appear to be considerably closer to the peak.


5.2 Heterogeneity and marginal tax rates

So far, we have considered a model with a representative agent, facing an affine-linear tax schedule.
How much will the analysis be affected if agent heterogeneity and nonlinear tax schedules are
incorporated? A full, quantitative analysis requires detailed knowledge about the distributions of
incomes from various sources, tax receipts, labor supply elasticities and so forth. While desirable,




                                                 23
this is beyond the scope of this paper. However, some insights can be provided, when imposing
additional and appealing restrictions.

We shall consider two extensions of the baseline model to investigate this issue. For both, replace
the assumption of the representative household with a population of heterogeneous and exoge-
nously given human capital h. We shall denote the aggregate distribution function for human
                                                         ∫
capital h ≥ 0 with H and assume the normalization 1 = hH(dh). For other variables, we
shall use the subscript h to denote the dependence on h. Variables without h−subscript denote
economy-wide averages. These averages shall normally be calculated per integrating across the
population, with exceptions as noted. In particular, we shall let n̄ denote the human-capital
weighted average of individual labor supplies,
                                                  ∫
                                          n̄ =        hn̄h H(dh)                                   (27)


as this is the aggregate labor supply of relevance for the production function. Wages are paid per
unit of time and unit of human capital, so that an agent of type h receives labor income wt hnh,t
in period t, before paying labor income taxes.

As a first extension, suppose that the agent “type” h is known to the government, and that the
government sets a marginal labor income tax rate τhn , which differs across agent types. Thus,
the after-tax labor income is (1 − τhn )wt hnh,t . The first-order conditions for consumption and
labor are now changed, compared to the benchmark model. Detrend all variables appropriately
to t = 1. The first-order condition with respect to labor is ūn;h = (1 − τhn )w̄hλ̄h where it is useful
to denote the additional factor h, compared to the benchmark model. Replacing (1 + τ c )λ̄h with
ūc;h , one obtains a version of equation (11):

                                 (         )−1
                                         1
                                      1+ φ          1     n̄ c̄h
                                  ηκn̄h        + 1 − = αh                                          (28)
                                                    η     ȳ hn̄h

where αh is given by
                                            (             )(        1
                                                                        )
                                                1 + τc         1+   φ
                                     αh =                                   .                      (29)
                                                1 − τhn        1−θ




                                                      24
This model already features considerable complexity, and can be enriched even further, when
also considering heterogeneity in wealth and transfers. The analysis simplifies considerably with
                                                                c̄h
the following high-level assumption however. Let zh =      (1−τhn )w̄hn̄h
                                                                            be the ratio of consumption to
after-tax labor income for an agent of type h, given tax rates.

Assumption A. 1. Assume that the ratio zh of consumption to after-tax labor income is constant
across the population, zh ≡ z, regardless of tax rates. I.e., the ratio z may change in the aggregate,
as tax rates are changed, but not on the individual level.

We regard this assumption as a benchmark and point of orientation for a richer analysis. The
assumption is immediately appealing in a model without capital income and without transfers:
in fact, there it must hold by construction. It is still appealing in the richer model here, if the
distribution of wealth and transfers is “in line” with after-tax labor income. The assumption is
appealing if all labor tax net factors (1 − τhn ) change by a common factor, but not, if e.g. some
τhn are changed, whereas others are not. While it may be interesting to derive specifications on
primitives, which deliver assumption (1) as a result, rather than as assumption, we shall proceed
without doing so.

The assumption directly implies that n̄h is constant across the population, given tax rates: n̄h ≡ n̄.
As another exception from our aggregation-per-integration rule, denote with τ n the human-capital
weighted average of the individual labor income tax rates,
                                               ∫
                                          n
                                         τ =       τhn hH(dh).                                        (30)


Indeed, this is the tax rate we implicitly calculate in our empirical results section 4, as we are
aggregating tax receipts τhn hn̄h and not tax rates τhn across the population. Per integration of
ch = z((1 − τhn )w̄hn̄h ), we see that c̄ = (1 − τ n )n̄. With that, equations (28) and (29) turn into
equation (11), and the analysis therefore proceeds as there.

Proposition 4. With assumption 1, the Laffer curves remain unchanged.

An interesting alternative benchmark is provided by the following assumption, distinguishing
between transfer receivers and tax payers, and replacing assumption 1:



                                                   25
Assumption A. 2. Assume that the human capital distribution is constant between h1 < h2 ,
i.e. limh>h1 ,h→h1 H(h) = H(h2 ). For some range of taxes, assume that agents with h ≤ h1 either
choose not to work, n̄h = 0, or cannot generate labor income h = 0, but are the receivers of all
transfers.

In that case, we immediately get

Proposition 5. Impose assumption (2). Then, for the range of taxes of that assumption, the
Laffer curves coincide with the Laffer curves obtained in the benchmark model for s = 0 and all
additional revenues spent on g.

From the perspective of the tax paying agents, the transfers to the transfer-receiving-only part of
the population has the same allocational consequences as general government spending.

As a second extension, we shall draw on Heathcote et al. (2010). These authors have recently
pointed out that it may be reasonable to model the increase in the marginal tax rates as a constant
elasticity of net income. To make their assumption consistent with the long-run growth economy
here and to furthermore keep the analysis simple, suppose that net labor income is given by


                                        (1 − τ n )wn̄1−υ (hn̄h )υ                                 (31)


for some general proportionality factor (1 − τ n )wn̄1−υ and some elasticity parameter υ: Heath-
cote et al. (2010) estimate υ = 0.74. The actual tax rate paid is therefore τhn = 1 − (1 −
τ n )n̄1−υ (hn̄h )υ−1 → 1 for hn̄h → ∞ and is actually negative for sufficiently small values of hn̄h ,
implying a subsidy. With (31) and in contrast to the first extension, the agent takes into account
the effect of changing marginal tax rates, as she is changing labor supply. Similar to the first
extension, the first-order conditions imply
                             (         )−1
                                     1
                                  1+ φ        1 1 n̄       c̄h
                              ηκn̄h        +1− = α                                                (32)
                                              η υ ȳ n̄ (hn̄h )υ
                                                       1−υ



with α as in (12). There are a few differences between (28) and (32): the most crucial one may
be the extra factor 1/υ on the right hand side of the latter.




                                                   26
                                                                              c̄h
To say more requires additional assumptions. Let zh =               (1−τ n )wn̄1−υ (hn̄h )υ
                                                                                              be the ratio of consump-
tion to after-tax labor income for an agent of type h, given tax rates. As argued above, we shall
proceed with assumption 1, that this ratio is independent of h, but may depend on aggregate
conditions. Again, the labor supply will then be independent of h, i.e. n̄h ≡ n̄, where the latter
may change with aggregate conditions. Per integration, one finds that n̄ satisfies

                                    (             1
                                                      )−1         1  1
                                        ηκn̄   1+ φ
                                                            +1−     = α c/y                                       (33)
                                                                  η  υ

with α as in (12). The difference to the benchmark model (11) is the additional factor 1/υ on the
right hand side. Similar to the human capital accumulation calculations of subsection 5.1, note
that κ should be calibrated, so that n̄U S = 0.25 solves the steady state equations. In particular,
for η = 1, the additional factor 1/υ will just result in multiplication of the previous value for κ
with υ, with the remaining analysis unchanged.

Proposition 6. With assumption 1, with η = 1 and with κ calibrated to US data, the Laffer
curves in τ k , τ n , τ c remain unchanged.

For η ̸= 1, the constant 1 − 1/η in (33) will result in some changes from the additional factor
1/υ, but they remain small, if η is near unity and κ is calibrated to US data. Finally, (33) now
allows the analysis of changes in the progressivity parameter υ of the tax code and its impact on
tax revenues.


5.3 Transition

So far, we have only compared long-run steady states. The question arises, how the results may
change, if we consider the transition from one steady state to the next. Indeed, if e.g. the
capital stock falls towards the new steady state, when taxes are raised, there will be a transitory
“windfall” of tax receipts during that transition, compared to the eventual steady state. This
windfall can potentially be large.




                                                            27
Investigating that issue requires additional assumptions about the dynamics. We assume that it
is costly to adjust capital, in dependence of the investment-to-capital ratio: note that this did
not matter for the steady state considerations up to now. Replacing equation (1), we assume
                                                      [     (          )        ]
                                                                 xt        kt−1
                               kt = (1 − δ)kt−1 + 1 − ϕ                           xt          (34)
                                                                kt−1        xt

          xt
where ϕ( kt−1 ) is a convex function with ϕ(ϖ) = ϕ′ (ϖ) = 0 and ϕ′′ (ϖ) ≥ 0 where ϖ = ψ − 1 + δ.
We assume it to take the iso-elastic form
                         (          )       [ √ ( x      )     √   (         )   ]
                              xt          1     1   t −ϖ      − γϖ
                                                                 1    xt
                                                                          −ϖ
                     ϕ                  =    e γϖ kt−1
                                                           +e        kt−1
                                                                               −2 ,           (35)
                             kt−1         2

where γ is chosen to imply an elasticity of the investment to capital ratio with respect to Tobin’s
q of 0.23 as in Jermann (1998). Finally, we assume that capital adjustment costs can be deducted
from the capital tax bill as in House and Shapiro (2006). Our quantitative results, however, do
not hinge critically on this assumption.

We assume a transition from the current “status quo” steady state to the new steady state, by
assuming that some tax rate is permanently changed to its new, long-run value and allow transfers
and/or government spending to adjust during the transition. Transition paths between the current
and new steady state are calculated using a standard two point boundary solution algorithm. We
then compute the net present value of tax revenues along the entire transition path. We do so by
discounting with the period-by-period real interest rate (dynamic discounting). As an alternative,
we discount with the constant (balanced growth) real interest rate (static discounting).

The results for the US calibration, at η = 2 and φ = 1, are in the upper part of figure 9 for the
labor tax Laffer curve. The figure compares the transition results to the original steady state
comparison. The peak of the labor tax Laffer curve shifts to the right and up. This result is
easy to understand: as the labor tax rate is increased, this will eventually decrease labor input
and therefore decrease the capital stock. Along the transition, the capital stock is “too high”,
producing additional tax revenue beyond the steady state calculations. Further, the figure shows
that using the period-by-period real interest rate (dynamic discounting) or the constant balanced
growth real interest rate (static discounting) makes a difference. However, the most appropriate


                                                       28
discounting is likely the one that takes the full transition of the real interest rates into account
since that is the interest rate at which the government borrows. Overall, the change of results
due to the explicit incorporation of transition dynamics appears to be modest enough that much
of the steady state comparison analysis is still valid. Notice in particular, that the slope of the
labor tax Laffer curve around the original tax rate has not changed much, so that the local degree
of self-financing of a labor tax cut remains largely the same.

The results are rather dramatically different for the capital income tax Laffer curve in the bottom
part of figure 9, however. While the steady state comparison indicates a very flat Laffer curve,
the transition Laffer curve keeps rising, generating substantial additional tax revenues, even for
very high capital income tax rates. The results are surprising only at first glance, however. One
way to gain some intuition here is to realize that a sudden and large increase of capital income
taxes induces a sizable fall of the real return on capital. Since it is the period-by-period real
interest rate that is used for discounting, the present value of government tax revenue shoots up.

In addition, a sudden and surprising increase in the capital income tax contains a large initial
wealth tax. A sudden, one-time wealth tax is not distortionary and can indeed raise substantial
revenue. As a piece of practical policy advice, there may nonetheless be good reasons to rely
on the steady state comparison rather than this transition path. Surprise tax increases are
rare in practice. With sufficient delay, the distortionary effect on future capital accumulation
can quickly outweigh the gains, that would be obtained for an immediate surprise rise, see e.g.
Trabandt (2007). Furthermore, a delayed, but substantial raise in capital income taxes is likely
to lead to large efforts of hiding tax returns, to tax evasions and to capital flight, rather than
increases in tax receipts. These considerations have been absent from the analysis above, and it
would be important to include them in future research on this issue.


6   Conclusion


We have characterized Laffer curves for labor and capital income taxation quantitatively for
the US, the EU-14 and individual European countries by comparing the balanced growth paths
of a neoclassical growth model featuring “constant Frisch elasticity” (CFE) preferences. For
benchmark parameters, we have shown that the US can increase tax revenues by 30% by raising

                                                29
labor taxes and by 6% by raising capital income taxes. For the EU-14 we obtain 8% and 1%. A
dynamic scoring analysis shows that 54% of a labor tax cut and 79% of a capital tax cut are self-
financing in the EU-14. By contrast and due to “accounting”, the Laffer curve for consumption
taxes does not have a peak and is increasing in the consumption tax throughout, converging to
a positive finite level when consumption tax rates approach infinity. We have derived conditions
under which household heterogeneity does not matter much for our results. However, transition
effects matter: a permanent surprise increase in capital income taxes always raises tax revenues
for the benchmark calibration. Finally, endogenous growth and human capital accumulation
locates the US and EU-14 close to the peak of the labor income tax Laffer curve.

We therefore conclude that there rarely is a free lunch due to tax cuts. However, a substantial
fraction of the lunch will be paid for by the efficiency gains in the economy due to tax cuts.
Transitions matter.


7   Appendix: Proof of Proposition 1.


King et al. (2001) have shown that consistency with long run growth implies that the preferences
feature a constant intertemporal elasticity of substitution 1/η > 0 and are of the form


                                      u(c, n) = log(c) − v(n)                                  (36)


if η = 1 and
                                               1 ( 1−η       )
                                  u(c, n) =       c v(n) − 1                                   (37)
                                              1−η
where v(n) is increasing (decreasing) in n iff η > 1 (η < 1). We concentrate on the second
equation. Interpret w to be the net-of-the-tax-wedge wage, i.e. w = ((1 − τ n )/(1 + τ c ))w̃, where
w̃ is the gross wage and where τ n and τ c are the (constant) tax rates on labor income and
consumption. Taking the first order conditions with respect to a budget constraint


                                        c + . . . = wn + . . .




                                                 30
we obtain the two first order conditions


                                                           λ = c−η v(n)                                 (38)

                                             −(1 − η)λw = c1−η v ′ (n).                                 (39)


Use (38) to eliminate c1−η in (39), resulting in

                                      1 − η η1  1                       d
                                           λ w = v ′ (n) (v(n)) η −1 =
                                                                1                1
                                  −                                       (v(n)) η .                    (40)
                                        η       η                      dn


The constant elasticity φ of labor with respect to wages implies that n is positively proportional
to wφ , for λ constant1 . Write this relationship and the constant of proportionality conveniently
as                                                              (     )
                                                           −1       1    1
                                               w = ξ1 ηλ   η     1+     nφ                              (41)
                                                                    φ
for some ξ1 > 0, which may depend on λ. Substitute this equation into (40). With λ constant,
integrate the resulting equation to obtain

                                                                 1           1
                                             ξ0 − ξ1 (1 − η)n φ +1 = v(n) η                             (42)


for some integrating constant ξ0 . Note that ξ0 > 0 in order to assure that the left-hand side
is positive for n = 0, as demanded by the right-hand side. Furthermore, as v(n) cannot be a
function of λ, the same must be true of ξ0 and ξ1 . Up to a positive affine transformation of the
preferences, one can therefore choose ξ0 = 1 and ξ1 = κ for some κ > 0 wlog. Extending the
proof to the case η = 1 is straightforward.


References

Acemoglu, D., 2008. Introduction to Modern Economic Growth, 1st Edition. Princeton University
     Press.

     1
         The authors are grateful to Robert Shimer, who pointed out this simplification of the proof.




                                                            31
Alesina, A., Glaeser, E., Sacerdote, B., 2005. Work and leisure in the US and Europe: Why so
  different? NBER Macroeconomic Annual 2005.

Barro, R. J., i Martin, X. S., 2003. Economic Growth, 2nd Edition. MIT Press.

Baxter, M., King, R. G., 1993. Fiscal policy in general equilibrium. American Economic Review
  82(3), 315–334.

Blanchard, O., 2004. The economic future of europe. Journal Of Economic Perspectives 18(4),
  3–26.

Braun, R. A., Uhlig, H., 2006. The welfare enhancing effects of a selfish government in the presence
  of uninsurable, idiosyncratic risk. Humboldt University SFB 649 Discussion Paper (2006-070).

Bruce, N., Turnovsky, S. J., 1999. Budget balance, welfare, and the growth rate: Dynamic scoring
  of the long run government budget. Journal Of Money, Credit And Banking 31, 162–186.

Carey, D., Rabesona, J., June 2004. Tax ratios on labour and capital income and on consumption.
  in Measuring the Tax Burden on Capital and Labor, editor Peter B. Sorensen, The MIT Press
  Books, ISBN 0262195038.

Chari, V. V., Kehoe, P. J., Mcgrattan, E. R., 2007. Business cycle accounting. Econometrica
  75 (3), 781–836.

Cooley, T. F., Prescott, E., 1995. Economic growth and business cycles. Frontiers Of Business
  Cycle Research (Ed. Thomas F. Cooley), Princeton University Press, 1–38.

Flodén, M., Lindé, J., 2001. Idiosyncratic risk in the United States and Sweden: Is there a role
  for government insurance? Review Of Economic Dynamics 4, 406–437.

Hall, R. E., 04 2009. Reconciling cyclical movements in the marginal value of time and the
  marginal product of labor. Journal of Political Economy 117 (2), 281–323.

Heathcote, J., Storesletten, K., Violante, G., 2010. Redistributive taxation in a partial-insurance
  economy, draft, New York University.




                                                32
House, C. L., Shapiro, M. D., December 2006. Phased-in tax cuts and economic activity. American
  Economic Review 96 (5), 1835–1849.

Ireland, P. N., 1994. Supply-side economics and endogenous growth. Journal Of Monetary Eco-
  nomics 33, 559–572.

Jermann, U., April 1998. Asset pricing in production economies. Journal Of Monetary Economics
  41(2), 257–275.

Jones, C. I., 2001. Introduction to Economic Growth, 2nd Edition. W.W. Norton & Company.

Jonsson, M., Klein, P., 2003. Tax distortions in Sweden and the United States. European Eco-
  nomic Review 47, 711–729.

Kimball, M. S., Shapiro, M. D., Jul. 2008. Labor supply: Are the income and substitution
  effects both large or both small? NBER Working Papers 14208, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.

King, R. G., Plosser, C. I., Rebelo, S. T., October 2001. Production, growth and business cycles:
  Technical appendix. Computational Economics 20(1-2), 87–116.

King, R. S., Rebelo, S. T., 1999. Resuscitating real business cycles. Handbook Of Macroeconomics,
  Edited By J. B. Taylor And M. Woodford, Amsterdam: Elsevier 1B, 927–1007.

Levine, R., Renelt, D., September 1992. A sensitivity analysis of cross-country growth regressions.
  American Econommic Review 82(4), 942–63.

Lindsey, L. B., 1987. Individual taxpayer response to tax cuts: 1982-1984: With implications for
  the revenue maximizing tax rate. Journal of Public Economics 33(2), 173–206.

Ljungqvist, L., Sargent, T. J., December 2007. Do taxes explain european employment?
  Indivisible labor, human capital, lotteries, and savings. In: NBER Macroeconomics Annual
  2006, Volume 21. National Bureau of Economic Research, pp. 181–246.

Lucas, R. E., 1988. On the mechanics of economic development. Journal of Monetary economics
  22, 3–42.


                                                33
Mankiw, G. N., Weinzierl, M., September 2006. Dynamic scoring: A back-of-the-envelope guide.
  Journal of Public Economics 90 (8-9), 1415–1433.

McGrattan, E. R., 1994. The macroeconomic effects of distortionary taxation. Journal Of Mone-
  tary Economics 33(3), 573–601.

Mendoza, E. G., Razin, A., Tesar, L. L., 1994. Effective tax rates in macroeconomics: Cross-
  country estimates of tax rates on factor incomes and consumption. Journal Of Monetary Eco-
  nomics 34, 297–323.

Novales, A., Ruiz, J., 2002. Dynamic laffer curves. Journal Of Economic Dynamics And Control
  27, 181–206.

Pissarides, C., Ngai, L. R., 2009. Welfare policy and the sectoral distribution of employment.
  Center for Structual Econometrics Discussion Paper No. 09/04, London School of Economics.

Prescott, E. C., 2002. Prosperity and depression. American Economic Review 92, 1–15.

Prescott, E. C., July 2004. Why do americans work so much more than europeans? Quarterly
  Review, Federal Reserve Bank Of Minneapolis.

Prescott, E. C., 2006. Nobel lecture: The transformation of macroeconomic policy and research.
  Journal Of Political Economy 114(2), 203–235.

Rogerson, R., July 2007. Taxation and market work: is scandinavia an outlier? Economic Theory
  32 (1), 59–85.

Schmitt-Grohe, S., Uribe, M., 1997. Balanced-budget rules, distortionary taxes, and aggregate
  instability. Journal Of Political Economy 105(5), 976–1000.

Shimer, R., 2009. Convergence in macroeconomics: The labor wedge. American Economic Jour-
  nal: Macroeconomics 1(1), 280–297.

Trabandt, M., 2007. Optimal pre-announced tax reforms under valuable and productive govern-
  ment spending, european University Institute, EUI Working Paper ECO 2007/52.




                                              34
Uzawa, H., 1965. Optimum technical change in an aggregative model of economic growth. Inter-
  national Economic Review 6, 18–31.

Wanniski, J., Winter 1978. Taxes, revenues, and the laffer curve. The Public Interest.

Yanagawa, N., Uhlig, H., 1996. Increasing the capital income tax may lead to faster growth.
  European Economic Review 40, 1521–1540.




                                               35
            Variable      US     EU-14    Description                                Restriction
               τn         28      41      Labor tax rate                               Data
               τk         36      33      Capital tax rate                             Data
               τc          5      17      Consumption tax rate                         Data
              b/y         63      65      Annual government debt to GDP                Data
              g/y         18      23      Gov.consumption+invest. to GDP               Data
                ψ          2       2      Annual balanced growth rate                  Data
             R̄ − 1        4       4      Annual real interest rate                    Data
              m/y          4      -1      Net imports to GDP                           Data
                                               Implied
              s/y          8       15     Government transfers to GDP
          b/y(R̄ − ψ)
          +s/y + m/y       12      16     Untaxed income to GDP

Table 1: Part 1 of the baseline calibration for the US and EU-14 benchmark model. All numbers are expressed in
percent.




                                                     36
               Parameter US EU-14 Description                                         Restriction
                   θ     0.38 0.38 Capital share in production                        Data
                   δ     0.07 0.07 Depreciation rate of capital                       Data
                              CFE preferences (Benchmark)
                   η       2   2     Inverse of IES                                   Data
                   φ       1   1     Frisch labor supply elasticity                   Data
                   κ     3.46 3.46 Weight of labor                                    n̄us = 0.25
                              CFE preferences (Alternative)
                   η       1   1     Inverse of IES                                   Data
                   φ       3   3     Frisch labor supply elasticity                   Data
                   κ     3.38 3.38 Weight of labor                                    n̄us = 0.25
                                Cobb-Douglas preferences
                   σ     0.32 0.32 Weight of consumption                              n̄us = 0.25

Table 2: Part 2 of the baseline calibration for the US and EU-14 benchmark model. IES denotes intertemporal
elasticity of substitution. CFE refers to constant Frisch elasticity preferences. n̄us denotes balanced growth labor
in the US which is set to 25 percent of total time.




                                                        37
                                                                          s/y
                                    n    k     c
                               τ        τ    τ  b/y      m/y    g/y    (Implied)
                         USA   28       36    5 63         4     18         8
                         EU-14 41       33   17 65        -1     23        15
                         GER   41       23   15 62        -3     21        15
                         FRA   46       35   18 60        -1     27        15
                         ITA   47       34   15 110       -2     21        19
                         GBR   28       46   16 44         2     21        13
                         AUT   50       24   20 65        -3     20        23
                         BEL   49       42   17 107       -4     24        21
                         DNK 47         51   35 50        -4     28        27
                         FIN   49       31   27 46        -8     24        22
                         GRE   41       16   15 100       10     20        15
                         IRL   27       21   26 43       -13     19        11
                         NET   44       29   19 58        -6     27        12
                         PRT   31       23   21 57         8     23        11
                         ESP   36       30   14 54         3     21        13
                         SWE   56       41   26 58        -7     30        21

Table 3: Individual country calibration of the benchmark model. Country codes: Germany (GER), France (FRA),
Italy (ITA), United Kingdom (GBR), Austria (AUT), Belgium (BEL), Denmark (DNK), Finland (FIN), Greece
(GRE), Ireland (IRL), Netherlands (NET), Portugal (PRT), Spain (ESP) and Sweden (SWE). See table 1 for
abbreviations of variables. All numbers are expressed in percent.




                                                    38
                                           θ            δ        κ   ḡM E /ȳ
                                   USA   0.35         0.083    3.619    0.4
                                   EU-14 0.38         0.070    4.595   -1.7
                                   GER   0.37         0.067    5.179   -0.2
                                   FRA   0.41         0.069    5.176    0.4
                                   ITA   0.39         0.070    5.028    0.4
                                   GBR   0.36         0.064    4.385    0.5
                                   AUT   0.39         0.071    3.985   0.6
                                   BEL   0.39         0.084    5.136    0.5
                                   DNK 0.40           0.092    3.266   0.7
                                   FIN   0.34         0.070    3.935   1.4
                                   GRE   0.40         0.061    3.364   -0.5
                                   IRL   0.36         0.086    5.662    0.6
                                   NET   0.38         0.077    5.797    0.1
                                   PRT   0.39         0.098    3.391    0.5
                                   ESP   0.42         0.085    5.169    0.3
                                   SWE 0.36           0.048    2.992   0.4

Table 4: Parameter variations for individual countries that match observed data and benchmark model predictions
for labor and capital-, investment- and consumption to GDP. Note that the individual country calibration displayed
in table 3 is imposed. ḡM E /ȳ denotes a measurement error on government consumption to GDP (expressed in
percent). CFE preferences with φ = 1 (Frisch elasticity of labor supply) and η = 2 (inverse intertemporal elasticity
of substitution) are assumed. See table 2 for abbreviations of parameters.




                                                        39
                                       Percent         Maximal labor      Max. additional
                                    self-financing      tax rate τ n       tax revenue
                  Parameters          US EU-14           US EU-14          US EU-14
                  φ = 1, η = 2        32      54         63     62          30      8
                  φ = 3, η = 1        38      65         57     56          21      4
                  φ = 3, η = 2        49      78         52     51          14      2
                  φ = 1, η = 2        32      54         63     62          30      8
                  φ = .5, η = 2       21      37         72     71          47     17
                  φ = 1, η = 2        32      54         63     62          30      8
                  φ = 1, η = 1        27      47         65     65          35     10
                  φ = 1, η = .5       20      37         69     68          43     15

Table 5: Labor tax Laffer curves: degree of self-financing, maximal tax rate, maximal additional tax revenues.
Shown are results for the US and the EU-14, and the sensitivity of the results to changes in the CFE preference
parameters φ (Frisch elasticity of labor supply) and η (inverse intertemporal elasticity of substitution) in the
benchmark model. All results are expressed in percent.




                                                      40
                                       Percent           Maximal labor Max. additional
                                    self-financing        tax rate τ n  tax revenue
                  Parameters         same varied          same varied   same varied
                  USA                  32      30          63       64   30       33
                  EU-14                54      55          62       61    8       7
                  GER                  50      51          64       64   10       10
                  FRA                  62      62          63       63    5       5
                  ITA                  63      62          62       62    4       4
                  GBR                  42      42          59       59   17       17
                  AUT                  71      70          61       62    2       2
                  BEL                  69      68          61       62    3       3
                  DNK                  83      79          55       57    1       1
                  FIN                  70      68          62       63    3       3
                  GRE                  54      55          60       59    7       7
                  IRL                  35      34          68       69   30       32
                  NET                  53      53          67       67    9       9
                  PRT                  45      44          59       60   14       15
                  ESP                  46      46          62       62   13       13
                  SWE                  83      86          63       61    1       0

Table 6: Labor tax Laffer curves across countries for CFE preferences with φ = 1 (Frisch elasticity of labor supply)
and η = 2 (inverse intertemporal elasticity of substitution): degree of self-financing, maximal tax rate, maximal
additional tax revenues. Shown are results for keeping the same parameters for all countries and for varying
the parameters so as to obtain observed labor and investment-, capital- and consumption to GDP ratio in the
benchmark model, see tables 3 and 4. All numbers are expressed in percent.




                                                        41
                                      Percent         Maximal capital Max. additional
                                   self-financing      tax rate τ k    tax revenue
                 Parameters          US EU-14          US EU-14        US EU-14
                 φ = 1, η = 2        51      79         63     48       6       1
                 φ = 3, η = 1        55      82         62     46       5       1
                 φ = 3, η = 2        60      87         60     44       4       0
                 φ = 1, η = 2        51      79         63     48       6       1
                 φ = .5, η = 2       45      73         64     50       7       1
                 φ = 1, η = 2        51      79         63     48       6       1
                 φ = 1, η = 1        48      77         64     49       6       1
                 φ = 1, η = .5       45      73         64     50       7       1

Table 7: Capital tax Laffer curves: degree of self-financing, maximal tax rate, maximal additional tax revenues.
Shown are results for the US and the EU-14, and the sensitivity of the results to changes in the CFE preference
parameters φ (Frisch elasticity of labor supply) and η (inverse intertemporal elasticity of substitution) in the
benchmark model. All results are expressed in percent.




                                                      42
                                      Percent     Maximal capital Max. additional
                                   self-financing  tax rate τ k    tax revenue
                 Parameters         same varied    same varied     same varied
                 USA                  51      46    63      68       6       7
                 EU-14                79      80    48      47       1       1
                 GER                  70      71    49      49       2       2
                 FRA                  88      89    44      43       0       0
                 ITA                  88      88    42      42       0       0
                 GBR                  73      73    57      58       1       1
                 AUT                  88      88    35      35       0       0
                 BEL                 103      98    40      43       0       0
                 DNK                 137      126   30      35       1       1
                 FIN                  92      90    38      40       0       0
                 GRE                  73      74    42      39       2       2
                 IRL                  50      48    62      67       8       8
                 NET                  75      74    50      52       1       1
                 PRT                  65      61    50      55       3       3
                 ESP                  68      67    52      53       2       2
                 SWE                 109      116   33      29       0       0

Table 8: Capital tax Laffer curves across countries for CFE preferences with φ = 1 (Frisch elasticity of labor
supply) and η = 2 (inverse intertemporal elasticity of substitution): degree of self-financing, maximal tax rate,
maximal additional tax revenues. Shown are results for keeping the same parameters for all countries and for
varying the parameters so as to obtain observed labor and investment-, capital- and consumption to GDP ratio
in the benchmark model, see tables 3 and 4. All numbers are expressed in percent.




                                                       43
                                           US               EU-14
                                         Maximal additional tax revenues
                           labor taxes   14 - 47             2 - 17
                           capital taxes 4 - 7               0-1
                                         Maximizing tax rate
                           labor taxes   52 - 72            51 - 71
                           capital taxes 60 - 64            44 - 50
                                         Percent self-financing of a tax cut
                           labor taxes   20 - 49            37 - 78
                           capital taxes 45 - 60            73 - 87

Table 9: Range of results for the parameter variations considered in the benchmark model, i.e. no human capital
accumulation, no transition dynamics, no heterogeneity. All numbers are expressed in percent.




                                                      44
                                                                                  Labor Tax Laffer Curve: USA
                                                                     140
                       Steady State Tax Revenues (USA Average=100)




                                                                     130

                                                                     120

                                                                     110

                                                                     100

                                                                      90
                                                                                  USA average
                                                                      80

                                                                      70

                                                                      60             C−D: η=1
                                                                                     CFE: η=1,Frisch=3
                                                                      50             CFE: η=2,Frisch=1

                                                                      40
                                                                        0   0.2        0.4          0.6         0.8   1
                                                                                   Steady State Labor Tax τ
                                                                                                          n


Figure 1: The US Laffer curve for labor taxes. Shown are steady state (balanced growth path) total tax revenues
when labor taxes are varied between 0 and 100 percent. All other taxes and parameters are held constant. Total tax
revenues at the US average labor tax rate are normalized to 100. Benchmark model results are provided for CFE
(constant Frisch elasticity) preferences with a unit Frisch elasticity of labor supply and an inverse intertemporal
elasticity of substitution, η = 2. For comparison, results are also provided for a different parameterization of CFE
preferences as well as for Cobb-Douglas (C-D) preferences.




                                                                                           45
                                                                            Joint Labor Tax Laffer Curve: USA EU−14
                                                                140

                                                                130

                      Steady State Tax Revenues (Average=100)   120

                                                                110
                                                                       USA avg.
                                                                100
                                                                                          EU−14 avg.
                                                                 90

                                                                 80

                                                                 70
                                                                                                       USA ,CFE: η=1,Frisch=3
                                                                 60                                    USA ,CFE: η=2,Frisch=1

                                                                 50                                    EU−14,CFE: η=1,Frisch=3
                                                                                                       EU−14,CFE: η=2,Frisch=1
                                                                 40
                                                                   0      0.2          0.4          0.6          0.8             1
                                                                                    Steady State Labor Tax

                                                                           Joint Capital Tax Laffer Curve: USA EU−14
                                                                110
                                                                                       USA avg.
                      Steady State Tax Revenues (Average=100)




                                                                100


                                                                 90
                                                                          EU−14 avg.
                                                                 80


                                                                 70


                                                                 60
                                                                                                       USA ,CFE: η=1,Frisch=3
                                                                                                       USA ,CFE: η=2,Frisch=1
                                                                 50
                                                                                                       EU−14,CFE: η=1,Frisch=3
                                                                                                       EU−14,CFE: η=2,Frisch=1
                                                                 40
                                                                   0      0.2          0.4          0.6          0.8             1
                                                                                    Steady State Capital Tax


Figure 2: Comparing the US and the EU-14 labor and capital tax Laffer curves. Shown are steady state (balanced
growth path) total tax revenues when labor taxes (upper panel) or capital taxes (lower panel) are varied between
0 and 100 percent. All other taxes and parameters are held constant. Total tax revenues at the average tax rates
are normalized to 100. Benchmark model results are provided for CFE (constant Frisch elasticity) preferences
with a unit Frisch elasticity of labor supply and an inverse intertemporal elasticity of substitution, η = 2. For
comparison, results are also provided for a different parameterization of CFE preferences.




                                                                                           46
                                                                                                      Labor Tax Laffer Curves:
                                                                     Distance to the Peak of the Labor Tax Laffer Curve (CFE utility, FRISCH=1,η=2)
                                                                      10
                                                                             IRL



                               Steady State Tax Revenues (% of Baseline GDP)
                                                                       9
                                                                                USA
                                                                                8

                                                                                7
                                                                                         GBR
                                                                                6

                                                                                5                  PRT
                                                                                                            ESP
                                                                                4
                                                                                                                         GER NET
                                                                                3                                       EU−14
                                                                                                                        GRE
                                                                                2                                                FRA
                                                                                                                                  ITA
                                                                                                                                     FIN
                                                                                                                                     BEL
                                                                                1                                                      AUT
                                                                                                                                   DNK
                                                                                                                                                       SWE
                                                                                0

                                                                               −1
                                                                                0.25         0.3       0.35      0.4      0.45       0.5        0.55            0.6
                                                                                                           Steady State Labor Tax τn

                                                                                                     Capital Tax Laffer Curves:
                                                        Distance to the Peak of the Capital Tax Laffer Curve (CFE utility, FRISCH=1,η=2)
                                                                               2.5             IRL
                     Steady State Tax Revenues (% of Baseline GDP)




                                                                                2

                                                                                                                             USA

                                                                               1.5


                                                                                                     PRT
                                                                                1
                                                                                                                  ESP
                                                                                                     GER
                                                                                       GRE                      NET
                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                              GBR         DNK
                                                                                                                        EU−14
                                                                                                                                    SWE
                                                                                                      AUT           FIN ITAFRA
                                                                                0                                                       BEL
                                                                                0.15     0.2         0.25      0.3     0.35      0.4    0.45        0.5         0.55
                                                                                                            Steady State Capital Tax τk


Figure 3: Distances to the peak of the labor tax (upper panel) and capital tax (lower panel) Laffer curves across
countries. The x-axes depict the observed tax rates (averages over time). The y-axes show the additional steady
state (balanced growth path) tax revenues in percent of baseline GDP that would arise when a country moves to
the peak of the Laffer curve. Stars denote countries that are to the left of the peak. Squares denote countries
that are to the rigtht of the peak. Benchmark model results are provided for CFE (constant Frisch elasticity)
preferences with a unit Frisch elasticity of labor supply and an inverse intertemporal elasticity of substitution,
η = 2. Tax rates, spending and parameters are varied across countries as provided in tables 3 and 4.


                                                                                                                        47
                                                                    Labor Tax Laffer Curve: Endogenous Transfers vs. Spending USA (CFE utility)
                                                                   160
                     Steady State Tax Revenues (USA Average=100)




                                                                                                                     O

                                                                   140                                           O

                                                                                                                 O

                                                                   120                                       O



                                                                   100
                                                                                          USA average


                                                                    80
                                                                                              Vary Spending , η=1, Frisch=3
                                                                                              Vary Transfers, η=1, Frisch=3
                                                                    60                        Vary Spending , η=2, Frisch=1
                                                                                              Vary Transfers, η=2, Frisch=1


                                                                    40
                                                                      0            0.2          0.4          0.6              0.8         1
                                                                                            Steady State Labor Tax τn


Figure 4: Labor tax Laffer curve US: spending versus transfers. Shown are steady state (balanced growth path)
total tax revenues when labor taxes are varied between 0 and 100 percent and either government transfers or
government consumption adjust endogenously to balance the government budget. All other taxes and parameters
are held constant. Total tax revenues at the US average labor tax rate are normalized to 100. Benchmark model
results are provided for CFE (constant Frisch elasticity) preferences with a unit Frisch elasticity of labor supply
and an inverse intertemporal elasticity of substitution, η = 2. For comparison, results are also provided for a
different parameterization of CFE preferences.




                                                                                                     48
                                                  Decomposition of Tax Revenues and Tax Bases: EU−14 (CFE;η=2; Frisch=1)

                                                  80                                              Total Tax Revenues
                                                                                                  Capital Tax Revenues
                                                                                                  Labor Tax Revenues
                                                  70                                              Cons. Tax Revenues
                                                                                                  Capital Tax Base
                     In Percent of Baseline GDP




                                                  60                                              Labor Tax Base
                                                                                                  Cons. Tax Base

                                                  50                      EU−14 average

                                                  40

                                                  30

                                                  20

                                                  10

                                                   0
                                                    0           0.2         0.4           0.6           0.8              1
                                                                        Steady State Capital Tax τk


Figure 5: Decomposing capital taxes: EU-14. Shown are steady state (balanced growth path) total tax revenues,
individual tax revenues and individual tax bases when capital taxes are varied between 0 and 100 percent. All
other taxes and parameters are held constant. All numbers are expressed in percent of baseline GDP. Benchmark
model results are provided for CFE (constant Frisch elasticity) preferences with a unit Frisch elasticity of labor
supply and an inverse intertemporal elasticity of substitution, η = 2.




                                                                                   49
                                                           Steady State Iso−Revenue Curves: USA (CFE utility; η=2; FRISCH=1)
                                                                                                          60                          60
                                                                                                     70                          70
                                                            60                                                              80




                                                                                                                                                                                60
                                                     0.9                              80                               90
                                                                                  τn USA average

                                                                                                                                                                80




                                                                                                                                                                           70
                                                                                                                100
                                                           70




                                                                                 90                                                         100          90
                                                     0.8                                                                         110
                                                                                                           0
                       Steady State Capital Tax τk




                                                                                                         11




                                                     0.7                                                              120
                                                           70

                                                                 80




                                                                                 100




                                                     0.6
                                                           60




                                                                                                                                                         110
                                                                                                                                             120




                                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                     0.5
                                                                            90




                                                                                                                                                                     100

                                                                                                                                                                            80
                                                                                                                                                                              70
                                                                                                                                                                               90
                                                                                                                                           τk USA average
                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                120
                                                                                                          110




                                                     0.3
                                                                       70

                                                                            80




                                                                                                   100




                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                 131
                                                                      60




                                                                                                                                                   120

                                                                                                                                                               110
                                                                                           90




                                                                                                                                                                                     60
                                                     0.1
                                                                                                                                                                       100

                                                                                                                                                                       80
                                                                                                                                                                         70
                                                                                                                                                                          90



                                                      0
                                                       0         0.1        0.2                    0.3   0.4    0.5    0.6     0.7                0.8            0.9
                                                                                                     Steady State Labor Tax τn


Figure 6: The “Laffer hill” for the US. Shown are steady state (balanced growth path) total tax revenues when
capital taxes and labor taxes are varied between 0 and 100 percent. Consumption taxes and other parameters are
held constant. Contour lines depict different levels of tax revenues. Total tax revenues at the average tax rates are
normalized to 100. Benchmark model results are provided for CFE (constant Frisch elasticity) preferences with a
unit Frisch elasticity of labor supply and an inverse intertemporal elasticity of substitution, η = 2.




                                                                                                                50
                                                                               Labor Tax Laffer Curve: USA (CFE, η=2, Frisch=1)
                                                                       140




                       Steady State Tax Revenues (USA Average=100)
                                                                       130

                                                                       120

                                                                       110

                                                                       100

                                                                        90

                                                                        80               USA avg.


                                                                        70

                                                                        60
                                                                                           Baseline (Exogenous Growth)
                                                                        50                 Human Capital (1st Generation − Endogenous Growth)
                                                                                           Human Capital (2nd Generation − Exogenous Growth)

                                                                         0       0.2          0.4           0.6              0.8                1
                                                                                          Steady State Labor Tax τn

                                                                              Labor Tax Laffer Curve: EU−14 (CFE,η=2, Frisch=1)
                                                                       110
                       Steady State Tax Revenues (EU−14 Average=100)




                                                                       100


                                                                        90


                                                                        80                          EU−14 avg.



                                                                        70


                                                                        60


                                                                        50                 Baseline (Exogenous Growth)
                                                                                           Human Capital (1st Generation − Endogenous Growth)
                                                                                           Human Capital (2nd Generation − Exogenous Growth)
                                                                        40
                                                                          0      0.2          0.4           0.6              0.8                1
                                                                                          Steady State Labor Tax τn


Figure 7: Labor tax Laffer curves: the impact of endogenous human capital accumulation. Shown are steady
state (balanced growth path) total tax revenues when labor taxes are varied between 0 and 100 percent in the
US (upper panel) and EU-14 (lower panel). All other taxes and parameters are held constant. Total tax revenues
at the average tax rates are normalized to 100. Three cases are examined. First, the benchmark model with
exogenous growth. Second, the benchmark model with a first generation version of endogenous human capital
accumulation that gives rise to endogenous growth. Third, the benchmark model with a second generation version
of endogenous human capital accumulation that features exogenous growth. All results are provided for CFE
(constant Frisch elasticity) preferences with a unit Frisch elasticity of labor supply and an inverse intertemporal
elasticity of substitution, η = 2.



                                                                                                    51
                                                                               Consumption Tax Laffer Curve: EU−14 (CFE, η=2, Frisch=1)
                      Steady State Tax Revenues (EU−14 Average=100)




                                                                      240

                                                                      220

                                                                      200    EU−14 avg.


                                                                      180

                                                                      160

                                                                      140

                                                                      120

                                                                      100                         Baseline (Exogenous Growth)
                                                                                                  Human Capital (1st Generation − Endogenous Growth)
                                                                                                  Human Capital (2nd Generation − Exogenous Growth)
                                                                       80
                                                                         0                1           2            3                 4                 5
                                                                                              Steady State Consumption Tax τc


Figure 8: Consumption tax Laffer curve in the EU-14: the impact of endogenous human capital accumulation.
Shown are steady state (balanced growth path) total tax revenues when consumption taxes are varied between
0 and 500 percent. All other taxes and parameters are held constant. Total tax revenues at the EU-14 average
consumption tax rate are normalized to 100. Three cases are examined. First, the benchmark model with
exogenous growth. Second, the benchmark model with a first generation version of endogenous human capital
accumulation that gives rise to endogenous growth. Third, the benchmark model with a second generation version
of endogenous human capital accumulation that features exogenous growth. All results are provided for CFE
(constant Frisch elasticity) preferences with a unit Frisch elasticity of labor supply and an inverse intertemporal
elasticity of substitution, η = 2.




                                                                                                          52
                                                                            Labor Tax Laffer Curve: Steady State vs. Transition (USA, CFE)
                                                                            (η=2, Frisch=1, PV=Present Value, Elast. x/k wrt. Tobins q=0.23)
                                                                     180




                       Steady State Tax Revenues (USA Average=100)
                                                                     160


                                                                     140


                                                                     120


                                                                     100
                                                                                                USA avg.

                                                                      80


                                                                      60
                                                                                                                           Steady State Tax Revenues (Baseline)
                                                                                                                           PV Tax Revenues (Dynamic Discounting)
                                                                                                                           PV Tax Revenues (Static Discounting)
                                                                      40
                                                                        0             0.2             0.4           0.6                      0.8                   1
                                                                                                  Steady State Labor Tax τn

                                                                            Capital Tax Laffer Curve: Steady State vs. Transition (USA, CFE)
                                                                            (η=2, Frisch=1, PV=Present Value, Elast. x/k wrt. Tobins q=0.23)
                                                                     180
                                                                               Steady State Tax Revenues (Baseline)
                       Steady State Tax Revenues (USA Average=100)




                                                                               Log PV Tax Revenues (Dynamic Discounting)
                                                                               PV Tax Revenues (Static Discounting)

                                                                     160



                                                                     140



                                                                     120                               USA avg.



                                                                     100



                                                                      80



                                                                      60
                                                                        0             0.2            0.4            0.6                      0.8                   1
                                                                                                 Steady State Capital Tax τk


Figure 9: Steady state vs transition Laffer curves for labor taxes (upper panel) and capital taxes (lower panel).
Two cases are examined. First, steady state (balanced growth path) total tax revenues are depicted when taxes
are varied between 0 and 100 percent. Second, due to a transition from the average US tax rate to a new steady
state tax rate on the interval 0 to 100 percent, present value total tax revenues are calculated. Discounting is done
either by the period-by-period real interest rate (dynamic discounting) or by the constant (balanced growth) real
interest rate (static discounting). Total tax revenues at the US average labor tax rate are normalized to 100. All
results are provided for CFE (constant Frisch elasticity) preferences with a unit Frisch elasticity of labor supply
and an inverse intertemporal elasticity of substitution, η = 2. The elasticity of the investment-capital ratio with
respect to Tobin’s q is set to 0.23 as in Jermann (1998).


                                                                                                            53
                           Supplementary Documentation
  “How Far Are We From The Slippery Slope? The Laffer Curve Revisited”
                         by Mathias Trabandt and Harald Uhlig


Contents

1 CFE Preferences                                                                                    2
  1.1   Cross-elasticities of CFE Preferences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      2
  1.2   Proposition and Proof of Log-Linear Properties of CFE Preferences . . . . . . . .            4

2 Analytical Expressions for Laffer Curves                                                           5

3 Details on the Calibration Choices                                                                 8

4 Comparing the Model to the Data                                                                    9

5 Data                                                                                               9
  5.1   Data Details and Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    10
  5.2   Macro Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    11
        5.2.1   Raw Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    11
        5.2.2   Data Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12
  5.3   Tax Rates Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    13
        5.3.1   Raw Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    13
        5.3.2   Tax Rate Calculations: Effective Tax Rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        15
  5.4   EU-14 Tax Rates and GDP Ratios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          16

6 References, in addition to those in the main paper                                                17

7 Tables                                                                                            18

8 Figures                                                                                           24




                                                 1
This supplementary documentation provides additons to the main text. In particular, it contains
further useful analysis and proofs for CFE preferences as well as analytical expressions for the
Laffer curves. Moreover, additional details on calibration choices are discussed. Further, the
model and the data are compared in more detail than in the main text. Finally, the details on
the construction of our tax rate and other data are available.


1. CFE Preferences


1.1. Cross-elasticities of CFE Preferences

Hall (2009) has recently emphasized the importance of the Frisch demand for consumption2
c = c(λ, w) and the Frisch labor supply n = n(λ, w), resulting from solving the first-order condi-
tions (38) and (39). His work has focussed attention in particular on the cross-elasticity between
consumption and wages. That elasticity is generally not constant for CFE preferences, but de-
pends on κ and the steady state level of labor supply. The next proposition provides the elasticities
of c(λ, w) and n(λ, w), which will be needed in (47). In particular, it follows that

                                                                                    φ
                         cross-Frisch-elasticity of consumption wrt wages =           νcn                   (43)
                                                                                    η

for some value νcn , given as an expression involving balanced growth labor supply and the CFE
parameters.

In equation (48) below, we shall show that νcn can be calculated from additional balanced growth
observations as well as φ and η alone, without reference to κ. Put differently, balanced growth
observations as well as the Frisch elasticity of labor supply and η imply a value for the cross
elasticity of Frisch consumption demand. Conversely, a value for the latter has implications for
some of the other variables: it is not a “free parameter”. When we calibrate our model, we will
provide the implications for the cross-elasticity in table 13, which one may wish to compare to the
value of 0.3 given by Hall (2009). As a start, the proposition below or, more explicitly, equation

  2
      Hall (2009) writes the Frisch consumption demand and Frisch labor supply as c = C(λ, λw) and n = N (λ, λw).




                                                        2
(48) further below implies, that νcn and therefore the cross elasticity is positive iff η > 1 (and is
zero, if η = 1).

The proposition more generally provides the equations necessary for calculating the log-linearized
dynamics of a model involving CFE preferences, or, alternatively, for solving for the elasticity
of the Frisch demand and Frisch supply. Given φ, η and νcn , all other coefficients are easily
calculated.

Note in particular, that the total elasticity of the Frisch consumption demand with respect to
deviations in the marginal value of wealth is not equal to the (negative of ) 1/η, but additionally
involves a term due to the change in labor supply in reaction to a change in the marginal value of
wealth. This is still true, when writing the Frisch consumption demand as c = C(λ, λw) as in Hall
(2009), and calculating the own elasticity per the derivative with respect to the first argument
(i.e., holding λw constant). The proposition implies that

                                                            φ      −1 φ(1 − η)
              own-Frisch-elasticity of consumption wrt λ = − νnn =   +         νcn              (44)
                                                            η      η     η2

or (for consumption)
                                                   (        )
                                            −1         1
                    own-Frisch-elasticity =    +         − 1 cross-Frisch-elasticity.           (45)
                                            η          η

Therefore, this expression should be matched to the benchmark value of −0.5 in Hall (2009),
rather than −1/η. We shall follow the literature, though, and use η = 2 as our benchmark
calibration, and will provide values for the elasticity above as a consequence, once the model is
fully calibrated. For example, the cross-Frisch-elasticity of 0.3 and a value of η = 2 implies an
own-Frisch-elasticity of −0.65. Conversely, an own-Frisch-elasticity of −0.5 and a cross-Frisch-
elasticity of 0.3 implies η = 3.5.




                                                   3
1.2. Proposition and Proof of Log-Linear Properties of CFE Preferences

Proposition 1. Suppose an agent has CFE preferences, where the preference parameter κt is
possibly stochastic. The log-linearization of the first-order conditions (38) and (39) around a
balanced growth path at some date t is given by


                           λ̂t                 = νcc ĉt + νcn n̂t + νcκ κ̂t
                                                                                           (46)
                           λ̂t + ŵt = νnc ĉt + νnn n̂t + νnκ κ̂t

or, alternatively, can be solved as log-linear Frisch consumption demand and Frisch labor supply
per                              (                     )
                                     −1
                        ĉt =        η
                                          +   φ
                                                 ν
                                              η 2 cn
                                                           λ̂t +    φ
                                                                      ν ŵ
                                                                    η cn t
                                                                             −   φ
                                                                                   ν κ̂
                                                                                 η cκ t
                                                                                           (47)
                        n̂t =                 φ
                                                λ̂
                                              η t
                                                                +    φŵt    −    φκ̂t

where hat-variables denote log-deviations and where


                     νcc = −η
                             (       )        ((         )−1       )−1
                                   1                   1         1
                    νcn = − 1 +        (1 − η) ηκn̄ 1+ φ
                                                             +1−
                                  φ                              η
                             φ
                    νcκ =       νcn
                           1+φ
                           1 1−η
                    νnn =    −        νcn
                           φ     η
                    νnc = 1 − η
                               1−η
                    νnκ = 1 −        νcκ .
                                η




                                                            4
Proof: Log-linearization generally leads to (46), where

                                                     ucc c
                                           νcc =
                                                      uc
                                                     ucn n
                                           νcn =
                                                      uc
                                                     ucκ κ
                                           νcκ =
                                                      uc
                                                     unn n
                                          νnn =
                                                      un
                                                     ucn c
                                           νnc =
                                                      un
                                                     ucκ κ
                                          νnκ =            .
                                                      un

For the explicit expressions, calculate. For the Frisch demand and supply, use matrix inversion
for (46) together with the explicit expressions for the coefficients, and calculate. •



Note that, given n̄ and κ we can calculate νcn for the coefficients in proposition 1. However, there
is a more direct and illuminating approach available. Equation (11) can be rewritten as
                                       (     )        (      )−1
                                           1
                               νcn   =− 1+     (1 − η) α c/y                                   (48)
                                           φ

allowing the calculation of νcn from observing the consumption-output ratio, the parameter α as
well as φ and η, without reference to κ. Put differently, these values imply a value for νcn and
therefore for the cross-elasticity of the Frisch consumption demand with respect to wages. The
values implied by our calibration below are given in table 13.


2. Analytical Expressions for Laffer Curves


This section provides an analytical characterization of the Laffer curves. That is, we provide
the explicit dependence on the taxation arguments. The equations for the g−Laffer curve in
the second part exactly parallels the equations for s−Laffer curve of the first part, except for
using χ̃/(1 + τ c ), γ̃/(1 + τ c ) rather than χ, γ. The expressions are a bit unwieldy and further




                                                 5
simplification does not appear to produce much. The expressions are useful for further numerical
evaluations or for further symbolic manipulations with suitable software.

It is useful to recall the following expressions:


                     χ = 1 − (ψ − 1 + δ) k/y                                                  (49)
                                                  −θ
                     γ = (m̄ − ḡ) k/y           1−θ
                                                                                              (50)
                         (         )(         )
                           1 + τc      1 + φ1
                     α =                                                                      (51)
                           1 − τn      1−θ
                                                                 (          )
                     χ̃ = 1 − (ψ − 1 + δ) k/y − τ n (1 − θ) − τ k θ − δ k/y                   (52)
                          (                   )     −θ
                     γ̃ = b̄(R̄ − ψ) + s̄ + m̄ k/y 1−θ                                        (53)


Proposition 2. Let x denote one of τ k , τ n , τ c .

   1. The s−Laffer curve curve L(x) of total tax revenues, when varying transfers s with the the
      varying tax revenues, is given by

                        (                             (            )) (        ) 1−θ
                                                                                  θ

                  L(x) = τc c/y(x) + τ n (1 − θ) + τ k θ − δk/y(x)      k/y(x)       n̄(x)    (54)


      where k/y(x) is given by (10) and varies with x only for x = τ k , where

                                                                         1
                                                c/y(x) = χ(x) + γ(x)         ,
                                                                       n̄(x)

      and where n̄(x) solves

                         (                  1
                                                )−1         1                         1
                             ηκ(n̄(x))   1+ φ
                                                      +1−     = α(x)χ(x) + α(x)γ(x)           (55)
                                                            η                       n̄(x)

      with χ(x), γ(x) given by (49,50) and dependent only on τ k via k/y(x) and with α(x) given
      by (51).
   2. The g−Laffer curve L̃(x) of total tax revenues, when varying government spending g with
      the the varying tax revenues, is given by

                         (                             (            )) (        ) 1−θ
                                                                                   θ

                  L̃(x) = τc c/y(x) + τ n (1 − θ) + τ k θ − δk/y(x)      k/y(x)       n̄(x)   (56)

                                                            6
     where k/y(x) is given by (10) and varies with x only for x = τ k , where

                                                     χ̃(x)      γ̃(x)    1
                                         c/y(x) =         c
                                                            +         c
                                                     1+τ      (1 + τ ) n̄(x)

     and where n̄(x) solves

                     (               1
                                         )−1         1        χ̃(x)           γ̃(x)    1
                         ηκ(n̄(x))1+ φ         +1−     = α(x)      c
                                                                     + α(x)         c
                                                                                                       (57)
                                                     η        1+τ           (1 + τ ) n̄(x)

     with χ̃(x), γ̃(x) given by (52,53) and with α(x) given by (51).
  3. In particular, the g−Laffer curve L̃(τ c ) with respect to consumption taxes x = τ c is given
     by

                     τc              (    ) 1−θ
                                             θ   (               (       )) (     ) 1−θ
                                                                                     θ
             c
          L̃(τ ) =        (χ̃n̄ + γ̃) k/y       + τ (1 − θ) + τ θ − δk/y
                                                   n           k
                                                                              k/y       n̄             (58)
                   1 + τc

     where k/y, n̄, χ̃ and γ̃ are independent of τ c .
  4. Let α = α(x) as well as χ = χ(x), γ = γ(x) for (55) and χ = χ̃(x)/(1+τ c ), γ = γ̃(x)/(1+τ c )
     for (57).
      (a) If φ = 1, then (55) and (57) are quadratic equations in n̄(x), with the solution
                                                     (             √                           )
                                    1                                          1           η
                     n̄(x) =                              −αγη +       (αγη)2 + + (αχ − 1)         .   (59)
                             2 + 2(αχ − 1)η)                                   κ           κ

      (b) If φ → ∞, then (55) and (57) become linear equations in n̄(x), with the solution

                                                               (1/κ) − αγη
                                                 n̄(x) →                    .                          (60)
                                                              (αχ − 1)η + 1


Proof: Equations (54) and (56) follow directly from calculating total tax receipts

                                                          T̄ (x)
                                               T̄ (x) =      ¯ ȳ(x)
                                                          y(x)

and noting that
                                                (      ) 1−θ
                                                          θ

                                         ȳ(x) = k/y(x)      n̄(x).


                                                          7
Equations (55) and (57) directly follow from (11) as well as (13) resp. (14). Equation (58) follows
directly from proposition 3. •



A few more closed-form solutions exist for (55) and (57), e.g. for φ ∈ { 31 , 12 , 2, 3}, relying on
solution formulas for polynomials of 3rd and 4th degree. Furthermore and in the case of the Laffer
curve when varying transfers, implicit differentiation of p(n̄, τ n ) given by equation (55) can be
used to provide reasonably tractable formulas for dn̄(τ n )/dτ n = −(∂p(n̄, τ n )/∂τ n )/(∂p(n̄, τ n )/∂ n̄)
and therefore for dL(x)/dτ n , but a software capable of symbolic mathematics would be highly
recommended for such further analysis.


3. Details on the Calibration Choices


Empirical estimates of the intertemporal elasticity vary considerably. Hall (1988) estimates it
to be close to zero. Recently, Gruber (2006) provides an excellent survey on estimates in the
literature. Further, he estimates the intertemporal elasticity to be two. Cooley and Prescott
(1995) and King and Rebelo (1999) use an intertemporal elasticity equal to one. The general
current consensus seems to be that the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is closer to 0.5,
which we shall use for our baseline calibration, but also investigating a value equal to unity as an
alternative, and impose it for the Cobb-Douglas preference specification.

There is a large literature that estimates the Frisch labor supply elasticity from micro data.
Domeij and FLoden (2006) argue that labor supply elasticity estimates are likely to be biased
downwards by up to 50 percent. However, the authors survey the existing micro Frisch labor
supply elasticity estimates and conclude that many estimates range between 0 and 0.5. Further,
Ziliak and Kniesner (2005) estimate a Frisch labor supply elasticity of 0.5 while and Kimball and
Shapiro (2008) obtain a Frisch elasticity close to 1. Hence, this literature suggests an elasticity
in the range of 0 to 1 instead of a value of 3 as suggested by Prescott (2006).

In the most closely related public-finance-in-macro literature, e.g. House and Shapiro (2006), a
value of 1 is often used. We shall follow that choice as our benchmark calibration, and regard a
value of 3 as the alternative specification.


                                                     8
We therefore use η = 2 and φ = 1 as the benchmark calibration for the CFE preferences, and use
η = 1 and φ = 3 as alternative calibration and for comparison to a Cobb-Douglas specification for
preferences with an intertemporal elasticity of substitution equal to unity and imposing n̄ = 0.25,
implying a Frisch elasticity of 3.


4. Comparing the Model to the Data


Figure 11 shows the match between model prediction and data for equilibrium labor as well as for
the capital-output ratio: the discrepancies get resolved by construction in the right-hand column,
with the varied parameters as in table 4. Figure 12 shows the implications for tax revenues relative
to output: the predictions do not move much with the variation in the parameters. Generally,
though, the model overpredicts the amount of labor tax revenues and underpredicts the amount
of capital tax revenues collected, compared to the data. Numerical results on the model vs data
comparison are available in tables 15 and 14.


5. Data


Figure 10 shows the resulting time series for taxes as well as the macroeconomic series we have
used. For the calibration, we equate the values on the balanced growth path with the averages
of these time series over the period from 1995 to 2007.

Using this methodology necessarily fails to capture fully the detailed nuances and features of the
tax law and the inherent incentives. Nonetheless, several arguments may be made for why we use
effective average tax rates instead of marginal tax rates for the calibration of the model. First, we
are not aware of a comparable and coherent empirical methodology that could be used to calculate
marginal labor, capital and consumption tax rates for the US and 15 European countries for a
time span of, say, the last 15 years. By contrast, our calculations along with Mendoza et al.
(1994) and Carey and Rabesona (2004) calculate effective average tax rates for labor, capital
and consumption for our countries of interest. There is some data available from the NBER for
marginal tax rates on the federal and state level: however and at least for the US, the difference
between marginal and average tax rates are modest.


                                                 9
Second, if any we probably make an error on side of caution since effective average tax rates can
be seen as as representing a lower bound of statutory marginal tax rates. Third, marginal tax
rates differ all across income scales. To analyze that, a model with heterogeneous households is
needed, as in subsection 5.2 of the paper. Fourth, statutory marginal tax rates are often different
from realized marginal tax rates due to a variety of tax deductions etc. So that potentially, the
effective tax rates computed and used here may reflect realized marginal tax rates more accurately
than statutory marginal tax rates in legal tax codes. Fifth, using effective tax rates following
the methodology of Mendoza et al. (1994) facilitates comparison to previous studies that also
use these tax rates as e.g. Mendoza and Tesar (1998) and many others. Nonetheless, a further
analysis taking these points into account in detail is a useful next step on the research agenda.


5.1. Data Details and Sources

Here we describe the data used in the main part of the paper. We use annual data from 1995 to
2007 for the following countries: USA, Germany (GER), France (FRA), Italy (ITA), United King-
dom (GBR), Austria (AUT), Belgium (BEL), Denmark (DNK), Finland (FIN), Greece (GRE),
Ireland (IRL), Netherlands (NET), Portugal (PRT), Spain (ESP) and Sweden (SWE).

AMECO: Database of the European Commission available at:
http : //ec.europa.eu/economy f inance/db indicators/db indicators8646 en.htm.



OECD: Databases for annual national accounts, labor force statistics and revenue statistics of
the OECD. Available at:
http : //stats.oecd.org/wbosdos/Def ault.aspx?usercontext = sourceoecd



GGDC: Groningen Growth and Development Centre and the Conference Board total economy
database, January 2008 available at: http : //www.ggdc.net or
http : //www.conf erence − board.org/economics/downloads/T ED08I.xls



NIPA: National income and product accounts provided by the BEA. Available at: www.bea.gov.


                                                10
5.2. Macro Data

5.2.1. Raw Data

All data below except for population and hours are in $, EUR or local currency for Denmark,
Sweden and United Kingdom:



Nominal GDP: Gross domestic product at current market prices (AMECO, UVGD).

Nominal government consumption: Final consumption expenditure of general government
at current prices (AMECO, UCTG).

Nominal total government expenditures: Total current expenditure: general government;
ESA 1995 (AMECO, UUCG).

Nominal total government expenditures excluding interest payments: Total current
expenditure excluding interest - general government - ESA 1995 (AMECO, UUCGI).

Nominal government debt: General government consolidated gross debt - Excessive deficit
procedure (based on ESA 1995) and former definition (linked series) (AMECO, UDGGL).

Nominal total private consumption: Private final consumption expenditure at current prices
(AMECO, UCPH).

Nominal total private investment: Gross fixed capital formation at current prices: private
sector (AMECO, UIGP).

Real capital stock: Net capital stock at constant (2000) prices; total economy (AMECO,
OKND).

Real GDP: Gross domestic product at constant (2000) market prices (AMECO, OVGD).

Nominal exchange rate: ECU-EUR exchange rates - Units of national currency per EUR/ECU
(AMECO, XNE).

Net exports: Net exports of goods and services at current prices (National accounts) (AMECO,
UBGS).



                                            11
Nominal government investment: Gross fixed capital formation at current prices: general
government; ESA 1995 (AMECO, UIGG0).

Total Hours Worked: Total annual hours worked (GGDC).

Nominal durable consumption: Final consumption expenditure of households, P311: durable
goods, old breakdown, national currency, current prices, national accounts database (OECD).

Population: Population 15-64, labor force statistics (OECD).


5.2.2. Data Calculations

Consumption and Investment. Total consumption in the data consists of non-durable consump-
tion of goods and services and and durable consumption. In the model consumption is meant
to be non-durable consumption only. In order to align the data with the model we therefore
substract durable consumption from total consumption and add it to private investment in the
data. Unfortunately, durable consumption data is available only for FRA, IRE, NET, UK and
US. The sample covered is somewhat different across these countries. However, in order to proxy
durable consumption data for the remaining countries we proceed as follows. We compute the
ratio of durable consumption and total private consumption per year for the available country
data. Interestingly, the shares for FRA, IRE and NET are twice as large as those for the UK and
the US. We then calculate the total average share per year of the average UK/US and average
FRA/IRE/NET shares. For the countries where there is no durable consumption data this total
average share per year is applied to the annual total private consumption data in order to obtain
a measure of durable consumption.

Government Interest Payments. Government interest payments are calculated as the difference
between total government expenditures and total government expenditures excluding interest
payments.

Implied Government Transfers and Tax-Unaffected Income. Government transfers that are con-
sistent with the model are calculated by substracting government consumption, government in-
terest payments and government investment from total government expenditures in the data.




                                               12
Similarly, tax-unaffected income consistent with the model is calculated by adding government
interest payments, government transfers and net imports in the data.

GDP Growth. Per capita GDP growth is calculated by dividing real GDP by population and then
calculating annual percentage changes.

Hours Worked. In order to obtain a measure of annual hours worked per person we divide total
annual hours by population. Furthermore, we assume 14.55 hours per day to be allocated between
leisure and work in the US and EU-14 similar to Ragan (2005) who assumes 14 hours. We obtain
a normalized average US hours per person measure of 0.25 as used in the main part of the paper.

Ratios of Variables to GDP. Based on the above data we calculate the GDP ratios for the coun-
tries. We also require the weighted EU-14 GDP ratios. Details on the calculations are available
below.

Note that variables that describe the fiscal sector such as e.g. government debt etc. are only
available in nominal terms. Consistent with the model, we divide these nominal variables by
nominal GDP i.e. deflate nominal variables with the GDP deflator. We also deflate all other
nominal variables with the GDP deflator. Since we are interested in GDP ratios only we do not
need to divide the time series by population since the division would appear in the numerator as
well as in the denominator and therefore would cancel out.


5.3. Tax Rates Data

We calculate effective tax rates on labor income, capital income and consumption following the
methodology of Mendoza, Razin and Tesar (1994).


5.3.1. Raw Data

All data below are nominal in $, EUR or local currency for Denmark, Sweden and United King-
dom:



5110: General taxes, revenue statistics (OECD).

5121: Excise taxes, revenue statistics (OECD).

                                              13
3000: Payroll taxes, revenue statistics (OECD).

4000: Property taxes, revenue statistics (OECD).

1000: Income, profit and capital gains taxes, revenue statistics (OECD).

2000: Social security contributions, revenue statistics (OECD).

2200: Social security contributions of employers, revenue statistics (OECD).

1100: Income, profit and capital gains taxes of individuals, revenue statistics (OECD).

1200: Income, profit and capital gains taxes of corporations, revenue statistics (OECD).

4100: Recurrent taxes on immovable property, revenue statistics (OECD).

4400: Taxes on financial and capital transactions, revenue statistics (OECD).



GW: Compensation of employees: general government - ESA 1995 (AMECO, UWCG).

OS: Net operating surplus: total economy (AMECO, UOND). This is net operating surplus plus
net mixed income or equivalently the gross operating surplus minus consumption of fixed capital.
For the USA OS is not available in AMECO. We obtained OS from NIPA table 11000 line 11.

W: Gross wages and salaries: households and NPISH (AMECO, UWSH). For the USA W is not
available in AMECO. We obtained W from NIPA table 11000 line 4.

PEI: Net property income: households and NPISH (AMECO, UYNH). Note that in contrast to
the data available to Mendoza, Razin and Tesar (1994) the present PEI data does not contain
entrepreneurial income of households anymore. Instead household entrepreneurial income is con-
tained in OSPUE defined below. For the USA PEI is not available in AMECO. We calculate this
from OECD property income received (SS14 S15: Households and non-profit institutions serving
households, SD4R: Property income; received, national accounts) minus property income paid
(SS14 S15: Households and non-profit institutions serving households, SD4P: Property income;
paid, national accounts).

OSPUE: Gross operating surplus and mixed income: households and NPISH (AMECO, UOGH).
OSPUE in Mendoza, Razin and Tesar (1994) is operating surplus of private unincorporated enter-

                                              14
prises. This data is called mixed income now. Note that all we need for the tax rate calculations
below is the sum OSPUE+PEI. We miss data on household entrepreneurial income in PEI above.
Therefore, we use gross operating surplus and mixed income of households in order to obtain a
measure of household entrepreneurial and mixed income. For the USA OSPUE is not available
in AMECO. We calculate this from the OECD (HH. Operating surplus and mixed income, gross,
national accounts, detailed aggregates). We substract consumption of fixed capital obtained
from the OECD (SS14 S15: Households and non-profit institutions serving households, national
accounts) from gross operating surplus and mixed income in order to obtain a measure of net
operating surplus and mixed income to be used for the tax rate calculations below.



For some European countries the above data starts at a later date than 1995. In addition, for
a few country data time series observations for 2007 are missing. In order to obtain estimates
for 2007 we apply the average growth rates of the last 5 to 20 years to the observation in 2006.
Finally, we use all available individual country data for calculating weighted averages for the
period 1995-2007.




5.3.2. Tax Rate Calculations: Effective Tax Rates

Following the methodology of Mendoza, Razin and Tesar (1994) we calculate the following effective
tax rates:
                                                        5110+5121
                      Consumption tax:       τc =   C+G−GW −5110−5121



                                                          1100
                      Personal income tax:   τh =   OSP U E+P EI+W



                                                    τ h W +2000+3000
                      Labor income tax:      τn =        W +2200



                                                    τ h (OSP U E+P EI)+1200+4100+4400
                      Capital income tax:    τk =                   OS

Where C, G and W denote nominal total private consumption, government consumption and
wages and salaries.


                                                15
For the overlapping years 2000 to 2005, our effective tax rates on consumption and labor income
are close to those obtained by Carey and Rabesona’s (2002) recalculation of the Mendoza, Razin
and Tesar (1994). In particular, the average cross country difference in consumption taxes from
2000 to 2005 is -0.3% percent and 0.7% for labor income taxes. For capital income taxes the
difference is somewhat larger i.e. -4.9%.

Sources of Tax Revenues to GDP Ratios. In the main part of the paper we require data for sources
of tax revenue to GDP ratios. According to the Mendoza, Razin and Tesar (1994) methodology
e.g. the capital tax is calculated as the ratio of capital tax revenues and the capital tax base.
With the above data at hand it is easy to calculate capital tax revenues and divide them by
nominal GDP to obtain the desired statistic. Labor and consumption tax revenues to GDP ratios
are calculated in a similar way.


5.4. EU-14 Tax Rates and GDP Ratios

In order to obtain EU-14 tax rates and GDP ratios we proceed as follows. E.g., EU-14 consump-
tion tax revenues can be expressed as:

                                                                   ∑
                                       c                                 c
                                      τEU −14,t cEU −14,t =             τj,t cj,t           (61)
                                                                    j


where j denotes each individual EU-14 country. Rewriting equation (61) yields the consumption
weighted EU-14 consumption tax rate:
                                                 ∑      c
                                                                    ∑ c
                                                     j τj,t cj,t     j τj,t cj,t
                                    c
                                   τEU −14,t =                     = ∑           .          (62)
                                                 cEU −14,t             j cj,t


The numerator of equation (62) consists of consumption tax revenues of each individual country
j whereas the denominator consists of consumption tax revenues divided by the consumption tax
rate of each individual country j. Formally,
                                                           ∑        Cons
                                           c                   j   Tj,t
                                          τEU −14,t    = ∑       Cons
                                                                Tj,t
                                                                           .                (63)
                                                                   c
                                                               j τj,t




                                                        16
The methodology of Mendoza et al. (1994) allows to calculate implicit individual country con-
                                                                                      c
sumption tax revenues so that we can easily calculate the EU-14 consumption tax rate τEU −14,t .

Likewise, applying the same procedure we calculate EU-14 labor and capital tax rates. Taking
averages over time yields the tax rates we report in table 1.

In order to calculate EU-14 GDP ratios we proceed as follows. E.g., the GDP weighted EU-14
debt to GDP ratio can be written as:
                                                       ∑     bj,t
                                         bEU −14,t         j yj,t yj,t
                                                   =   ∑                                    (64)
                                         yEU −14,t           j   yj,t

where bj and yj are individual country government debt and GDP. Likewise, we apply the same
procedure for the EU-14 transfer to GDP ratio. Taking averages over time yields the numbers
used for the calibration of the model.

Tables 10, 11 and 12 contain our calculated panel of tax rates for labor, capital and consumption
respectively.


6. References, in addition to those in the main paper

  1. Domeij, D. and M. Flodén (2006), “The Labor-Supply Elasticity And Borrowing Con-
      straints: Why Estimates Are Biased,” Review Of Economic Dynamics, vol. 9, 242-262.
  2. Gruber, J., (2006) “ A Tax-Based Estimate Of The Elasticity Of Intertemporal Substitu-
      tion,”, NBER Working Paper 11945.
  3. Hall, Robert E. (1988), “Intertemporal Substitution Of Consumption,” Journal Of Political
      Economy, vol. 96(2), 339-357.
  4. E. G. Mendoza, E.G. and L. L. Tesar (1998), “The International Ramifications Of Tax
      Reforms: Supply-Side Economics In A Global Economy,” American Economic Review, vol.
      88, 402-417.
  5. Ziliak, James P. and Thomas J. Kniesner (2005), “The Effect of Income Taxation on Con-
      sumption and Labor Supply,” Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 23(4), 769-796.




                                                  17
7. Tables




      1995     1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001               2002    2003   2004    2005   2006   2007
USA   27.6     28.2 28.6 28.9 29.2 29.6 29.4               27.2    26.3   26.1    27.4   27.9   28.4
EU-14 42.3     42.2 42.0 41.3 41.5 40.5 40.2               39.7    40.1   40.1    40.5   41.0   41.3
GER   42.0     40.9 41.4 41.9 41.7 41.4 41.7               40.8    40.6   40.0    40.2   41.2   41.5
FRA   46.2     46.8 46.6 45.4 45.8 45.3 44.7               44.4    45.0   44.7    46.0   45.9   45.7
ITA   46.4     48.5 49.7 45.9 46.3 45.7 45.5               45.6    45.9   46.2    46.1   46.2   47.8
GBR   26.8     26.1 25.7 26.9 27.4 27.8 27.7               27.2    27.7   28.8    29.3   29.8   30.4
AUT   47.5     48.7 50.0 50.1 50.3 49.4 50.8               50.7    50.7   50.8    50.3   50.3   50.3
BEL   48.1     48.0 48.6 49.0 48.4 48.3 48.3               49.0    49.3   49.6    49.5   48.5   48.8
DNK   46.4     46.8 47.4 46.6 48.6 48.8 48.7               47.5    47.7   46.6    47.0   46.7   47.9
FIN   51.9     52.6 50.4 49.9 48.9 49.4 48.6               48.0    46.6   45.8    46.6   47.1   47.2
GRE   NaN      NaN NaN NaN NaN 40.2 39.8                   41.0    42.3   40.5    40.3   40.0   40.3
IRL   NaN      NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN                     25.4    25.6   26.9    27.0   27.4   28.5
NET   49.4     46.4 46.8 42.3 43.6 43.6 40.4               40.7    41.0   41.8    42.8   45.8   45.0
PRT   29.4     29.8 30.1 29.9 30.1 30.8 31.2               31.4    32.0   31.9    32.5   32.7   34.4
ESP   NaN      NaN NaN NaN NaN 34.1 34.8                   35.1    35.1   35.1    35.9   36.6   37.4
SWE   52.9     54.6 56.3 58.1 60.7 57.2 55.2               53.6    55.2   55.9    56.0   56.5   54.6

Table 10: Labor income taxes in percent across countries and time. Country codes: Germany (GER), France
(FRA), Italy (ITA), United Kingdom (GBR), Austria (AUT), Belgium (BEL), Denmark (DNK), Finland (FIN),
Greece (GRE), Ireland (IRL), Netherlands (NET), Portugal (PRT), Spain (ESP) and Sweden (SWE). See text
for details.




                                                  18
      1995     1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001                 2002   2003    2004   2005    2006   2007
USA   37.8     37.3 37.1 37.5 37.3 38.3 36.1                 32.9   33.6    34.0   36.4    36.4   38.2
EU-14 29.6     30.9 32.6 33.3 35.2 34.7 33.7                 31.7   30.6    31.0   32.7    34.8   34.4
GER   23.1     22.8 22.8 23.9 25.9 27.0 21.6                 21.4   22.0    21.6   22.3    24.4   24.8
FRA   27.9     30.3 32.2 34.9 37.5 36.9 38.0                 36.0   34.6    36.6   37.1    40.1   39.2
ITA   32.7     34.0 36.2 32.3 35.1 32.2 33.7                 32.9   31.7    31.8   32.8    37.4   39.1
GBR   40.3     39.9 42.8 45.9 47.4 52.1 52.5                 45.8   42.4    42.5   46.9    49.2   45.1
AUT   20.4     23.5 25.6 25.6 24.0 23.6 28.7                 24.4   24.0    23.6   22.9    22.3   23.2
BEL   38.1     40.4 41.9 44.9 44.9 44.3 46.6                 45.3   42.8    41.4   40.8    40.5   39.6
DNK   43.3     44.6 44.9 52.5 47.8 46.2 49.5                 50.7   51.5    52.3   57.3    58.3   59.3
FIN   28.2     32.0 32.4 33.3 33.3 39.2 31.4                 31.1   29.3    29.5   30.1    28.4   29.3
GRE   NaN      NaN NaN NaN NaN 20.1 17.1                     16.7   15.0    14.8   15.5    14.5   14.5
IRL   NaN      NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN                       17.5   19.0    20.3   21.0    24.2   22.5
NET   27.6     30.4 30.3 30.9 31.4 30.3 31.3                 29.5   26.9    27.4   30.8    28.2   26.1
PRT   18.9     20.6 21.2 21.0 23.4 26.1 24.4                 25.2   23.4    23.2   24.0    25.6   27.6
ESP   NaN      NaN NaN NaN NaN 25.9 24.8                     26.6   27.1    29.1   32.6    35.0   36.2
SWE   30.1     36.2 39.0 39.8 41.5 49.8 47.2                 40.4   40.3    40.7   44.0    40.8   41.8

Table 11: Capital income taxes in percent across countries and time. Country codes: Germany (GER), France
(FRA), Italy (ITA), United Kingdom (GBR), Austria (AUT), Belgium (BEL), Denmark (DNK), Finland (FIN),
Greece (GRE), Ireland (IRL), Netherlands (NET), Portugal (PRT), Spain (ESP) and Sweden (SWE). See text
for details.




                                                   19
        1995 1996 1997        1998   1999   2000    2001   2002   2003   2004    2005   2006   2007
USA      5.1  5.1  5.0         5.0    4.9    4.8     4.6    4.5    4.5    4.4     4.5    4.4    4.2
EU-14   17.0 17.1 17.1        17.4   17.7   17.5    17.0   16.9   16.8   16.7    16.6   16.7   16.9
GER     15.4 15.3 15.0        15.2   15.9   16.0    15.5   15.5   15.6   15.1    14.9   15.2   16.6
FRA     18.5 19.4 19.5        19.5   19.7   18.7    18.0   17.9   17.5   17.5    17.6   17.4   17.2
ITA     15.4 14.4 14.2        15.1   14.7   15.6    14.9   14.6   14.1   13.7    13.7   14.3   14.0
GBR     16.9 17.2 17.2        17.1   17.1   16.7    16.1   15.9   16.0   15.9    15.4   15.1   14.9
AUT     18.6 19.1 20.2        20.4   20.9   19.7    19.4   19.9   19.4   19.5    19.4   18.8   19.2
BEL     16.4 16.7 17.1        17.0   18.0   17.7    16.6   17.0   16.8   17.5    17.8   18.0   18.2
DNK     32.4 33.9 34.2        35.4   36.4   35.7    35.8   35.7   35.0   34.8    34.9   35.2   34.3
FIN     26.5 26.5 29.0        28.7   29.0   28.1    26.8   26.9   27.3   26.3    26.2   25.8   25.0
GRE     15.8 16.0 16.5        15.7   16.2   15.2    15.8   15.7   14.9   14.5    14.2   15.1   14.9
IRL     24.2 24.6 25.1        26.3   26.6   27.3    24.2   25.1   24.9   26.1    26.6   27.1   25.6
NET     17.9 18.4 18.5        18.7   19.5   19.3    19.9   19.1   19.2   19.8    20.8   20.2   20.5
PRT     19.8 20.4 20.1        21.3   21.4   20.3    20.4   21.1   20.9   20.5    21.3   21.6   21.5
ESP     12.8 13.1 13.5        14.3   15.0   15.0    14.5   14.6   15.0   14.9    15.1   15.2   14.7
SWE     26.8 25.3 25.1        25.5   25.1   24.8    25.2   25.1   25.3   25.4    25.8   26.1   26.5

Table 12: Consumption taxes in percent across countries and time. Country codes: Germany (GER), France
(FRA), Italy (ITA), United Kingdom (GBR), Austria (AUT), Belgium (BEL), Denmark (DNK), Finland (FIN),
Greece (GRE), Ireland (IRL), Netherlands (NET), Portugal (PRT), Spain (ESP) and Sweden (SWE). See text
for details.




                                                   20
                                           Cross-Frisch-elast.     Own-Frisch-elast.
                         Parameter         US       EU-14          US     EU-14
                         φ = 1, η = 2      0.4        0.3          -0.7     -0.7
                         φ = 3, η = 1      -0.0      -0.0          -1.0     -1.0
                         φ = 3, η = 2      1.1        0.9          -1.0     -1.0
                         φ = 1, η = 2      0.4        0.3          -0.7     -0.7
                         φ = .5, η = 2     0.2        0.2          -0.6     -0.6
                         φ = 1, η = 2      0.4        0.3          -0.7     -0.7
                         φ = 1, η = 1      -0.0      -0.0          -1.0     -1.0
                         φ = 1, η = .5     -0.7      -0.6          -2.7     -2.6

Table 13: Cross-Frisch elasticity of consumption with respect to wages and own-Frisch elasticity of consumption
with respect to the Lagrange multiplier on wealth. Shown are results for the US and the EU-14, and the sensitivity
of the results to changes in the CFE preference parameters φ (Frisch elasticity of labor supply) and η (inverse
intertemporal elasticity of substitution) in the benchmark model.




                                                       21
                                       Consumption            Capital         Hours Worked
                                        US EU-14             US EU-14           US EU-14
                 Data                    61   51             238   294          25    20
                 Model
                   φ = 1, η = 2           60      50         286     294         25       23
                   φ = 3, η = 1           60      50         286     294         25       23
                   C-D                    60      50         286     294         25       23
                 Varied params.,
                 φ = 1, η = 2             61      51         238     294         25       20

Table 14: Comparing measured and calculated key macroeconomic aggregates in the benchmark model:
consumption- and capital to GDP and hours worked (as a share of total time). All results are expressed in
percent. Results are shown for the same parameters across countries. Sensitivity of the results with respect to
changes in the CFE preference parameters φ (Frisch elasticity of labor supply) and η (inverse intertemporal elas-
ticity of substitution) and with respect to Cobb-Douglas (C-D) preferences are provided. For further sensitivity,
parameters are also varied across countries as provided in tables 3 and 4




                                                       22
                                     Labor Tax Rev.          Cap. Tax Rev.       Cons. Tax Rev.
                                       US EU-14                US EU-14            US EU-14
               Data                    14     19                9     8             3     10
               Model
                 φ = 1, η = 2            17       25             7       6            3       8
                 φ = 3, η = 1            17       25             7       6            3       8
                 C-D                     17       25             7       6            3       8
               Varied params.,
               φ = 1, η = 2              17       25             7       6            3       8

Table 15: Comparing measured and implied sources of tax revenue. All results are expressed in percent. Results
are shown for the same parameters across countries. Sensitivity of the results with respect to changes in the CFE
preference parameters φ (Frisch elasticity of labor supply) and η (inverse intertemporal elasticity of substitution)
and with respect to Cobb-Douglas (C-D) preferences are provided. For further sensitivity, parameters are also
varied across countries as provided in tables 3 and 4




                                                        23
8. Figures




             24
                          Government Consumption (incl. Gov. Investment)                                                    Trade Balance
                    21                                                                               2

                    20                                                                               1

                    19                                                                               0
In Percent of GDP




                                                                                In Percent of GDP
                                                               EU−14                                                                             EU−14
                                                                                                    −1
                    18                                         US                                                                                US
                                                                                                    −2
                    17
                                                                                                    −3
                    16
                                                                                                    −4

                    15                                                                              −5

                         1996    1998     2000    2002     2004     2006                                 1996      1998     2000    2002      2004   2006
                                        Government Debt                                                                      Labor Taxes
                                                                                                    42
                    70
                                                                                                    40
                    68
                                                                                                    38
In Percent of GDP




                    66
                                                                                                    36                                           EU−14
                    64                                                          In Percent                                                       US
                                                                                                    34
                    62
                                                                                                    32
                    60
                                                                                                    30
                    58                                         EU−14                                28
                                                               US
                    56
                         1996    1998     2000    2002     2004     2006                                 1996      1998     2000    2002      2004   2006
                                          Capital Taxes                                                                   Consumption Taxes
                    38

                    37                                                                              16

                    36                                                                              14
                    35      EU−14                                                                                                                EU−14
In Percent




                                                                                In Percent




                            US                                                                      12                                           US
                    34
                                                                                                    10
                    33

                    32                                                                               8

                    31
                                                                                                     6
                    30
                         1996    1998     2000    2002     2004     2006                                 1996      1998     2000    2002      2004   2006
                                  Implied: Government Transfers                                                 Implied: Sum of Tax−Unaffected Incomes
                    18

                    17                                                                              21

                    16
                                                                                                    20
In Percent of GDP




                                                                                In Percent of GDP




                    15                                         EU−14
                                                               US                                   19
                    14

                    13                                                                              18
                    12
                                                                                                    17
                    11

                    10                                                                              16                                           EU−14
                                                                                                                                                 US
                    9
                         1996    1998     2000    2002     2004     2006                                 1996      1998     2000    2002      2004   2006
                                                                           25
                             Figure 10: Data used for calibration of baseline model. See text for details.
                                                         Same parameters                                                                                   Varied parameters
                                     Actual vs predicted: hours (CFE utility, η=2; Frisch=1)                                                    Actual vs predicted: hours (CFE utility, η=2; Frisch=1)
                                                                                                                                      0.25                                                                     USA
                   0.28
                                                                                                                                      0.24
                                                                                                                                                                                             PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                           IRL
                   0.26                                                                                                               0.23                                               SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                       DNK
   Actual (Data)




                                                                                                                      Actual (Data)
                                                                                    USA
                                                                                                                                      0.22
                   0.24                                                                                                                                                       GBR
                                                                  PRT                                                                                                         FIN
                                                                                                           IRL
                                                              SWE                                                                     0.21
                                                          DNK                                                                                                           GRE
                   0.22
                                                                 FIN GBR
                                                                                                                                         0.2
                                                         GRE                                                                                             NET
                                                                                                                                                         EU−14
                                                                                                                                                        AUT
                    0.2                                                                                                                                ESP
                                                                                                                                                       GER
                                                         AUT       EU−14
                                                                    ESP  NET                                                          0.19
                                                                     GER                                                                           FRA
                                                              BEL FRA                                                                            BEL
                                                 0.2
                                                              ITA
                                                           0.22    0.24  0.26                 0.28
                                                                                                                                                ITA
                                                                                                                                                  0.19  0.2  0.21             0.22     0.23      0.24     0.25
                                                                   Predicted                                                                                            Predicted

                                                       Actual vs predicted: capital output ratio                                                      Actual vs predicted: capital output ratio
                                                                                           GRE                                                                                                                GRE
                                    3.6                                                                                                  3.6

                                    3.4                                                                                                  3.4

                                    3.2                                                                                                  3.2
                    Actual (Data)




                                                                                                                         Actual (Data)




                                                                    FRA AUT
                                                                  SWE     GER                                                                                                   AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                SWE
                                                                                                                                                                               FRA
                                                                                                                                                                               GER
                                     3                                 ESP                                                                3                                 ESP
                                                                     ITA
                                                                      EU−14                                                                                                ITA
                                                                                                                                                                          EU−14
                                                                        NET                                                                                             NET
                                    2.8                                                                                                  2.8

                                    2.6                       GBR           FIN IRL                                                      2.6                FIN
                                                                                                                                                           IRL
                                                                                                                                                          GBR
                                                               BEL             PRT                                                                        PRT
                                                                                                                                                         BEL
                                    2.4                                 USA                                                              2.4     USA
                                                2.4
                                                        DNK
                                                        2.6       2.8       3        3.2     3.4         3.6
                                                                                                                                               DNK
                                                                                                                                                2.4  2.6          2.8       3        3.2      3.4       3.6
                                                                        Predicted                                                                                       Predicted

                                                Actual vs predicted: consumption to output                                                           Actual vs predicted: consumption to output
                                                                                                       GRE                                                                                                     GRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                              USA
                    0.6
                                                                                                     USA                                 0.6
                                                                                            GBR                                                                                                     GBR
                   0.55                                                                                                               0.55
                                                                                             PRT                                                                                           PRT
   Actual (Data)




                                                                                                                      Actual (Data)




                                                                     EU−14                                                                                                   EU−14
                    0.5                                             GERITA ESP                                                           0.5                               ITA
                                                                                                                                                                          ESP
                                                                                                                                                                          GER
                                                                     AUT                                                                                                AUT
                   0.45                                          BEL
                                                                FRA                                                                                    BEL
                                                                                                                                      0.45
                                                  FIN                                                                                                 FRA
                                     SWE                     DNK                                                                                   FIN
                    0.4                                                                                                                          DNK
                                                                                                                                                SWE
                                       IRL
                                        NET                                                                                              0.4 IRL
                                          0.4            0.45         0.5            0.55          0.6
                                                                                                                                            NET0.4         0.45           0.5          0.55             0.6
                                                                   Predicted                                                                                            Predicted


Figure 11: Model-data comparison without and with varying country specific parameters as provided in tables 3
and 4.




                                                                                                                 26
                                           Same parameters                                                                                           Varied parameters
                              Actual vs predicted: labor tax revenues to output                                                            Actual vs predicted: labor tax revenues to output
                                                                                                                    0.35


                     0.3
                                                                                                                       0.3
                                                                                         SWE                                                                                                            SWE
   Actual (Data)




                                                                                                    Actual (Data)
                    0.25                                                                                            0.25
                                                                            AUT
                                                                          DNK                                                                                                           AUT
                                                                       FRAFIN
                                                                           BEL                                                                                                      DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                  FRA BEL FIN
                     0.2                                            GER
                                                                      NET                                              0.2                                                       GER
                                                                    EU−14                                                                                                         NET
                                                                        ITA                                                                                                     EU−14
                                                                                                                                                                                    ITA
                                                           ESP                                                                                                  ESP
                    0.15                                                                                            0.15
                                             PRT
                                           USA
                                           GBR                                                                                                               PRT
                                                                                                                                                            USA
                                                                                                                                                           GBR
                                                                    GRE                                                                                              GRE
                                   0.15
                                           IRL    0.2           0.25       0.3                                                                0.15
                                                                                                                                                          IRL0.2    0.25             0.3          0.35
                                                        Predicted                                                                                                   Predicted

                              Actual vs predicted: capital tax revenues to output                                                             Actual vs predicted: capital tax revenues to output
                                                         ITA                                                                                                            ITA
                     0.1                                                  GBR                                                        0.1                                                   GBR
                                                                       BEL                                                                                                         BEL
                    0.09                                                                                                            0.09
                                                             USA                                                                                                USA
                    0.08                      ESP                                      DNK                                          0.08                      ESP                            DNK
                               IRL                 FRA SWE
    Actual (Data)




                                                                                                                    Actual (Data)




                                               FIN
                                                EU−14                                                                                       IRL              FIN EU−14FRA                  SWE
                    0.07    GRE               NET                                                                                   0.07    GRE              NET
                    0.06
                                     PRT
                                     AUT                                                                                            0.06
                                                                                                                                                  PRTAUT
                    0.05
                                     GER                                                                                                            GER
                                                                                                                                    0.05
                    0.04
                                                                                                                                    0.04
                    0.03
                                                                                                                                    0.03
                            0.03    0.04   0.05    0.06 0.07 0.08         0.09   0.1                                                    0.03       0.04     0.05    0.06 0.07 0.08       0.09     0.1
                                                     Predicted                                                                                                         Predicted

                           Actual vs predicted: consumption tax revenues to output                                                   Actual vs predicted: consumption tax revenues to output
                                                                                                                                                                                                        DNK
                    0.15                                                                 DNK                        0.14


                                                                                                                                                                        SWE FIN
                                                                                                                    0.12                                                   PRT
                                                         SWEFIN
                                                              PRT                                                                                                      IRL
                                                          IRL                                                                                                     FRAAUT
                                                                                                                                                                     GRE
   Actual (Data)




                                                                                                    Actual (Data)




                                                         AUT
                                                        GRE                                                            0.1                                      NET  GBR
                     0.1                           NET GBR
                                                      FRA                                                                                                          EU−14
                                                     EU−14                                                                                                       BEL
                                                                                                                                                                 GER
                                                  GERBEL
                                                  ITA                                                                                                          ITA
                                                                                                                                                               ESP
                                                    ESP                                                             0.08


                                                                                                                    0.06
                    0.05
                                                                                                                    0.04
                           USA                                                                                                        USA
                                   0.05                       0.1                 0.15                                                     0.04      0.06          0.08     0.1     0.12        0.14
                                                        Predicted                                                                                                   Predicted


Figure 12: Model-data comparison without and with varying country specific parameters as provided in tables 3
and 4.




                                                                                               27
                                                                                            Same Parameters                                                                                                                                          Varied Parameters
                                                                                                                                      Labor Tax Laffer Curves:
                                                                 Distance to the Peak of the Labor Tax Laffer Curve (CFE utility, FRISCH=1,η=2)                                                                               Distance to the Peak of the Labor Tax Laffer Curve (CFE utility, FRISCH=1,η=2)
            Distance in Terms of the Steady State Labor Tax τn




                                                                                                                                                                         Distance in Terms of the Steady State Labor Tax τn
                                                                 0.5                                                                                                                                                          0.5


                                                                          IRL                                                                                                                                                          IRL
                                                                 0.4                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                            USA                                                                                                                                                          USA

                                                                           GBR                                                                                                                                                           GBR
                                                                 0.3                                                                                                                                                          0.3
                                                                                      PRT                                                                                                                                                          PRT
                                                                                               ESP                                                                                                                                                          ESP
                                                                                                            GER NET                                                                                                                                                    GER NET
                                                                                                           EU−14                                                                                                                                                      EU−14
                                                                 0.2                                       GRE                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GRE
                                                                                                                  FRA                                                                                                                                                        FRA
                                                                                                                    ITA                                                                                                                                                        ITA
                                                                                                                          FIN                                                                                                                                                        FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BEL
                                                                                                                          BEL                                                                                                                                                          AUT
                                                                                                                            AUT
                                                                 0.1                                                                                                                                                          0.1                                                  DNK
                                                                                                                      DNK                  SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SWE

                                                                   0                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                  0.25          0.3         0.35      0.4      0.45       0.5          0.55           0.6                                                                      0.25          0.3      0.35      0.4      0.45       0.5          0.55            0.6
                                                                                                Steady State Labor Tax τn                                                                                                                                 Steady State Labor Tax τn


                                                                                                                                    Capital Tax Laffer Curves:
                                                             Distance to the Peak of the Capital Tax Laffer Curve (CFE utility, FRISCH=1,η=2)                                                                             Distance to the Peak of the Capital Tax Laffer Curve (CFE utility, FRISCH=1,η=2)
                                                              0.5                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                             IRL
Distance in Terms of the Steady State Capital Tax τk




                                                                                                                                                             Distance in Terms of the Steady State Capital Tax τk




                                                                 0.4                                                                                                                                                          0.4              IRL


                                                                                        PRT                     USA
                                                                 0.3                                                                                                                                                          0.3
                                                                                        GER                                                                                                                                            GRE           PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GER                     USA
                                                                          GRE                        ESP
                                                                                                     NET                                                                                                                                                        ESP
                                                                 0.2                                                                                                                                                          0.2                               NET

                                                                                                           EU−14                                                                                                                                                      EU−14
                                                                                         AUT                                        GBR                                                                                                               AUT                                      GBR
                                                                 0.1                                   FIN ITA                                                                                                                0.1                                         ITAFRA
                                                                                                             FRA                                                                                                                                                    FIN

                                                                   0                                                          BEL                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SWE
                                                           −0.1                                                                                                                                                         −0.1
                                                                                                                        SWE
                                                                                                                                                DNK
                                                           −0.2                                                                                                                                                         −0.2                                                                               DNK

                                                                   0.15         0.2     0.25      0.3     0.35      0.4        0.45       0.5         0.55                                                                      0.15     0.2         0.25      0.3     0.35      0.4      0.45       0.5         0.55
                                                                                               Steady State Capital Tax τ                                                                                                                                   Steady State Capital Tax τ
                                                                                                                          k                                                                                                                                                          k




                                                                  Figure 13: Distances to the peak of the labor tax (upper panel) and capital tax (lower panel) Laffer curves across
                                                                  countries. The x-axes depict the observed tax rates (averages over time). The y-axes show the distance to the
                                                                  peak of the Laffer curves in terms of the tax rate. Stars denote countries that are to the left of the peak. Squares
                                                                  denote countries that are to the rigtht of the peak. Benchmark model results are provided for CFE (constant
                                                                  Frisch elasticity) preferences with a unit Frisch elasticity of labor supply and an inverse intertemporal elasticity
                                                                  of substitution, η = 2. Tax rates, spending and parameters are either the same or are varied across countries as
                                                                  provided in tables 3 and 4.




                                                                                                                                                                       28
                                                        Sensitivity to φ (Frisch elasticity)                 Sensitivity to η (IES)
                                                                                     Labor Tax Laffer Curves:
                                                         Sensitivity of the Labor Tax Laffer Curve: USA (CFE utility;η=2)                                                                 Sensitivity of the Labor Tax Laffer Curve: USA (CFE utility; FRISCH=1)
                                                 160                                                                                                                                160
   Steady State Tax Revenues (USA Average=100)




                                                                                                                                      Steady State Tax Revenues (USA Average=100)
                                                                                                            O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              O
                                                 140                                                                                                                                140
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        O
                                                                                                    O                                                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      O
                                                 120                                                                                                                                120
                                                                                          O

                                                 100                                                                                                                                100
                                                                          USA average                                                                                                                         USA average

                                                  80                                                                                                                                 80


                                                  60                                                                                                                                 60                                    η=0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           η=1
                                                                                                         Frisch=0.5                                                                                                        η=2
                                                  40                                                     Frisch=1                                                                    40                                    η=5
                                                                                                         Frisch=3

                                                  20                                                                                                                                 20
                                                    0             0.2           0.4          0.6                0.8          1                                                         0              0.2           0.4          0.6              0.8           1
                                                                            Steady State Labor Tax τn                                                                                                           Steady State Labor Tax τn


                                                                                                           Capital Tax Laffer Curves:
                                                        Sensitivity of the Capital Tax Laffer Curve: USA (CFE utility;η=2)                                                                Sensitivity of the Capital Tax Laffer Curve: USA (CFE utility; FRISCH=1)
                                                 110                                                                                                                                110
                                                                                                    OO                                                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OO
   Steady State Tax Revenues (USA Average=100)




                                                                                                                                      Steady State Tax Revenues (USA Average=100)




                                                                                                O
                                                 100                                                                                                                                100


                                                  90                                                                                                                                 90


                                                  80                                                                                                                                 80

                                                                                USA average                                                                                                                         USA average
                                                  70                                                                                                                                 70


                                                  60                                                                                                                                 60

                                                                                                                                                                                                   η=0.5
                                                  50                                                                                                                                 50            η=1
                                                                                                         Frisch=0.5                                                                                η=2
                                                  40                                                     Frisch=1                                                                    40            η=5
                                                                                                         Frisch=3

                                                  30                                                                                                                                 30
                                                    0             0.2          0.4           0.6                0.8          1                                                         0              0.2           0.4           0.6             0.8           1
                                                                           Steady State Capital Tax τk                                                                                                          Steady State Capital Tax τk



Figure 14: Sensitivity of labor tax (upper panel) and capital tax (lower panel) Laffer curves in the benchmark
model for the US. Each tax is varied between 0 and 100 percent while holding all other taxes and parameters
constant. Steady state (balanced growth path) total tax revenues are normalized to 100 at the average US tax rate.
Sensitivity analysis is performed for CFE (constant Frisch elasticity) preferences with different Frisch elasticities
of labor supply and an inverse intertemporal elasticities of substitution, η.




                                                                                                                                 29
                                                                               Capital Tax Laffer Curve: USA (CFE, η=2, Frisch=1)
                                                                       110




                       Steady State Tax Revenues (USA Average=100)
                                                                       100


                                                                        90


                                                                        80                     USA avg.



                                                                        70


                                                                        60


                                                                        50                  Baseline (Exogenous Growth)
                                                                                            Human Capital (1st Generation − Endogenous Growth)
                                                                                            Human Capital (2nd Generation − Exogenous Growth)

                                                                         0       0.2          0.4            0.6              0.8                1
                                                                                          Steady State Capital Tax τk

                                                                              Capital Tax Laffer Curve: EU−14 (CFE, η=2, Frisch=1)
                                                                       110
                       Steady State Tax Revenues (EU−14 Average=100)




                                                                       100


                                                                        90


                                                                        80                   EU−14 avg.



                                                                        70


                                                                        60


                                                                        50                  Baseline (Exogenous Growth)
                                                                                            Human Capital (1st Generation − Endogenous Growth)
                                                                                            Human Capital (2nd Generation − Exogenous Growth)
                                                                        40
                                                                          0      0.2          0.4            0.6              0.8                1
                                                                                          Steady State Capital Tax τk


Figure 15: Capital tax Laffer curves: the impact of endogenous human capital accumulation. Shown are steady
state (balanced growth path) total tax revenues when capital taxes are varied between 0 and 100 percent in the
US (upper panel) and EU-14 (lower panel). All other taxes and parameters are held constant. Total tax revenues
at the average taxes rate are normalized to 100. Three cases are examined. First, the benchmark model with
exogenous growth. Second, the benchmark model with a first generation version of endogenous human capital
accumulation that gives rise to endogenous growth. Third, the benchmark model with a second generation version
of endogenous human capital accumulation that features exogenous growth. All results are provided for CFE
(constant Frisch elasticity) preferences with a unit Frisch elasticity of labor supply and an inverse intertemporal
elasticity of substitution, η = 2.



                                                                                                   30
