NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXPORT PRICES ACROSS FIRMS AND DESTINATIONS
Kalina Manova
Zhiwei Zhang
Working Paper 15342
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15342

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2009

This paper was previously circulated as "Quality Heterogeneity across Firms and Export Destinations."
We thank the editor (Elhanan Helpman), four anonymous referees, Kyle Bagwell, Doireann Fitzgerald,
Penny Goldberg, James Harrigan, Pete Klenow, Aprajit Mahajan, Marc Melitz, Robert Staiger, and
seminar participants at Stanford, Harvard, Princeton, Yale, Penn State, UC Berkeley, UC Riverside,
UBC, UVA, UC Boulder, Maryland, U Houston, Syracuse, World Bank, Dallas Fed, 2009 NBER
ITI spring meeting, 2009 NBER China meeting, 2009 CESifo Venice Summer Institute, 2009 SNB-CEPR
Zürich Conference and 2010 AEA annual meeting for their helpful comments. Parts of this research
were conducted while Kalina Manova was a Kenen Fellow at Princeton. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Kalina Manova and Zhiwei Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Export Prices Across Firms and Destinations
Kalina Manova and Zhiwei Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 15342
September 2009, Revised October 2011
JEL No. F10,F12,F14,L11,L16
ABSTRACT
This paper establishes six stylized facts about firms' export prices using detailed customs data on the
universe of Chinese trade flows. First, across firms selling a given product, exporters that charge higher
prices earn greater revenues in each destination, have bigger worldwide sales, and enter more markets.
Second, firms that export more, that enter more markets and that charge higher export prices import
more expensive inputs. Third, across destinations within a firm-product, firms set higher prices in
richer, larger, bilaterally more distant and overall less remote countries. Fourth, across destinations
within a firm-product, firms earn bigger revenues in markets where they set higher prices. Fifth, across
firms within a product, exporters with more destinations offer a wider range of export prices. Finally,
firms that export more, that enter more markets and that offer a wider range of export prices pay a
wider range of input prices and source inputs from more origin countries. We propose that trade models
should incorporate two features to rationalize these patterns in the data: more successful exporters
use higher-quality inputs to produce higher-quality goods (stylized facts 1 and 2), and firms vary the
quality of their products across destinations by using inputs of different quality levels (stylized facts
3, 4, 5 and 6).
Kalina Manova
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
manova@stanford.edu
Zhiwei Zhang
International Monetary Fund
Research Department
700 19th Street NW
Washington, DC 20431 USA
zzhang@hkma.gov.hk

1 Introduction
The literature has documented a number of robust facts about the substantial and systematic
variation in export performance across firms. More productive firms are more likely to export,
have higher export revenues, and enter more markets. 1 Among exporters, larger firms pay higher
wages and are more skill and capital intensive. Moreover, exporters charge higher prices than nonexporters, and plant size is positively correlated with output and input prices. 2 These patterns are
congruent with heterogeneous-firm models that emphasize firms’ production efficiency and
product quality as the determinants of export success. In these models, more productive firms
enjoy superior export performance because they choose to use more expensive, higher-quality
inputs in order to sell higher-quality goods at higher prices. 3
This paper establishes six stylized facts about the variation in export prices and importedinput prices across firms, products and trade partners using detailed customs data on the universe
of Chinese trade flows. These stylized facts have two main implications. First, more successful
exporters use higher-quality inputs to produce higher-quality goods. Second, firms vary the quality
of their products across destinations with different income, market size, bilateral distance and
overall remoteness 4 by using inputs of different quality levels. While the first conclusion confirms
recent evidence in the literature, the second is novel. Together, they suggest that international
trade models should incorporate not only quality differentiation across firms, but also across trade
partners within firms, in order to account for the patterns in the data. Our findings thus uncover a
previously unexplored dimension of firm heterogeneity and adjustments on the quality margin
within firms across destinations.
The first two stylized facts we document constitute evidence consistent with quality
differentiation across exporters. First, within narrowly defined product categories, firms that
charge higher free-on-board (f.o.b.) export prices earn greater revenues in each destination, have

1

See Clerides, Lach and Tybout (1998), Aw, Chung and Roberts (2000), Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2004, 2008),
and Bernard, Jensen and Schott (2009), and Bernard et al. (2007) for a survey of the literature.
2
See Bernard and Jensen (1995), Verhoogen (2008), Kugler and Verhoogen (2008), Hallak and Sivadasan (2008) and
Iacovone and Javorcik (2008).
3
See Melitz (2003), Bernard et al. (2003), Melitz and Ottaviano (2008), Johnson (2007), Baldwin and Harrigan
(2011), Sutton (2007), Verhoogen (2008), Kugler and Verhoogen (2008), Hallak and Sivadasan (2008), Kneller and
Yu (2008), and Gervais (2009).
4
While bilateral distance pertains to two countries’ geographic proximity, remoteness is a weighted average of a
country's bilateral distance to all other countries in the world, using countries' GDP as weights. A country is remote in
economic terms if it is physically isolated from most other nations or is close to small countries but far away from big
economies. See footnote 17.

1

bigger worldwide sales, and export to more markets. These patterns are more pronounced in richer
destinations and in sectors with greater scope for quality differentiation, as proxied by the Rauch
(1999) classification of non-homogeneous goods, R&D- or advertising intensity. Second, firms
that export more, that service more destinations and that charge higher export prices import more
expensive inputs. In the absence of detailed information on domestic input usage or direct
measures of product quality, the prices of producers’ imported intermediates offer an imperfect
signal for the quality of all of their inputs. 5 We thus interpret our results as evidence that more
successful exporters purchase inputs of higher quality in order to produce more expensive and
more sophisticated products. This interpretation is consistent with productivity being an important
factor in firms' export decisions, since it may well determine their optimal choice over input and
output quality.
Our findings corroborate the conclusion in the recent literature that quality differentiation
across firms matters for export performance. This literature has typically examined country-level
export prices or firm-level data on export status, plant size and input prices instead of detailed
information on firms' foreign sales. Our paper is thus the first to document these two facts using
comprehensive data on firms' matched exports and imports by product and trade partner.
Moreover, we are able to identify the inputs that exporters source from abroad specifically for
further processing, assembly and re-exporting. This level of detail is rare in trade datasets, and also
allows us to examine the variation in export activity across destinations within firms. 6
The remaining stylized facts we establish together suggest that exporters adjust the quality
of their products across destinations by varying the quality of their inputs. Our third finding is that
firms charge higher f.o.b. prices for a given product in richer, larger, bilaterally more distant and
overall less remote economies. The effects of size, distance and remoteness are concentrated in
rich destinations and among firms that vary prices more across countries. Fourth, firms earn more
revenues from a specific good in markets where they set higher prices. This pattern is more
prominent in richer countries and for goods with bigger potential for quality upgrading. Fifth,
within each product, firms with more destinations offer a wider range of export prices, especially
for products with greater scope for quality differentiation. Lastly, firms that export more, that enter

5

This is consistent with Kugler and Verhoogen (2009) who find a positive correlation between the prices Colombian
plants pay for imported and domestic inputs.
6
As far as we know, comparable data are available only for the United States, France and Denmark. Papers utilizing
these data have examined other questions and rarely exploited the matched data on firms' export and import activity.

2

more markets and that offer a wider range of export prices pay a wider range of input prices and
source inputs from more origin countries.
Stylized facts three and four are identified purely from the variation across destinations
within firm-product pairs. If firms export an identical good to each country, the firm-product fixed
effects we include would capture its cost and quality characteristics. Any residual variation in
prices across markets would then be due to variable mark-ups. However, current heterogeneousfirm models predict either a constant mark-up above marginal cost (CES demand) or a lower
mark-up in big, distant and less remote countries where competition is tougher (linear demand).
Thus, if firms sold an identical product to all trade partners, export prices would counterfactually
be either uncorrelated or negatively correlated with market size, income, distance and centrality.
Instead, we propose that firms not only tailor their mark-up to each market, but also
customize their products' quality. This explanation can also rationalize the last two stylized facts:
While variable mark-ups can generate the positive correlation between a firm's number of
destinations and price dispersion across markets, they cannot explain our results for firms' import
price dispersion and number of source countries. On the other hand, our findings are consistent
with exporters buying multiple quality versions of an input in order to produce multiple quality
versions of an output for sale in different markets.
While the stylized facts we uncover suggest that firms adjust product quality to destination
characteristics, we cannot decisively determine what drives firms' quality choice. The finding that
firms charge higher prices in richer destinations is strongly indicative of non-homothetic
preferences. With such preferences, firms have a bigger incentive to improve product quality when
they face wealthier consumers with lower marginal utility of income and greater willingness to
pay for quality. 7 The results for market size, proximity and remoteness, on the other hand, lend
themselves to a number of interpretations. We discuss some of these alternatives, but leave it to
future work to conclusively establish the underlying mechanism.
In the linear-demand models we consider, destinations' size, bilateral distance and
centrality are positively correlated with market toughness. It is thus possible that firms respond to
market competition both by reducing mark-ups and by increasing product quality. If quality
upgrading requires more expensive, higher-quality inputs, it could raise marginal costs sufficiently
quickly to dominate the mark-up correction. This would generate high export prices in big, distant

7

See Verhoogen (2008), Fajgelbaum, Grossman and Helpman (2009), and Simonovska (2010).

3

and less remote countries as we observe. Our results would then capture the net effect of both the
quality and mark-up adjustments, and provide a lower bound for the response of product quality.
Alternatively, firms might export products of higher quality to more distant trade partners
if they incur per unit transportation costs. Specifically, exporters might sell multiple quality
versions of a product to each country but vary the quality mix with destinations' proximity. Firms
would then optimally shift exports to more distant markets towards better-quality goods because
higher unit costs lower the relative price of and increase relative demand for such products.
As for market size, firms might offer products of higher quality to larger destinations if
there are economies of scale in the production or delivery of quality goods. On the production
side, upgrading quality might entail fixed investments in specialized equipment or hiring skilled
workers. On the delivery side, the fixed costs of marketing and distribution might be increasing in
product sophistication. As long as firms expect to earn higher revenues in larger markets and the
destination-specific fixed costs of exporting rise with product quality, firms will have an incentive
to improve the quality of goods shipped to bigger countries.
Identifying the determinants of firms’ export success is instrumental in understanding the
patterns of international trade across countries, the welfare and distributional consequences of
globalization, and the design of export-promoting policies in developing economies.
Firm heterogeneity has significant implications for countries’ trade and growth.
Reallocations across sectors and across firms within a sector are both important in the adjustment
to trade liberalization and its impact on aggregate productivity (Pavcnik [2002], Bernard, Jensen
and Schott [2006], Chaney [2008]). While Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2009) find
that, under certain conditions, the effects on aggregate welfare are unaltered by firm heterogeneity,
Burstein and Melitz (2011) suggest that heterogeneity matters under endogenous firm productivity
growth. In this context, our results raise the possibility that, in addition to adjusting trade volumes,
product scope and export destinations, firms might also vary product quality within and across
markets in response to trade reforms. This could potentially generate different welfare gains than a
world in which firms exported the same product quality to all markets. This is a fruitful area for
future research as the models we consider, as well as Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare
(2009), assume that firm efficiency and product quality are fixed over time.
Even if the effects of globalization on aggregate welfare do not depend on the nature of
firm heterogeneity, its distributional consequences do. For example, U.S. output and employment
4

appear less vulnerable to import competition from low-wage countries in sectors characterized by
longer quality ladders (Khandelwal [2010]). 8 Evidence also suggests that bigger, more productive
firms benefit more from trade reforms (Pavcnik [2002], Bustos [2011]). A natural extension of our
work would be to test whether firms producing higher-quality goods are more resilient to import
competition and more likely to expand if given export opportunities. A related question for future
research is whether input quality and labor skill are complementary in the production of highquality goods, and if so, whether trade liberalization affects employment and wages differentially
across the skill distribution.
Finally, a deeper understanding of the factors that drive firms’ export success will facilitate
the design of policies that promote trade, and ultimately growth in developing countries. The
cross-sectional patterns we document say little about firms' capacity to upgrade product quality.
Nevertheless, they indirect imply that improving quality can boost firms' export potential. It might
therefore be beneficial for governments to encourage investment in R&D and technologies that
allow firms to produce and export more sophisticated goods. In addition, firms in developing
countries might find it difficult to source high-quality inputs domestically and instead rely on
imported inputs from more advanced economies. 9 This would explain why more successful
Chinese exporters are able to offer higher-quality goods despite the widespread belief that product
quality and quality control are weak in China. This argument provides one reason why developing
countries might want to liberalize imports if they seek to improve their export performance.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes how our
work relates to the previous literature. Section 3 introduces the data, while Section 4 documents
the six stylized facts, and Section 5 discusses their robustness. Section 6 summarizes the
implications of different heterogeneous-firm trade models for the behavior of export prices, which
we use to interpret the empirical results in Section 7. The last section concludes.

2 Related Literature
Our work builds on recent papers that study aggregate export prices to determine the relative
importance of production efficiency and product quality for firms’ export success. Baldwin and
Harrigan (2011) and Johnson (2007), for instance, explore the variation in product-level export
prices with destination size, income, distance and remoteness, and find evidence in support of
8
9

See also Fernandes and Paunov (2009) for related evidence from Chile.
Kugler and Verhoogen (2009) find that Colombian firms' imported inputs are of higher quality than local inputs.

5

quality sorting. Since different models can deliver similar predictions for the behavior of aggregate
prices, however, the latter can in principle be inconclusive. It can in fact be misleading if unit
values at the product level exhibit patterns consistent with a given model, but the underlying firm
prices do not. The detailed nature of our dataset allows us to address this challenge and directly
analyze firms' export prices, while also providing evidence on firms' imported inputs.
Our results also contribute to recent firm-level evidence indicative of quality
differentiation across firms. Verhoogen (2008), Kugler and Verhoogen (2008), Hallak and
Sivadasan (2008) and Iacovone and Javorcik (2008) document that exporters charge higher prices
than non-exporters, that plant size is positively correlated with output and input prices, and that
more productive firms pay higher wages to produce better-quality goods. In concurrent work,
Crozet, Head and Mayer (2009) show that highly-ranked French wine producers export more to
more markets at a higher average price. Also in concurrent work, Bastos and Silva (2010) find that
firms set higher prices in bigger, richer and more distant countries in a sample of Portuguese
exporters. 10 They do not, however, offer an explanation for these findings, explore the relationship
between firms’ export prices and revenues, or study firm inputs to make inferences about product
quality. Finally, Brambilla, Lederman and Porto (2009) show that Argentine firms that export to
richer countries pay higher wages, and suggest that these firms sell products of higher quality.
This paper is the first to examine matched data on firm-level export and import prices by
product and destination/source country, and to do so for the universe of trade flows. We uncover
new stylized facts and offer a novel explanation based on firms varying product quality across
countries in response to market characteristics. Our results suggest that international trade models
should incorporate quality differentiation both across firms and across destinations within firms in
order to explain the stylized facts in the data. Verhoogen (2008) constitutes an important step in
this direction by modeling firms that produce two quality levels in the presence of non-homothetic
preferences: one for home, and a higher one for a richer export market. Incorporating unit
transportation costs in this framework could also rationalize our results for bilateral distance.
Future theoretical work should seek to provide a unified explanation for the patterns we document
for market size, income, bilateral distance and remoteness.
Our findings are also related to the work of Schott (2004), Hummels and Klenow (2005),
Hallak (2006) and Mandel (2008). They show that aggregate export prices systematically increase

10

See Görg, Halpern and Muraközy (2010) for related evidence for Hungary.

6

with both trade partners’ GDP per capita and with the capital and skill intensity of the exporting
country. They propose that cross-country quality differentiation in production capabilities and
consumption preferences can generate these outcomes. 11
Finally, our results indirectly speak to the large literature on exchange-rate pass-through.
This literature has found evidence of pricing to market, i.e. that firms vary mark-ups across
markets segmented by variable exchange rates. 12 Combined with the stylized facts we establish,
this suggests that models with constant mark-ups or product quality across destinations are
unlikely to explain either the trade or exchange-rate pass-through patterns in the data.

3

Data

We use recently released proprietary data on the universe of Chinese firms that participated in
international trade over the 2003-2005 period. 13 These data have been collected and made
available by the Chinese Customs Office. They report the free-on-board value of firm exports and
imports in U.S. dollars by product and trade partner for 243 destination/source countries and 7,526
different products in the 8-digit Harmonized System. 14 The dataset also provides information
about the quantities traded in one of 12 different units of measurement (such as kilograms, square
meters, etc.), which makes it possible to construct unit values. We have confirmed that each
product is recorded in a single unit of measurement, and we include product fixed effects in all
regressions to account for the different units used across goods.
In principle, unit values should precisely reflect producer prices. Since trade datasets at
both the aggregate and firm level rarely contain direct information on producer prices, the prior
literature has typically relied on unit values as we do. The level of detail in our data is an
important advantage in the construction of unit prices as they are not polluted by aggregation
across firms or across markets within firms. Nevertheless, we perform a number of specification
checks in Section 5.1 to ensure that measurement error in unit values does not drive our results.
While the Chinese customs data are available at a monthly frequency, we focus on annual
exports in the most recent year in the panel, 2005. This decision is motivated by a number of
considerations. First, we aim to establish stylized facts that obtain in the cross-section of firms and
11

See also Hallak and Schott (2011) who decompose countries’ export prices into quality and quality-adjusted prices.
See Gopinath, Itskhoki and Rigobon (2010), Burstein and Jaimovich (2009), and Fitzgerald and Haller (2010).
13
Manova and Zhang (2008) describe the data and stylized facts about firm heterogeneity in Chinese trade.
14
Product classification is consistent across countries at the 6-digit HS level. The number of distinct product codes in
the Chinese 8-digit HS classification is comparable to that in the 10-digit HS trade data for the U.S..
12

7

are not interested in export dynamics. Second, there is a lot of seasonality and lumpiness in the
monthly data, and most firms do not export a given product to a given market in every month. By
focusing on the annual data, we can abstract from these issues and related concerns with sticky
prices. Third, when we explore how firms' export prices vary with characteristics of the
destination market, we use annual data on GDP, GDP per capita, distance and remoteness. If the
outcome variable were at the monthly frequency, the standard errors could be misleadingly low
because we would effectively multiply the number of observations without necessarily introducing
new information. Finally, outliers are likely to be of greater concern in the monthly data. Section
5.1 confirms that all results hold at the monthly frequency and in fact become more significant.
Some state-owned enterprises in China are pure export-import companies that do not
engage in manufacturing but serve exclusively as intermediaries between domestic producers
(buyers) and foreign buyers (suppliers). Following standard practice in the literature, we identify
such wholesalers using keywords in firms’ names and exclude them from our main results. 15 We
do so in order to focus on the operations of firms that both make and trade goods since we are
interested in how firms' production efficiency and product quality affect their export activities.
Showing direct evidence on firms' imported-input prices is thus an important component of our
analysis as they proxy for input quality. We cannot apply this approach to intermediaries because
we do not observe their suppliers and cannot interpret their import transactions as input purchases.
However, since wholesalers and producers compete in the same markets, their export prices
should exhibit similar patterns. We confirm that this is indeed the case in Section 5.2.
Since we examine data for one year denominated in US dollars, and given that roughly 8590% of Chinese trade is invoiced in US dollars (with the remainder split between euro and yen),
our analysis has little to say about the effects of currency movements on firms' optimal pricing
behavior. In unreported regressions, we have nevertheless confirmed that all of our results are
robust to explicitly controlling for countries' bilateral exchange rate with the renminbi or for firms'
exchange rate exposure on the import or export side. We proxy the latter with firms' average
exchange rate across source (destination) countries, using import (export) values as weights.
< Table I about here >
Table I illustrates the substantial variation in prices across 96,522 Chinese exporters, 6,908
products, and 231 importing countries. After removing product fixed effects, the average log price
15

We drop 23,073 wholesalers who mediate a quarter of China’s trade. Using the same data, Ahn, Khandelwal and
Wei (2010) identify intermediaries in the same way in order to study wholesale activity.

8

in the data is 0.00, with a standard deviation of 1.24 across goods, firms, and trade partners. Prices
vary considerably across Chinese producers selling in a given country and good: The standard
deviation of firm prices in the average destination-product market is 0.90. This highlights the
extent of firm heterogeneity in the data. There is also a lot of variation in unit values across trade
partners within a given exporter: The standard deviation of log prices across destinations for the
average firm-product pair is 0.46. This suggests that models, in which firms adjust mark-ups,
product quality or both across markets would likely be more successful at matching the data.
We explore four destination-country characteristics in the analysis: market size, income,
bilateral distance from China, and overall remoteness. We use data on GDP and GDP per capita
from the World Bank's World Development Indicators, and obtain bilateral distances from
CEPII. 16,17 As is standard in the literature, we construct a measure of remoteness as a weighted
average of a country's bilateral distance to all other countries in the world, using countries' GDP as
weights. A destination is remote in economic terms if it is geographically isolated from most other
nations or is close to small countries but far away from big economies. 18 The correlation between
distance to China and overall remoteness in our sample is 0.09, and is not significant at 10%.
Based on the availability of data for these country indicators, we work with 242,403
observations across 179 countries and 6,879 HS-8 codes at the destination-product level, and
2,098,634 observations across 94,664 firms at the firm-destination-product level. The firm-level
regressions that do not require information on the importer's characteristics exploit the universe of
trade flows for a total of 2,179,923 observations (96,522 firms, 6,908 products and 231 countries).
Our analysis makes use of three different proxies for products' scope for quality
differentiation. These measures are relatively standard in the literature and meant to capture
technological characteristics of a given product or sector that are exogenous from the perspective
of an individual firm and innate to the nature of the manufacturing process. The first indicator is
the Rauch (1999) dummy for differentiated goods, identified as products not traded on an
organized exchange or listed in reference manuals. It is available for SITC-4 digit goods, which
we concord to the Chinese HS-8 digit classification. We also employ continuous measures of
16

The data on bilateral and inner distances are available at http://www.cepii.fr/anglaisgraph/bdd/distances.htm.
GDP and distance are imperfect, if commonly used proxies for market size and bilateral trade costs. We leave the
study of alternative measures to future work.
18
∑
We measure the remoteness of destination d as
·
, where
is the GDP of
is the distance between o and d, and the summation is over all countries in the world o.
origin country o,
See Baldwin and Harrigan (2011) for a discussion of alternative remoteness indices. Practically identical results obtain
/
.
if we instead proxy remoteness with another common measure, ∑
17

9

R&D intensity or combined advertising and R&D intensity from Klingebiel, Kroszner and Laeven
(2007) and Kugler and Verhoogen (2008), respectively. They are based on U.S. data for 3-digit
ISIC sectors which we match to the HS-8 products in our sample. Exploiting the imperfect
correlation among these three proxies for quality differentiation makes it less likely that our results
are instead driven by some unobserved product characteristic. 19

4

Stylized Facts

This section documents stylized facts about the variation in export and import prices across firms,
products and trade-partner countries. We first explore the correlation between export prices and
export revenues across firms within a given product- or destination-product market. We then
examine the link between firms' export prices and number of export destinations. Next we study
the relationship between export prices, revenues and country characteristics across trade partners
within a firm-product pair. Finally, we consider how firms’ imported-input prices, import price
dispersion and number of source countries relate to their export performance.

4.1 Export prices at the product level
For consistency with the prior literature, we first briefly document how aggregate f.o.b. export
prices at the product level vary with characteristics of the destination country. We construct these
aggregate prices such that they equal the unit value that product-level data would report. In
particular, we first sum the export value and quantity across all firms that sell a specific HS-8
good to a given market. We then obtain the average Chinese export price for each destinationproduct by dividing total revenues by total quantities.
< Table II about here >
Table II reports results from a gravity-type regression of product-level unit values on
destination size, income, bilateral distance to China, and overall remoteness, with all variables in
logs. As column 1 shows, the average f.o.b. export price is higher in smaller, richer, more
proximate and more central markets. 20 When we repeat the analysis separately for destinations
above and below the median income level in the sample, however, we find that these patterns
differ between rich and poor markets. The average Chinese export price increases with income,
19

The correlation between R&D and combined advertising and R&D intensity across the 30 sectors is 0.21. At the
HS-8 digit level, the correlation between the Rauch dummy and R&D (advertising and R&D) is 0.16 (0.20).
20
We will describe countries that are closer to China as either less distant or more proximate. We will refer to
countries that are globally more remote as more isolated or less central.

10

distance and centrality for the 89 rich importers without varying systematically with market size.
By contrast, it falls with GDP, distance and remoteness in the poorer half of the sample without
responding to GDP per capita. 21 For reference, Baldwin and Harrigan (2011) find that average
U.S. export prices fall with the importer's GDP, proximity and remoteness, and vary either
positively or negatively with income depending on the specification. Since they focus on U.S.' top
100 export destinations which largely overlap with the countries in the richer half of our sample,
our results are consistent with theirs at the product level.
As we explain in Section 6, the behavior of aggregate prices might not conclusively
distinguish between efficiency and quality heterogeneity across firms as both can exhibit the same
patterns at the product level. More importantly, aggregate prices could be misleading if they are
consistent with a given model, but the underlying firm prices are not. In the rest of the paper we
therefore exploit the richness of our data and directly examine firm-level prices.

4.2 Export prices across firms
Consider first the correlation between free-on-board export prices and worldwide export revenues
across firms selling a given HS-8 digit product. To explore this variation, we aggregate the data to
the firm-product level by summing sales and quantities across markets. We then take their ratio
and construct firm f’s average export price for product p across all destinations d it serves,
∑

. Using this measure, we estimate the following specification:

∑

log
where product fixed effects

· log

,

(1)

control for systematic differences across goods in consumer appeal,

comparative advantage, transportation costs, units of measure, and other product characteristics
that affect all manufacturers equally. At this level of aggregation, the sample comprises 898,247
observations spanning 96,522 firms and 6,908 products. We cluster errors
We are primarily interested in the sign of

by firm.

, which reflects the sign of the conditional

correlation between export price and revenues across firms within a product. 22 The sign of this
correlation will later allow us to evaluate the importance of production efficiency and product
21

We cluster errors by product in Table II, but obtain similar results with robust standard errors. When we instead
cluster errors by destination, only income and remoteness (only market size and distance) enter significantly in
columns 1 and 2 (column 3). The inconclusiveness of these results further motivates our analysis at the firm level.
22
More precisely, is the ratio of the covariance of price and revenue to the variance of revenue. thus has the same
sign as the correlation between price and revenue.

11

quality for firms' export performance. We emphasize that we cannot and do not want to give

a

causal interpretation since firms' unit values and sales are both affected by unobserved firm
characteristics and are the joint outcome of firms' profit maximization.
< Table III about here >
As column 1 in Table III shows, within a given product, firms that charge a higher average
export price earn bigger worldwide revenues. 23 The point estimates suggest that a one-standarddeviation increase in log export sales is associated with a 27% higher export price, which
represents 20% of the standard deviation in log average export prices. 24 The strength of this
correlation, however, varies systematically across products with different scope for quality
upgrading. In column 3, we regress unit values on firm sales and their interaction with the dummy
for differentiated goods. The positive correlation between price and revenues across firms is two
and a half times stronger among non-homogeneous products. Similar results obtain in columns 4,
5 and 6 when we instead proxy the potential for quality differentiation with sectors' R&D intensity
or combined advertising and R&D intensity. 25 All of these patterns are significant at 1%.
In the last column of Table III, we distinguish between firms' exports to rich and poor
destinations. In particular, we compute average prices and total revenues at the firm-product level
separately for countries above and below the median income in the sample, using the same cut-off
as in Table II. When we expand (1) to include a dummy for rich destinations and its interaction
with revenues, we find that the correlation between export prices and sales is positive for both
poor and rich markets, but a significant 50% higher for the latter.
This analysis abstracts away from the substantial variation across exporters in the number
of countries they sell to. It also ignores potentially large differences in the market environment
across destinations that may influence firms' export participation and pricing decisions. We
therefore next exploit the full dimensionality in the data, and examine the variation in export

23

Column 2 in this table, as well as in Tables IV and VI, documents the negative correlation between f.o.b. export
prices and quantities. This is consistent with both efficiency and quality sorting and does not help differentiate
between them. Moreover, this result may be driven by measurement error in quantities since we obtain prices as unit
values. For these reasons, we report these results only for completeness and do not discuss them further.
24
These comparative statics use the standard deviation of export values and prices after demeaning them with their
product-specific average. Very similar results obtain if we use the raw data without demeaning instead.
25
The coefficient on the interaction with R&D intensity is negative, though only significant at 10%. R&D intensity is
very unevenly distributed in the data, however, with many values between 0.00-0.03 and a few above 0.07. When we
group sectors into high- and low-R&D intensity, the interaction with a dummy for high-R&D intensity is positive and
significant at 1%.

12

prices across Chinese firms selling in a given market, where a market is defined as a destinationproduct pair. This could be, for example, all Chinese shoe manufacturers exporting to Germany.
We adopt the following estimating equation: 26
log
Here

· log

and

are the f.o.b. bilateral export price and revenue of firm f selling

product p in destination d, and
interpret the sign of

(2)

are destination-product pair fixed effects. Once again, we

as the sign of a conditional correlation that does not reflect causality. We

conservatively cluster errors

by destination-product, but note that all of our results are robust

to alternative levels of clustering, such as by firm, product, destination, firm-destination or firmproduct. Since the unit of observation is now at the firm-product-country level, the sample size in
these regressions grows to 2,179,923 data points.
Similarly to (1), the extensive set of fixed effects in this specification implicitly control for
product characteristics that are invariant across manufacturers and trade partners. However, they
also condition on features of the importing country that affect all products and firms selling there,
such as consumer income, regulatory restrictions, legal institutions, inflation and exchange rates.
Finally and most importantly, the

's take account of transportation costs, bilateral tariffs,

demand conditions, market toughness, and other economic factors that influence exporters in any
given destination-product market. The coefficient on revenues is thus identified purely from the
variation across firms within very fine segments of the world economy.
< Table IV about here >
Table IV presents robust evidence that firms setting a higher export price earn greater
revenues even within such narrowly-defined destination-product markets. This relationship is
highly statistically significant. It is also markedly stronger for goods with greater scope for quality
upgrading, as proxied by product differentiation and sectors' R&D or advertising intensity. Finally,
it is systematically more positive in richer destinations, as indicated by the interaction of revenues
with the importer's GDP per capita.
In terms of economic magnitudes, these estimates have similar implications to those in
Table 3. The elasticity of export prices with respect to revenues is 0.08. A doubling in firm sales in
a given market is thus associated with 6% higher bilateral unit prices for the average product. This
26

In all specifications, we use the same symbols for the intercept, coefficients, fixed effects and error terms as in
equation (1). This is only for expositional convenience; these objects will of course differ across specifications.

13

number is, however, 7 percentage points bigger for sectors at the upper end of the distribution in
advertising and R&D intensity relative to sectors at the lower end of the distribution. Similarly, the
magnitudes are 150% higher for differentiated goods relative to homogeneous products. Finally,
the elasticity of price with respect to sales is twice as large in a rich destination (75th percentile of
the distribution of GDP per capita) compared to a poor export market (25th percentile). 27
When evaluating these results, it is important to note that constructing unit prices as the
ratio of export revenues to export quantities does not restrict the sign of the correlation between
price and revenue. Appendix Table A.1 illustrates this with six examples, in which five
observations always have the same price profile but very different revenue and quantity patterns.
Prices may be perfectly positively correlated with revenue and uncorrelated with quantity (Case
1), or negatively correlated with quantity and uncorrelated with revenue (Case 2). Prices may also
be positively (negatively) correlated with both revenue and quantity (Cases 3 and 4), or positively
correlated with revenue and negatively correlated with quantity (Case 5). Finally, prices may be
only weekly correlated with revenue and/or quantity (Case 6). The only pattern ruled out by
construction is the combination of a positive correlation between price and quantity and a negative
correlation between price and revenue. A positive correlation between price and revenue in the
data can thus be informative and does not arise mechanically by construction.

4.3 Export prices and number of destinations
We next examine the relationship between firms' export prices and number of export destinations.
Of interest are both firms' average unit value and the extent to which they vary prices across
markets. The following regressions explore how these variables co-move with the number of trade
partners at the firm-product level:
· log #

log
log
As before,

(3)
· log #

(4)

refers to firm f's average export price for product p, while #

gives the number of countries which buy p from f. We measure price dispersion with
log

, the standard deviation of log f.o.b. export prices across destinations within

27

All comparative statics in the paper are based on regressions which include product, firm-product or destinationproduct fixed effects. These fixed effects naturally absorb a lot of the variation in the data, but are necessary for the
clean interpretation of the estimated coefficients.

14

each firm-product pair. The estimation controls for good-specific characteristics with product
fixed effects

, and clusters errors

by firm. In both equations,

is identified purely from the

variation across firms within a given HS-8 code. It is thus not affected by any systematic
differences across products in average price or in typical price variability across importers. Since
firms' market entry decisions are made jointly with their pricing strategies, we will later interpret
the results from these specifications in terms of correlations and not causality.
< Table V about here >
As reported in Table V, exporters that supply more countries systematically charge a
higher average price (Panel A). Firms selling to more destinations also exhibit greater price
dispersion across importers (Panel B). 28 These results are both largely driven by products with
substantial potential for quality differentiation. As columns 2-6 show, the patterns hold only for
differentiated varieties (but not for homogeneous goods) and are more pronounced in R&D- and
advertising-intensive sectors. Note also that the correlations in Panel B do not arise mechanically
since firms can choose to offer the same price in every market or a narrower range of prices if they
transact with more trade partners.
To gauge the economic significance of these correlations, consider a one-standarddeviation increase in a firm's trade-partner intensity, or 2.11 more destinations. Such an increase
would be accompanied by a 1% rise in the firm's average export price and 0.5% more dispersion
in export prices across markets. These calculations are for the average product. While these
magnitudes would be negligible for sectors at the low end of the distribution by R&D intensity,
however, they would reach 3% and 2% respectively for a sector at the top of the distribution.

4.4 Export prices across destinations within firms
The analysis so far has focused on the variation in export prices across firms within narrowlydefined product categories or destination-product markets. This subsection instead documents
systematic patterns in the variation of export prices across trade partners within firm-product pairs.
We first study the correlation between f.o.b. export prices and revenues across importing
countries within an exporter with the following specification:
log

28

· log

(5)

Price dispersion is only defined for firm-product pairs with at least two destinations, hence the smaller sample size.

15

We now include firm-product pair fixed effects

. In addition to subsuming the role of product

characteristics common to all firms, these fixed effects also control for firm attributes such as
overall production efficiency, managerial talent, labor force composition, general input quality,
etc. that affect the firm's export performance equally across products. Crucially, the

's account

for firm-product specific characteristics that are invariant across export markets. 29 The coefficient
of interest,

, is thus identified purely from the variation in prices across destinations within a

given manufacturer and product line. We cluster errors at the destination-product level, but our
findings are robust to alternative clustering, such as by firm, product or destination.
< Table VI about here >
In Table VI, we consistently find that firms earn bigger revenues from a given HS-8
product in markets where they set higher f.o.b. prices. This result cannot simply be attributed to
firms' market power, as they are robust to controlling for firms' market share in each country and
product (column 3). 30 The remainder of the table further shows that the positive correlation
between export price and sales across destinations within a firm is stronger among richer
destinations and for goods with greater scope for quality differentiation.
So far we have largely treated destinations anonymously and symmetrically. Chinese trade
partners, however, vary considerably along a number of dimensions. We focus on four country
characteristics in particular: size (
(

, income (

, or GDP per capita), distance to China

, and overall economic remoteness (

). To explore how these market features

affect Chinese exporters' optimal f.o.b. bilateral prices, we estimate the following specification:
log

· log
· log

· log
· log

As in (5), we include firm-product pair fixed effects

(6)
such that

, ,

and

are identified

purely from the variation in unit values across destinations for a given producer and good. To
account for the potential correlation in the error term across firms within a destination-product
market, we cluster errors by destination-product.
29

In the models in Section 6, all products enter the utility function symmetrically. The models’ predictions are thus for
prices per utility-adjusted unit of output. Firm-product pair fixed effects help address the concern that consumers get
different utils from the products of different firms.
30
We measure firm f's market share with the share of f's exports of product p to destination d in total Chinese exports
of p to d. f's true market share is our measure, multiplied by the share of Chinese exports in total consumption of p in
d, which is invariant across Chinese exporters. While imperfect, this is the best proxy for market power in these data.

16

< Table VII about here >
Table VII establishes that firms charge higher f.o.b. prices for the same HS-8 product in
bigger, richer, more distant and less remote markets. These results are not driven by firms'
country-product-specific market share (column 6). 31 They are also highly statistically and
economically significant. For example, raising market size from the first quartile to the third
quartile of the distribution is associated with 2.3% higher export prices. The corresponding
numbers for income, distance and remoteness are 4.3%, 0.9% and -1.1%, respectively.
< Table VIII about here >
Table VIII explores how the sensitivity of export prices to a market's GDP, proximity and
centrality depends on the income level in that market, by including the interactions of the former
three variables with GDP per capita. We find that market size, distance and remoteness increase
firm prices relatively more in richer countries. All three interaction terms enter positively and
significantly at the 1%. Splitting the sample into homogenous and differentiated goods, we further
observe that this result holds only for products with scope for quality upgrading but not for
standardized items (columns 2 and 3).
The coefficients on the main effects of GDP and distance change sign when we include
their interactions with GDP per capita. The overall impact of size and distance on firms' export
prices is therefore positive whenever income is above a certain cut-off level, and negative
otherwise. In the cross-section of 179 countries in the sample, the total effect of GDP (distance) is
positive for the richest 107 (72) markets. However, in the full sample of firm-product-destination
triplets, it is positive for fully 88% (82%) of all observations. 32
The sign of these effects, though, says little about their economic or statistical significance.
In columns 4 and 5 we therefore estimate specification (6) separately in two subsamples of rich
and poor destinations, with GDP per capita above and below the median respectively. We find
significant results for all four country characteristics in the rich group, but only for GDP per capita
in the poor set. 33 This highlights the robustness of our results for income, and suggests that the
effects of the other market features on firms' prices are concentrated in richer destinations.

31

We may be over-controlling in this context since firms' market share likely rises with product quality.
This is because firms are substantially more likely to enter richer countries and there are many fewer observations
for poorer destinations.
33
Similar results obtain if we instead distinguish between countries with income above or below the cut-off above
which the overall effects of GDP and distance turn positive in column 1.
32

17

The last two columns of Table VIII further document that while all firms set higher export
prices in richer countries, market size, distance and remoteness have differential effects across
firms. In particular, the more firms vary prices across trade partners, the likelier they are to charge
more in bigger, more distant and less remote destinations. These results are based on expanding
specification (6) to include the interactions of all four country characteristics with the measure of
firms' export price dispersion from Table V (i.e. the standard deviation of prices across
destinations within a firm-product pair). Note that the main effect of market size, distance and
remoteness in these regressions is opposite to that of the interaction. We have confirmed that the
total effect of these variables goes in the direction of the interaction term for two thirds of all firms
and observations, and is not significantly different from 0 for the observations at the bottom third
of the distribution by export price dispersion.
Distinguishing among firms in this way also allows us to control for systematic differences
across economies with country fixed effects (column 7). While these fixed effects subsume the
main impact of each market characteristic, the coefficients on the interaction terms can still be
identified from the variation in price dispersion across firms within a given destination. Even in
this stringent specification, we continue to observe that exporters which vary prices more across
importers set higher prices in bigger, more distant and less remote markets. Because the effect of
income is very strong for all firms and the income elasticity of price does not vary across sellers,
that interaction term is not significant as in column 6.
Finally, we have confirmed that our results are qualitatively similar when we allow for
different sources of heteroskedasticity in the unobserved error term. There might be multiple
dimensions along which the error is correlated across observations in our sample. In particular,
is likely correlated across firms in a given destination-product market because of unobserved
demand or cost shocks common to suppliers serving that market. That is why we cluster errors by
destination-product in the main specifications we report. However,

might also be correlated

across countries within a firm-product if the cost or demand shock operates at that level, or across
countries and products within firms. As Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan (2004) argue, including
fixed effects at the level at which the error term is correlated addresses this problem in part, but
not fully. Separately, our regressions of firm-product-destination level prices on destination
characteristics may be subject to the Moulton (1990) problem if the variance of

differs across

countries, because multiple observations share the same values for the right-hand side variables.

18

Since the econometrician cannot be certain about the source of heteroskedasticity in the
data, an agnostic approach is to use Huber-White heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. This
allows for a flexible structure of clusters in the data, where errors are correlated within each
cluster. Reassuringly, all of our results obtain at similar or higher levels of significance when we
estimate them with robust standard errors. Our results also hold when we alternatively cluster by
firm, product, firm-product, or firm-destination. When we cluster by country, we continue to
observe statistically significant coefficients on GDP, GDP per capita and remoteness if we
estimate the effect of each characteristic separately in Table VII. When we group economies in
three bins according to their proximity to China, we also recover a positive and significant
coefficient on distance for markets at intermediate distances (see also Section 5.3). When we
instead jointly estimate the effect of all four country measures, we find that only destination
income and size are significant, and remoteness has a significant impact if it enters non-linearly.
However, all of our results for the differential effects of country characteristics across firms with
different export price dispersion in Table VIII are robust to clustering by destination.

4.5 Imported-input prices and export performance
The last set of stylized facts we uncover concern the relationship between firms' input purchases
and export performance. In the absence of detailed figures on domestic input orders, we use data
on producers' imported intermediates as an imperfect but informative signal for all of their inputs.
We examine three aspects of exporters' import activity: input prices, number of suppliers, and
input price dispersion across source countries.
The detailed nature of our data allows us to distinguish between imported inputs used in
the production of goods for the home and foreign markets. In particular, the Chinese customs
records discriminate between "ordinary" trade and trade under the "processing-and-assembly"
regime. We exploit information only on firms' imports in the latter category to ensure that we can
correctly interpret them as inputs to the goods firms sell abroad. 34 Of the 96,522 exporting firms in
our sample, 37,647 also import under processing and assembly. We observe all of their import
values, quantities and hence unit prices by HS-8 product and country of origin. Below, we
examine the correlation between import prices and export performance for this subset of firms.

34

All of our results hold if we instead use data on all imported inputs and not only those under the processing-andassembly regime. We can then study 58,337 firms.

19

Many firms import and export multiple products, and we cannot match specific inputs to
output categories. For this reason, we use four different firm-level measures of export performance
that have been aggregated across export goods and destinations: total exports worldwide; number
of countries to which the firm ships at least one product; the average export price across products
and destinations; and the standard deviation of export prices across products and markets. For each
firm, the average export price is the weighted average of all (log) firm-product-destination prices
which have been demeaned by their product-specific average, with export revenue shares as
weights. The standard deviation of the (log) export price within a firm across goods and markets is
also based on demeaned unit values.
We first study the relationship between imported-input prices and export activity with the
following specification:
·

log
where

,

(7)

is the price that firm f pays for import product p from origin country o, and
is one of the four firm-level measures described above. At this level of

disaggregation, the sample spans 724,790 observations. All regressions in this subsection cluster
errors by firm, and are robust to alternative levels of clustering.
The product fixed effects

in (7) control for characteristics of each imported good that

are common across firms, such as average value and quality, import restrictions, domestic
distribution costs, the measurement unit for quantities, or the need for specialized labor or
equipment to process the input.

is thus identified from the variation across exporters that buy a

given intermediate product. We are only interested in the sign of

as the sign of a conditional

correlation, since we expect that unobserved firm characteristics determine both input choices and
export performance.
< Table IX about here >
We find that firms paying more for their imported inputs have consistently higher export
prices, larger worldwide export revenues, and a bigger number of export destinations (Panel A of
Table IX). Exporters that vary prices more across markets also tend to buy more expensive inputs
on average. All of these results are highly statistically and economically significant. For example,
a firm that exports twice as much typically uses inputs that are 10% more expensive, while a firm
whose exports are twice as expensive pays 38% higher prices for its imported inputs.

20

We next examine the spread (standard deviation) of prices that firms are willing to incur
for a given imported input:
log

·

(8)

The unit of observation is now a firm-product pair, for 129,059 data points. The left-hand-side
variable is the standard deviation of (log) import unit values across origin countries o within a firm
f and import product p.
We systematically observe that firms paying a broader range of import prices for a given
good export more to more markets at a higher average price (Panel B of Table IX). They also offer
a broader menu of export prices across destinations. These results obtain even after controlling for
product fixed effects which capture, among other things, the average amount of price dispersion
and scope for quality differentiation in each imported input. Similar patterns emerge in Panel D,
where we collapse the data to the firm level and study the total variation in import prices across all
products and source countries within a firm. 35
Since

log

is only defined for firms that purchase input p from multiple

countries of origin, in Panel C we also look directly at the (log) number of countries from which
producers source p. Consistently with the results above, firms that employ more suppliers offer a
wider menu of export prices and ship more to more destinations at a higher average price.

4.6 Summary of stylized facts
We summarize the systematic patterns we have established with six stylized facts.
Stylized Fact 1: Across firms selling a given product, exporters that charge higher prices earn
greater revenues in each destination, have bigger worldwide sales, and enter
more markets. These patterns are more pronounced for products with greater
scope for quality differentiation and for richer destinations.
Stylized Fact 2: Firms that export more, that enter more markets and that charge higher export
prices use more expensive imported inputs.

In particular, we estimate
log
·
in the cross-section of firms.
The left-hand-side variable is now the standard deviation of (log) import unit values across origin countries o and
products p within a firm f, after these prices have been demeaned with their product-specific average.

35

21

Stylized Fact 3: Across countries within a firm-product, firms set higher prices in richer, bigger,
more distant and less remote markets. The effects of size, distance and
remoteness are concentrated in rich destinations and among firms that vary
prices more across markets.
Stylized Fact 4: Across countries within a firm-product, firms earn more revenues in markets
where they set higher prices. This pattern is more pronounced for products with
greater scope for quality differentiation and for richer destinations.
Stylized Fact 5: Across firms within a product, firms with more destinations offer a wider range
of export prices. This pattern is more pronounced for products with greater
scope for quality differentiation.
Stylized Fact 6: Firms that export more, that enter more markets and that offer a wider range of
export prices pay a wider range of input prices and source inputs from more
origin countries.
Note that some of these stylized facts confirm that patterns recently established for a
subsample of exporters (in other countries) hold in comprehensive data on the universe of
(China's) export transactions. Focusing on the wine industry in France, for example, Crozet, Head
and Mayer (2009) show that highly-ranked French wine makers export more to more destinations
at a higher average price. In a sample of Portuguese exporters, Bastos and Silva (2010) document
that firms set higher prices in bigger, richer and more distant countries. Aside from these two
findings, all other stylized facts above are novel.

5

Robustness

5.1 Measurement error
A potential concern with the analysis is that export revenues or quantities may be measured with
error. If there is classical measurement error (ME) in revenues, it would generate attenuation bias
in the regressions of export prices on export sales (Tables III, IV and VI). Because unit values are
the ratio of revenues to quantities, however, measurement error may also be non-classical and
appear on both sides of these regressions. By contrast, such ME cannot affect any of the other
specifications. In particular, it does not pose a challenge for the correlations between export prices

22

and country characteristics (Tables II, VII and VIII), between export prices and the number of
destinations (Table V), or between import and export activity (Table IX).
Non-classical measurement error in export prices may introduce either positive or negative
bias in Tables III, IV and VI. To understand why the direction of the bias is ex-ante ambiguous,
consider first ME in export quantities. Recall that the coefficient β from a regression of log prices
on log revenues equals the ratio of the covariance of measured price and revenues to the variance
of measured revenues. If log actual quantities were q* but one observed q=q*+η, measured log
unit prices would be p=r*-q=(r*-q*)-η=p*-η. One would then estimate β=cov(p*-η,r*)/var(r*)=
cov(p*,r*)/var(r*)-cov(η,r*)/var(r*)=β*-cov(η,r*)/var(r*). If η is uncorrelated with actual
revenues r*, it would not affect the coefficient point estimates but potentially reduce precision.
Downward bias would arise, though, if η is positively correlated with r*, i.e. if quantities are
systematically inflated in high-revenue transactions. Conversely,

would be overestimated if the

opposite were true. Measurement error in revenues could similarly generate either positive or
negative bias, depending on how it correlates with the true values of price and revenues.
The extensive set of fixed effects in the regressions help alleviate concerns with ME to a
certain degree. The product fixed effects in all specifications ensure that the results are not driven
by some goods being easier to monitor by customs officers. Firm-product fixed effects further
control for the fact that some exporters might systematically misreport in certain goods. Similarly,
destination-product fixed effects account for the possibility that all firms have more incentives to
be truthful about exports of some products to certain markets, or that customs officials are more
conscientious about given goods in some countries. ME would thus have to vary in very particular
ways across firms, products and markets in order to explain our findings.
Exploiting the variation across products with varying scope for quality differentiation and
across destinations with dissimilar income levels is also useful in dealing with potential
measurement error. For example, the ME in quantity would not only have to be negatively
correlated with revenue in general, but this correlation would have to be systematically stronger in
richer markets and in differentiated, R&D- and advertising intensive goods, in order to explain the
findings in Tables III, IV and VI. In other words, ME is more likely to affect the coefficients on
the main effects than on the interaction terms in the regressions.

23

To address concerns with ME, we nevertheless perform a number of robustness checks and
find that our results continue to hold at comparable levels of economic and statistical significance.
Unless reported in the appendix, the results from these specifications are available upon request.
First, all results in Tables II-IX obtain when outliers are removed from the sample.
Following common practice in the literature, we identified outliers as firm-product-destination
triplets with export value, quantity and/or unit price below the 1st percentile or above the 99th
percentile of the respective distribution. 36 This is a conservative classification since observations
are labeled as outliers even if only one of these three variables lies in the bottom or top percentile,
while the other two do not. Such outliers likely reflect severe measurement error, and it is
reassuring that they do not drive the results. Our findings also hold when we instead winsorize the
data and set outliers equal to the value at the 1st (99th) percentile of the distribution if they were
below (above) this cut-off point.
Second, our results are based on annual data that have been aggregated from raw data at
the monthly level. The stylized facts remain unchanged, however, when we instead estimate all
specifications in Tables II-IX at the monthly frequency, including month fixed effects. In fact, all
coefficients are of comparable magnitudes but often become statistically more significant. It is ex
ante unclear whether monthly data are more or less subject to measurement error than annual data,
but it is encouraging that the same systematic patterns emerge at both frequencies.
Third, turning specifically to the potential for ME in Tables III, IV and VI, our results are
robust to using the ranking of firms' export price and revenues instead of price and revenue levels.
This approach allows us to rely much less directly on the construction of unit prices. For space
considerations, Panel A of Appendix Table A.2 reports the rank results only for Table IV; as
Section 7 explains, this is the most important of the three tables in question. There is a strong
positive correlation between firms' rank by price and rank by revenue across firms within a
product-destination. It is moreover higher in goods with greater scope for quality differentiation
and in richer markets. This sensitivity analysis suggests that our findings are not driven by ME
bias, since such bias would have to be quite severe to distort firm rankings in a systematic way.
Fourth, the positive correlation between price and revenue across firms in a destinationproduct market (Table IV) holds when we change the outcome variable from firms' bilateral price
36

Qualitatively and quantitatively the same patterns emerge whether we choose cut-off points in the full distribution
in the sample or in product-specific distributions. When the analysis called for aggregation to the firm, firm-product,
or product-destination level, we first excluded outliers at the firm-product-destination level before aggregating up.

24

by product and destination to firms' average export price by product (Panel B of Appendix Table
A.2). The latter is constructed as the ratio of firms' worldwide export sales and quantity, by
product. Since this average price is not directly related to firms' bilateral revenues on the righthand-side of the regression, this specification is less likely to be affected by non-classical
measurement error bias. On the other hand, classical ME may still introduce attenuation bias. The
fact that we continue to observe a significant positive coefficient and that it is higher in richer
countries and in goods with greater scope for quality upgrading is thus further indication that our
results are not driven by ME. This robustness check cannot be applied to Table III where the unit
of observation is at the firm-product level already, or to Table VI where we include firm-product
pair fixed effects.
Finally, the patterns in Tables III, IV and VI are equally well pronounced in a subsample
of sectors which are less likely to suffer from measurement error: textiles and apparel. In these
industries, China faced restrictive export quotas under the Multi-Fiber Agreement. While these
quotas were relaxed on January 1, 2005, textile and apparel exports remained under scrutiny
throughout 2005 (the year of our sample) as many importing countries were concerned about
China's rapid export growth. For this reason, firms and customs authorities arguably recorded
trade flows in these industries with considerable precision. The robustness of our results in these
sectors gives us further confidence in our conclusions.

5.2 Wholesalers vs. retailers
Our analysis has focused on the operations of firms that both make and trade goods since we are
ultimately interested in how firms' production efficiency and product quality affect their export
activities. However, since wholesalers and producers compete in the same destination-product
markets, their export success should be governed by the same market conditions and underlying
mechanisms. In particular, their export prices should exhibit the same patterns across firms in a
destination and across destinations within a firm.
In unreported regressions, we have confirmed that all of our results in Tables II-VIII
indeed hold in the full sample of Chinese exporting firms that includes both manufacturers and
wholesalers. The point estimates in these specifications are almost always qualitatively and
quantitatively the same. The only notable exception is Panel A of Table V, where many of the
coefficients turn insignificant. As will become clearer, however, this table examines the
theoretically ambiguous relationship between firms’ average export price and number of export
25

destinations, by product. Since we cannot interpret wholesalers' import transactions as input
purchases, we are also not interested in the correlations in Table IX for these firms.

5.3 Functional form for distance
Prior researchers have suggested that trade costs as proxied by bilateral distance might have a nonlinear effect on trade flows and unit values (c.f. Baldwin and Harrigan [2011]). In robustness
checks, we have allowed the elasticity of export prices with respect to distance to vary nonlinearly in Tables II, VII and VIII. In particular, we grouped the 179 countries in our sample into 3
tertiles by distance from China. We then regressed (log) prices on (log) distance and the
interactions of (log) distance with dummies for countries that are in the second and third (top)
tertile in the distribution. In these specifications, the coefficient on distance captures the baseline
elasticity of price to distance in the first tertile of the distribution, while the two interaction terms
show whether this elasticity is significantly different for countries at higher tertiles.
The point estimates on the main effect of distance double when we allow for non-linearity
in Table VII, but are less affected in Tables II and VIII (results available upon request). The
interaction terms typically enter with the opposite sign, but are an order of magnitude smaller.
This implies that, while the elasticity of export prices with respect to distance remains of the same
sign at all distance levels, it is generally lower at higher distances.

6 Heterogeneous Firm Models in the Literature
In order to interpret the stylized facts we have documented, we first review different models in the
literature that feature firm heterogeneity in production efficiency and product quality. We focus on
the models' implications for firms' export prices and summarize them in Table X. 37
< Table X about here >
In all models we consider, firms can be ranked according to a single exogenous attribute,
productivity, which uniquely determines their export status, pricing, revenues and profits. In the
absence of quality differentiation across firms, all producers are assumed to use identical inputs to
manufacture symmetric outputs, but more productive firms have lower marginal costs. Models

37

Each comparative static in Table X is ceteris paribus, and holds when the single-product firm, single-sector models
we consider are extended to multi-product companies in a multi-sector world. See Bernard, Redding and Schott (2007,
2009), Mayer, Melitz and Ottaviano (2009), and Eckel et al. (2010).

26

with quality heterogeneity further allow firms to select the quality of their product by choosing the
quality of their inputs. We will refer to these two frameworks as efficiency and quality sorting.
We focus on four country characteristics in the models we consider: consumer income,
total expenditure, bilateral iceberg trade costs and aggregate price index. These are widely viewed
as the theoretical counterparts to our empirical measures of GDP per capita, GDP, bilateral
distance and overall economic remoteness. To see the latter, note that a country which is relatively
far from most other economies has high shipping costs, high c.i.f. (cost, insurance and freight
inclusive) import prices, and thus a high aggregate price index.

6.1

Efficiency and quality sorting with CES demand

Under efficiency sorting and CES demand (Melitz [2003]), more productive firms have lower
marginal costs, set lower prices, sell higher quantities and earn larger revenues. This generates a
negative correlation between f.o.b. export prices and export revenues across firms offering a
particular good in a given destination.
A number of recent papers have incorporated quality differentiation across firms into this
framework. In these models, product quality enters the utility function through a quantityaugmenting term and quality-adjusted prices behave as in Melitz (2003). While the microfoundations of firms’ quality choice differ across papers, more successful firms always sell higherquality goods. For example, quality upgrading may entail a fixed cost which only more productive
firms can afford (Johnson [2007]), or firms may choose the quality of their inputs (Verhoogen
[2008], Kugler and Verhoogen [2008]). In view of our results, we discuss the latter framework
below.
Although more productive firms can process any given input more efficiently, they
optimally use more expensive, better-quality inputs to produce higher-quality goods. If quality
increases in productivity sufficiently quickly, so will marginal costs and f.o.b. prices. F.o.b. export
prices would then be positively correlated with revenues across sellers in a given market. On the
other hand, when the elasticity of marginal costs with respect to quality is not sufficiently high, all
predictions of the quality-augmented model would be identical to those of Melitz (2003). In Table
X and below, we summarize the former case.
With CES demand, firms optimally charge a constant mark-up above variable cost in every
market. Thus, an exporter’s f.o.b. price does not depend on the identity of its trade partner, and

27

does not vary systematically with revenues, market size, income, distance or remoteness across
destinations. This holds under both efficiency and quality sorting.
In the presence of fixed trade costs, only firms above a certain productivity threshold make
positive profits and become exporters. Since firm revenues increase with aggregate spending and
with the aggregate price index in an economy, this cut-off is lower for bigger 38 and more remote
markets. On the other hand, it rises with bilateral distance because servicing more distant countries
entails higher transportation costs and lower profits. This implies that under efficiency sorting, the
average export price across all Chinese firms selling in a given country-product market should rise
with destination size and remoteness and fall with bilateral distance. The opposite would hold
under quality sorting. Since CES preferences are homothetic, however, GDP per capita would not
affect firm selection into exporting nor the average price across exporters, all else equal.

6.2

Efficiency and quality sorting with linear demand

Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) provide an alternative treatment of efficiency sorting in which firms
face linear demand as in Ottaviano, Tabuchi and Thisse (2002). Kneller and Yu (2008) extend this
framework to embed quality differentiation across firms. In both models, the price elasticity of
residual demand is not constant as with CES preferences, but depends on the toughness of
competition in a market. Chinese firms would then optimally charge lower mark-ups and lower
f.o.b. prices for the same product in bigger and more distant destinations. This occurs because
larger markets attract a greater number of competitors, while countries further away from China
are supplied by relatively more productive Chinese firms that set lower prices. Both forces reduce
the aggregate price index and incentivize Chinese exporters to cut their mark-ups. On the other
hand, the aggregate price index is higher in remote destinations. Holding bilateral distance from
China fixed, a Chinese exporter would thus charge more in remote markets. 39 Because export
revenues increase with market size but fall with distance, however, unit values may be either
positively or negatively correlated with sales within a firm across destinations.
Since more productive firms have lower marginal costs in Melitz and Ottaviano (2008),
they offer lower prices, sell higher quantities and earn larger revenues, even though they charge
higher mark-ups. This efficiency-sorting model thus also delivers a negative correlation between
38

This result holds with free entry in general equilibrium. See Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2004), Helpman, Melitz
and Rubinstein (2008), Chaney (2008), and Baldwin and Harrigan (2011).
39
These predictions are not limited to models of variable mark-ups based on linear demand. The translog expenditure
function in Feenstra (2003), for example, would deliver similar results.

28

f.o.b. export prices and sales across Chinese exporters in a given market. Quality sorting in
Kneller and Yu (2008), on the other hand, implies that better-quality firms set higher prices
because of their larger variable costs, as well as because they charge a bigger mark-up. 40 When
quality rises sufficiently quickly with marginal costs, higher-quality firms capture a bigger market
share, and f.o.b. prices and revenues are positively correlated across firms in a given destination.
Otherwise, the correlation remains negative as in Melitz and Ottaviano (2008).
With linear demand, demand for any product is zero above a given price and only firms
above a certain productivity or quality cut-off become exporters. This threshold is higher for
bigger, more distant and less remote destinations where competition is tougher. Under efficiency
sorting, tougher markets both select firms with lower marginal costs and force each exporter to set
a lower mark-up. The average f.o.b. price across Chinese exporters to a given country would thus
fall with its GDP, bilateral distance, and centrality. On the other hand, the behavior of aggregate
prices is ambiguous under quality sorting: While tougher competition attracts firms above a higher
quality cut-off that charge higher prices, it also induces lower mark-ups. Finally, since linear
demand preferences are not homothetic, the impact of destinations' income on export prices at the
firm level, as well as on the average price across Chinese exporters, is theoretically ambiguous.

7

Interpreting the stylized facts

We next interpret the stylized facts we have established in view of the models described above,
and conclude that none of the existing theoretical frameworks can match all empirical results. We
suggest that a successful model should incorporate quality differentiation across firms, as well as
across destinations within firms, in order to rationalize the systematic patterns in the data.

7.1 Quality differentiation across firms
The observed variation in trade activity across Chinese exporters is strongly indicative of quality
differentiation across firms. In particular, exporters that charge higher prices earn greater revenues
within narrowly defined destination-product markets (stylized fact 1). Moreover, firms that sell
more abroad and that charge higher export prices import more expensive inputs (stylized fact

40

Kneller and Yu (2008) directly assume that firms with higher marginal costs produce higher quality. See
Antoniades (2008) and Auer and Sauré (2009) for explicit models of firms' quality choice under linear demand.

29

2). 41,42 These results are consistent with the idea that firms using higher-quality inputs, as proxied
by steeper input prices, are able to produce more expensive, higher-quality products and thereby
enjoy superior export performance. This does not imply that efficiency is unimportant for firms’
export success, since productivity can determine firms' optimal choice of input and output quality.
Our results for firms' worldwide sales and number of export destinations provide further
support for this quality interpretation. Heterogeneous-firm models predict that more productive
firms not only have bigger revenues in any given country, but also enter more markets because
they are above the exporting cut-off for more trade partners. More productive firms thus also enjoy
higher global revenues. With quality sorting, export and input prices should thus be positively
correlated with worldwide sales and number of destinations across manufacturers of a given
product. This is indeed what we find in the data (stylized facts 1 and 2). These correlations would
instead have been negative in the absence of quality differentiation across firms.
The systematic variation we document across products with varying scope for quality
differentiation and across countries with different income levels further corroborates these
conclusions. While stylized fact 1 holds for all products, it applies to a greater degree to nonhomogenous goods and sectors intensive in R&D and advertising ̶ precisely the cases where we
believe the elasticity of marginal costs and prices with respect to quality to be high. 43 We also
expect firms to have greater incentives to invest in quality when serving richer consumers with a
higher willingness to pay for quality. The next subsection discusses this point in more detail.
The results for firms' imported inputs and number of export destinations are crucial for
establishing the quality story. This is because we have considered a prominent, yet specific class
of models, and frameworks with other market structures could deliver a positive correlation
between prices and sales across firms in a market even in the absence of quality differentiation.
Conversely, in some environments the correlation might be negative even when firms do in fact

41

Exporters who import inputs have bigger sales, more export destinations, and higher prices than exporters who do
not (available on request). This suggests that foreign inputs are of higher quality than local inputs, and that more
productive firms are able to incur the costs of sourcing inputs from abroad. See also Kugler and Vehoogen (2009).
42
We have also found mixed evidence that firms might improve output quality by buying higher input quantities per
unit of output. While this quantity ratio is positively correlated with firms' export price, it is negatively correlated with
firms' export revenues and number of destinations.
43
While the Rauch classification does not distinguish between horizontal and vertical differentiation, R&D and
advertising intensity proxy the latter. The robustness of our results across these three measures, as well as the findings
for firms' imported inputs, suggest that the variation identified by the Rauch dummy in our data is of a quality nature.

30

differ in product quality.44 Separately, our robustness checks notwithstanding, measurement error
in export unit values could affect the estimated sign of this correlation. Different market structures,
however, cannot rationalize the relationship of export performance with input prices or with trade
partner intensity. Neither could ME bias, because the data on input values are unrelated to those on
export activity, and the number of export markets is unrelated to export values.

7.2 Quality differentiation across destinations within firms
While the variation across firms in the data is consistent with existing models of quality sorting,
the variation across destinations within a firm cannot be reconciled with any of the heterogeneousfirm models we have examined. In particular, firms charge higher f.o.b. prices for the same
product in richer, larger, more distant and less isolated economies (stylized fact 3). The models we
have discussed assume that each firm exports an identical product to all of its trade partners. If so,
the firm-product pair fixed effects in our regressions would capture the marginal cost and quality
characteristics of the firm's good. Any residual variation in f.o.b. prices across destinations would
then have to be due to variable mark-ups. Extant models, however, predict either constant markups (CES demand) or a pattern exactly opposite to that in the data (linear demand).
What can explain our results is that firms adjust not only mark-ups, but also the quality of
their products to the destination market, by varying the quality of their inputs. Firms might thus
respond to market competition in two ways that are not mutually exclusive: by lowering mark-ups
(for a given quality level) and by increasing product quality (for a given mark-up). Both strategies
would reduce the quality-adjusted price for their product, thereby making them more competitive
and their good more appealing to consumers. If quality upgrading requires more expensive
sophisticated inputs, it could raise marginal costs sufficiently to dominate the mark-up reduction.
We would then observe firms charging higher export prices in bigger, more distant and less remote
destinations where market competition is tougher. 45 Since our results would capture the net price
effect of both the quality and mark-up adjustments, they would provide a lower bound for the
former, without ruling out the latter.

44

Price and revenue might be more positively correlated across firms at the lower end of the quality spectrum and less
positively or even negatively correlated at the high end. If so, the patterns we document might hold because Chinese
producers differ in product quality but nevertheless remain at the bottom of the worldwide quality distribution.
45
Depending on modeling assumptions, bilateral distance may or may not affect market toughness once overall
remoteness is controlled for.

31

The positive correlation between f.o.b. prices and destinations' GDP per capita can also be
attributed to quality differentiation across markets within a firm. Exporters might offer higherquality versions of their product and/or charge a higher mark-up for it in richer countries because
wealthier consumers have a lower marginal utility of income and a greater willingness to pay for
quality. This is consistent with the theoretical predictions Verhoogen (2008), Fajgelbaum,
Grossman and Helpman (2009) and Simonovska (2010) derive using non-homothetic preferences.
It can also explain why the effects of market size, proximity and remoteness are concentrated in
richer countries: In response to market toughness, firms have a greater incentive to upgrade quality
when prospective consumers are willing to pay more for it. 46
To illustrate these mechanisms, consider a Chinese shoe maker. This manufacturer can
choose cheap man-made upper and low-quality soles to produce a cheap pair of shoes for export to
Malaysia. He can then use high-quality leather upper and expensive waterproof soles to build
shoes for the German or American market. This could be optimal because Malaysia is a poor
country where consumers have little taste for quality and the market is not very tough because it is
relatively small and close to China but otherwise quite remote. By contrast, American and German
buyers are richer and have lower marginal utilities of income. The shoe maker also faces more
competition in those big, distant and more central markets, but could increase profits by improving
quality and charging a higher price. Moreover, he need not incur fixed costs for each quality line,
but could simply use different inputs and the same assembly technology.
This quality interpretation is furthermore consistent with the other empirical patterns we
document. According to stylized fact 5, firms entering more markets offer a broader menu of
export prices. This could emerge if firms adjust either mark-ups and/or quality across destinations.
However, the relationship is more pronounced for products with greater potential for quality
upgrading, which speaks to quality discrimination across countries. Stylized fact 6 in turn provides
indirect evidence that firms vary input quality to manufacture multiple quality versions of their
output product. In particular, firms that export more, that sell to more destinations, and that offer a
broader menu of export prices buy inputs from more origin countries and pay a wider range of

46

Firms might offer more quality versions of a product in countries with greater income inequality in order to cater to
different consumer segments of the market. We can measure this imperfectly with (i) the standard deviation of export
prices across months within a firm, product and destination triplet; and with (ii) the standard deviation of export prices
across months and firms within a product-destination pair. While both are negatively correlated with countries' Gini
coefficient on average, the correlation is indeed more positive for products with greater scope for quality upgrading.

32

input prices. In the absence of detailed information on firms’ domestic input purchases, this
evidence is an imperfect signal of the quality range of all their inputs.
The positive correlation between f.o.b. prices and revenue across markets within a firmproduct pair is also consistent with firms tailoring quality to each destination (stylized fact 4). Two
factors can generate this pattern. First, firms offer higher-quality versions of a good in bigger
markets, where revenues are higher, and in more distant markets, where sales are lower. If product
quality is sufficiently sensitive to market size, the former effect would dominate. Second, if firms
both increase quality and lower mark-ups in tougher markets, their quality-adjusted price would
fall, raising firm revenues precisely in markets where export prices are high.
While market size, bilateral distance and centrality are positively correlated with the
toughness of competition in the linear-demand models we have considered, they need not be more
generally. We therefore emphasize that the stylized facts are consistent with firms varying product
quality in response to these destination characteristics without arguing that market toughness is
necessarily the driving force behind these adjustments.
For example, firms might offer superior quality to bigger markets because of economies of
scale in the production or delivery of quality goods. On the production side, upgrading product
quality might entail fixed investments in specialized equipment or hiring skilled workers. On the
delivery side, goods of expert quality might have higher fixed costs of marketing and distribution
because of more sophisticated packaging, costlier transportation, or better-trained local sales
managers. As long as firms expect to earn higher revenues in larger markets and the destinationspecific fixed costs of exporting rise with product quality, firms would have an incentive to
improve the quality of goods shipped to bigger countries.
Firms might also export products of higher quality to more distant nations if they face perunit transportation costs instead of the iceberg shipping costs assumed in the models above. Perunit costs lower the relative price of and rise relative demand for high-quality goods. Hence, if
firms sell multiple quality versions of a product in each market, they would optimally export
relatively more of their expensive, better-quality varieties to less proximate destinations. 47
Finally, we briefly discuss two peripheral results. First, exporters who vary prices more
across markets tend to import more expensive inputs on average (column 4 of Panel A in Table
IX). Firms with greater export price dispersion are also more likely to set higher prices in big,

47

Alchian and Allen (1964) and Hummels and Skiba (2004) study this effect at the aggregate product level.

33

distant and central markets (stylized fact 3). Second, producers charging a higher average export
price pay a wider range of import prices and source inputs from more countries (column 3 of
Panels B, C and D in Table IX). This suggests that successful exporters both offer higher quality
products on average and are better at varying product quality across markets. 48
To summarize, we conclude that theory will have to incorporate both quality
differentiation across firms and across destinations within a firm in order to be consistent with the
stylized facts in the data. A successful framework will likely inherit properties of existing
heterogeneous-firm models with quality sorting and endogenous input choice, but also rationalize
why firms offer higher quality to richer, bigger, more distant and less remote markets.

7.3 Alternative explanations
Since we do not observe product quality directly, we consider two alternative explanations for our
results, and find that each of them can match some but not all of the patterns in the data.
First, with CES preferences and per-unit transportation costs, it is optimal for firms to
charge higher mark-ups in more distant countries, even in the absence of quality differentiation
across firms (Martin 2009). This framework, however, cannot generate a positive correlation
between export prices and revenues across firms in a given market, or rationalize the systematic
patterns we find for firms' imported input prices.
Second, the positive correlation between sales and unit values across firms could be
induced by firm-product-destination specific demand shocks. Combined with market power in
input markets, such demand shocks could also produce some of our results for import prices. For
example, if exporters have monopsony power in input markets, a positive demand shock could
increase their demand for inputs and explain why import prices are positively correlated with
export prices and export revenues. Alternatively, if input producers have market power, a positive
demand shock could reduce exporters’ elasticity of input demand, allowing upstream suppliers to
extract a higher price. This explanation, however, cannot rationalize the higher prices exporters
charge in richer, bigger, more distant and less remote markets, unless demand shocks vary
systematically across countries. Neither can it account for the relationships we find between firms’
range of import prices, range of export prices and export performance. It also does not explain

48

Exporters that sell more goods also offer more quality versions within each product (available on request). This
suggests that a characteristic such as managerial talent may jointly determine firms' capacity to expand their product
scope and quality range. Eckel et al. (2010) and Manova and Zhang (2011) study multi-product, multi-quality firms.

34

why the positive correlation between price and revenues increases with goods' scope for quality
differentiation or with destination income.

8 Conclusion
This paper examines the variation in export and import prices across firms, products and trade
partners to shed light on the determinants of firms’ export success. We establish six stylized facts
using rich data on the universe of Chinese trading firms. These stylized facts have two main
implications. First, more successful exporters use higher-quality inputs to produce higher-quality
goods. Second, firms vary the quality of their products across destinations with different market
size, income, bilateral distance and overall remoteness by using inputs of different quality levels.
We conclude that international trade models should incorporate both of these features in order to
rationalize the systematic patterns in the data. While we discuss alternative explanations for the
effects of country characteristics on firms' quality choice, we remain agnostic about the underlying
mechanism driving this decision. Our findings thus point to previously unexplored dimensions of
firm heterogeneity and adjustments on the quality margin within firms across destinations that
future theoretical and empirical work should pursue.
Understanding the nature of firm heterogeneity is important because of its implications for
aggregate trade patterns and growth. Our results raise the possibility that, in addition to modifying
trade volumes, product scope and export destinations, firms might also vary product quality within
and across markets in response to trade reforms. A fruitful area for future research is how this new
margin of adjustment impacts the effects of globalization on aggregate welfare and inequality.
Kalina Manova, Stanford University and NBER
Zhiwei Zhang, Nomura Asset Management and IMF

35

References
Alchian, Armen and William Allen, University Economics, (Wadsworth Publishing Company,
1964.
Ahn, JaeBin, Amit Khandelwal, and Shang-Jin Wei, "The Role of Intermediaries in Facilitating
Trade," Journal of International Economics, forthcoming, 2010.
Antoniades, Alexis, "Heterogeneous Firms, Quality, and Trade," Columbia University mimeo,
2008.
Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, "New Trade Models, Same Old
Gains?" American Economic Review, forthcoming, 2009.
Auer, Raphael and Philip Sauré, "Spatial Competition in Quality," Swiss National Bank mimeo,
2009.
Aw, Bee Yan, Sukkyun Chung, and Mark Roberts, "Productivity and Turnover in the Export
Market: Micro-level Evidence from the Republic of Korea and Taiwan (China)," World Bank
Economic Review, 14 (2000), 65-90.
Baldwin, Richard and James Harrigan, "Zeros, Quality and Space: Trade Theory and Trade
Evidence," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 3 (2011), 60-88.
Bastos, Paulo and Joana Silva, "The Quality of a Firm’s Exports: Where You Export to Matters,"
Journal of International Economics, 82 (2010), 99-111.
Bernard, Andrew, Jonathan Eaton, Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum, "Plants and Productivity
in International Trade," American Economic Review, 93 (2003), 1268-1290.
Bernard, Andrew and Bradford Jensen, "Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in U.S. Manufacturing, 19761987," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics, 1995 (1995), 67-112.
Bernard, Andrew, Bradford Jensen, Stephen Redding, and Peter Schott, "Firms in International
Trade," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21 (2007), 105-130.
Bernard, Andrew, Bradford Jensen, and Peter Schott, "Trade Costs, Firms and Productivity,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, 53 (2006), 917-937.
Bernard, Andrew, Bradford Jensen, and Peter Schott, "Importers, Exporters, and Multinationals: A
Portrait of Firms in the U.S. that Trade Goods," in Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from
Micro Data, Timothy Dunne, Bradford Jensen, and Mark Roberts, eds. (University of Chicago
Press, 2009).
Bernard, Andrew, Stephen Redding, and Peter Schott, "Comparative Advantage and
Heterogeneous Firms," Review of Economic Studies, 74 (2007), 31-66.
Bernard, Andrew, Stephen Redding, and Peter Schott, "Multi-Product Firms and Trade
Liberalization," Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming, 2009.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, "How Much Should We Trust
Differences-in-Differences Estimates?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (2004), 249-275.
Brambilla, Irene, Daniel Lederman, and Guido Porto, "The Quality of Trade: Exports, Export
Destinations, and Wages," Universidad de San Andrés mimeo, 2009.
Burstein, Ariel and Nir Jaimovich, "Understanding Movements in Aggregate and Product-Level
Real-Exchange Rates," Duke University mimeo, 2009.

36

Burstein, Ariel and Marc Melitz, "Trade Liberalization and Firm Dynamics," Harvard University
mimeo, 2011.
Bustos, Paula, "Trade Liberalization, Exports, and Technology Upgrading: Eidence on the Impact
of MERCOSUR on Argentinian Firms," American Economic Review, 101 (2011), 304-340.
Chaney, Thomas, "Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International
Trade," American Economic Review, 98 (2008), 1707-1721.
Clerides, Sofronis, Saul Lach, and James Tybout, "Is Learning by Exporting Important? Microdynamic Evidence from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
113 (1998), 903-947.
Crozet, Matthieu, Keith Head, and Thierry Mayer, "Quality Sorting and Trade: Firm-level
Evidence for French Wine," University of British Columbia mimeo, 2009.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz, "Dissecting Trade: Firms, Industries, and
Export Destinations," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 94 (2004), 150154.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz, "An Anatomy of International Trade:
Evidence from French Firms," Econometrica, forthcoming, 2008.
Eckel, Carsten, Leonardo Iacovone, Beata Javorcik, and Peter Neary, "Multi-Product Firms at
Home and Away: Cost- versus Quality-Based Competence," University of Oxford mimeo,
2010.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo, Gene Grossman, and Elhanan Helpman, "Income Distribution, Product
Quality and International Trade," NBER Working Paper No. w15329, 2009.
Feenstra, Robert, "A Homothetic Utility Function for Monopolistic Competition Models, Without
Constant Price Elasticity," Economic Letters, 78 (2003), 79-86.
Fernandes, Ana and Caroline Paunov, "Does Tougher Import Competition Foster Product Quality
Upgrading?" World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. w4894, 2009.
Fitzgerald, Doireann and Stefanie Haller, "Pricing-to-Market: Evidence from Producer Prices,"
Stanford University mimeo, 2010.
Gervais, Antoine, "Product Quality and Firm Heterogeneity in International Trade," University of
Maryland mimeo, 2009.
Gopinath, Gita, Oleg Itskhoki, and Roberto Rigobon, "Currency Choice and Exchange Rate Passthrough," American Economic Review, 100 (2010), 304-336.
Görg, Holger, László Halpern and Balász Muraközy, "Why Do Within Firm-Product Export Prices
Differ Across Markets?" Kiel Working Paper No. w1596, 2010.
Hallak, Juan-Carlos, "Product Quality and the Direction of Trade," Journal of International
Economics, 68 (2006), 238-265.
Hallak, Juan-Carlos and Peter Schott, "Estimating Cross-Country Differences in Product Quality,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126 (2011), 417-474.
Hallak, Juan-Carlos and Jagadeesh Sivadasan, "Firms' Exporting Behavior under Quality
Constraints," University of San Andrés mimeo, 2008.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein, "Estimating Trade Flows: Trading Partners
and Trading Volumes," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123 (2008), 441-487.

37

Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Stephen Yeaple, "Export versus FDI with Heterogeneous
Firms," American Economic Review, 94 (2004), 300-316.
Hummels, David and Peter Klenow, "The Variety and Quality of a Nation's Exports," American
Economic Review, 95 (2005), 704-723.
Hummels, David and Alexandre Skiba, "Shipping the Good Apples Out? An Empirical
Confirmation of the Alchian-Allen Conjecture," Journal of Political Economy, 112 (2004),
1384-1402.
Johnson, Robert, "Trade and Prices with Heterogeneous Firms," Dartmouth mimeo, 2007.
Khandelwal, Amit, "The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders," Review of Economic Studies, 77
(2010), 1450-1476.
Klingebiel, Daniela, Randall Kroszner, and Luc Laeven, "Banking Crises, Financial Dependence,
and Growth," Journal of Financial Economics, 84 (2007), 187-228.
Kneller, Richard and Zhihong Yu, "Quality Selection, Chinese Exports and Theories of
Heterogeneous Firm Trade," University of Nottingham mimeo, 2008.
Kugler, Maurice and Eric Verhoogen, "Prices, Plant Size, and Product Quality," Review of
Economic Studies, forthcoming, 2008.
Kugler, Maurice and Eric Verhoogen, "Plants and Imported Inputs: New Facts and an
Interpretation," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 99 (2009), 501-507.
Mandel, Benjamin, "Heterogeneous Firms and Import Quality: Evidence from Transaction-Level
Prices," University of California at Davis mimeo, 2008.
Manova, Kalina and Zhiwei Zhang, "China's Exporters and Importers: Firms, Products, and Trade
Partners," NBER Working Paper No. w15249, 2008.
Manova, Kalina and Zhiwei Zhang, "Multi-Product Multi-Quality Firms," in progress, 2011.
Martin, Julien, "Spatial Price Discrimination in International Markets," CREST-INSEE mimeo,
2009.
Mayer, Thierry, Marc Melitz, and Gianmarco Ottaviano, "Market size, Competition, and the
Product Mix of Exporters," Harvard University mimeo, 2009.
Melitz, Marc, "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity," Econometrica, 71 (2003), 1695-1725.
Melitz, Marc and Gianmarco Ottaviano, "Market Size, Trade, and Productivity," Review of
Economic Studies, 75 (2008), 295-316.
Moulton, Brent, "An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate Variables on
Micro Unit," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 72 (1990), 334-338.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco, Takatoshi Tabuchi, and Jacques-François Thisse, "Agglomeration and
Trade Revisited," International Economic Review, 43 (2002), 409-436.
Pavcnik, Nina, "Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Evidence from
Chilean Plants," The Review of Economic Studies, 69 (2002), 245-276.
Rauch, James, "Networks versus Markets in International Trade," Journal of International
Economics, 48 (1999), 7-35.
Schott, Peter, "Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization in International Trade,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (2004), 647-678.
38

Simonovska, Ina, "Income Differences and Prices of Tradables," NBER Working Paper No.
w16233, 2010.
Sutton, John, "Quality, Trade and the Moving Window: The Globalization Process," Economic
Journal, 117 (2007), 469-498.
Verhoogen, Eric, "Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Manufacturing
Sector," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123 (2008), 489-530.

39

Table I
The Variation in Export Prices across Firms, Products and Destinations

# Obs

Average

St Dev

Min

5th
Percentile

95th
Percentile

Max

Variation in (log) prices across firms and destinations within HS-8 products
1. firm-product-destination prices
(product F.E.)

2,179,923

0.00

1.24

-12.12

-1.93

2.02

13.65

2. st dev of prices across firms
and destinations within products
(product F.E.)

6,591

1.11

0.65

0.00

0.26

2.33

5.92

0.00

0.01

1.39

9.14

0.00

0.08

2.30

8.36

Variation in (log) prices across destinations within firm-HS-8 product pairs
3. st dev of prices across
destinations within firm-product
pairs (firm-product pair F.E.)

303,935

0.46

0.49

Variation in (log) prices across firms within destination-HS-8 product pairs
4. st dev of prices across firms
within destination-product pairs
(destination-product pair F.E.)

159,778

0.90

0.74

Notes: This table summarizes the variation in free-on-board export prices across 96,522 Chinese firms, 6,908 products, and 231 importing
countries in 2005. Line 1: summary statistics for firm-product-destination log prices, after taking out HS-8 product fixed effects. Line 2: for each
HS-8 product, we take the standard deviation of log prices across firms and destinations. Line 2 shows how this standard deviation varies
across the 6,591 HS-8 products traded by at least two firm-destination pairs. Line 3: for each firm that exports a given product to multiple
countries, we record the standard deviation of log prices across destinations, by product. Line 3 shows how this standard deviation varies
across firm-product pairs. Line 4: for each destination-product market with multiple Chinese exporters, we record the standard deviation of log
prices across firms. Line 4 shows how this standard deviation varies across destination-product pairs.

Table II
Product-Level Average Export Prices and Destination Characteristics
Dependent variable: (log) average f.o.b. export price, by HS-8 product and destination
All Destinations

Rich Destinations

Poor Destinations

(1)

(2)

(3)

(log) GDP per capita

0.019***
(6.60)

0.053***
(12.07)

-0.006
(-0.76)

(log) GDP

-0.005**
(-2.02)

-0.003
(-1.10)

-0.025***
(-6.40)

(log) Distance

-0.027***
(-5.62)

0.021***
(3.91)

-0.108***
(-11.79)

(log) Remoteness

-0.148***
(-15.48)

-0.134***
(-13.60)

-0.106***
(-4.39)

Y

Y

Y

0.854
242,403
6,879
179

0.855
161,835
6,773
89

Product FE
R-squared
# observations
# product clusters
# destinations

0.876
80,568
5,860
90

Notes: This table examines the effect of destination income, market size, distance and remoteness on
average export prices. The outcome variable is the (log) average free-on-board export price across all
Chinese exporters in a given destination and HS-8 product. Column 1 presents results for the full sample of
179 countries, while Column 2 (Column 3) restricts the sample to countries with GDP per capita above (below)
the sample median. All regressions include a constant term and HS-8 product fixed effects, and cluster errors
by HS-8 product. T-statistics in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

Table III
Firms' Export Prices and Worldwide Export Revenues
Dependent variable: (log) average f.o.b. export price, by firm and HS-8 product

Variation Across Firms Within Products
(1)
(log) Revenue

(2)

0.094***
(49.25)

(log) Quantity

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.040***
(14.15)

0.097***
(48.26)

0.091***
(47.14)

0.085***
(41.31)

0.067***
(24.07)

-0.165***
(-103.75)

(log) Revenue x
Different. Good

0.065***
(22.83)

(log) Revenue x
R&D Intensity

-0.079*
(-1.73)

(log) Revenue x
High R&D Intensity

0.008***
(4.67)

(log) Revenue x
Adv.+R&D Intensity

0.362***
(8.23)

(log) Revenue x
Rich destinations
Product FE
R-squared
# observations
# products
# firm clusters

0.031***
(11.37)
Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

0.644
898,247
6,908
96,522

0.671
898,247
6,908
96,522

0.642
619,357
4,276
84,464

0.637
871,596
6,182
93,514

0.637
871,596
6,182
93,514

0.637
875,097
6,252
94,005

0.649
974,033
6,879
94,664

Notes: This table examines the relationship between firms' worldwide export prices and revenues. It exploits the variation across firms
within products, by including HS-8 product fixed effects. The outcome variable is the (log) average free on board export price by firm and
HS-8 product, constructed as the ratio of worldwide revenues and quantities exported by firm and product. Products' scope for quality
differentiation is proxied by (1) a dummy variable equal to 1 for differentiated products as classified by Rauch (1999), Column 3; (2) R&D
intensity by 3-digit ISIC sector from Klingebiel, Kroszner and Laeven (2007), Column 4; a dummy variable equal to 1 for R&D intensity
above the median, Column 5; or (3) the combined advertising and R&D intensity by 3-digit ISIC sector from Kugler and Verhoogen
(2008), Column 6. In Column 7, the average price and worldwide revenues are computed separately for countries above and below the
median income in the sample, and the regression includes a dummy for rich destinations and its interaction with revenues. All
regressions include a constant term and cluster errors by firm. T-statistics in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level.

Table IV
Variation in Export Prices Across Firms in A Destination
Dependent variable: (log) f.o.b. export price, by firm, destination and HS-8 product

Variation Across Firms
Within Destination - Product Pairs
(1)
(log) Revenue

(2)

0.081***
(70.07)

(log) Quantity

(3)
0.036***
(9.36)

(4)
0.077***
(54.61)

(5)
0.065***
(35.32)

0.054***
(12.97)

(log) Revenue x
R&D Intensity

0.200***
(3.17)

(log) Revenue x
Adv.+R&D Intensity

0.616***
(10.63)

(log) Revenue x
(log) GDP per capita

R-squared
# observations
# dest-product pairs

0.061***
(9.72)

-0.183***
(-144.72)

(log) Revenue x
Different. Good

Destination-Product FE

(6)

0.002***
(3.17)
Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

0.744
2,179,923
258,056

0.773
2,179,923
258,056

0.729
1,494,839
163,873

0.741
2,130,413
247,867

0.741
2,139,735
249,874

0.743
2,098,634
242,403

Notes: This table examines the relationship between firms' bilateral export prices and revenues. It exploits the variation across firms
within a destination-product market by including country-HS-8 product pair fixed effects. The outcome variable is the (log) free-on-board
export price by firm, destination and HS-8 product. Products' scope for quality differentiation is proxied as in Table III. Column 6 includes
the interaction of revenues with the destination's GDP per capita. All regressions include a constant term and cluster errors by destinationproduct. T-statistics in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

Table V
Firms' Export Prices and Number of Export Destinations
Panel A. Dep. variable: (log) average f.o.b. export price, by firm and HS-8 product

(1)
(log) # Destinations

0.014***
(2.79)

(log) # Dest x
Different. Good

(2)
0.010
(1.41)

Hom. Goods

Diff. Goods

(3)

(4)

0.010
(1.40)

0.022***
(4.12)

(5)
0.004
(0.70)

0.428**
(2.43)

(log) # Dest x
Adv.+R&D Intensity

R-squared
# observations
# products
# firm clusters

-0.003
(-0.46)

0.012
(1.50)

(log) # Dest x
R&D Intensity

Product FE

(6)

0.577***
(3.77)
Y
0.632
898,247
6,908
96,522

Y
0.628
619,357
4,276
84,464

Y
0.647
61,843
1,321
23,390

Y
0.622
557,514
2,955
76,793

Y
0.624
871,596
6,182
93,514

Y
0.624
875,097
6,252
94,005

Panel B. Dep. variable: st. dev. of (log) f.o.b. export prices across destinations within a firm-HS-8 product pair

(1)
(log) # Destinations

0.004**
(2.12)

(log) # Dest x
Different. Good

(2)
0.004
(0.90)

Hom. Goods

Diff. Goods

(3)

(4)

0.004
(0.88)

0.006***
(2.65)

(5)

(6)

-0.002
(-0.77)

0.007**
(2.33)

0.002
(0.53)

(log) # Dest x
R&D Intensity

0.248***
(3.21)

(log) # Dest x
Adv.+R&D Intensity
Product FE
R-squared
# observations
# products
# firm clusters

-0.112
(-1.36)
Y
0.139
303,935
5,852
66,360

Y
0.137
210,419
3,666
54,545

Y
0.200
18,741
1,026
10,560

Y
0.126
191,678
2,640
48,845

Y
0.135
296,777
5,365
64,223

Y
0.136
298,032
5,426
64,616

Notes: This table examines the relationship between firms' export prices and number of destinations, by firm and HS-8 product. The
outcome variable in Panel A is the (log) average free-on-board export price, constructed as the ratio of worldwide revenues and
quantities exported by firm and product. The outcome variable in Panel B is the standard deviation of the (log) export price across
destinations within firm-product pairs with more than one destination. Products' scope for quality differentiation is proxied as in Table
III. All regressions include a constant term and cluster errors by firm. T-statistics in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

Table VI
Variation in Export Prices Across Destinations Within A Firm
Dependent variable: (log) f.o.b. export price, by firm, destination and HS-8 product

Variation Across Destinations
Within Firm - Product Pairs
(1)
(log) Revenue

(2)

0.021***
(36.34)

(log) Quantity

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.020***
(35.77)

0.015***
(6.52)

0.018***
(23.79)

0.017***
(13.92)

0.004***
(4.29)

-0.080***
(-117.98)

Market Share

0.015***
(4.53)

(log) Revenue x
Different. Good

0.008***
(3.27)

(log) Revenue x
R&D Intensity

0.093***
(3.90)

(log) Revenue x
Adv.+R&D Intensity

0.145***
(3.81)

(log) Revenue x
(log) GDP per capita
Firm-Product FE
R-squared
# observations
# dest-product clusters
# firm-product pairs

0.002***
(21.60)
Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

0.954
2,179,923
258,056
898,247

0.957
2,179,923
258,056
898,247

0.954
2,179,923
258,056
898,247

0.950
1,494,839
163,873
619,357

0.953
2,130,413
247,867
871,596

0.953
2,139,735
249,874
875,097

0.954
2,098,634
242,403
869,203

Notes: This table examines the relationship between firms' bilateral export prices and revenues. It exploits the variation across destinations
within a firm by including firm-HS-8 product pair fixed effects. The outcome variable is the (log) free-on-board export price by firm,
destination and HS-8 product. Column 3 controls for the share of each firm's exports in total Chinese exports, by destination and product.
Products' scope for quality differentiation is proxied as in Table III. Column 7 includes the interaction of revenues with the destination's GDP
per capita. All regressions include a constant term and cluster errors by destination-product pair. T-statistics in parenthesis. ***, **, and *
indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

Table VII
Firms' Export Prices and Destination Characteristics
Dependent variable: (log) f.o.b. export price, by firm, destination and HS-8 product

Variation Across Destinations
Within Firm - Product Pairs
(1)
(log) GDP per capita

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.021***
(27.24)

(log) GDP

0.012***
(23.30)

(log) Distance

0.016***
(8.40)

(log) Remoteness

-0.062***
(-18.75)

(5)
0.015***
(14.84)

0.015***
(15.42)

0.005***
(8.25)

0.008***
(11.75)

0.012***
(6.01)

0.009***
(4.52)

-0.027***
(-8.26)

-0.021***
(-6.60)

Market Share

Firm-Product FE
R-squared
# observations
# dest-product clusters
# firm-product pairs
# destinations

(6)

0.067***
(18.03)
Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

0.954
2,098,634
242,403
869,203
179

0.954
2,098,957
242,649
869,297
180

0.954
2,177,935
256,772
898,035
210

0.954
2,177,935
256,772
898,035
210

0.954
2,098,634
242,403
869,203
179

0.954
2,098,634
242,403
869,203
179

Notes: This table examines the effect of destination income,market size, distance and remoteness on firms' export prices. It
exploits the variation across destinations within a firm, by including firm-HS-8 product pair fixed effects. The outcome variable is
the (log) free-on-board export price by firm, destination and HS-8 product. Column 6 controls for the share of each firm's
exports in total Chinese exports, by destination and product. All regressions include a constant term and cluster errors by
destination-product pair. T-statistics in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

Table VIII
Destinations's Willingness to Pay for Quality and Firms' Export Price Dispersion
Dependent variable: (log) f.o.b. export price, by firm, destination and HS-8 product

Variation Across Destinations Within Firm - Product Pairs
GDP per Capita

Interaction Variable:

All
(1)
(log) GDP per capita

-0.505***
(-4.45)

Hom. Goods Diff. Goods
(2)
0.038
(0.10)

(3)
-0.626***
(-4.25)

Firm Price Dispersion
Rich Dest

Poor Dest

All

All

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.021***
(13.49)

0.015***
(4.37)

(log) GDP per capita
Interaction

-0.002
(-0.43)

(log) GDP

-0.015***
(-4.41)

0.007
(0.67)

-0.013***
(-2.87)

(log) GDP Interaction

0.002***
(5.51)

0.000
(0.21)

0.002***
(3.65)

(log) Distance

-0.097***
(-7.92)

-0.024
(-0.70)

-0.117***
(-6.85)

(log) Distance Interaction

0.011***
(8.37)

0.003
(0.94)

0.014***
(7.16)

(log) Remoteness

-0.107***
(-4.11)

-0.008
(-0.09)

-0.134***
(-3.95)

(log) Remoteness
Interaction

0.009***
(3.42)

-0.001
(-0.15)

0.012***
(3.38)

Firm-Product FE
Destination FE
R-squared
# observations
# dest-product clusters
# firm-product pairs
# destinations

0.015***
(8.64)

Y
N
0.954
2,098,634
242,403
869,203
179

Y
N
0.958
125,495
24,541
58,732
175

0.005***
(6.34)

-0.002
(-1.00)

-0.005***
(-4.55)
0.023***
(7.36)

0.014***
(6.32)

-0.007
(-1.43)

Y
N

Y
N

0.949
1,315,615
129,181
541,348
179

0.953
1,767,397
161,835
792,906
89

-0.020
(-1.64)

Y
N
0.978
331,237
80,568
181,127
90

0.024***
(7.69)

-0.022***
(-8.08)
0.072***
(8.85)

-0.021***
(-6.04)

-0.002
(-0.35)

0.073***
(9.21)

0.026***
(4.31)
-0.112***
(-6.84)

-0.109***
(-6.68)

Y
N

Y
Y

0.935
1,533,339
209,259
303,908
179

0.935
1,533,339
209,259
303,908
179

Notes: This table examines the differential effect of market income, size, distance and remoteness on firms' export prices across destinations at
different income levels and across firms with different export price dispersion. It exploits the variation across destinations within a firm, by including
firm-HS-8 product pair fixed effects. Column 7 also includes destination fixed effects. The outcome variable is the (log) free-on-board export price by
firm, destination and HS-8 product. Columns 1, 6 and 7 examine the full sample; Column 2 (Column 3) restricts the sample to homogeneous
(differentiated) goods only, according to the Rauch (1999) classification; and Column 4 (5) restricts the sample to destinations with GDP per capita
above (below) the sample median. Firms' export price dispersion in Columns 6 and 7 is measured by the standard deviation of the (log) export price
across destinations within firm-product pairs with more than one destination. All regressions include a constant term and cluster errors by
destination-product pair. T-statistics in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

Table IX
Firms' Imported-Input Prices and Export Performance
Panel A. Dep. variable: (log) import price, by firm, source country and HS-8 product

(1)
(log) Total Firm Exports

(2)

(3)

0.139***
(25.45)

(log) # Export Destinations

0.047***
(4.58)

Average (log) Export Price

0.459***
(44.30)

St. Dev. of (log) Export Price
Product FE
R-squared
# observations
# products
# firm clusters

(4)

0.669***
(33.05)
Y
0.603
724,790
5,351
37,647

Y
0.589
724,790
5,351
37,647

Y
0.630
724,790
5,351
37,647

Y
0.599
587,110
5,142
27,291

Panel B. Dep. variable: st. dev. of (log) import prices across source countries within a
firm and HS-8 product

(1)
(log) Total Firm Exports

(2)

(3)

0.042***
(24.07)

(log) # Export Destinations

0.051***
(17.04)

Average (log) Export Price

0.076***
(21.39)

St. Dev. of (log) Export Price
Product FE
R-squared
# observations
# products
# firm clusters

(4)

0.147***
(19.48)
Y
0.193
129,059
3,760
21,248

Y
0.182
129,059
3,760
21,248

Y
0.191
129,059
3,760
21,248

Y
0.185
125,828
3,738
20,027

Notes: This table examines the relationship between firms' imported-input prices, export performance and export prices for the subset
of Chinese exporters that import inputs under the processing and assembly regime. The dependent variable in Panel A is the (log)
import price by firm, source country and HS-8 product. In Panel B, it is the standard deviation of (log) import prices across source
countries within a firm and HS-8 product pair. In Panel C, it is the (log) number of source countries within a firm and HS-8 product
pair. All regressions in Panels A, B and C include HS-8 product fixed effects and cluster errors by firm. The dependent variable in
Panel D is the standard deviation of (log) import prices within a firm across source coutries and HS-8 products, after these prices
have been demeaned by their HS-8 product average. The right-hand side variables include (log) worldwide firm exports and the (log)
number of export destinations. For each firm, the average (log) export price is the weighted average of (log) (firm, destination, HS-8
product) prices which have been demeaned by their HS-8 product average, with export shares as weights. The standard deviation of
(log) export prices within a firm across destinations and HS-8 products is also based on product-demeaned (log) export prices. All
regressions include a constant term. T-statistics in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

Table IX
Firms' Imported-Input Prices and Export Performance
Panel C. Dep. variable: (log) number of source countries within a firm and HS-8
product

(1)
(log) Total Firm Exports

(2)

(3)

0.059***
(41.37)

(log) # Export Destinations

0.065***
(26.77)

Average (log) Export Price

0.013***
(4.68)

St. Dev. of (log) Export Price
Product FE
R-squared
# observations
# products
# firm clusters

(4)

0.026***
(4.86)
Y
0.189
460,213
5,362
37,671

Y
0.159
460,213
5,362
37,671

Y
0.138
460,213
5,362
37,671

Y
0.141
443,702
5,326
34,584

Panel D. Dep. variable: st. dev. of (log) import prices within a firm across source
countries and HS-8 products

(1)
(log) Total Firm Exports

(2)

(3)

0.045***
(29.70)

(log) # Export Destinations

0.022***
(8.04)

Average (log) Export Price

0.074***
(25.53)

St. Dev. of (log) Export Price
R-squared
# observations (# firms)

(4)

0.349***
(64.73)
0.027
32,187

0.002
32,187

0.074
32,187

0.123
29,803

Notes: This table examines the relationship between firms' imported-input prices, export performance and export prices for the subset
of Chinese exporters that import inputs under the processing and assembly regime. The dependent variable in Panel A is the (log)
import price by firm, source country and HS-8 product. In Panel B, it is the standard deviation of (log) import prices across source
countries within a firm and HS-8 product pair. In Panel C, it is the (log) number of source countries within a firm and HS-8 product
pair. All regressions in Panels A, B and C include HS-8 product fixed effects and cluster errors by firm. The dependent variable in
Panel D is the standard deviation of (log) import prices within a firm across source coutries and HS-8 products, after these prices
have been demeaned by their HS-8 product average. The right-hand side variables include (log) worldwide firm exports and the (log)
number of export destinations. For each firm, the average (log) export price is the weighted average of (log) (firm, destination, HS-8
product) prices which have been demeaned by their HS-8 product average, with export shares as weights. The standard deviation of
(log) export prices within a firm across destinations and HS-8 products is also based on product-demeaned (log) export prices. All
regressions include a constant term. T-statistics in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

Table X
Firm Heterogeneity in Efficiency and Quality
Firm Price
Across firms in
a destination
Nature of Firm
Heterogeneity

Avg Price

Across destinations within a firm

Across destinations

Relevant Papers

Export Revenue

Export
Revenue

Income

Market
Size

Distance

Remoteness

Income

Market
Size

Distance

Remoteness

Efficiency sorting,
CES demand

Melitz 2003

-

0

0

0

0

0

0

+

-

+

Efficiency sorting,
linear demand

Melitz-Ottaviano
2008

-

+/-

+/-

-

-

+

+/-

-

-

+

Quality sorting,
CES demand

Baldwin-Harrigan 2011,
Johnson 2007, KuglerVerhoogen 2008,
Verhoogen 2008

+

0

0

0

0

0

0

-

+

-

Quality sorting,
linear demand

Kneller-Yu 2008,
Antoniades 2008

+

+/-

+/-

-

-

+

+/-

+/-

+/-

+/-

+

+

+

+

+

-

+

-

+/-

-

Data

Notes: This table summarizes the predicted behavior of export prices when export success is driven by efficiency or quality sorting across firms. Each cell reports the predicted sign of the correlation
between firm or average (product-level) free on board prices with export revenues, income, market size, bilateral distance or overall remoteness ceteris paribus . The column headings indicate whether
this correlation is across firms in a destination or across destinations within a firm. The bottom row shows the patterns that obtain in the data.

Appendix Table A1. The Correlation Between Price, Revenue and Quantity: An Illustration
Case 1

Case 2

Observation

Revenue

Quantity

Price=R/Q

Revenue

Quantity

Price=R/Q

1.

10

10

1

60

60

1

2.

20

10

2

60

30

2

3.

30

10

3

60

20

3

4.

40

10

4

60

15

4

5.

50

10

5

60

12

5

Corr (Price,Revenue)
Corr (Price,Quantity)

1.000
NA

NA
-0.902

Case 3

Case 4

Observation

Revenue

Quantity

Price=R/Q

Revenue

Quantity

Price=R/Q

1.

10

10

1

18

18

1

2.

30

15

2

30

15

2

3.

36

12

3

30

10

3

4.

76

19

4

24

6

4

5.

70

14

5

15

3

5

Corr (Price,Revenue)
Corr (Price,Quantity)

0.941
0.560

-0.277
-0.996

Case 5

Case 6

Observation

Revenue

Quantity

Price=R/Q

Revenue

Quantity

Price=R/Q

1.

15

15

1

1

1

1

2.

18

9

2

6

3

2

3.

18

6

3

15

5

3

4.

28

7

4

8

2

4

5.

20

4

5

5

1

5

Corr (Price,Revenue)
Corr (Price,Quantity)

0.643
-0.902

0.307
-0.094

Notes: This table illustrates that constructing unit prices as the ratio of revenues and quantities does not restrict the sign of the correlation
between price and revenue or between price and quantity. The table shows 6 hypothetical scenarios in which 5 observations have the same
price profile but very different revenue and quantity profiles.

Appendix Table A.2. Alternative Specifications for Table IV
Panel A. Dep. variable: (log) rank of a firm's f.o.b. export price, by HS-8 product and destination

Variation Across Firms
Within Destination - Product Pairs
(1)
(log) Revenue Rank

(2)

0.077***
(41.63)

(log) Quantity Rank

(3)
0.026***
(3.05)

(4)
0.073***
(30.06)

(5)
0.051***
(13.60)

0.059***
(6.69)

(log) Revenue Rank x
R&D Intensity

0.192***
(2.65)

(log) Revenue Rank x
Adv.+R&D Intensity

0.973***
(8.49)

(log) Revenue Rank x
(log) GDP per capita

R-squared
# observations
# dest-product pairs

0.057***
(5.53)

-0.254***
(-189.44)

(log) Revenue Rank x
Different. Good

Destination-Product FE

(6)

0.002*
(1.85)
Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

0.796
2,179,923
258,056

0.808
2,179,923
258,056

0.795
1,494,839
163,873

0.796
2,130,413
247,867

0.796
2,139,735
249,874

0.796
2,098,634
242,403

Notes: This table examines the relationship between firms' bilateral export prices and revenues. It exploits the variation across firms within a
destination-product market by including country-HS-8 product pair fixed effects. The outcome variable in Panel A is the (log) rank of the free-onboard export price of a firm in a destination and HS-8 product; the (log) revenue rank on the right-hand side is similarly defined. The outcome
variable in Panel B is the (log) average free-on-board export price by firm and HS-8 product, constructed as the ratio of worldwide revenues and
quantities exported by firm and product; the right-hand-side variable is the firm's (log) revenue by HS-8 product and destination. Products' scope
for quality differentiation is proxied by (1) a dummy variable equal to 1 for differentiated products as classified by Rauch (1999); (2) R&D intensity
by 3-digit ISIC sector from Klingebiel, Kroszner and Laeven (2007); or (3) the combined advertising and R&D intensity by 3-digit ISIC sector from
Kugler and Verhoogen (2008). All regressions include a constant term and cluster errors by destination-product. T-statistics in parenthesis. ***, **,
and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

Appendix Table A.2. Alternative Specifications for Table IV
Panel B. Dep. variable: (log) f.o.b. export price, by firm and HS-8 product

Variation Across Firms
Within Destination - Product Pairs
(1)
(log) Revenue

(2)

0.065***
(58.85)

(log) Quantity

(3)
0.023***
(6.38)

(4)
0.065***
(48.40)

(5)
0.061***
(53.05)

(6)
0.054***
(30.22)

0.050***
(13.02)

(log) Revenue x
R&D Intensity

0.007
(0.11)

(log) Revenue x
High R&D Intensity

0.009***
(4.00)

(log) Revenue x
Adv.+R&D Intensity

0.417***
(7.41)

(log) Revenue x
(log) GDP per capita

R-squared
# observations
# dest-product pairs

0.061***
(3.61)

-0.154***
(-126.72)

(log) Revenue x
Different. Good

Destination-Product FE

(7)

0.005***
(7.23)
Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

0.762
2,185,553
258,382

0.784
2,185,553
258,382

0.748
1,499,163
164,083

0.758
2,136,030
248,190

0.758
2,136,030
248,190

0.758
2,145,355
250,199

0.760
2,103,953
242,710

Notes: This table examines the relationship between firms' bilateral export prices and revenues. It exploits the variation across firms within a
destination-product market by including country-HS-8 product pair fixed effects. The outcome variable in Panel A is the (log) rank of the free-onboard export price of a firm in a destination and HS-8 product; the (log) revenue rank on the right-hand side is similarly defined. The outcome
variable in Panel B is the (log) average free-on-board export price by firm and HS-8 product, constructed as the ratio of worldwide revenues and
quantities exported by firm and product; the right-hand-side variable is the firm's (log) revenue by HS-8 product and destination. Products' scope
for quality differentiation is proxied by (1) a dummy variable equal to 1 for differentiated products as classified by Rauch (1999); (2) R&D intensity
by 3-digit ISIC sector from Klingebiel, Kroszner and Laeven (2007); or (3) the combined advertising and R&D intensity by 3-digit ISIC sector from
Kugler and Verhoogen (2008). All regressions include a constant term and cluster errors by destination-product. T-statistics in parenthesis. ***,
**, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

