NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE RIGHT AMOUNT OF TRUST
Jeffrey Butler
Paola Giuliano
Luigi Guiso
Working Paper 15344
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15344
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2009

We thank Yann Algan, Oriana Bandiera, Sascha Becker, Larry Blume, Francesco Caselli, Bhajan Grewal,
Erzo Luttmer, Bo Rothstein, Bernard Salanié, Guido Tabellini, Romain Wacziarg and Georg Weizsäcker,
as well as participants at various conferences and seminars. We are grateful to the International Atlantic
Economic Society for inviting Luigi Guiso to deliver the Robert A. Mundell distinguished address
at the 67th meeting. Luigi Guiso and Paola Giuliano thank the EUI and the UCLA-CIBER grant, respectively,
for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Jeffrey Butler, Paola Giuliano, and Luigi Guiso. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Right Amount of Trust
Jeffrey Butler, Paola Giuliano, and Luigi Guiso
NBER Working Paper No. 15344
September 2009, Revised June 2014
JEL No. A1,A12,D01,O15,Z1
ABSTRACT
We investigate the relationship between individual trust and individual economic performance. We
find that individual income is hump-shaped in a measure of intensity of trust beliefs. Our interpretation
is that highly trusting individuals tend to assume too much social risk and to be cheated more often,
ultimately performing less well than those with a belief close to the mean trustworthiness of the population.
On the other hand, individuals with overly pessimistic beliefs avoid being cheated, but give up profitable
opportunities, therefore underperforming. The cost of either too much or too little trust is comparable
to the income lost by forgoing college. We develop a framework to take into account heterogeneity
in the trustworthiness of the pool of people with whom individuals interact as well as the presence
of heterogenous costs of trust mistakes. Both sources of heterogeneity drive the relationship between
trust and income which is hump-shaped for all individuals. This framework allows us to show that
income-maximizing trust typically exceeds the trust level of the average person as well as to estimate
the distribution of income lost to trust mistakes. We find that although a majority of individuals has
well calibrated beliefs, a non-trivial proportion of the population (10%) has trust beliefs sufficiently
poorly calibrated to lower income by more than 13%. Our findings hold in large-scale international
survey data as well as inside a country with high quality institutions and are also supported by experimental
findings.
Jeffrey Butler
Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance
Via Sallustiana 62 - 00187
Rome, Italy
jeff.butler@eief.it
Paola Giuliano
Anderson School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
C517 Entrepreneurs Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and IZA
and also NBER
paola.giuliano@anderson.ucla.edu

Luigi Guiso
Axa Professor of Household Finance
Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance
Via Sallustiana 62 - 00187
Rome, Italy
luigi.guiso@eief.it

1

Introduction

More than 35 years ago Kenneth Arrow (1972), recognizing the pervasiveness of mutual
trust in commercial and non-commercial transactions, went so far as to state that “it can
be plausibly argued that much of the economic backwardness in the world can be explained
by the lack of mutual con…dence” (p. 357). Since then, Arrow’s conjecture has received
considerable empirical support. A vast literature investigates the link between aggregate
trust and aggregate economic performance and …nds a positive and monotonic relationship.1
However, there is no research available on the relationship between individuals’ levels of
trust— beliefs held about others’trustworthiness— and individuals’economic outcomes. The
latter relationship is the focus of this paper.
Trust beliefs are quite heterogeneous across individuals. Figure 1 shows the distribution
of trust for each of the countries surveyed in the European Social Survey (ESS). Here,
trust is the belief about how much a generic person should be trusted, measured on a scale
between 0 and 10: zero means no trust at all, while 10 means others can be fully trusted.2
If this question accurately measures individuals’beliefs about the average trustworthiness
of each country— a single number— respondents cannot all be simultaneously right.3 Some
must have overly pessimistic beliefs, while others must have beliefs that are too optimistic.
Individuals with beliefs in the tails of the trust distribution must either underestimate or
overestimate the trustworthiness of others and this should be re‡ected in their economic
performances: those who trust too little will give up trade and pro…t opportunities too often,
depressing their economic performance; conversely, individuals who trust too much will
over-invest in others and get cheated more frequently, hampering their economic outcomes.
1

Trust has been shown to be strongly correlated with GDP per capita and GDP growth (Knack and Zak
(2001); Knack and Keefer (1996); Guiso et al (2004); Tabellini (2008b); Algan and Cahuc (2010)); with the
organization of …rms across countries (Bloom et al., (2009) and their ability to grow large (La Porta et. al.
(1997)); with the size of a country’s stock market (Guiso et. al. (2008a)); with regulation (Aghion, Algan,
Cahuc and Shleifer, (2010) and with cross-country trade patterns (Guiso et al., 2009)).
2
See Section 3 for the exact wording of the question in the European Social Survey.
3
An alternative story is that answers re‡ect the trustworthiness of only those people with whom respondents interact. Since these sub-populations are likely heterogeneous, all respondents can be simultaneously
correct. We take this concern seriously and, after developing a theoretical model, at the end of Section 2
argue that this would work against our main …nding.

1

Hence, at the individual level, the relationship between trust and economic performance is
hump-shaped. There exists an intermediate level of trust— the “right amount of trust”—
that maximizes individual income. This level of income, and trust, will be attained by
individuals whose beliefs are in line with the average trustworthiness of the population they
interact with.
We test the relationship between trust and income using data from the European Social
Survey. Since the survey measures the intensity of individuals’ trust beliefs on a scale
from zero to 10, we can explore the relationship between individual trust and individual
economic performance, particularly at the tails of the distribution of trust beliefs. When
we regress individuals’ income on a set of dummies for the 11 di¤erent levels of trust we
…nd a marked hump-shaped relationship: people with low levels of trust have signi…cantly
lower income than those with intermediate levels of trust. Income tends to reach a peak at
a level of trust around 7. Beyond a trust level of 7 income declines. The decline is initially
small, however income falls precipitously moving from the trust level of 9 to the highest
trust level. This is consistent with the idea that some people make trust mistakes. The
magnitude of the income cost of these mistakes is also economically relevant. On average,
the income of individuals with the lowest level of trust is 14 percent lower than that of
individuals with a level of trust corresponding to peak income. This di¤erence is of the
same order of magnitude as the income premium in our data associated with obtaining a
college degree. Those who express the highest level of trust (10) make an income that is
7.3 percent lower than the income at the peak. Accordingly, the cost of deviating from the
right amount of trust can be substantial.
There are four issues with the pooled OLS analysis done with the European Social
Survey. The …rst is that the identi…cation of the hump-shaped relationship between income
and trust mainly comes from the drop in income for individuals whose level of trust is equal
to 10. This raises the concern that the results could be driven by a small fraction of the
population with speci…c characteristics. We show this is not the case in three ways. First
of all, we document that individuals reporting a trust level of ten do not di¤er signi…cantly
2

in terms of observables from the median person in their country. Secondly, we restrict
attention to countries in the ESS with a relatively low average level of trust, where the
identi…cation does not come from individuals reporting 10 anymore, and show that income
is still hump-shaped in trust in these countries. Thirdly, we gather additional data on
Sweden, a country in which there is a substantial fraction of observations in the upper tail
of the trust distribution, and show that the hump-shaped relationship still holds there.
The second issue with the pooled regressions with the ESS is that there might be different groups (possibly di¤erent by country), all of which have a di¤erent trust-income
relationship, perhaps not necessarily inverted-U shaped. The inverted-U shaped relationship could then simply be the result of composition e¤ects, obtained by pooling di¤erent
groups from di¤erent countries. The Swedish dataset allows us to address this concern by
splitting the sample according to a large number of observable characteristics. We …nd that
the relationship between trust and income is hump-shaped in a wide variety of sub-groups.
The third concern is the possibility of reverse causality: it may be income causing trust
rather than the other way around. Although we believe reverse causality could explain the
rising portion of the relationship but not the declining part, we tackle the issue formally
with an instrumental variable approach, developed using the observation that trust beliefs
are highly persistent across generations. The instrument will also address the possibility
that omitted variables could at the same time have an e¤ect on both income and trust.
The last concern is that when pooling all the countries in the ESS, we impose a single
income-trust relation and thus the same income maximizing trust for all individuals in
the sample. But the right amount of trust could be individual speci…c: if individuals in
our sample interact with pools of people which di¤er in their trustworthiness, the level
of trust that maximizes income will also di¤er across individuals. Additionally, the cost
of trust mistakes can also vary among individuals: for instance, a trust mistake made by
an entrepreneur may have di¤erent income consequences than a trust mistake made by a
public employee. We formally model heterogeneity by allowing for: a) observed systematic
cross-country di¤erences in the average trustworthiness of the pool of people in a country;
3

b) unobserved heterogeneity in the trustworthiness of the pool a person faces; c) unobserved
heterogeneity in the cost of making trust mistakes.
Modeling heterogeneity explicitly in the ESS considerably enriches our results by allowing us to calculate the cross-sectional distribution of the right amount of trust, the
magnitude of trust mistakes at the individual level – i.e., the di¤erence between the right
amount of trust and individual trust –as well as individuals’income losses induced by trust
mistakes. It also allows us to test for the presence of two di¤erent sources of heterogeneity
– the pool people interact with and individuals’ sensitivity to trust mistakes. We cannot
reject that both sources are present. Still, we do establish that the income-trust relationship is hump-shaped for all individuals in the sample. Modeling heterogeneity also allows
us to calculate whether a person bene…ts or not (in terms of income) from having a level of
trust that di¤ers from his or her country’s average trust level. We …nd that typically the
income-maximizing trust exceeds the trust level of the average person. For example, for a
country where the average person has a trust level of 5, we estimate that the level of trust
that maximizes income is 6.7. When we compute the cross-sectional distribution of trust
mistakes and the associated costs we …nd that although a majority of individuals has well
calibrated beliefs, for 10 percent of the sample trust mistakes entail income losses exceeding
13% of the income they would earn in the absence of such mistakes.
Beyond documenting the trust-income relationship, the European Social Survey allows
us to study one of the mechanisms through which trust beliefs a¤ect economic performance:
exposure to the risk of being cheated. The survey asks individuals whether, over the past
…ve years, they have been “cheated” over four di¤erent domains: dealing with a bank,
buying goods second hand, buying food, and dealing with a plumber, builder, mechanic or
repairman. All else equal, exceedingly trusting individuals should be cheated more often.
Obscuring this relationship in the data, however, is the fact that individuals who are cheated
learn and revise their trust beliefs downward. In this way, learning generates a negative
correlation between trust and the experience of being cheated. We isolate the causal e¤ect
of trust on the probability of being cheated with an instrumental variable approach and
4

…nd that those who trust more are indeed more likely to be cheated across all the domains
for which we have data.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present a simple
framework that predicts a hump-shaped relationship between individual trust and performance. In Section 3 we describe the survey data and present basic descriptive results from
our estimation of the trust-performance relationship coming from the ESS complemented
with evidence from a large survey for Sweden. Section 4 formally deals with the key issue
of heterogeneity, whereas in Section 5 we estimate the e¤ect of trust on the frequency with
which one is cheated. Section 6 concludes.

2

Individual trust and economic performance: a simple model

In this section we present a simple framework to motivate the empirical relationship between
income and trust found in the data. Consider an investor with an endowment E which can
be invested, totally or partially, in a venture managed by a partner. The endowment and
the partnership should be interpreted broadly. The endowment could represent capital
contributed to a project run by an entrepreneur or money invested in a fund managed by a
professional which a¤ects income from capital. Alternatively, E could be the time and e¤ort
(human capital) that a worker allows his or her boss to manage in hopes of advancing more
quickly along the career path which a¤ects labor income. Or, in a more familiar setting, E
could represent ideas that a researcher shares with coauthors on a joint project.
An amount S

E invested creates surplus according to the production function f (S) >

S, of which the partner agrees to return a fraction 0 <

< 1 to the investor. Partners can

be one of two types: honest or cheater. A fraction 1

of partners are cheaters, while

the rest of the economy’s partners are honest. Each investor is randomly matched with a
partner, as in Dixit (2003). An honest partner returns the promised share of the surplus,
f (S), while a cheater absconds with the whole surplus.4 Investors are heterogenous in
4
We assume that f (S) is increasing and concave (f 0 > 0 and f 00 < 0), and that
investment has a positive return if the partner does not cheat. We also assume that

5

f (S) > S so that
f 0 (0) > 1: at zero

their trust beliefs. Assume there is a continuum of investors each characterized by a level
of trust, , distributed on the unit interval [0; 1]. Given these (possibly incorrect) beliefs,
an investor solves the problem:

M axS : Y (S) = E
s:t: : S

S+

f (S)

E

Let S denote the optimal amount invested when beliefs about others’trustworthiness are
equal to

and let Y (S ) = E

S +

f (S ) be the investor’s average income.

Income realizations depend on the actual fraction of trustworthy partners. In particular
it is easy to show that an investor’s average income, Y (S ), is a hump-shaped function of
the investor’s trust beliefs5 . This function attains its maximum when the investor’s beliefs
about the share of trustworthy partners, , equals the true share

. We will often refer to

the level of trust beliefs that maximizes income as the “right amount of trust.” This implies
that both investors with very low and very high levels of trust do worse than those with a
trust level close to the average trustworthiness of the population. In the …rst case, by underinvesting, investors with very low trust lose little if cheated; but by retaining too much of
their endowment, they give up pro…t opportunities— and the latter e¤ect far exceeds the
former. On the other hand, investors in the second group invest a lot in the productive
venture, which can potentially raise their income. But since they grant partners more
trust than they deserve, they lose a lot when cheated and the latter e¤ect dominates the
former. Hence, the relationship between individual economic performance and trust beliefs
is hump-shaped. Furthermore, if individuals face pools of partners which di¤er in their
trustworthiness, then observed individual performance, Y (S ), will, ceteris paribus, peak at
investment the expected marginal return from investing exceeds the return from keeping the endowment
idle. Together these assumptions imply a unique, internal, optimal investment amount.
5
When an individual’s trust beliefs are , his average realized income is Y (S ) = E S +
f (S )
where S is such that f 0 (S ) 1 from the …rst order condition of the individual’s maximization problem.
f 0 (S )
@S
> 0: Di¤erentiating Y (S ) with respect to the level of trust, , yields
This also implies @ =
f 00 (S )
@Y (S )

@S

@Y (S )

=[
1] @ : It follows that @
= 0 when =
@
is hump shaped in and achieves a maximum when = :

6

and

@Y (S )
@

? 0 when

? ; implying Y (S )

a higher level of trust for individuals facing more trustworthy pools. So, for instance, one
would expect income to peak at a higher level of trust in more highly trustworthy countries.
This is a relevant prediction that we can and do test empirically.
In this simple model the channel through which trust beliefs and individual performance are related is systematic errors in beliefs. In our empirical analysis below, we will
provide evidence suggesting that these systematic errors in beliefs are driven by ingrained
heterogeneous priors given the trustworthiness, possibly itself heterogeneous, of the pool
of people with whom individuals interact. Obviously, there could be other channels. For
instance, highly trusting people may become targets of swindlers who can exploit naive
expectations of good faith. Alternatively, highly trusting people may be more exposed to
con…dence games even when their own attitude to trust is not explicitly targeted. Bernard Mado¤’s story can be interpreted as one where highly trusting individuals were more
likely to fall prey to Mado¤’s game even if they were not individually targeted. These two
mechanisms can explain why those who trust too much may under-perform. However, they
cannot explain why those who trust too little do poorly. Culturally-induced heterogeneity in
beliefs or heterogeneity in values, together with the tendency of individuals to form beliefs
extrapolating from their own types, i.e. a form of false consensus, can explain both.6
Before ending this section, it is worth noting that if the heterogeneity in trust that we
observe in the data re‡ects correctly anticipated heterogeneity in the trustworthiness of the
partners each individual interacts with instead of re‡ecting, at least to some extent, trust
mistakes, then the individual trust-income relationship should be monotonically increasing
in trust. Individuals matched with less trustworthy partners correctly foresee this, express
lower trust, trade less, create lower surplus and make less income than individuals matched
with more trustworthy groups.7 If both trust mistakes and anticipated heterogeneity in
6

For the relevance of false consensus in the determination of heterogeneity in trust beliefs, see Butler,
Giuliano and Guiso (2013).
7
Suppose individuals correctly forsee the trustworthiness of the group they are matched with and groups
di¤er in trustworthiness. From Y (S = ) = E S = + f (S = ) di¤erentiating with respect to we have
@S =
@f (S = ) @S =
@Y
= f (S = ) > 0; since
+
= 0 from the …rst order condition. Thus income is
@
@
@S =
@
monotonically increasing in trust.

7

the trustworthiness of partners are both present in the data, then ignoring the latter when
estimating the trust-income relationship tends to bias the results against …nding a humpshaped relationship. This should be kept in mind when interpreting the results in Section
3.2.

3

Data and Empirical Analysis

3.1
3.1.1

Data
The European Social Survey

To study the relationship between individual performance and trust beliefs we rely as a main
data source on …ve waves of the European Social Survey (ESS). The ESS is a biennial crosssectional survey administered in a large sample of mostly European nations, containing
information on individuals’ social values, cultural norms and behavioral patterns. The
survey has been conducted …ve times: in 2002/2003, 2004/2005, 2006/2007, 2008/2009,
2010/2011. We pool data from the …ve waves, using information on 32 di¤erent countries.8
When studying the relationship between trust and cheating (Section 5), we use only the
second wave because it is the only one containing the measures of cheating. For each
wave, within each country, a representative sample of around 2,000 individuals is surveyed.9
Pooling data across countries and waves yields 228,609 observations. From the original
sample of 228,609 we lose 65,973 observations because of missing data for income or the
trust variable (28.9% of the whole sample, so that the restricted sample would be 162,636);
an additional 60,338 observations (37.1% of the whole sample) are lost due to missing
values in the explanatory variables. Our …nal reference sample for the baseline speci…cation
consists of 102,298 observations. The non-response rate in the income variable is unevenly
distributed across countries. As long as the country non-response is related to some country
8

The list of countries together with further details about the sample, the overall survey design and our
variables of interest is provided in the on-line appendix (henceforth, OA).
9
Some countries are not present in all the waves. In our regressions, sample size di¤ers by country
depending on country population and ranges from 579 in Iceland (which was surveyed only once) to 14,487
for Germany (by pooling together all of the waves).

8

characteristics, the country …xed e¤ects should correct for the bias in non-response. We
do, however, treat the problem of selection on observables in non-reporting income more
rigorously by estimating a Heckman selection model (see the empirical analysis for details).
Measuring trust The ESS elicits trust beliefs by asking the classical question “Generally
speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted, or that you can’t be too careful
in dealing with people?” While in most comparable surveys (the World Values Survey, the
US General Social Survey, etc.) the trust question is binary, in the ESS respondents are
asked to express the intensity of their trust beliefs on a scale from 0 to 10, where 0 means
no trust at all and 10 means that most people can be fully trusted. It is this feature of the
ESS that allows us to investigate whether the relationship between individuals’trust beliefs
and economic performance is hump-shaped. The overall distribution of the trust measure
is reported in Table A2 of the online appendix.
Measuring performance

The ESS is rich in many dimensions, but as with most sur-

veys focusing on values it has little information on individuals’economic outcomes or other
economic variables. The best available performance indicator is a measure of total net
household income, which is the measure we use. Respondents are asked to report which income bracket, identi…ed with a letter, best approximates their household’s total net income.
They are asked to consider income from all sources, including labor income and income from
capital and investments. This is an important feature because, as we have argued, trust
can a¤ect all sources of income.10 In order to facilitate answers, the question is framed in
a way that accounts for country-speci…c conventions in the frequency of income payments.
Respondents can provide the income …gure using the frequency they know best: weekly,
monthly or annual. Each letter identi…es an income bracket in euros de…ned so as to be
10
While trust may a¤ect all types of income, certain types, such as income from capital, may perhaps be
more exposed to opportunistic behavior than other types (e.g., labor income) and thus more sensitive to
incorrect trust beliefs. Unfortunately, we cannot test this possibility as the ESS does not provide information
on income components.

9

consistent across di¤erent frequencies.11 We convert all responses to their annual equivalent. The resulting brackets range from less than 1800 euros per year to above 120,000 (the
largest net income allowed). In our analysis we identify each bracket with its mid-point.
The last bracket for the top income is coded in a country speci…c way.12 Table A1, panel
A, shows summary statistics for (log) income in the sample.
3.1.2

The SOM survey

To study the relationship between individual performance and trust beliefs we also use
information drawn from the SOM survey, a nationwide survey carried out in Sweden from
the SOM Institute, a research center studying Society, Opinion and Media at Gothenborg
University. The survey collects information on politics, society, the use of media, public
service, the environment, risks, new media technology and leisure-time activities. Starting
from 1996, individuals were also asked (like in the ESS, on a scale from 0 to 10) the extent
to which they believe that in general other people can be trusted. We use all the years
from 1996 to 2009. The number of observations varies by wave, ranging from 1,779 in
1996 to 4,926 in 2009. Pooling data across waves yields 47,111 observations. From the
original sample of 47,111 we lose 6,291 observations because of missing data for one or
more explanatory variables (the restricted sample would be 40,820); an additional 1,829
observations (roughly 4% of the whole sample) are lost due to missing values in income.
Our …nal reference sample consists of 38,991 observations.
Measuring trust The SOM survey elicits trust beliefs by asking the following question:
“In your opinion, to what extent can one trust people in general?" Responses can take
11

For instance, the …rst income category identi…es income below 40 euros per week or below 150 euros per
month or below 1800 euros per year. These …gures are roughly equivalent if a month is made of four paid
working weeks and a year of 12 paid working months. See the OA for more details.
12
The average income for people whose income is higher than 120,000 euros has been calculated using a
variety of surveys. For most of the countries in our sample, we use the European Union Statistics on Income
and Living Conditions (EU-SILC); data for Switzerland and Turkey (the only two countries not covered by
EU-SILC) have been obtained from the Luxembourg Income Study and the Income and Living Condition
Use Survey, respectively. We also run as a robustness check interval regressions and the results are essentially
the same.

10

values from 0 (”Cannot trust people in general”) to 10 (“Can trust people in general.”) One
interesting feature of the Swedish dataset is the high number of individuals answering 9 or
10: 3,070 and 2,703, respectively (see Table A3 of the OA). This makes it unlikely that the
hump-shaped income-trust relationship, if present, is identi…ed only from a small number
of people with peculiar unobserved characteristics.
Measuring performance

We measure performance using the log of household income

before taxes (the de…nition includes pensions and study allowances). The variable is de…ned
in brackets. As for the ESS, we assign the mid-point to each income bracket and adjust for
in‡ation.13 Table A1, panel B, shows summary statistics for (log) income in the sample.

3.2

Empirical analysis

Figure 1 shows the distribution of trust beliefs by country. The …gure indicates systematic
di¤erences in the shape of the trust distribution across countries. In one group— the high
trust North European countries such as Norway, Denmark, Finland, Sweden, Iceland and
the Netherlands— the distribution has a fat right tail and the modal level of trust is quite
high and at around 7. A second group, which includes several Mediterranean and Eastern
European countries, features a fat left tail, denoting low average trust. In a third group
consisting of several European countries (e.g., Austria, Germany, France and the UK) the
distribution is approximately symmetric around modal values of 5.14 Figure 1 also shows
that there is a considerable number of observations at the two tails of the distribution which
also varies substantially among countries: in high trust countries like Denmark, the fraction
of people reporting 9 or 10 is equal to 12.0 and 6.7 per-cent of the overall sample respectively,
whereas the fraction of people reporting 0 or 1 is equal to 1.0 and 0.9 percent, respectively.
At the other extreme are countries like Turkey, where the fraction of people reporting 9 or
10 is equal to 3.3 percent of the sample, whereas the fraction of people reporting 0 or 1 is
13

There are 10 income brackets for the period between 1996 and 1998, 8 income brackets for the period
between 1999 and 2007, and 9 income brackets for the 2008-2009 period. Details are provided in the OA.
We also run interval regressions with the SOM survey and the results are unchanged.
14
The (whole) sample mean trust level is around 5, with a standard deviation of 2.5 (see Table A1).

11

equal to 48.4 percent overall.
We start to study the relationship between individual economic performance and individual trust by estimating the following model in the pooled sample of the countries in the
ESS:
yic =

j

j T rustjic

+ Xic + C +

ic

(1)

Here yic is the income (in logs) of individual i in country c and Xic is a vector of individual
controls that can a¤ect economic performance. We capture the e¤ect of trust with a set
of 10 dummies T rust1 ; T rust2 , ....T rust10 , the excluded group being individuals reporting
the lowest possible trust level of 0. This speci…cation allows wide ‡exibility in estimating
the relationship between income and trust imposing no parametric assumptions. Finally,
to control for systematic di¤erences in average income across countries we insert a vector
of country …xed e¤ects C. Among other things, these …xed e¤ects capture di¤erences in
individual performance due to systematic di¤erences in the average level of trustworthiness
across countries.15 The vector Xic includes years of education as well as years of education
of the father as proxies for acquired and inherited human capital, respectively. It also
contains a linear and quadratic term in age to capture life cycle e¤ects in income, dummies
for gender, marital and employment status, immigration status, as well as dummies for city
size with rural areas as the excluded category.16 To account for the possibility that the
trust question is not measuring risk aversion, altruism or trustworthiness,17 we also include
proxies for these three variables in our speci…cation.18
15

In the appendix we also report estimates of (1) that include regional …xed e¤ects. These estimates (see
Table A6 of the OA) give the same results as the speci…cation with only country …xed e¤ects. We do not
include them in the main speci…cation because of the large number of missing observations on the region.
We always include region …xed e¤ects when we use data from Sweden.
16
This set of controls could be correlated with trust (Alesina and La Ferrara, 2002) and a¤ect income
independently.
17
These variables are described in the OA, p. 4 and p. 6.
18
There is a still-unsettled debate over whether questions such as those asked by the ESS or the World
Values Survey (WVS) re‡ect expected trustworthiness only, or a mix of beliefs and individual preferences
(see Miller and Mitamura, 2003). Fehr (2009) points out that the answers to trust questions like those asked
in the ESS likely re‡ect not only individuals’ beliefs about others’ trustworthiness, but also individuals’
preferences toward risk, and in particular towards social risk. Cox (2004) has argued that trust may re‡ect
pure altruistic preferences in addition to beliefs about others’trustworthiness, so that for given beliefs, more
altruistic individuals would exhibit more trust. Finally, Glaeser et al. (2000) argue that the typical trust

12

The baseline speci…cation indicates that the income-trust relationship is increasing for
low levels of trust, before leveling o¤ and peaking at a trust level of 7. Beyond a trust level of
7 income declines. The decline is initially small, however income falls precipitously moving
from the trust level of 9 to the highest trust level. Table 1 shows the resulting estimates and
Figure 2 plots the corresponding coe¢ cients of column 1.19 Using these estimates, those
with a very low level of trust (trust=1) earn an income that is 14 percent lower than that
of individuals with a level of trust corresponding to peak income. This di¤erence is of the
same order of magnitude as the income premium in our data associated with obtaining a
college degree. Those who express the highest level of trust (10) make an income that is
7.3 percent lower than the income at the peak. Both of these di¤erences are statistically
signi…cant, as the t-tests at the bottom of the table show. Thus, departing from the right
amount of trust, either because one trusts too much or because one trusts too little can be
individually very costly.
In columns 2-5 we report robustness to some concerns with the baseline speci…cation.
Column 2 accounts for selection in reporting income with the use of a Heckman selection
model.20 Accounting for selection the peak of income is at a trust level of 8 and the cost
of departing from the income maximizing trust is even higher. But the qualitative result is
unchanged. Column 3 tests whether the hump-shaped e¤ect of trust on income is robust
to the inclusion of a larger set of controls. In particular, we include a full set of age
dummies to better capture the non-linearity in the age-income relationship, a full set of
education dummies and their interactions with each country to account for country-speci…c
survey question measures trustworthiness rather than trust beliefs. For a di¤erent view on this point see
Sapienza et al. (2007).
19
The controls have e¤ects consistent with our priors: income increases with own and father’s education;
it is higher for male and married people, lower for the unemployed, for those out of the labor force and for
immigrants. The coe¢ cients for the full set of controls are reported in the OA, Table A4. Risk tolerance
and trustworthiness are positively related to income, whereas altruism does not have a signi…cant e¤ect.
20
The exclusion restriction in the selection equation is the absolute di¤erence between the month in which
the individual is interviewed and the month in which taxes are …led in a given country. We expect that
this variable a¤ects the probability of reporting income because individuals are more likely to remember
income when taxes are due. Hence, the probability of reporting should decrease with the distance between
the interview and tax …ling. However, this distance is unlikely to systematically a¤ect the level of reported
income. The complete estimates of the Heckman model are reported in Table A5 of the OA.

13

human capital e¤ects, measures of mother’s and partner’s education (in addition to own
and father’s education) as well as the number of people living at home. The inclusion
of this richer set of controls (although it substantially reduces the sample size) does not
alter the results. Column 4 addresses another concern: generalized trust in people could
be correlated with, and therefore pick up the e¤ect of, trust in institutions. To allow for
this possibility we include ten dummies measuring the level of trust individuals have in the
legal system (also available in the survey on a scale from 0 to 10).21 The “trust in the
legal system" variable does not a¤ect the hump in the generalized trust regression. Using
other measures of trust such as trust in parliament, trust in the police, trust in politicians,
trust in political parties and trust in the United Nations produces similar results (Table
A7 of OA). Finally, the trust measure may be capturing a general tendency of individuals
with moderate attitudes (e.g., moderate risk aversion or moderate generosity) to succeed
economically. For instance, it may be that people who are too generous or too stingy
make less income than moderately generous people, and moderation itself is an individual
characteristic also re‡ected in moderate levels of trust. To account for this possibility we
allow other types of traits to a¤ect income non-monotonically. Column 5 reports the results
with the non-linear inclusion of risk aversion, in the appendix we test the robustness to
other traits including altruism, political preferences and religiosity.22 The hump-shaped
relationship between income and trust beliefs is not a¤ected.
One additional concern with the hump-shaped relationship is that it may be the result of
systematic variation in the dispersion of trust beliefs with income. Suppose that individuals
can collect costly information about the probability that their counterparts are trustworthy.
Wealthier people can a¤ord to pay for more informative signals about their trading partners
and therefore have more precise assessments of their trustworthiness. If true, this implies
that wealthy people have similar trust beliefs concentrated around the population’s true
trustworthiness; the middle class would have beliefs that are correct on average but some21

The question reads as follows: "Please tell me on a score of 0-10 how much do you personally trust the
legal system. 0 means you do not trust an institution at all, and 10 means you have complete trust".
22
For the exact wording of the questions see the OA. Results are reported in Table A8.

14

what less precise; while the poor would also have beliefs that are correct on average but
even more di¤use. In this way, heterogeneity in belief precision could mechanically imply
a hump-shaped relationship between trust and economic performance. This di¤erence in
incentives to collect information has, however, another implication: dispersion in trust beliefs should be inversely related to income. To check whether this mechanism is driving our
results, we computed for each country the relationship between the standard deviation of
trust beliefs and income. The predicted negative relationship is not in the data (Figure A1
in the OA). What our model instead implies, since exposure to social risk increases with
how much one trusts, is a positive relationship between the variance of income and trust.
We investigate this prediction using our survey data by calculating the standard deviation
of income for each level of trust and for each country in the ESS. The results con…rm the
presence of a positive association between trust and the variance of income.23
The strategy followed so far provides a …rst good description of the data and it is useful
to rule out a number of potential confounds. But it has an important drawback: apart from
the shifts in the constant captured by country …xed e¤ects, the speci…cation restricts the
trust-income relationship to be the same –and thus generates the same right level of trust
–across individuals. If individuals in our sample interact with pools of people which di¤er
in their trustworthiness and if the costs to trust mistakes are individual speci…c, the level
of trust that maximizes income will also di¤er. We account explicitly for the presence of
these heterogeneous e¤ects in Section 4.
3.2.1

Further probing of the hump-shaped relationship between trust and income

In this section we provide additional results to con…rm the existence of a hump-shaped
relationship between trust and income. One concern with the pooled OLS regressions in
Table 1 is that the hump-shaped relationship is identi…ed entirely from individuals who
23
We run two di¤erent regressions: one where the data are collapsed at the trust-country-wave level and
country and wave …xed e¤ects are included; and another where the data are collapsed at the trust-country
level and only country …xed e¤ects are included (see Table A9 in the OA).

15

respond 10 to the trust question, who may be few in number and possibly have peculiar
(unobserved) characteristics that could be responsible for the results. We address this issue
in three ways.
First, we compare observables in our sample between people reporting a trust level of
10 and people whose level of trust is equal to the median of the population in each country.
We …nd few systematic di¤erences in observables. Compared to individuals reporting the
median level of trust, individuals reporting trust equal to 10 have similar levels of education,
both own and parental. These highly trusting individuals furthermore are not less likely to
be migrants, are not less likely to be married, nor are they less likely to live in urban or rural
areas. They are also not systematically di¤erent in terms of risk aversion or trustworthiness.
We …nd small di¤erences in gender, more women report 10, and unemployment status. Since
unemployment is lower for people reporting 10, however, this latter di¤erence is unlikely to
drive the decline in income observed at 10. The only signi…cant di¤erence we …nd is in terms
of age, for which we fully control with the inclusion of age dummies in our speci…cation.24
Second, we run separate regressions for low, average and high trust countries. Once
we split the sample in groups of countries with similar distribution of trust beliefs, the
identi…cation in low trust countries does not come anymore from people answering 10, as
Figure 3 shows.25 In these countries, income peaks at a lower level of trust and starts falling
already at trust 8 and 9. It is interesting to note that the peak moves from 7 to 8 and 9
depending on the average level of trust in the population (using a quadratic speci…cation,
the peak is obtained at 6, 8 and 8.25 respectively). This is what the model in Section (2)
predicts, under the mild assumption that the average trust in a country is correlated with
the average trustworthiness of its population.
Third, we report results using the Swedish dataset. This country is particularly relevant
for our purposes because of the large fraction of people in the upper tail of the trust
24

Results are reported in Table A10 of the OA.
The …gure reports the coe¢ cients of a regression for each group of countries with all the individual
controls of column 1, Table1. In Table A11 of the OA we report the regression results for the three groups
and the quadratic speci…cation.
25

16

distribution which makes it less likely that such individuals have peculiar characteristics.
Furthermore, it allows us to document that exceeding in personal trust can be harmful even
when high quality institutions are in place and when most of the population has a high level
of trust.26
Results from the Swedish sample are shown in Table 2.27 These estimates also point
to a hump-shaped relationship between income and trust: as shown at the bottom of the
table we can reject the hypothesis that income at trust=10 is not lower than at the incomemaximizing level of trust. Those with a trust level of 10 have an income about 7.7 percentage
points lower than the peak of income, which occurs at trust level of 9. The second column
uses a quadratic speci…cation. With this speci…cation, the income-maximizing level of trust
is also equal to 9.
The data on Sweden are also useful to rule out the possibility that results are driven by
composition e¤ects. One worry with the ESS is that there might be di¤erent groups, possibly
di¤erent by country, all of which have a di¤erent trust-income relationship (e.g. some
positively others negatively sloped), and that the hump-shaped relationship we document
comes primarily from composition e¤ects when di¤erent groups from di¤erent countries are
pooled in the same regression. The relatively small number of observations for each country
in the ESS does not allow us to split the sample by sub-groups. With the Swedish dataset,
however, we can split the sample according to a large number of observables and check
whether the shape of the trust-income relationship di¤ers qualitatively across sub-groups.
Appendix Table A13 shows separate regressions for the following groups: young and old;
married and unmarried; living in rural versus urban areas, or in di¤erent regions of Sweden.
We also show di¤erences by level of education and by types of occupation (entrepreneurs
versus workers, white collar or farmers). We also split the sample by gender, by di¤erent
levels of risk aversion and by whether respondents are Swedish citizens. Finally, we split
the sample according to whether an individual grew up in Sweden or not. Reassuringly, we
26

See Figure A2 in the OA for the distribution of trust across di¤erent regions of Sweden.
The controls are the same individual-level variables as in Table 1. The full speci…cation is reported in
Table A12 of the OA.
27

17

…nd a hump-shaped trust-income relationship in all of these di¤erent sub-groups.
3.2.2

Reverse causality, persistence of trust beliefs and IV estimates

When looking at the correlation between individual income and trust one may argue that
it may be income causing patterns in trust rather than the other way around, as we are
arguing. For instance, high income people may be more prone to trust others if they tend to
accumulate more social relations, as in Glaeser (2000), and social relations enhance trust.
Insofar as this reverse causality argument is true, the rising portion of the documented
trust-performance relationship may re‡ect it; however it cannot explain the declining part
of the relationship. Similarly, if, for whatever reason, high income causes lower trust, then
reverse causality could explain the falling part of the relationship but not its rising portion.
Hence reverse causality, even if present, is unlikely to be the full driver of the relationship.
Nevertheless, we tackle directly the issue of reverse causality using an instrumental variable
approach.
To de…ne our instrument we use the fact that trust beliefs tend to be highly persistent
across generations.28 To develop our instrument, we follow Algan and Cahuc (2010). The
authors develop a method to uncover the causal e¤ect of trust on economic growth by
focusing on the inherited component of trust. In particular, the authors propose a strategy
where current generation average trust is instrumented with a measure of inherited trust,
28

Two plausible explanations have been provided in literature to justify this persistence. According to
one view, individuals’ beliefs are initially acquired through cultural transmission and then slowly updated
through experience from one generation to the next (see Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales, 2008b). Dohmen et.
al (2012) provide evidence consistent with this view. Heterogeneity is the result of family speci…c shocks.
Within a generation, correlation between current beliefs and received priors is diluted as people age and
learn. Yet this dilution need not to be complete and a high degree of persistence remains. One mechanism
generating this persistence could be con…rmation bias (a tendency to seek and …nd evidence that con…rms
existing beliefs and ignores discon…rmatory evidence), which tends to operate unconsciously (Westen, et.
al., 2006). Alternatively, cultural beliefs may persist because, once hardwired, they are painful to eradicate
and this pain makes one reluctant to update them even in spite of discon…rmatory information (Blanco,
2008). The second plausible explanation is that parents instill values rather than beliefs and beliefs re‡ect
values because of false consensus. In particular, parents may teach values of trustworthiness: acting justly
even at the expense of material gains. Cultural transmission of values of cooperation and trustworthiness
is the focus of Bisin and Verdier (2000), Bisin, Topa, and Verdier (2004) and Tabellini (2008a) who show
how norms of behavior are optimally passed down from parents to children and persist from generation
to generation. Heterogeneity in parents’ preferences and experiences may then result in heterogeneity in
instilled trustworthiness and in trust beliefs via false consensus (cf. Butler et al, 2013).

18

calculated using data from second generation immigrants. The idea is as follows: if trust
beliefs are transmitted from parents to children, one can instrument the beliefs of individuals
of the current generation with those of their ancestors. The beliefs of the ancestors can be
calculated by looking at second generation immigrants in a given or di¤erent countries.
Algan and Cahuc (2010) instrument the average level of trust of the current generation
in a given country with the average level of trust among second generation immigrants in
the US from that country. We adapt this idea to our case by making two fundamental
changes. First we work with the individual level of trust and instrument the trust of an
individual in a given country. Second, instead of using only the mean as an instrument, we
use the information on the overall distribution by mapping the individual level of trust to
the corresponding moment of the distribution of trust among second generation immigrants
from the same country and living in any of the countries present in the ESS. For example, if
for a Spaniard based in Spain trust is equal to 1 and this corresponds to the 10th percentile
of the current trust distribution in Spain we look for the value of trust corresponding
to that speci…c percentile among second generation immigrants from Spain (the value of
trust corresponding to the 10th percentile could be equal to 2 in the distribution of second
generation immigrants from that speci…c country) living in any of the other ESS countries.
Assuming intergenerational transmission of beliefs, a moment in the distribution of
immigrants has predictive power over the same moment in the home distribution; because
it is uncorrelated with income at home, it is uncorrelated with income shocks to individual
i and is thus a valid instrument. The instrument could of course be correlated with other
transmitted values that are relevant for income (e.g., education) which we do control for in
our regressions.
To support the instrument, in the OA we report the distribution of trust among second
generation immigrants by country of origin (Figure A3) which can be compared with the
distribution of current population trust in the country of origin in Figure 1. We also
compute the correlation between several moments of the trust distribution in the countries of
origin (mean, median, standard deviation and skewness) and second generation immigrants
19

(Figure A4). Both the direct comparison of the distributions in Figures 1 and A3 as well
as inspection of the correlations in Figure A4 show evidence of a remarkable persistence in
the distribution of trust beliefs.
To obtain IV estimates we rely on a quadratic speci…cation so as to reduce the number
of instruments needed. In Table 3, for comparison we …rst run an OLS regression (column
1) of income on a linear and a quadratic term in individual trust, as well as on all the
other controls used in our baseline speci…cation. This parametric speci…cation allows a
direct test of the hump-shaped relationship. Consistent with the previous evidence, the
linear term is positive and signi…cant, while the quadratic term is negative and signi…cant.
With these estimated parameters, the maximum level of income is attained when trust is
equal to 8.66, con…rming the hump-shaped relationship.29 Next we run our instrumental
variables regression, where individual trust is instrumented with the corresponding moment
in the distribution of trust beliefs among second generation immigrants, using it linearly
and squared to match the linear and quadratic terms in current individual trust.30 The …rst
stage is shown at the bottom of the panel and reveals the considerable predictive power of
the instruments. With the IV strategy the income maximizing level of trust is 8.5. This
suggests that reverse causality, or other sources of endogeneity that are addressed by the
instrument, do not seem to be biasing much the income-trust relationship.
One potential concern with our instrument is that the distribution of trust from the
country of origin re‡ects some characteristics of the original population that could be correlated with trust. For example migrants reporting 1 could do so as a result of a lower level
of education, or higher risk aversion. For that reason we construct for each level of trust of
the migrant population the average level for all the observables included in our regressions.
When we include these controls the results are basically unchanged: the right amount of
29

We include in the regression a dummy for a level of trust equal to …ve. People tend to cluster around
this value in survey questions and we do observe a blip in our data. Results do not change if we omit this
dummy.
30
For brevity we do not report all individual controls, which have magnitude and sign similar to the OLS
regressions in Table 1.

20

trust is equal to 8.25.31

4

Dealing with heterogeneity

As already remarked in Section 3, the most serious limitation of the analysis with the pooled
data is that it implicitly assumes that individuals in our sample face pools of people that
are equally trustworthy and that the cost of trust mistakes is similar across individuals.
These assumptions imply that the right amount of trust is the same for all individuals,
independently, for instance, of the country where they live. We already noticed that heterogeneity could be an important element for the interpretation of our results: when splitting
the sample of countries in low, average and high trust level countries we …nd that the right
amount of trust varies depending on the average level in the population. This result was
of course only suggestive, as one could split the sample in various ways depending on the
underlying assumptions on the pool of people with whom individuals interact.
In this section we tackle this problem more formally. We indeed relax the assumption
that the right amount of trust is the same for all individuals, by modeling heterogeneity explicitly. This will allow us to show that the hump-shaped relation between individual income
and trust extends to all individuals though its shape di¤ers systematically (as predicted by
our model) across individuals of di¤erent countries and, to a lesser extent, individuals of
the same country.

4.1

Modelling heterogeneity

To model heterogeneity we write the income (in logs) of individual i living in country c, as:

yic = ymax (Xic )

ai (

ic

2
ic )

+ &i

(2)

where:
31

The linear and quadratic level of trust are equal to 0.0328965 and -0.00115368, with standard errors of
0.0037 and 0.000, respectively.

21

- ymax (Xic ) is the individual maximum attainable income when trust beliefs are correct.
The maximum attainable income depends on a vector of variables (Xic ) capturing both
features of the country and characteristics of the individual;
- Lic = ai (

ic

ic )

2

is a loss incurred by an individual upon failing to correctly anticipate

the true trustworthiness of the pool of people with which he or she interacts. The loss Lic
depends on the trustworthiness of the pool of people individual i interacts with (
individual level of trust (

ic )

ic ),

his/her

and his/her sensitivity to trust mistakes (ai ).

- & i is a random component orthogonal to the explanatory variables.
Our strategy allows for heterogeneity in both the trustworthiness of the pool of people
individuals interact with (
We model

ic

ic )

as well as the sensitivity to trust mistakes (ai ).

as having two components. The …rst component is an observed hetero-

geneity component common to all individuals in the same country,

c.

We assume this

component is linearly related to the average trust in the country, xc , so that

c

= m + bxc

where m and b are parameters. The second is an unobserved individual-speci…c component,
i,

corresponding to the trustworthiness of the pool of people with whom i interacts. This

latter component is identically and independently distributed across individuals, has zero
mean and is independent of i — the heterogeneity in the income sensitivity to trust mistakes
(see below)— but potentially correlated with individual trust,
explanatory variables in (2): Hence
We model ai as ai = a +

i

where

ic ,

though not with the other

ic

= m + bxc +

i.

i

is an individual speci…c component of the sensitivity

to making trust mistakes, distributed with zero mean and potentially correlated with
not with the other explanatory variables in 2. In particular we assume E( i ) = E(

ic

but

i j)

=0

for i 6= j; E( i & i ) = 0; E( i Xic ) = 0: With this speci…cation we avoid taking a stance on
what drives this heterogeneity.
4.1.1

Estimating the income trust relation in presence of heterogeneity

After replacing ai and
32

ic

in (2), the equation we want to estimate becomes:32

See Appendix 1 for details on how to obtain equation (3).

22

yic =
where

= ymax (Xic )

error term is vi = & i

+

am2

(a + "i )

ab2 x2c

2
i

2
2 ic

1 ic

+

3 xc ic

2abmxc ,

2 i (a + "i )(

c

+ vi

1

= 2am;

ic )

"i (

c

(3)
2

= a;
ic )

3

= 2ab; and the

2:

Consistent estimates of the parameters of equation (3) would allow us to obtain an
estimate of the average income sensitivity to trust mistakes (a =
parameters b (=

3 =2 2 )

and m (=

1 =2 2 )

2)

and back out the

that tie the average trustworthiness of a

country population to its average trust beliefs. OLS estimation of equation (3) would
deliver consistent estimates33 only if individual trust

ic

were exogenous and there were

no feedback from income to trust. If, however, individuals optimally select their current
trust— e.g. because there is some learning and learning depends on income shocks— then
OLS estimates are inconsistent34 as in standard selection models (Garen, 1984). To obtain
consistent estimates of the parameters in (3) we follow Garen’s (1984) selection correction
model.
The methodology is a two equation system, where the main equation is the income
equation given in equation (3) together with a trust selection equation:

yic =

+

=

c

ic

2
2 ic

1 ic

+ (1

)

pic

+

+

3 xc ic

+ vi

(4)

i

We model the trust selection equation as a linear combination of three elements:
- the average trustworthiness of the country pool,
33

c,

which is in turn given by m + bxc

Estimates could be possibly ine¢ cient as the error term is heteroskedastic (Hildreth and Houck, 1968).
A model that generates selection is one, for instance, where individuals choose their current trust beliefs
so as to minimize a quadratic cost function C( i ) that depends on the deviation of income from its maximum
2
attainable value and a cost of adjusting the beliefs from their prior pi : C( i ) = f (ymax yi ) + d( i
pi ) .
The cost of deviating from this prior can be thought of as a psychological cost of giving up the inherited
component of trust ingrained during childhood. The minimization of the above cost function (using (2) to
d
i
replace ymax yi ) with respect to i yields i = f afia+d
ic + f a +d ip : Replacing ai = a + "i and taking a
i
…rst order approximation of the two parameters around ai = a we obtain i =
) ip + i where
c + (1
=
+
"
+
(
)"
;
and
=
f
a=(f
a
+
d):
Thus,
because
is
correlated
with
"
i
c
ip
i
i
i and i it will
i
i
i
be correlated with the error term i in (3), implying that OLS estimates are inconsistent .
34

23

(see above)
- the individual prior,

pic

and

- a speci…c error component

i

containing the unobserved heterogeneity terms.

The individual prior is our exclusion restriction, which we discuss at length later. Intuitively, it a¤ects an individual’s current level of trust but does not enter directly into the
income equation once current trust is controlled for.
This speci…cation yields a triangular system of equations with random parameters. If
the errors terms

i

were uncorrelated with vi , the system could be estimated consistently

with 2SLS using as an instrument

pic

(Kelejian, 1974). If instead the error vi and

i

were

correlated (for example as a result of some selection mechanism like the one described in
footnote 34), the 2SLS will not be consistent. Garen’s (1984) methodology allows us to
produce consistent estimates. The methodology works in two steps:
i) in the …rst, it uses the trust selection equation to obtain a consistent estimate of

i,

say bi .

ii) in the second step, this consistent estimate is used to replace the error term vi in (4)

with a function of bi (the derivation of vi is provided in the appendix) given by:
b

5 i( c

ic ) +

b

2
ic ) +

6 i( c

b +

4 i

b , where b is a pure error term possibly heteroskedastic.
i
i

It is the analogous of the two step Heckman selection model for the case where the selection
variable is continuous rather than dichotomous.
The equation to be estimated is:35

yic =

+

1 ic

2
2 ic

which, after replacing
35

c

+

3 xc ic

+

b +

4 i

= m + bxc , becomes:

See Appendix 1 for the derivation of equation (6)

24

b

5 i( c

i)

+

b

6 i( c

2
i)

+ bi

(5)

yic = +

1 ic

0

where

4

=

0
2
b
2 ic + 3 xc ic + 4 i

4

+m

+ m2

5

0

6;

0

+b

5

0

b

2
b
b 2
b 2
5 i ic +b 6 i xc + 6 i ic

5 i xc

=

5

+ 2m

2b

b

b

6 i xc ic + i

(6)

6:

Overall equation (6) is useful because:
1. It allows us to calculate an individual-speci…c right amount of trust, which is given
by:

ic

=

(

1 + 3 xc

2(

b)

2

6 i

b
b)

0
5 +2b
2( 2

6 xc ) i

. Since the right amount of trust is a function of

6 i

xc this naturally generates a di¤erent average right level of trust for each country. In
addition by comparing

with xc we can establish whether the level of trust that

ic

maximizes income falls short or exceeds the level of trust of the average person in the
country.
2. It allows us to test which of the two sources of heterogeneity matters. Recall that the
heterogeneity in the trustworthiness of the pool faced by each individual depends on
i,

whereas heterogeneity in the income sensitivity to trust mistakes is expressed by
0

"i . The estimated parameters

5

and

6

depend on

i

and "i and are thus informative

of the sources of unobserved heterogeneity. It can be shown that:36
if

0

6= 2(a + m)

5

6

and

6= 0 then "i 6= 0 and

6

heterogeneity are present. Notice also that since
0

for
if

5

6

can be rewritten as:

6= 0 and

0

5

= 2(

2

+

0

5

6= 2(

2

1 =2 2 ) 6 ,

+

1

i

6= 0 and thus both types of

= 2am and

2

= a, the expression

1 =2 2 ) 6 :

then only heterogeneity in the trustworthiness

of the pool is present.
if

0

5

6= 2(

2

+

1 =2 2 ) 6

and

6

= 0, which implies that

0

5

geneity in the income sensitivity to trust mistakes is present.
36

See Appendix 1 for the exact derivation.

25

6= 0, then only hetero-

3. It allows us to calculate the loss Lic of deviating from the right amount of trust for
each individual in the sample.
4.1.2

Evidence from the ESS sample

Following Garen’s methodology described above, we perform the two-step procedure using
data from the ESS sample. As a …rst step we obtain a consistent estimate of

i,

by estimating

with OLS the trust selection equation.
The trust selection equation In order to model the trust equation we need to …nd a
proxy for the average trustworthiness of the country pool and a proxy for an individual
trust prior. We can capture the average trustworthiness of the country pool with a set of
country …xed e¤ects. The di¢ cult part of the selection equation is to …nd a proxy for the
individual prior. For this to be a valid instrument it should a¤ect the individual current
level of trust but should not enter the income equation once current trust is controlled for.
The instrument described in Section 3.2.2 (the corresponding moment of second generation
immigrants’trust distribution) satis…es both conditions.
We use two di¤erent speci…cations of the trust selection equation: one when no individual
controls are added in the …rst stage selection regression (this corresponds to the speci…cation
of column 3 of Table 3), and another where individual controls are included (column 4;
for brevity these controls are not reported).37 The results of the trust selection equation
are reported in panel B of Table 3. Immigrants’ trust has a strong predictive power in
the selection equation for current individual trust, both when none of the individual-level
variables used in the income regressions are added and also when all are added. This
provides reassurance that the exclusion restriction for the selection equation induces relevant
variation in current trust, helping identi…cation.
37

Which speci…cation is appropriate depends on the model that generates the selection equation. For
instance, in the example of footnote 34 all individual controls that a¤ect the maximum attainable level of
income do not a¤ect individual trust. But other models may have di¤erent implications.

26

As a second step, we estimate the trust-income rela-

The trust-income relationship

tionship given in (6). To capture systematic di¤erences in the maximum attainable income
we include country …xed e¤ects and the set of controls of the pooled OLS regressions of
the determinants of income. To account for heteroskedasticity we compute robust standard
errors. The results for the income equation are reported in the upper panel of Table 3
(columns 3 and 4).
Looking at the third column in the top panel,38 both the linear and quadratic terms in
individual trust are highly statistically signi…cant, the …rst (
and the second (

2)

1)

with a positive coe¢ cient

negative, implying that the trust-income relationship is hump-shaped.

Furthermore, the interaction between individual trust and the average trust in the country is
positive and signi…cant so that the income maximizing level of trust increases systematically
with the average trust of the country. At the bottom of Table 3 we report the incomemaximizing level of trust computed for a country with a mean trust level of 5 (the average
trust in the pooled data) and for an individual with bi = 0 and …nd that it is equal

to 6.6. In general, for an individual with bi = 0 the parameter estimates imply that
ic

=

1 + 3 xc

2

2

= 2:6 + 0:8xc : Thus

ic

always exceeds the trust of the average person in the

country. Put di¤erently, the average person trusts less than the level that would maximize
his/her income.
Finding the right amount of trust

Consider the case of a generic individual with

b 6= 0. The shape of the trust-income relationship and the level of trust that maximizes
i

income involve also the interaction terms with the individual component bi : Concerning the
hump, the second derivative of income with respect to individual trust is

b ) and is negative (implying a hump-shaped relationship) whenever b >
i
i

this is always the case in our sample since the lowest c
ic is equal to

in column 2;

5: Empirically,

4:41 (for the estimates

4:28 for those in column 3). Thus, the trust-income relationship is hump-

shaped for all individuals in our sample.
38

2 (0:005+0:001

The results are essentially the same if we use estimates of column 4.

27

Using the estimates in Table 3, column 3

What are the sources of heterogeneity?

(results are similar using those in column 4), since

6

6= 0 we cannot reject that there

is heterogeneity in the trustworthiness of the pool faced by each individual. In addition
2(

2

+

0:005;

1

)

2

2

6

=

=

6

0:0052 using the point estimates of these parameters (
0

0:001). Since the estimated

reject the null that

0

5

= 2(

2

+

1

2

2

)

6

5

is

=

1

= 0:026;

2

=

0:004 with a standard error of 0:002 we

0:0052 at the 5% con…dence level and thus

reject that there is no heterogeneity in income sensitivity to trust mistakes. Therefore both
sources of heterogeneity drive the relationship between trust and income.
Cross-sectional distributions of the right amount of trust, trust mistakes and
income losses from making trust mistakes

We can use the results of Table 3 to

calculate the cross-sectional distributions of the right amount of trust, trust mistakes and
income losses induced by trust mistakes (Figure 4, Panels A-C). For a country with average
trust level of 5, in the cross-section the income-maximizing level of trust ranges from
when bi equals its 5th percentile to

ic

ic

=7

= 6:28 for bi equal to its 95th percentile. Results

are essentially the same when in the selection equation we insert all individual controls that

appear in the income equation (last column of Table 3). In the overall sample the mean
value of

ic

is 6.54 with a standard deviation of 0.81. Figure 4 panel A shows the sample

distribution of

ic :

It re‡ects both variation in the average trust across countries as well as

heterogeneity in the pool of people faced by each individual. As can be seen, 90% of the
observations are bounded between 5.5 and 8. Furthermore, we have checked that most of
the variation in the cross sectional distribution of

ic

is due to variation in average trust

across countries rather than in the pool of people individuals face. In fact, restricting the
sample to countries with average trust between 5 and 6, 90% of the values of

ic

are in the

interval 6.4-7.5 suggesting that most individuals tend to interact with a pool of people that
is representative of their country’s population in this respect.
Figure 4, panel B shows the cross sectional distribution of trust mistakes computed
as the di¤erence between the income-maximizing trust level and actual trust,

28

ic

ic :

Because on average

ic

exceeds the trust of the average person in the country, mistakes are

not symmetric around zero but tend to be positive. The mean mistake is 1.65 (median 1.55)
with considerable variation as documented by a high standard deviation (2.4). Though a
majority of individuals has well calibrated beliefs (55% have an absolute mistake not greater
than 1.68), a full 10% of the people in the sample make trust mistakes exceeding 4.98. These
are typically individuals with very low levels of trust interacting with relatively trustworthy
groups.
Figure 4, panel C shows the cross sectional distribution of the income loss implied by
estimated trust mistakes computed using the estimated average cost of a mistake a = 0:005.
Consistent with the fact that most people have trust beliefs close to the trustworthiness of
their pool, the distribution is highly skewed to the right. For around half of the sample the
income cost of trust mistakes is less than 1.6% of what they would earn if they had correct
beliefs, and for 3/4 of the sample it is less than 6.4%. However for about 10% of the sample
the cost exceeds 13% of potential income and for half of these individuals the cost is larger
than 17%.
Finally, Figure 4 panel D shows the relationship between income loss and the level of
individual trust implied by our estimates country by country. Because the trust-income
relationship is hump-shaped in all countries the income loss is u-shaped in trust with a
minimum at the right amount of trust. The point to take away from this …gure is that in
all countries in our sample it is generally true that trusting very little— that is exposing
oneself to the risk of giving up pro…t opportunities— is more costly than trusting a lot and
facing a higher risk of being cheated. The …rst type of loss is particularly large in highly
trustworthy countries such as Denmark and Norway, while in less trustworthy countries (e.g.
Greece and Turkey) the cost of the two types of mistakes is of comparable size. We conclude
that accounting for systematic di¤erences in trustworthiness across countries, unobserved
heterogeneity in the trustworthiness of the pool each individual faces within a country, as
well as for unobserved heterogeneity in the sensitivity to trust mistakes, still results in a
humped-shaped relationship between income and trust beliefs. Thus, it is unlikely that
29

the latter simply re‡ects composition e¤ects. If anything, accounting for heterogeneity
magni…es the hump as the income maximizing level of trust is estimated below that implied
by the pooled OLS regressions.

5

Trust and cheating

Two sources of suboptimal behavior contribute to the hump-shaped relationship between
income and trust. On the one hand, too little trust worsens performance through overlycautious decision making that leads to missed pro…t opportunities. On the other hand,
too much trust undermines performance by increasing the chances of being cheated and,
conditional on being cheated, exposing individuals to larger losses. The …rst channel implies
that the chances of missing pro…table opportunities are smaller for those who trust more; the
second channel implies that the chances of being cheated are increasing in trust. Providing
evidence on the …rst channel is problematic because missed opportunities are typically
unobservable. However, we can test the second channel since the European Social Survey
provides information on how often individuals have been cheated in various domains.

5.1

Measuring cheating experience

The second wave of the ESS reports information on how often respondents have been cheated
within the …ve years prior to the interview along four dimensions: being cheated by a
bank/insurance company; a plumber, builder, car mechanic or other repair person; a seller
of second hand goods; or a grocer or food seller. Speci…cally, the ESS asks participants:
“How often, if ever, have each of these things happened to you in the last …ve years?”
1. A bank or insurance company failed to o¤er you the best deal you were entitled to.
2. You were sold something second-hand that quickly proved to be faulty.
3. You were sold food that was packed to conceal the worse bits.

30

4. A plumber, builder, car mechanic or other repair person overcharged you or did unnecessary work.
Respondents could answer in one of 5 ways— never, once, twice, 3 or 4 times or, …nally,
5 times or more— which we code with the numbers 0 to 4. Figure 5 shows histograms of
the answers to each of the four cheating dimensions for the pooled data. Not surprisingly,
in all cases there is a spike at “Never,” so that the vast majority of respondents report not
having been cheated. However, a non-negligible proportion of people— ranging from 22%
in the case of the purchase of second-hand goods to over 40% for food purchases— report
having been cheated at least once. Furthermore, quite a few people report being cheated
more than once, but the frequency with which people report being cheated decays rapidly
in all domains except food, where close to 10% of respondents report being cheated 5 times
or more.
In addition to analyzing the frequency with which individuals are cheated in each of the
four domains, we also construct two summary indicators: the number of times an individual
has been cheated over the four domains collectively, and a variable extracting the …rst
principal component of the four cheating indicators. Summary statistics are reported in
Table A1.

5.2

Empirical speci…cation

To test whether the chances of being cheated increase with trust we estimate the following
model:
d
Zic
= T rustic + Xic + C +

ic

(7)

d is an indicator of how often individual i has been cheated in country C in the
where Zic

domain d (cheated by a bank; or when buying food; or by a car repairer; or when buying
goods second hand). The other variables have the same meaning as in equation (1) of
Section 3, but in this speci…cation trust is a single variable (rather than a set of dummies)
taking values from 0 to 10. We use a single trust measure because we are going to instrument
31

for trust. Furthermore, in principle the risk of being cheated should increase monotonically
with trust. We control for income to capture di¤erences in the number of transactions people
engage in for a given level of trust. To address the concern that trust is simply a proxy
for risk attitudes, we add the survey measure of risk tolerance as a control. All regressions
include a full set of occupation dummies. In the OA we also report a speci…cation in which
we further control for industry dummies, establishment size and a dummy for whether the
person is responsible for supervising other employees (Table A14).
Moreover, we insert into this regression a full set of country (C) dummies to account
for national di¤erences in the fraction of cheaters, and to absorb any location-speci…c characteristics that may encourage or discourage cheating.39
Before considering the estimates of (7) we have to confront an identi…cation issue. Since
people learn from experience and revise their priors accordingly, those who have been
cheated are more likely to revise their trust beliefs downwards. Because we observe the
level of trust after they have been cheated, this tends to generate a negative correlation
between cheating and trust. When we run OLS estimates of (7) for the various domains
we indeed …nd that this negative correlation is predominant (OA, Table A15). A solution
to this reverse causality problem would be to instrument current trust with the level of
inherited trust, for example using second generation immigrants trust. This instrument
however is likely to be invalid in this context. To see why, notice that a negative correlation between cheating and trust is not necessarily (or at least not only) the result of
learning. For instance, those mistrusting could be more likely to report being cheated because they are more attentive and thus more likely to detect cheating. This reporting error
in our measures of cheating biases towards …nding a negative correlation. Alternatively,
those mistrusting could also be more paranoid about the possibility of being cheated. They
could, for example, consider as cheating any small disappointment in an exchange/relation
with a counterpart, again biasing towards …nding a negative correlation between cheating
39

These …xed e¤ects also take care of any variation across countries in what is considered to be cheating,
and that may result in di¤erent frequencies of reported cheating across countries. Our results are robust to
the inclusion of regional dummies.

32

and trust. IV estimates can also account for these sources of bias arising from unobserved
heterogeneity. However, if they are present, inherited trust is not a valid instrument in the
cheating regression. In fact, though inherited trust could be a valid instrument to correct
the reverse causality induced by learning, it would still be correlated with “unobserved
attentiveness to cheating” or “unobserved cheating notions” breaking its validity.
To address this endogeneity issue we need a variable that systematically a¤ects an
individual’s propensity to trust others, but is unlikely to respond to shocks to being cheated
or be correlated with these sources of unobserved heterogeneity in the cheating regression.
To obtain this exogenous source of variation we rely on the idea that individuals, when
forming their trust beliefs, are a¤ected by their own intrinsic trustworthiness because of
“false consensus" - the tendency of individuals to extrapolate the behavior of others from
their own type (Ross, Green and House, 1977). In our context own trustworthiness can
be seen as a source of information any time an individual needs to form a trust belief.
In the absence of a history of information about the reliability of a pool of people, those
interacting with an unknown pool form a belief by asking themselves how they would behave
in similar circumstances: since they would personally behave di¤erently, they come up with
di¤erent beliefs.40 Our index of trustworthiness is a measure of how much responsibility is
delegated to individuals by their supervisors at work. Speci…cally, the ESS asks individuals
to state, on a scale from zero to 10, how much latitude their manager grants them along
three di¤erent dimensions: a) freedom in organizing their daily work; b) power to in‡uence
policy decisions about the activities of the organization; and c) freedom to choose or change
the pace of their work (see the OA for exact wording).41
We sum the answers from the three parts of the delegation question to construct a single
40

False consensus has been shown to be a persistent phenomenon: neither providing additional information
about the population of interest, nor warning individuals about false consensus, eliminates the e¤ect (Krueger
and Clement, 1994). Furthermore, it has been found that false consensus is not drowned out by monetary
incentives for accurate predictions (e.g. Massey and Thaler, 2006). Butler et al. (2013) show that measures
of trustworthiness obtained from behavior in a trust game predict trust beliefs in the same experiment and
that, in addition, trustworthiness can be traced back to the values instilled by parents.
41
It is worth remarking that while the “delegation” measure is likely to be a valid instrument in the
cheating regression it is not in the income regression estimated in Section 3, as delegation may a¤ect income
directly. Inherited trust instead is a valid instrument in the income regression.

33

measure of how much authority individuals’managers grant them on the job. Since more
trustworthy individuals are more likely, ceteris paribus, to be delegated more power and
freedom of choice, we use this variable as a proxy for individuals’intrinsic trustworthiness.
If individuals indeed extrapolate from their own type when forming trust beliefs, this index
should have predictive power on measured trust. To be a valid instrument we also require
that workplace delegation has no direct e¤ect on individuals’ risk of being cheated in the
domains we observe. We see no obvious reason why such delegation would directly a¤ect
the chances that a person is cheated by, e.g., a mechanic or a plumber. Similarly, we do not
see why being more or less trustworthy should make one more or less attentive to cheating
or paranoid about it, or how shocks to how frequently a person is cheated in his private
life— which is private information and thus unobservable to the manager— could a¤ect the
amount of delegation a manager grants this person on the job. The only reason we see
why there could be a correlation with the residuals in the cheating regression is because
there could be an uncontrolled-for individual characteristic making it obvious to an outsider
that the individual is susceptible to being cheated which would also reduce delegation to
this individual. If this were the case, the IV estimates would be inconsistent. However, the
inconsistency would take the form of a downwardly biased estimate of the true e¤ect of trust
on the frequency of being cheated. Since, as we will see, the IV estimates suggest a positive
e¤ect, this should be taken as a lower bound of the true e¤ect of trust on the risk of being
cheated. We do acknowledge that the validity of our instrument may not be robust to the
presence of unobserved heterogeneity in skills. If delegation is correlated with a worker’s
skill, our instrument may be invalid as skilled workers might be better able to deal with
untrustworthy individuals (which would lead to a negative bias in the IV estimates); but
skilled workers might also be better able to recognize that they were indeed cheated (which
would lead to a positive bias in the estimates). This concern should at least partly be dealt
with by the fact that we control for education and income in the cheating regressions.
Table 4 (Panel A) shows the results of the IV estimates. The …rst four columns report
results for each of the four domains. In all cases, the negative e¤ect of trust beliefs in the
34

OLS estimates is reversed by the IV estimates, and a positive e¤ect of trust on the number of
times an individual has been cheated results. Economically, the e¤ect of trust on exposure
to cheating is substantial. Increasing trust by one standard deviation raises the number of
times one is cheated by a bank by 1.85 (1.22 times the sample mean); the frequency of being
cheated when buying second hand goods by 0.57 (62% of the sample mean); the frequency
of being cheated when buying food by 1.38 (68% of the sample mean); and increases how
frequently one is cheated by a plumber or repairer by 1.28 (79% of the sample mean). The
remaining two columns show estimates using as the dependent variable the total number of
times an individual was cheated in any domain (column 5) and the …rst principal component
of the measure of being cheated (column 6). In all cases the IV estimate shows a positive
and highly signi…cant e¤ect of trust beliefs on being cheated.
Table 4 (Panel B) shows the …rst stage regression, focusing on the excluded instrument.
Consistent with our identi…cation strategy the instrument has a positive e¤ect on the level
of individual trust and is highly statistically signi…cant (with the F-stat always above 10).
The reduced form estimates of the e¤ect of delegation (Table 4, Panel C) imply that the
e¤ect of delegation on the number of times one is cheated is close to that implied by the
…rst and the second stage of the IV estimates, lending indirect support to the validity of
this instrument.
Overall, these estimates imply a large e¤ect of trust on exposure to cheating. This is consistent with the idea that mistrust shields individuals from the risk of being cheated, while
too much trust ampli…es this risk and hinders individual economic performance, lending
support to one of the mechanisms through which heterogeneity in trust beliefs can produce
a hump-shaped relationship between trust and income.

6

Conclusions

We document the existence of a hump-shaped relationship between individual trust and
individual income. For an individual the cost of miscalibrated trust beliefs can be substantial

35

and of the same order of magnitude as returns to education. Our results hold in large scale
survey data and inside a country with high quality institutions. They hold when we use an
instrumental variable strategy and formally account for heterogeneity. In the working paper
version of this paper (Butler et al. (2009)), we also show that the relationship between trust
and income is hump-shaped in a laboratory setting, where subjects play a trust game. In
the laboratory income is the result of performance and cannot cause participants’beliefs.
In addition, since in the laboratory individuals face the same pool of opponents and are
randomly matched with one of them, the results cannot be due to pool heterogeneity and
sorting but only to incorrect beliefs. In summary, the relationship between trust and income
uncovered in this paper is quite general and holds in di¤erent settings.
Though both excessive trust and excessive mistrust are individually costly, the data
suggest that the income cost of trusting too little far exceeds that of trusting too much,
even in low trust countries. From a societal point of view, however, there is an important
di¤erence between the two excesses. While excessive mistrust and excessive trust are both
individually costly, mistrust is also socially costly as it reduces surplus creation. On the
contrary, excessive trust may create social surplus even if this surplus is allocated in a
way that harms the overly trusting individuals. This di¤erence reconciles our …ndings
of a concave relationship between performance and trust at the individual level and the
monotonically increasing relationship found in aggregate data.

36

References
[1] Aghion, Philippe, Yann Algan, Pierre Cahuc and Andrei Shleifer (2010), "Regulation
and Distrust", The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125 (3): 1015-1049.
[2] Algan,Yann and Pierre Cahuc (2010) "Inherited Trust and Growth,” American Economic Review, 100 (5): 2060-92.
[3] Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara (2002),“Who Trusts Others?," Journal of Public
Economics, 85(2), 207-234.
[4] Arrow, Kenneth (1972), “Gifts and Exchanges,” Philosopy &Public A¤ airs, 1(4), 343362.
[5] Berg, J., Dickhaut, J. and K. McCabe (1995), "Trust, Reciprocity and Social History,"
Games and Economic Behavior, 10, 122-142.
[6] Bisin, Alberto, Giorgio Topa, and Thierry Verdier (2004). “Cooperation as a Transmitted Cultural Trait,” Rationality and Society, 16 (4), 477-507.
[7] Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier (2000). “Beyond the Melting Pot: Cultural Transmission, Marriage, and the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 115 (3), 955–988.
[8] Blanco, Mariana (2008), “Within-Subject Experiments on Other-Regarding Preferences,” Chapter 1, Phd thesis, Royal Holloway, University of London.
[9] Bloom, Nicholas, Ra¤aella Sadun and John Van Reenen (2009), “The Organization of
Firms across Countries,” CEPR DP 937.
[10] Butler, Je¤rey V., Paola Giuliano and Luigi Guiso (2009), "The Right Amount of
Trust", NBER WP 15344.
[11] Butler, Je¤rey V., Paola Giuliano and Luigi Guiso (2013), "Trust, Values and False
Consensus", UCLA mimeo.
37

[12] Camerer, Colin F (2003). Behavioral Game Theory: experiments in strategic interaction. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
[13] Hildreth, Cli¤ord and James P. Houck (1968), “Some Estimators for a Linear Model
with Random Coe¢ cients”, Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 63,
No. 322, pp. 584-595
[14] Cox, James C. (2004), “How to Identify Trust and Reciprocity,”Games and Economic
Behavior, 46, 260-281
[15] Dixit, Avinash (2003), "Trade Expansion and Contract Enforcement," Journal of Political Economy, 111 (6), 1293-1317.
[16] Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Hu¤man, and Uwe Sunde (2012). “The Intergenerational Transmission of Risk and Trust Attitudes,” Review of Economic Studies, 79
(2): 645-677.
[17] Fehr, Ernst (2009), “On the Economics and Biology of Trust,”Journal of the European
Economic Association, 7 (2-3): 235-266.
[18] Fernandez, Raquel and Alessandra Fogli (2009), “Culture: An Empirical Investigation
of Beliefs, Work, and Fertility,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1),
146-177.
[19] Garen, John , “The Returns to Schooling: A Selectivity Bias Approach with a Continuous Choice Variable”, Econometrica, Vol. 52, No. 5 (Sep., 1984), pp. 1199-1218
[20] Giuliano, Paola (2007), “Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin Matter?,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 5 (5), 927-952.
[21] Glaeser, Edward, David Laibson, Josï¿œ A. Scheinkman and Christine L. Soutter
(2000), “Measuring Trust,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3), 811-846.

38

[22] Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales (2004), “The Role of Social Capital in
Financial Development,” The American Economic Review, 94, 526-556.
[23] Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales (2008a), “Trusting the Stock Market,”
Journal of Finance, 63 (6), 2557-2600.
[24] Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales (2008b), “Social Capital as Good
Culture,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(2–3), 295–320.
[25] Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales (2009), “Cultural Biases in Economic
Exchange?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124 (3), 1095-1131.
[26] Kelejian, H. H. (1974), “Random Parameters in a Simultaneous Equation Framework:
Identi…cation and Estimation”, Econometrica, Vol. 42, No. 3 (May, 1974), pp. 517-528
[27] Knack, Stephen and Keefer, Philip (1996) “Does Social Capital Have an Economic
Payo¤?A Cross-Country Investigation,”The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112 (4),
1251-1288.
[28] Knack, Stephen and Paul Zak (2001) “Trust and Growth,” The Economic Journal,
111, 295-321.
[29] Krueger, Joachim and Russel W. Clement (1994), “The Truly False Consensus E¤ect:
An Ineradicable and Egocentric Bias in Social Perception,”Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 67 (4):596-610.
[30] La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, Andrea Shleifer and Robert Vishny (1997)
“Trust in Large Organizations,” The American Economic Review, 87 (2), 333-338.
[31] Luttmer, Erzo and Monica Singhal (2011), "Culture, Context, and the Taste for Redistribution", American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(1), 157 - 179.
[32] Massey, Cade and Richard H. Thaler (2006), “The Loser’s Curse: Overcon…dence
vs. Market E¢ ciency in the National Football League Draft,” University of Chicago,
mimeo.
39

[33] Miller, A. S., and T. Mitamura (2003). “Are Surveys on Trust Trustworthy?,” Social
Psychology Quarterly, 66, 62-70.
[34] Ross, Lee, Greene, D., and House, P. (1977), “The False Consensus Phenomenon:
An Attributional Bias in Self-Perception and Social Perception Processes,” Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 13(3), 279-301.
[35] Sapienza, Paola, Anna Toldra and Luigi Zingales (2007), “Understanding Trust,”
NBER WP 13387
[36] Tabellini, Guido (2008a). “The Scope of Cooperation:

Values and Incentives,”

Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123 (3), 905–950.
[37] Tabellini, Guido (2008b), “Institutions and Culture,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(2-3), 255-294.
[38] Westen, Drew, Pavel S. Blagov, Keith Harenski, Clint Kilts and Stephan Hamann
(2006), “Neural Bases of Motivated Reasoning: An MRI Study of Emotional Constraints on Partisan Political Judgment in the 2004 U.S. Presidential Election,”,
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18(11), 1947–58.

40

Figure 1
Trust beliefs: density functions by country
.3
.2
.1

AT

BE

BG

CH

CY

CZ

DE

DK

EE

ES

FI

FR

GB

GR

HR

HU

IE

IL

IS

IT

LT

LU

LV

NL

NO

PL

PT

RO

RU

SE

0

.3
.2
.1
0

.3
.2
.1
0

.3
.2
.1
0

.3
.2
.1
0

0

SI

.3
.2
.1

SK

5

10

0

TR

0
0

5

10

0

5

10

0

5

10

Most people can be trusted or you can't be too careful
Empirical density
Fitted normal density
Graphs by Country

41

5

10

0

5

10

Figure 2
The empirical relationship between trust and income

42

Figure 3
The empirical relationship between trust and income in low, average and high trust countries

43

Figure 4. Trust maximing income, trust mistakes and income cost of of trust mistakes

0

5

Percent
10

15

20

A. Cross sectional distribution of the right amount of trust

4

6
8
Income maximizing trust

10

0

5

Percent

10

15

B. Cross sectional distribution of trust mistakes (Trust maximizing income- actual trust)

-5

0

5
Trust mistakes

44

10

0

20

Percent

40

60

C. Income cost of trust mistakes

0

.1

.2
.3
Income loss

.4

.5

D. Income cost of trust mistakes and level of individual trust, by country
BE

BG

CH

CY

CZ

DE

DK

EE

ES

FI

FR

GB

GR

HR

HU

IE

IL

IS

IT

LU

LV

NL

NO

PL

PT

RO

RU

SE

SI

0 .1 .2 .3
0 .1 .2 .3
0 .1 .2 .3

0

SK

5

10

0

5

TR

0 .1 .2 .3

Average income loss

0 .1 .2 .3

0 .1 .2 .3

AT

0

5

10

0

5

10

Individual trust beliefs
Graphs by Country

45

10

0

5

10

0

5

10

0

0

.2

.2

Density
.4

Density
.4

.6

.6

.8

.8

Figure 5
Number of times being cheated

0

1

-1

0

1

2
Bank/insurance

3

4

3

4

-1

0

1

2
Second hand

3

4

-1

0

1

2
Plumber

3

4

0

0

.2

.2

Density

Density
.4

.4

.6

.6

.8

-1

2
Food

46

Table 1
The relationship between trust and income
Dependent var.: Log (income)
Trust 1
Trust 2
Trust 3
Trust 4
Trust 5
Trust 6
Trust 7
Trust 8
Trust 9
Trust 10
Individual controls
Altruism, risk aversion, trustworthiness
Additional controls
Trust legal system (10 dum.)
Controlling for moderation
Observations
R-squared
Trust peak = Trust 2 (p-values)
Trust peak = Trust 10 (p-values)

(1)
OLS
-0.003
(0.013)
0.044***
(0.012)
0.070***
(0.011)
0.073***
(0.011)
0.083***
(0.010)
0.117***
(0.011)
0.140***
(0.010)
0.139***
(0.011)
0.138***
(0.014)
0.067***
(0.017)
yes
yes
no
no
no
102298
0.67
0.00
0.00

(2)
Heckman
0.002
(0.014)
0.054***
(0.013)
0.094***
(0.012)
0.102***
(0.013)
0.107***
(0.011)
0.159***
(0.013)
0.176***
(0.013)
0.184***
(0.014)
0.174***
(0.017)
0.092***
(0.002)
yes
yes
no
no
no
96782
0.00
0.00

(3)
OLS
0.004
(0.015)
0.041***
(0.014)
0.070***
(0.013)
0.059***
(0.013)
0.071***
(0.012)
0.106***
(0.012)
0.134***
(0.012)
0.128***
(0.012)
0.140***
(0.015)
0.071***
(0.021)
yes
yes
yes
no
no
64404
0.72
0.00
0.00

(4)
OLS
-0.003
(0.013)
0.040***
(0.012)
0.060***
(0.011)
0.060***
(0.011)
0.069***
(0.010)
0.097***
(0.011)
0.116***
(0.010)
0.113***
(0.011)
0.115***
(0.014)
0.056***
(0.017)
yes
yes
no
yes
no
100449
0.67
0.00
0.00

(5)
OLS
-0.004
(0.013)
0.042***
(0.012)
0.068***
(0.011)
0.070***
(0.011)
0.081***
(0.010)
0.114***
(0.011)
0.136***
(0.010)
0.136***
(0.011)
0.136***
(0.014)
0.066***
(0.017)
yes
yes
no
no
yes
102298
0.67
0.00
0.00

Notes: [1] Each regression controls for country and wave fixed effects; [2] *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, *
significant at 10%. [3] Trust is the answer to the following question: “Generally speaking would you say that most people
can be trusted or that you can’t be too careful in dealing with people? Please tell me on a score of 0 to 10, where 0 means
you can’t be too careful and 10 means that most people can be trusted”; [4] Individual controls in column (1) include a
quadratic in age, gender, immigrant, marital and labor market status, years of education, education of the father and
dummies for city size. The specification also includes measures of risk aversion, altruism and trustworthiness. The
variables are described on p. 4 and p. 6 of the on line appendix. Additional controls in column (3) are a full set of age
dummies, a full set of education dummies and their interactions with country dummies, mother’s and partner’s education
and the number of people living at home. Column (4) includes 10 dummies for trust in the legal system, whereas column
(5) controls for a measure of moderation, including dummies for risk aversion.

47

Table 2
The relationship between income and trust, Sweden
Dep. var.: log(income)
Trust 1

(1)
0.038
(0.041)
0.170***
(0.032)
0.205***
(0.029)
0.222***
(0.029)
0.210***
(0.027)
0.275***
(0.028)
0.295***
(0.027)
0.319***
(0.027)
0.337***
(0.028)
0.260***
(0.028)

Trust 2
Trust 3
Trust 4
Trust 5
Trust 6
Trust 7
Trust 8
Trust 9
Trust 10
Trust
Trust squared
Income maximizing trust

9.0

(2)

.0653***
(0.006)
-.0036***
(0.000)
9.10

Trust peak = Trust 2 (p-value)
0.00
Trust peak = Trust 10 (p-value)
0.00
Observations
38991
38991
R-squared
0.29
0.29
Notes: [1] *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at
10%. [2] Trust is the answer to the following question: “In your opinion,
to what extent can one trust people in general?” The answers go from
“Cannot trust people in general” (0) to “Can trust people in general”
(10); [3] Each regression controls for a quadratic in age, marital and labor

market status, rural and urban areas dummies, education, risk aversion,
citizenship status, region and year of interview fixed effects.

48

Table 3
The relationship between trust and income, dealing with causality and heterogeneity
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Dependent variable: Log(income)

Trust: 1
Trust squared: െߚଶ
(Individual trust)*(avg trust): 3

OLS

IV

0.0397***
(0.003)
-0.00229***
(0.000)

0.034***
(0.003)
-0.002***
(0.000)

8.66

8.5

134682
0.65

130825

Residuals: ߚସᇱ
Residuals*average trust: b  5'
Residuals*individual trust:  5'
Residuals*(avg trust squared): b 2  6
Residuals*(individual trust squared): 6
Residuals*(indiv. trust)*(avg. trust): 2b  6
Income maximizing trust
Observations
R-squared

Heterogeneity
No controls in
the first stage
0.026***
(0.008)
-0.005***
(0.002)
0.008*
(0.004)
-0.002
(0.018)
0.001
(0.004)
0.004**
(0.002)
-0.001**
(0.000)
-0.001***
(0.000)
0.001***
(0.000)

Heterogeneity
With controls in
the first stage
0.026***
(0.007)
-0.005***
(0.001)
0.009**
(0.004)
-0.003
(0.018)
0.001
(0.004)
0.004**
(0.002)
-0.001***
(0.000)
-0.001***
(0.000)
0.001***
(0.000)

6.6
for avg trust=5

7.1
for avg trust=5

130825
130825
0.66
0.66
Trust selection equation

First stage
Trust
Immigrants trust
0.869***
0.972***
0.973***
(0.003)
(0.022)
(0.022)
Immigrants trust sq.
0.009***
(0.000)
Trust
squared
Immigrant trust
-1.065***
(0.032)
Immigrant trust sq.
0.930***
(0.003)
Notes: [1] Each regression controls for country and wave fixed effects; [2] *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, *
significant at 10%. [3] Trust is the answer to the following question: “Generally speaking would you say that most people can
be trusted or that you can’t be too careful in dealing with people? Please tell me on a score of 0 to 10, where 0 means you
can’t be too careful and 10 means that most people can be trusted”; [4] Individual controls (in the OLS and the first stage of
the heterogeneity regression) include a quadratic in age, gender, immigrant, marital and labor market status, years of
education, education of the father and dummies for city size.
49

Table 4
Trust and cheating: Instrumental variable regressions
PANEL A: Second stage

Trust
Observations

(1)
Bank
insurance

(2)
Second
hand
things

(3)
Food

0.740***
(0.197)
22253

0.231**
(0.101)
23798

0.560***
(0.191)
24220

(4)
Plumber,
builder,
mechanic,
repairer
0.517***
(0.155)
23626

(5)
Times
being
cheated
(sum)
2.116***
(0.567)
20846

(6)
Being
cheated
(principal
component)
1.085***
(0.290)
20846

(5)
Trust
.0088***
(.0020)
20846
18.79

(6)
Trust
.0088***
(.0020)
20846
18.79

(5)
Times
being
cheated
(sum)
0.019***
(0.002)
20867
0.14

(6)
Being
cheated
(principal
component)
0.010***
(0.001)
20867
0.14

PANEL B: First stage

Trustworthiness
Observations
F-stat

(1)
Trust
.0084***
(.0020)
22253
18.25

(2)
Trust
.0076***
(.0019)
23798
16.27

(3)
Trust
.0080***
(.0019)
24220
17.86

(4)
Trust
.0085***
(.0019)
23626
19.77

PANEL C: Reduced form

Trustworthiness
Observations
R-squared

(1)
Bank
insurance

(2)
Second
hand
things

(3)
Food

0.006***
(0.001)
22280
0.10

0.002***
(0.001)
23832
0.10

0.005***
(0.001)
24252
0.13

(4)
Plumber,
builder,
mechanic,
repairer
0.004***
(0.001)
23658
0.08

Notes: [1] Each regression controls for country fixed effects and 8 occupational dummies; [2] *** significant at 1%, **
significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. [3] Trust is the answer to the following question: “Generally speaking would you say
that most people can be trusted or that you can’t be too careful in dealing with people? Please tell me on a score of 0 to 10,
where 0 means you can’t be too careful and 10 means that most people can be trusted”; [4] Trust is instrumented using the
variable Trustworthiness obtained as the sum of the answers to the following three questions: “I am going to read out a list of
things about your working life. Using this card, please say how much the management at your work allows/allowed you to
1) decide how your own daily work is/was organized; 2) influence policy decisions about the activities of the organization?
3) to choose or change your pace of work?” The answer to each question can take values from 0 (I have/had no influence)
to 10 (I have/had complete control). [5] The excluded group for father education are people with college or more; the
excluded group for marital status is divorced or widower; the excluded group for labor status are people employed; the
excluded group for city size are people living in a country village, a farm or a home in the countryside.

50

Web Appendix for

The Right Amount of Trust
Jeff Butler
EIEF (Rome)

Paola Giuliano
UCLA, NBER, CEPR and IZA

Luigi Guiso
EIEF (Rome), CEPR

(NOT FOR PUBLICATION)

APRIL 2014

1

1. Introduction
This appendix accompanies “The Right Amount of Trust” by Jeff Butler, Paola Giuliano
and Luigi Guiso. Section 2 provides further details of the data used in the paper, as well as their
sources. Section 3 reports additional tables discussed in the body of the paper, but not reported
explicitly.
2. Additional details on some of the datasets and their sources
In this section we describe more in details some of the datasets and variable construction
that have not been fully discussed in the body of the paper.
2.1. European Social Survey
The central aim of the European Social Survey (ESS) is to gather data about changing values,
attitudes, attributes and behavioral patterns within European polities. Academically driven but
designed to feed into key European policy debates, the ESS hopes to measure and explain how
people’s social values, cultural norms and behavior patterns are distributed; the ways in which they
differ within and between nations; and the direction and speed at which they are changing.
Data collection takes place every two years, by means of face-to-face interviews lasting
around one hour, which are followed by a short supplement. The questionnaire consists of a “core”
module lasting about half an hour---which remains relatively constant from round to round--- plus
two “rotating” modules, repeated at intervals. Each of these latter modules is devoted to a
substantive topic or theme.
The purpose of the rotating modules is to provide an in-depth focus on a series of particular
academic or policy concerns, while the core module aims instead at monitoring change or continuity
in a wide range of socio-economic, socio-political, socio-psychological and socio-demographic
variables.
For the income regressions, we use the five rounds of the ESS (conducted in 2002, 2004,
2006, 2008, 2010) containing the following 32 countries: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Latvia, Luxembourg, Netherland, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, UK.
Questions about cheating have been asked only in the second round of the ESS, for that
reason for the cheating regressions we use data only on the second round of the ESS, containing the
following 26 countries: Austria, Belgium, Switzerland, Czech Republic, Germany, Denmark, Estonia,
2

Spain, Finland, France, Great Britain, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Sweden, Slovenia, Slovakia, Turkey, Ukraine.
A. Measuring performances in the ESS
Each respondent in the ESS is asked to report which income category, identified with a
letter, best approximates his or her household’s total net income. The values, in euros, are defined
according to the following table in the first three rounds.
Approximate weekly

Approximate monthly

Approximate annual

J

Less than 40

Less than 150

Less than 1800

R

40 to under 70

150 to under 300

1800 to 3600

C

70 to under 120

300 to under 500

3600 to under 6000

M

120 to under 230

500 to under 1000

6000 to under 12000

F

230 to under 350

1000 to under 1500

12000 to under 18000

S

350 to under 460

1500 to under 2000

18000 to under 24000

K

460 to under 580

2000 to under 2500

24000 to under 30000

P

580 to under 690

2500 to under 3000

30000 to under 36000

D

690 to under 1150

3000 to under 5000

36000 to under 60000

H

1150 to under 1730

5000 to under 7500

60000 to under 90000

U

1730 to under 2310

7500 to under 10000

90000 to under 120000

N

2310 or more

10000 or more

120000 or more

In rounds 4 and 5 a different method of measuring household income has been introduced.
The categories are national categories based on deciles of the actual household income range in the
given country. The deciles are derived from the best source for the country. Possible sources for the
calculation of deciles used in the ESS are national register data, or representative countrywide
surveys (for example the EU-SILC). The deciles are reported in national currency and the
conversion rate to Euro is documented.
A show card with the 10 deciles is used in each country. The ten rows on the show card
display the income ranges selected and be presented by the 10 letters which helps to ensure
respondent confidentiality. The show card is similar to the one reported above for the first 3 rounds
but with 10 categories instead of 12. Each country can choose whether to include weekly, monthly,

3

or annual amounts on the show card or whether they want to include more than one of these as
appropriate.
For all the waves we convert all responses to their annual equivalent. To facilitate our
analysis we identify each bracket with its mid-point. The last bracket for the top income is coded in a
country specific way. In particular, to code the last income bracket, we use a variety of surveys. For
most of the countries in our sample, we use the EU-SILC dataset; data for Switzerland and Turkey
(the only two countries not covered by EU-SILC) have been obtained from the Luxembourg
Income Study and the income and Living Condition Use Survey, respectively.
B. Additional details on some of the independent variables
Risk aversion and altruism. Our measures of risk aversion and altruism rely on questions
eliciting attitudes on various domains by asking participants how a certain description applies to
them. Respondents were asked the following question: "I will briefly describe some people. Please
listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you." To obtain an
indicator of risk attitudes we use the following description: "She/he looks for adventures and likes
to take risks. She/he wants to have an exciting life." To obtain an indicator of altruism we rely on
the following description: "It is important to her/him to be loyal to her/his friends. She/he wants to
devote herself/himself to people close to her/him." For these questions, respondents provide
answers between 1 and 6, with 1 meaning "very much like me," 6 meaning "Not like me at all" and
values in between reflecting intermediate similarity. Thus higher values of the risk preference
indicator signal high risk aversion and higher values of the altruistic preferences measure mean less
altruism. In all of the analysis in the paper, we re-order responses to these questions so that higher
values indicate higher risk tolerance and more altruism, respectively.
Religiosity. The question asks the respondent how religious he/she is. The question goes from
“not at all religious” (0) to “very religious” (10).
Political ideology. The question asks the respondent his/her political ideology from left (0) to
right (10).
Other measures of trust. The survey contains information on the following measures of trust,
coded from “not trust at all” (0) to “complete trust” (10): trust in the legal system, trust in
parliament, trust in the police, trust in politicians, trust in political parties and trust in the United
Nations.

4

Measure of trustworthiness in the cheating regressions and in Table A6. In the cheating regressions,
trustworthiness is a measure of how much responsibility is delegated to individuals by their
supervisors at work. Specifically, the ESS asks individuals to state, on a scale from zero to 10, how
much latitude their manager grants them along three different dimensions. In particular, the survey
asks: "Please say how much the management at your work allows/allowed you: a) … to decide how
your own daily work is/was organized; b) … to influence policy decisions about the activities of the
organization; c) … to choose or change your pace of work". We construct a single measure of how
much authority individuals' managers grant them on the job. This measure is called trustworthiness_b
in the descriptive statistics. We also use the three disaggregated measures in Table A6.
Measure of trustworthiness in the income regressions. The income regressions also control for a
measure of trustworthiness. This measure, called trustworthiness_a is the sum of only two of the three
questions included in the trustsworthiness_b measure (on how work should be organized daily and on
whether the person is able to influence policy decisions). The reason for doing that is that the
question on choosing or change pace at work in only asked in the second round of the ESS, and we
will therefore loose four waves of our sample.
2.2. SOM, Sweden
The SOM survey is a nationwide survey carried on in Sweden from the SOM Institute, a
research and conference center studying Society, Opinion and Media at Goteborg University1. The
survey collects information on politics, society, the use of media, public service, the environment,
risks, new media technology and leisure-time activities. Starting from 1996, individuals were also
asked the extent to which they believe that in general other people can be trusted. The trust question
is asked, like in the ESS, on a scale from 0 to 10. We use all the years from 1996 to 2009.
Measuring performance in the SOM. The dependent variable is the log of household income
before taxes (the definition includes pensions and study allowance). The variable is defined in
brackets (there are 10 income brackets for the period between 1996 and 1998, 8 income brackets for
the period between 1999 and 2007, and 9 income brackets for the 2008-2009 period). We assign the
mid-point to each income bracket and correct for inflation. The brackets for the different years are
reported below:

The SOM Institute is jointly managed by the Institute for Journalism and Mass Communication, the Department of
Political Science, and the School of Public Administration.
1

5

From 1996 to 1998

From 1999 to 2007

From 2008 to 2009

1

Less than 100,000

Less than 100,000

Less than 100,000

2

101,000-150,000

101,000-200,000

101,000-200,000

3

151,000-200,000

201,000-300,000

201,000-300,000

4

201,000-250,000

301,000-400,000

301,000-400,000

5

251,000-300,000

401,000-500,000

401,000-500,000

6

301,000-350,000

501,000-600,000

501,000-600,000

7

351,000-400,000

601,000-700,000

601,000-700,000

8

401,000-450,000

More than 700,000

701,000-800,000

9

451,000-500,000

10

More than 500,000

More than 800,000

Additional details on some of the independent variables
Risk aversion: “How often during the last 12 months have you gambled on sports, lotto
(football, horses, etc)”. The answer could take the following values: never (1), some time every year
(2), some time every half a year (3), some time every quarter of a year (4), some time every month
(5), some time every week (6), several times a week (7).
Rural and urban areas: we include dummies for “smaller conurbation”, “city or bigger
conurbation”, and “Stockolm, Goteborg, Malmo”. The excluded group is “rural area”.

3. Additional Tables and Figures

6

Table A1
Descriptive Statistics
A. European Social Survey
Variable
Log income
Age
Male
Immigrant
Married
Father primary education
Unemployed
Out of labor force
Years of education
Big city
Small city
Partner primary education
Mother primary education
Number of household members
Professionals
Technicians
Clerks
Workers
Agricultural workers
Mechan., repairers, textile work.
Assemblers, operators, drivers
Labourers, elementary occ.
Risk aversion
Altruism
People helpful

Mean
9.716
45.309
0.476
0.084
0.552
0.373
0.047
0.519
12.182
0.331
0.306
0.125
0.412
3.084
0.138
0.161
0.110
0.144
0.039
0.134
0.078
0.103
3.034
5.078
4.897

St. dev.
1.072
17.966
0.499
0.278
0.497
0.484
0.212
0.500
4.127
0.471
0.461
0.331
0.492
1.230
0.345
0.368
0.313
0.351
0.194
0.341
0.269
0.304
1.412
0.871
2.325

Variable
Treated equally
Helping others
Choose pace at work
Decide daily work
Influence policy decision
Trustworthiness_a
Trustworthiness_b
Religiosity
Left-right scale
Trust
Trust (immigrants’ distribution)
Trust legal
Trust parliament
Trust police
Trust politicians
Trust political parties
Trust United Nations
Cheated: Bank
Cheated: Second hand goods
Cheated: Food
Cheated: Plumber, repairer
Cheated (sum)
Cheated (princ. comp.)
Residuals (column 3, Table 4)
Residuals (column 4, Table 4)

Mean
4.936
3.843
5.734
6.160
4.041
10.204
16.237
4.585
5.121
5.097
13.998
5.218
4.594
5.973
3.680
3.681
5.324
1.508
1.359
2.045
1.617
2.486
0.107
0.054
0.040

St. dev.
1.019
0.792
3.611
3.490
3.601
6.407
9.398
2.953
2.184
2.489
7.916
2.629
2.537
2.547
2.352
2.329
2.490
0.905
0.780
1.419
0.995
2.754
1.381
2.104
2.081

0.502
0.043
0.351
0.439
0.313
3.264

0.500
0.202
0.477
0.496
0.464
2.176

B. SOM Survey, Sweden
Log(income)
Trust
Age
Married
Smaller conurbation
City or bigger conurbation
Stockholm, Goterborg, Malmo

12.546
6.464
47.723
0.520
0.235
0.455
0.149

0.652
2.246
17.510
0.500
0.424
0.498
0.356

7

Women
Unemployed
Out of labor force
Up to high school degree
University or higher
Risk aversion

Table A2
Distribution of trust, ESS Survey
Trust
Freq.
Percent
Cum.
0
9,755
6.00
6.00
1
7,067
4.35
10.34
2
10,963
6.74
17.08
3
16,467
10.13
27.21
4
14,958
9.20
36.41
5
31,955
19.65
56.05
6
16,976
10.44
66.49
7
24,832
15.27
81.76
8
20,583
12.66
94.42
9
5,683
3.49
97.91
10
3,397
2.09
100.00
Total
162,636
100.00
Table A3
Distribution of trust, SOM Survey, Sweden
Trust
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Total

Freq.
729
453
1,147
2,120
2,041
6,379
3,545
7,509
9,295
3,070
2,703
38,991

Percent
1.87
1.16
2.94
5.44
5.23
16.36
9.09
19.26
23.84
7.87
6.93
100.00

8

Cum.
1.87
3.03
5.97
11.41
16.64
33.01
42.10
61.36
85.19
93.07
100.00

Table A4
The relationship between trust and income
Dependent variable: log(income)
(1)
(3)
(4)
OLS
OLS
OLS
Trust 1
-0.003
0.004
-0.003
(0.013)
(0.015)
(0.013)
Trust 2
0.044***
0.041***
0.040***
(0.012)
(0.014)
(0.012)
Trust 3
0.070***
0.070***
0.060***
(0.011)
(0.013)
(0.011)
Trust 4
0.073***
0.059***
0.060***
(0.011)
(0.013)
(0.011)
Trust 5
0.083***
0.071***
0.069***
(0.010)
(0.012)
(0.010)
Trust 6
0.117***
0.106***
0.097***
(0.011)
(0.012)
(0.011)
Trust 7
0.140***
0.134***
0.116***
(0.010)
(0.012)
(0.010)
Trust 8
0.139***
0.128***
0.113***
(0.011)
(0.012)
(0.011)
Trust 9
0.138***
0.140***
0.115***
(0.014)
(0.015)
(0.014)
Trust 10
0.067***
0.071***
0.056***
(0.017)
(0.021)
(0.017)
Age
-0.002**
-0.001*
(0.001)
(0.001)
Age squared
-0.000***
-0.000***
(0.000)
(0.000)
Male
0.041***
-0.009*
0.040***
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.004)
Immigrant
-0.098***
-0.091***
-0.097***
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.008)
Married
0.367***
0.033***
0.366***
(0.004)
(0.007)
(0.004)
Father primary
-0.095***
-0.049***
-0.095***
(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.005)
Unemployed
-0.515***
-0.481***
-0.510***
(0.011)
(0.014)
(0.011)
Out of labor force
-0.175***
-0.126***
-0.175***
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.005)
Years of education
0.036***
0.014**
0.035***
(0.001)
(0.006)
(0.001)
Big city
0.082***
0.130***
0.081***
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.005)
Small city
0.022***
0.052***
0.022***
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.005)
Risk tolerance
0.015***
0.016***
0.015***
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Altruism
0.001
0.004
0.001
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.002)
Trustworthiness
0.011***
0.009***
0.011***
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)

9

(5)
OLS
-0.004
(0.013)
0.042***
(0.012)
0.068***
(0.011)
0.070***
(0.011)
0.081***
(0.010)
0.114***
(0.011)
0.136***
(0.010)
0.136***
(0.011)
0.136***
(0.014)
0.066***
(0.017)
-0.002**
(0.001)
-0.000***
(0.000)
0.041***
(0.004)
-0.097***
(0.007)
0.366***
(0.004)
-0.095***
(0.005)
-0.514***
(0.011)
-0.174***
(0.005)
0.035***
(0.001)
0.082***
(0.005)
0.022***
(0.005)
0.002
(0.002)
0.011***
(0.000)

Risk tolerance 2

0.029***
(0.006)
0.059***
(0.007)
0.067***
(0.007)
0.070***
(0.008)
0.061***
(0.011)

Risk tolerance 3
Risk tolerance 4
Risk tolerance 5
Risk tolerance 6
Trust legal 1

0.023*
(0.013)
0.051***
(0.011)
0.054***
(0.010)
0.069***
(0.011)
0.056***
(0.010)
0.096***
(0.010)
0.104***
(0.010)
0.108***
(0.010)
0.121***
(0.012)
0.028*
(0.015)

Trust legal 2
Trust legal 3
Trust legal 4
Trust legal 5
Trust legal 6
Trust legal 7
Trust legal 8
Trust legal 9
Trust legal 10
Mother primary education
Partner primary education
Number of household members
Age dummies
Education dummies*country dummies
Observations
R-squared

102298
0.67

-0.042***
(0.007)
-0.183***
(0.008)
0.039***
(0.002)
yes
yes
64404
0.72

100449
0.67

102298
0.67

Notes: [1] Each regression controls for country and wave fixed effects; [2] *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. [3]
Trust is the answer to the following question: “Generally speaking would you say that most people can be trusted or that you can’t be too careful
in dealing with people? Please tell me on a score of 0 to 10, where 0 means you can’t be too careful and 10 means that most people can be
trusted”; [4] Individual controls in column (1) include a quadratic in age, gender, immigrant, marital and labor market status, years of education,
education of the father, dummies for city size and measures of risk aversion, altruism and trustworthiness. The variables are described on p. 4
and p. 6 of the on line appendix. Additional controls in column (3) are a full set of age dummies, a full set of education dummies and their
interactions with country dummies, mother’s and partner’s education and the number of people living at home. Column (4) includes 10
dummies for trust in the legal system; whereas column (5) controls for a measure of moderation, using dummies for risk aversion.

10

Table A5
Heckman selection model (corresponding to column 2 of Table 1 in the paper)
(1)
Log(income)
0.002
(0.014)
0.054***
(0.013)
0.094***
(0.012)
0.102***
(0.013)
0.107***
(0.011)
0.159***
(0.013)
0.176***
(0.013)
0.184***
(0.014)
0.174***
(0.017)
0.092***
(0.019)
0.005**
(0.001)
-0.000***
(0.000)
0.052***
(0.005)
-0.098***
(0.009)
0.365***
(0.005)
-0.081***
(0.006)
-0.521***
(0.011)
-0.173***
(0.006)
0.037***
(0.001)
0.093***
(0.006)
0.033***
(0.006)
0.015***
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.003)

Trust 1
Trust 2
Trust 3
Trust 4
Trust 5
Trust 6
Trust 7
Trust 8
Trust 9
Trust 10
Age
Age squared
Male
Immigrant
Married
Father primary education
Unemployed
Out of labor force
Years of education
Big city
Small city
Risk aversion
Altruism

11

(2)
Selection
0.016
(0.023)
0.045**
(0.021)
0.082***
(0.020)
0.103***
(0.021)
0.080***
(0.018)
0.142***
(0.021)
0.135***
(0.020)
0.175***
(0.021)
0.134***
(0.030)
0.083**
(0.036)
0.029***
(0.001)
-0.000***
(0.000)
0.052***
(0.009)
0.014
(0.016)
-0.014
(0.009)
0.049***
(0.011)
-0.018
(0.019)
0.026***
(0.010)
0.005***
(0.001)
0.031***
(0.011)
0.046***
(0.010)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.005)

Trustworthiness

0.010***
(0.000)

Distance from the filing taxes month
Inverse Mills ratio

-0.002***
(0.001)
-0.006***
(0.001)

0.652***
(0.101)
Observations
96782
96782
Notes: [1] Each regression controls for country and wave fixed effects; [2]
*** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. [3] Trust is
the answer to the following question: “Generally speaking would you say
that most people can be trusted or that you can’t be too careful in dealing
with people? Please tell me on a score of 0 to 10, where 0 means you can’t
be too careful and 10 means that most people can be trusted”.

12

Table A6
Trust and income, controlling for regional dummies
Dependent var.: Log (income)
Trust 1
Trust 2
Trust 3
Trust 4
Trust 5
Trust 6
Trust 7
Trust 8
Trust 9
Trust 10
Individual controls
Altruism, risk avers., trustworthiness
Additional controls
Trust legal system (10 dum.)
Controlling for moderation
Observations
R-squared
Trust peak = Trust 2 (p-values)
Trust peak = Trust 10 (p-values)

(1)
OLS
-0.004
(0.017)
0.082***
(0.015)
0.135***
(0.013)
0.165***
(0.014)
0.199***
(0.012)
0.272***
(0.013)
0.329***
(0.013)
0.349***
(0.013)
0.341***
(0.018)
0.191***
(0.022)
yes
yes
no
no
no
91231
0.55
0.00
0.00

(3)
OLS
-0.003
(0.016)
0.032**
(0.014)
0.059***
(0.013)
0.048***
(0.013)
0.060***
(0.012)
0.090***
(0.013)
0.119***
(0.012)
0.113***
(0.013)
0.128***
(0.016)
0.060***
(0.022)
yes
yes
yes
no
no
57505
0.52
0.00
0.00

(4)
OLS
-0.014
(0.017)
0.057***
(0.015)
0.096***
(0.014)
0.116***
(0.014)
0.141***
(0.013)
0.193***
(0.014)
0.234***
(0.013)
0.243***
(0.014)
0.237***
(0.018)
0.120***
(0.022)
yes
yes
no
yes
no
89594
0.56
0.00
0.00

(5)
OLS
-0.005
(0.017)
0.081***
(0.015)
0.133***
(0.013)
0.162***
(0.014)
0.196***
(0.012)
0.268***
(0.013)
0.326***
(0.013)
0.347***
(0.013)
0.338***
(0.018)
0.190***
(0.022)
yes
yes
no
no
yes
91231
0.55
0.00
0.00

Notes: [1] Each regression controls for wave fixed effects; [2] *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. [3] Trust
is the answer to the following question: “Generally speaking would you say that most people can be trusted or that you can’t be too
careful in dealing with people? Please tell me on a score of 0 to 10, where 0 means you can’t be too careful and 10 means that most
people can be trusted”; [4] Individual controls in column (1) include a quadratic in age, gender, immigrant, marital and labor market
status, years of education, education of the father, dummies for city size, measures of risk aversion, altruism and trustworthiness. The
variables are described on p. 4 and p. 6 of the on line appendix. Additional controls in column (3) are a full set of age dummies, a full
set of education dummies and their interactions with country dummies, mother’s and partner’s education and the number of people
living at home. Column (4) includes 10 dummies for trust in the legal system, whereas column (5) controls for moderation with the
inclusions of dummies for risk aversion.

13

Table A7
Trust and income, controlling for other measures of trust
Dependent variable: Log(income)
Trust 1
Trust 2
Trust 3
Trust 4
Trust 5
Trust 6
Trust 7
Trust 8
Trust 9
Trust 10

(1)
-0.004
(0.013)
0.034***
(0.012)
0.051***
(0.011)
0.050***
(0.011)
0.062***
(0.010)
0.087***
(0.011)
0.107***
(0.010)
0.108***
(0.011)
0.105***
(0.014)
0.059***
(0.017)
yes

(2)
-0.005
(0.013)
0.035***
(0.012)
0.055***
(0.011)
0.057***
(0.011)
0.069***
(0.010)
0.096***
(0.011)
0.118***
(0.010)
0.120***
(0.011)
0.116***
(0.014)
0.066***
(0.017)

(3)
-0.009
(0.013)
0.034***
(0.012)
0.054***
(0.011)
0.053***
(0.011)
0.066***
(0.010)
0.092***
(0.011)
0.114***
(0.010)
0.114***
(0.011)
0.111***
(0.014)
0.057***
(0.017)

(4)
-0.008
(0.013)
0.036***
(0.012)
0.056***
(0.011)
0.055***
(0.011)
0.067***
(0.010)
0.094***
(0.011)
0.117***
(0.010)
0.118***
(0.011)
0.116***
(0.014)
0.061***
(0.017)

(5)
-0.000
(0.014)
0.040***
(0.012)
0.055***
(0.011)
0.055***
(0.012)
0.068***
(0.011)
0.092***
(0.011)
0.114***
(0.011)
0.115***
(0.011)
0.112***
(0.014)
0.054***
(0.018)

Trust parliament
Trust police
yes
Trust politicians
yes
Trust political parties
yes
Trust united nations
yes
Observations
104300
105276
104712
104221
97282
R-squared
0.67
0.67
0.67
0.67
0.65
Notes: [1] Each regression controls for country and wave fixed effects; [2] *** significant at 1%, ** significant at
5%, * significant at 10%. [2] Individual controls include a quadratic in age, gender, immigrant, marital and labor
market status, years of education, education of the father and dummies for city size.

14

Table A8
Trust and income, controlling for moderation
Trust

-0.002
0.045***
0.070***
0.072***
0.083***
0.116***
0.138***
0.138***
0.138***
0.070***
(0.013)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.014)
(0.017)
Risk tolerance
0.028***
0.058***
0.066***
0.070***
0.060***
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.011)
Test of equality
All equal coeff.
Trust 2 = Trust peak
Trust 10 = Trust peak
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
of coef. (p-values)
Trust
-0.004
0.042***
0.067***
0.069***
0.080***
0.113***
0.136***
0.136***
0.135***
0.066***
(0.013)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.014)
(0.017)
Altruism
-0.032
-0.010
-0.003
0.009
-0.002
(0.049)
(0.045)
(0.044)
(0.044)
(0.044)
Test of equality
All equal coeff.
Trust 2 = Trust peak
Trust 10 = Trust peak
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
of coef. (p-values)
Trust
-0.005
0.036***
0.058***
0.058***
0.071***
0.098***
0.120***
0.123***
0.127***
0.061***
(0.015)
(0.013)
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.012)
(0.014)
(0.018)
-0.002
0.045***
0.055***
0.068***
0.046***
0.098***
0.134***
0.126***
0.103***
0.060***
Pol. ideology
(0.018)
(0.015)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.017)
(0.017)
Test of equality
All equal coeff.
Trust 2 = Trust peak
Trust 10 = Trust peak
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
of coef. (p-values)
Trust
-0.004
0.042***
0.067***
0.067***
0.080***
0.111***
0.135***
0.137***
0.141***
0.076***
(0.013)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.014)
(0.017)
0.011
0.010
0.014*
-0.000
-0.029***
-0.006
-0.008
-0.039***
-0.081***
-0.120***
Religiosity
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.011)
(0.011)
Test of equality
All equal coeff.
Trust 2 = Trust peak
Trust 10 = Trust peak
of coef. (p-values)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
Notes: [1] Each regression controls for country and wave fixed effects; [2] *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. [3] Trust is the
answer to the following question: “Generally speaking would you say that most people can be trusted or that you can’t be too careful in dealing with people?
Please tell me on a score of 0 to 10, where 0 means you can’t be too careful and 10 means that most people can be trusted”; [4] Individual controls include a
quadratic in age, gender, immigrant, marital and labor market status, years of education, education of the father and dummies for city size.

15

Table A9
Variance of income and trust
(1)
(2)
St. dev. income
St. dev. income
Trust
212.410***
272.714***
(79.724)
(64.653)
Country fixed effects
Yes
yes
Wave fixed effects
No
yes
Observations
363
1199
R-squared
0.89
0.75
*** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%.

Table A10
Differences in means for observable characteristics between individuals reporting 10 and
the median person in each country
Difference
in means
5.735
-0.054
0.022
-0.023
0.01
-0.01
-0.285
-0.005
-0.005
0.061
0.613

Age
Male
Immigrant
Married
Father primary educ.
Unemployed
Years of education
Big city
Small city
Risk aversion
Trustworthiness

16

p-value
0.000
0.003
0.127
0.240
0.799
0.071
0.353
0.781
0.755
0.416
0.154

Table A11
The relationship between trust and income in low, average and high trust countries
Dependent variable: log(inc.)
Trust 1
Trust 2
Trust 3
Trust 4
Trust 5
Trust 6
Trust 7
Trust 8
Trust 9
Trust 10

(1)
Low trust
-0.019
(0.021)
0.027
(0.020)
0.074***
(0.019)
0.064***
(0.021)
0.083***
(0.018)
0.127***
(0.023)
0.129***
(0.022)
0.099***
(0.024)
0.051
(0.037)
0.064*
(0.038)

(2)
Aver. trust
0.013
(0.021)
0.039**
(0.018)
0.053***
(0.017)
0.076***
(0.017)
0.087***
(0.016)
0.131***
(0.018)
0.142***
(0.017)
0.154***
(0.019)
0.148***
(0.031)
0.039
(0.038)

Trust

(3)
High trust
0.002
(0.029)
0.061***
(0.023)
0.078***
(0.021)
0.068***
(0.021)
0.073***
(0.020)
0.106***
(0.020)
0.137***
(0.019)
0.138***
(0.020)
0.147***
(0.022)
0.076***
(0.026)

(4)
Low trust

(5)
Aver. trust

(6)
High trust

0.036***
0.032***
0.033***
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.005)
Trust squared
-0.003***
-0.002***
-0.002***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.000)
Optimal trust
6
8
8.25
Observations
16777
30497
55024
16777
30497
55024
R-squared
0.63
0.56
0.47
0.63
0.56
0.47
The specification for each column corresponds to the one of column 1, Table 2. Low trust countries are Bulgaria,
Cyprus, Greece, Romania, Russia, Slovenia, Slovakia and Turkey. Average trust countries are: Croatia, Czech
Republic, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland and Portugal. High trust countries are Austria,
Belgium, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Great Britain, Ireland, Israel, Island, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland.

17

Table A12
The relationship between trust and income, SOM survey, Sweden
Dependent variable: Log(income)
(1)
Trust 1
0.038
(0.041)
Trust 2
0.170***
(0.032)
Trust 3
0.205***
(0.029)
Trust 4
0.222***
(0.029)
Trust 5
0.210***
(0.027)
Trust 6
0.275***
(0.028)
Trust 7
0.295***
(0.027)
Trust 8
0.319***
(0.027)
Trust 9
0.337***
(0.028)
Trust 10
0.260***
(0.028)
Age
0.010***
(0.001)
Age squared
-0.000***
(0.000)
Married
0.336***
(0.006)
Smaller conurbation
0.049***
(0.009)
City or bigger conurbation
0.028***
(0.008)
Stockolm, Gotenborg, Malmo
-0.048***
(0.012)
Female
-0.089***
(0.006)
Non-Swedish citizen
-0.208***
(0.020)
Unemployed
-0.409***
(0.018)
Out of labor force
-0.391***
(0.010)
Up to high school
0.197***
(0.008)
University or higher
0.258***
(0.008)
18

Risk tolerance

0.005***
(0.001)
38991
0.29

Observations
R-squared

Notes: [1] Each regression controls for region and year
of interview fixed effects; [2] *** significant at 1%, **
significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. [3] Trust is the
answer to the following question: “In your opinion, to
what extent can one trust people in general?” The
answers go from “Cannot trust people in general” (0)
to “Can trust people in general” (10).

19

Table A13
SOM survey, Sweden: Splitting the sample according to observables
Dependent variable: log(inc.)

(1)
Up to high
school

(2)
More than
high school

(3)
Employed

(6)
White
collars,
workers,
farmers
Trust 1
0.038
0.005
0.077
-0.001
-0.106
0.028
(0.044)
(0.102)
(0.052)
(0.062)
(0.168)
(0.045)
Trust 2
0.170***
0.193**
0.181***
0.153***
0.117
0.141***
(0.034)
(0.080)
(0.040)
(0.049)
(0.111)
(0.034)
Trust 3
0.206***
0.239***
0.213***
0.194***
0.126
0.168***
(0.031)
(0.075)
(0.038)
(0.043)
(0.104)
(0.031)
Trust 4
0.215***
0.274***
0.225***
0.218***
0.190*
0.193***
(0.031)
(0.075)
(0.038)
(0.043)
(0.107)
(0.031)
Trust 5
0.224***
0.203***
0.222***
0.198***
0.143
0.191***
(0.029)
(0.072)
(0.036)
(0.039)
(0.096)
(0.029)
Trust 6
0.287***
0.290***
0.278***
0.273***
0.197**
0.242***
(0.030)
(0.072)
(0.036)
(0.041)
(0.098)
(0.029)
Trust 7
0.317***
0.289***
0.291***
0.304***
0.226**
0.261***
(0.029)
(0.071)
(0.036)
(0.039)
(0.096)
(0.029)
Trust 8
0.338***
0.312***
0.312***
0.328***
0.282***
0.282***
(0.029)
(0.070)
(0.035)
(0.038)
(0.094)
(0.028)
Trust 9
0.342***
0.340***
0.329***
0.347***
0.282***
0.300***
(0.031)
(0.071)
(0.036)
(0.043)
(0.100)
(0.029)
Trust 10
0.264***
0.277***
0.284***
0.224***
0.230**
0.233***
(0.031)
(0.072)
(0.037)
(0.041)
(0.099)
(0.030)
Observations
26805
12186
23633
15358
2635
31377
R-squared
0.25
0.39
0.20
0.13
0.28
0.33
Notes: [1] Controls are those of the baseline regression reported in Table 3; [2] *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. [3] Trust is the answer
to the following question: “In your opinion, to what extent can one trust people in general?” The answers go from “Cannot trust people in general” (0) to “Can trust
people in general” (10).

20

(4)
Unemployed,
out of the
labor force

(5)
Entrepreneurs

Table A13, continued:
SOM survey, Sweden: splitting the sample according to observables
Dependent variable: log(inc.)

(1)
Low risk
aversion

(2)
High risk
aversion

(3)
Citizen

(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Grew up Grew up
Men
Women
in
outside
Sweden
Sweden
Trust 1
0.079
0.047
0.039
0.035
0.025
-0.080
0.085
-0.013
(0.059)
(0.054)
(0.042)
(0.194)
(0.043)
(0.120)
(0.056)
(0.060)
Trust 2
0.186***
0.199***
0.180***
-0.021
0.157***
-0.007
0.203***
0.133***
(0.047)
(0.043)
(0.032)
(0.161)
(0.033)
(0.118)
(0.043)
(0.047)
Trust 3
0.219***
0.234***
0.208***
0.125
0.175***
0.202**
0.237***
0.169***
(0.042)
(0.039)
(0.029)
(0.139)
(0.030)
(0.102)
(0.040)
(0.042)
Trust 4
0.254***
0.234***
0.226***
0.165
0.202***
0.211**
0.245***
0.195***
(0.042)
(0.040)
(0.029)
(0.142)
(0.030)
(0.102)
(0.040)
(0.042)
Trust 5
0.242***
0.225***
0.215***
0.063
0.190***
0.098
0.232***
0.186***
(0.039)
(0.037)
(0.027)
(0.128)
(0.028)
(0.092)
(0.037)
(0.039)
Trust 6
0.321***
0.276***
0.279***
0.192
0.247***
0.207**
0.276***
0.271***
(0.040)
(0.038)
(0.028)
(0.139)
(0.029)
(0.103)
(0.038)
(0.040)
Trust 7
0.343***
0.290***
0.296***
0.249*
0.257***
0.294***
0.306***
0.281***
(0.038)
(0.037)
(0.027)
(0.128)
(0.028)
(0.094)
(0.037)
(0.039)
Trust 8
0.360***
0.327***
0.320***
0.273**
0.280***
0.263***
0.343***
0.292***
(0.038)
(0.037)
(0.027)
(0.128)
(0.028)
(0.094)
(0.037)
(0.038)
Trust 9
0.385***
0.330***
0.338***
0.318**
0.299***
0.214*
0.342***
0.326***
(0.039)
(0.039)
(0.028)
(0.148)
(0.029)
(0.122)
(0.038)
(0.040)
Trust 10
0.318***
0.237***
0.264***
0.145
0.225***
0.181
0.282***
0.243***
(0.040)
(0.039)
(0.028)
(0.144)
(0.029)
(0.117)
(0.039)
(0.040)
Observations
21048
18712
37768
1223
36098
1710
19414
19577
R-squared
0.28
0.32
0.29
0.26
0.29
0.23
0.28
0.30
Notes: [1] Controls are those of the baseline regression reported in Table 3; [2] *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. [3] Trust is the answer to
the following question: “In your opinion, to what extent can one trust people in general?” The answers go from “Cannot trust people in general” (0) to “Can trust people
in general” (10). [4] Risk aversion is the answer to the question: “How often during the last 12 months have you gambled on sports, lotto, football, horses, etc. Possible
answers are “never” (1), “sometime every year” (2), “sometime every half a year” (3), “sometime every quarter of a year” (4), “sometime every month” (5), “sometime
every week” (6), “several times a week” (7). Low risk aversion includes all values from 1 to 3. High risk aversion, values higher than 3.

21

(4)
Not
citizen

Table A13, continued:
SOM survey, Sweden: splitting the sample according to observables
Dependent variable: log(inc.)

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Young
Old
Married
Not married
Rural
Urban
Region 1
Region 2
Region 3
Region4
Trust 1
0.019
0.047
0.011
0.053
0.045
0.037
0.138
0.227*
0.232
-0.026
(0.062)
(0.051)
(0.052)
(0.059)
(0.060)
(0.055)
(0.096)
(0.126)
(0.169)
(0.050)
Trust 2
0.179***
0.146***
0.116***
0.198***
0.161***
0.193***
0.252***
0.145
0.290*
0.150***
(0.048)
(0.039)
(0.042)
(0.045)
(0.048)
(0.042)
(0.080)
(0.108)
(0.149)
(0.037)
Trust 3
0.236***
0.166***
0.136***
0.244***
0.194***
0.225***
0.308***
0.217**
0.382***
0.168***
(0.045)
(0.035)
(0.037)
(0.042)
(0.044)
(0.038)
(0.074)
(0.092)
(0.142)
(0.034)
Trust 4
0.246***
0.186***
0.136***
0.273***
0.189***
0.250***
0.365***
0.237***
0.361**
0.179***
(0.045)
(0.035)
(0.037)
(0.042)
(0.044)
(0.038)
(0.073)
(0.092)
(0.144)
(0.034)
Trust 5
0.228***
0.184***
0.156***
0.246***
0.191***
0.233***
0.311***
0.216**
0.352**
0.179***
(0.043)
(0.032)
(0.034)
(0.039)
(0.041)
(0.035)
(0.069)
(0.085)
(0.137)
(0.032)
Trust 6
0.319***
0.217***
0.215***
0.309***
0.258***
0.299***
0.420***
0.266***
0.400***
0.236***
(0.044)
(0.033)
(0.035)
(0.041)
(0.042)
(0.036)
(0.070)
(0.087)
(0.140)
(0.033)
Trust 7
0.326***
0.255***
0.245***
0.321***
0.271***
0.322***
0.428***
0.313***
0.450***
0.252***
(0.042)
(0.032)
(0.034)
(0.039)
(0.041)
(0.035)
(0.068)
(0.084)
(0.136)
(0.031)
Trust 8
0.350***
0.278***
0.257***
0.360***
0.296***
0.345***
0.460***
0.332***
0.448***
0.277***
(0.042)
(0.032)
(0.034)
(0.039)
(0.041)
(0.035)
(0.067)
(0.083)
(0.135)
(0.031)
Trust 9
0.350***
0.303***
0.276***
0.367***
0.286***
0.377***
0.495***
0.355***
0.443***
0.289***
(0.044)
(0.033)
(0.035)
(0.041)
(0.043)
(0.036)
(0.069)
(0.087)
(0.140)
(0.033)
Trust 10
0.314***
0.217***
0.219***
0.271***
0.205***
0.304***
0.410***
0.273***
0.431***
0.214***
(0.045)
(0.033)
(0.035)
(0.042)
(0.043)
(0.036)
(0.070)
(0.089)
(0.141)
(0.033)
Observations
19799
19192
20281
18710
15436
23555
7132
3658
2165
26036
R-squared
0.22
0.42
0.38
0.19
0.28
0.31
0.28
0.31
0.33
0.28
Notes: [1] Controls are those of the baseline regression reported in Table 3; [2] *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. [3] Trust is the
answer to the following question: “In your opinion, to what extent can one trust people in general?” The answers go from “Cannot trust people in general” (0) to
“Can trust people in general” (10). [4] “Old” include all people older than 48.

22

Table A14
Trust and Cheating, IV Regressions, Robustness to the Inclusion of Additional Controls

Trust
Age
Age squared
Male
Immigrant
Married
Single
Years of educ.
Father primary
Father secondary
Unemployed
Out of labor force
Risk tolerance
Log income
Big city
Small city
Establ. Size (10-24)
Establ. Size (25-99)
Establ. Size (100-499)
Establ. Size (500 or more)
Supervising other employees
Observations

(1)
Bank
insurance

(2)
Second
hand
things

(3)
Food

0.601***
(0.197)
0.017***
(0.004)
-0.000***
(0.000)
0.085***
(0.029)
0.032
(0.045)
-0.139***
(0.052)
-0.245***
(0.060)
-0.013
(0.010)
0.161*
(0.083)
0.098
(0.065)
0.154**
(0.073)
0.038
(0.029)
0.005
(0.012)
-0.013
(0.026)
0.078**
(0.038)
0.092**
(0.039)
-0.021
(0.035)
-0.072**
(0.032)
0.016
(0.040)
0.015
(0.047)
0.105***
(0.028)
20722

0.087
(0.090)
-0.005**
(0.002)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.095***
(0.013)
0.041*
(0.022)
-0.046**
(0.023)
-0.016
(0.027)
-0.002
(0.005)
-0.013
(0.038)
-0.017
(0.031)
0.069*
(0.036)
0.033**
(0.014)
0.013**
(0.006)
-0.020*
(0.012)
0.014
(0.018)
0.040**
(0.017)
-0.065***
(0.016)
-0.055***
(0.016)
-0.074***
(0.018)
-0.078***
(0.022)
0.024*
(0.013)
22095

0.499**
(0.194)
0.015***
(0.004)
-0.000***
(0.000)
-0.209***
(0.029)
0.019
(0.047)
-0.091*
(0.053)
-0.211***
(0.061)
-0.005
(0.010)
0.074
(0.082)
-0.004
(0.063)
0.214***
(0.077)
0.156***
(0.032)
-0.024*
(0.013)
-0.006
(0.027)
0.167***
(0.039)
0.129***
(0.038)
-0.041
(0.035)
-0.047
(0.035)
0.025
(0.041)
0.091*
(0.050)
0.095***
(0.030)
22446

23

(4)
Plumber,
builder,
mechanic,
repairer
0.361***
(0.137)
0.012***
(0.003)
-0.000***
(0.000)
0.087***
(0.022)
0.062*
(0.036)
-0.139***
(0.038)
-0.214***
(0.044)
-0.006
(0.007)
0.011
(0.059)
0.016
(0.048)
0.105*
(0.055)
0.050**
(0.024)
0.008
(0.009)
0.006
(0.019)
0.102***
(0.029)
0.085***
(0.028)
-0.022
(0.026)
-0.064**
(0.025)
-0.007
(0.031)
0.007
(0.037)
0.095***
(0.022)
21937

(5)
Times
being
cheated
(sum)
1.754***
(0.574)
0.033**
(0.014)
-0.001***
(0.000)
0.036
(0.089)
0.139
(0.141)
-0.472***
(0.162)
-0.711***
(0.179)
-0.035
(0.029)
0.241
(0.230)
0.143
(0.187)
0.502**
(0.214)
0.246***
(0.087)
-0.004
(0.037)
-0.048
(0.075)
0.418***
(0.111)
0.391***
(0.118)
-0.118
(0.106)
-0.180*
(0.098)
-0.054
(0.120)
-0.001
(0.141)
0.321***
(0.085)
19448

(6)
Being
cheated
(principal
component)
0.887***
(0.290)
0.016**
(0.007)
-0.000***
(0.000)
0.063
(0.045)
0.077
(0.071)
-0.246***
(0.082)
-0.359***
(0.090)
-0.018
(0.015)
0.127
(0.116)
0.076
(0.095)
0.248**
(0.108)
0.114***
(0.044)
0.003
(0.018)
-0.027
(0.038)
0.201***
(0.056)
0.195***
(0.059)
-0.063
(0.054)
-0.097**
(0.049)
-0.036
(0.061)
-0.015
(0.071)
0.164***
(0.043)
19448

Notes: [1] Each regression controls for country fixed effects, 8 occupational dummies and 9 industry dummies; the
excluded group for establishment size is size “smaller than 10” [2] *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, *
significant at 10%. [3] Trust is the answer to the following question: “Generally speaking would you say that most
people can be trusted or that you can’t be too careful in dealing with people? Please tell me on a score of 0 to 10,
where 0 means you can’t be too careful and 10 means that most people can be trusted”; [4] Trust is instrumented
using the variable Trustworthiness obtained as the sum of the answers to the following three questions: “I am going to
read out a list of things about your working life. Using this card, please say how much the management at your work
allows/allowed you to 1) decide how your own daily work is/was organized; 2) influence policy decisions about the
activities of the organization? 3) to choose or change your pace of work?” The answer to each question can take
values from 0 (I have/had no influence) to 10 (I have/ had complete control). [5] The excluded group for father
education are people with college or more; the excluded group for marital status is “divorced or widower”; the
excluded group for labor status are people employed; the excluded group for city size are people living in a country
village, a farm or a home in the countryside.

24

Table A15
Trust and Cheating, OLS Regressions

Trust
Age
Age squared
Male
Immigrant
Married
Single
Years of education
Father primary
Father secondary
Unemployed
Out of labor force
Risk tolerance
Log income
Big city
Small city
Observations
R-squared

(1)
Bank
insurance

(2)
Second
hand
things

(3)
Food

-0.022
(0.003)***
0.017
(0.002)***
-0.000
(0.000)***
0.138
(0.013)***
0.023
(0.023)
-0.007
(0.016)
-0.114
(0.021)***
0.015
(0.002)***
-0.089
(0.025)***
-0.083
(0.023)***
0.012
(0.028)
0.005
(0.015)
0.027
(0.005)***
0.049
(0.009)***
0.017
(0.017)
0.012
(0.015)
22720
0.10

-0.017
(0.002)***
-0.006
(0.002)***
-0.000
(0.000)
0.098
(0.011)***
0.036
(0.020)*
-0.015
(0.014)
0.003
(0.018)
0.002
(0.002)
-0.061
(0.021)***
-0.041
(0.018)**
0.044
(0.027)
0.021
(0.012)*
0.016
(0.004)***
-0.016
(0.008)**
-0.000
(0.014)
0.029
(0.013)**
24321
0.10

-0.027
(0.004)***
0.016
(0.003)***
-0.000
(0.000)***
-0.152
(0.020)***
-0.002
(0.033)
0.026
(0.025)
-0.101
(0.032)***
0.021
(0.003)***
-0.117
(0.037)***
-0.126
(0.033)***
0.074
(0.043)*
0.120
(0.022)***
-0.001
(0.007)
0.046
(0.013)***
0.144
(0.025)***
0.087
(0.022)***
24766
0.13

(4)
Plumber,
builder,
mechanic,
repairer
-0.031
(0.003)***
0.013
(0.002)***
-0.000
(0.000)***
0.124
(0.014)***
0.049
(0.026)*
-0.063
(0.018)***
-0.144
(0.023)***
0.012
(0.002)***
-0.150
(0.027)***
-0.103
(0.024)***
0.006
(0.032)
0.022
(0.016)
0.023
(0.005)***
0.047
(0.010)***
0.063
(0.018)***
0.044
(0.016)***
24142
0.08

(5)
Times
being
cheated
-0.096
(0.008)***
0.038
(0.007)***
-0.001
(0.000)***
0.238
(0.041)***
0.101
(0.072)
-0.044
(0.051)
-0.342
(0.066)***
0.047
(0.006)***
-0.435
(0.076)***
-0.347
(0.067)***
0.098
(0.089)
0.169
(0.045)***
0.066
(0.014)***
0.127
(0.028)***
0.271
(0.051)***
0.174
(0.046)***
21276
0.15

(6)
Being
cheated
(principal
component)
-0.049
(0.004)***
0.018
(0.003)***
-0.000
(0.000)***
0.162
(0.021)***
0.057
(0.036)
-0.028
(0.025)
-0.172
(0.033)***
0.023
(0.003)***
-0.219
(0.038)***
-0.175
(0.034)***
0.044
(0.045)
0.072
(0.022)***
0.038
(0.007)***
0.061
(0.014)***
0.122
(0.026)***
0.084
(0.023)***
21276
0.14

Notes: [1] Each regression controls for country fixed effects and 8 occupational dummies; [2] *** significant at 1%, **
significant at 5%, * significant at 10%.; [3] Trust is the answer to the following question: “Generally speaking would you say
that most people can be trusted or that you can’t be too careful in dealing with people? Please tell me on a score of 0 to 10,
where 0 means you can’t be too careful and 10 means that most people can be trusted”; [4] The cheating variables are the
answer to the following questions: “how often, if ever, have each of these things happened to you in the last five years? A
bank or insurance company failed to offer you the best deal you were entitled to; you were sold something second-hand
that quickly proved to be faulty; you were sold food that was packed to conceal the worse bits; A plumber, builder, car
mechanic or other repair person overcharged you or did unnecessary work” The answer could take values Never (1), once
(2), twice (3), 3 or 4 time (4) 5 times or more (5); [5] The excluded group for father education are people with college or
more; the excluded group for marital status are divorced or widows; the excluded group for labor status are people
employed; the excluded group for city size are people living in a country village, a farm or a home in the countryside.

25

Figure A1
Trust standard deviation and income, by country
BE

CH

CZ

DE

DK

EE

ES

FI

FR

GB

GR

HU

IE

IS

IT

LU

NL

NO

PL

PT

SE

SI

SK

TR

1 2 3 4 5
1 2 3 4 5
1 2 3 4 5
1 2 3 4 5

Trust standard deviation

1 2 3 4 5

AT

0

5

10

15

0

5

10

15

0

5

10

15

0

5

10

Household's total net income, all sources
Graphs by Country

26

15

0

5

10

15

Figure A2
Sweden: trust beliefs, density functions by region

Trust distribution in Swedish regions
Region 2

Region 3

0

0

Region 4

Total

0

.1

.2

.3

Density

.1

.2

.3

Region 1

0

5

10

0

5

trust
Graphs by region

Region 1 indicates the Stockholm, Sodertalke A-region,
Region 2 the Gothenburg's A-region
Region 3 includes Malmo/Lund/Trelleborg
Region 4 indicates all the other regions.
27

10

5

10

Figure A3
Trust beliefs: density functions for second generation immigrants, by country of origin

.3
.2
.1

AT

BE

BG

CH

CY

CZ

DE

DK

EE

ES

FI

FR

GB

GR

HR

HU

IE

IL

IS

IT

LT

LU

LV

NL

NO

PL

PT

RO

RU

SE

0

.3
.2
.1
0

.3
.2
.1
0

.3
.2
.1
0

.3
.2
.1
0

0

SI

SK

5

10

0

TR

.3
.2
.1
0
0

5

10

0

5

10

0

5

10

Most people can be trusted or you can't be too careful
Empirical Density
Fitted normal density

28

5

10

0

5

10

Figure A4
Correlations between moments of trust distribution in countries of origin and among second generation immigrants

IS
SE
IL

3

4
5
country of origin

DK
NO

FI

GB CH
NL
DE
IE
BE
AT EE
LU
PL
SI FR
RO
RUHUIT
LT
UA CZ
ES
CY
PT HR
LV
BG
GR SK

TR

Second generation
5
6
7

Median
CH

6

7

TR

BG

2

Second generation
-.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2

Second generation
1.8 2 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8

LT
HU
GR HR
EE
SK
DE
CZ
ATIE
FR PT LU
PL
SI
IT
BE
GB
CH
NL
ES

BG
RU
LVRO UA
TR
CY

IS

2

2.2
2.4
country of origin

NL

BE
AT
CY
ES
EE
FR
HU
HR
LU
LT
IT

IE

3

4
5
country of origin

6

7

Skewness

DK SE

1.8

CZ
GR
LV
RU
RO
PT
PL
SI
UA

DE
GB

SK

St. Dev.

FI
NO

DK
FI
IS
NO
SE

IL

4

Second generation
4
5
6
7

Mean

2.6

2.8

LU

IS

BE EE DE
IL
GB
FI
DK
NL
NO
SE

-1

29

IT
ES
IE AT
FR

-.5

SK
GR
LT
HR
HU PT
RU
UA
CZ
RO
PL
CYLV

TR
BG

SI

CH

0
.5
country of origin

1

Modeling heterogeneity
Derivation of equation (3)
To model heterogeneity, we model the income of individual i as:
yic = ymax (Xic )

ai (

ic

2
ic )

+ &i

(2)

where yic is the income of individual i in country c; ymax is his or her maximum
attainable income when trust beliefs are correct which depends on a vector of variables
(Xic ) capturing both features of the country and characteristics of the individual; ic is
the trustworthiness of the pool of people individual i interacts with; ic is individual i’s
level of trust; and &i is a random component orthogonal to the explanatory variables. The
sensitivity to trust mistakes is captured by the parameter ai :
We further model ic as having two components: an observed heterogeneity component
common to all individuals in the same country, c , and linearly related to the average
trust in the country (xc ) and an unobserved individual-speci…c component i . Thus: c =
m + bxc + i .
We model ai as ai = a + i where i is an individual speci…c component1 .
After replacing ai and ic in (2), the equation we want to estimate becomes:
2
yic = ymax (Xic ) (a + "i )( m + bxc + i
ic ) + &i =
2
2
= ymax (Xic ) a(m + bxc + i
"i ( m + bxc + i
ic )
ic ) + &i =
2
2
= ymax (Xic ) a(m + bxc ic ) a i 2a i ( m + bxc ic ) "i ( m + bxc + i ic )2 + &i
= ymax (Xic ) am2 ab2 x2c 2abmxc + 2am ic a ic2 + 2abxc ic a i2 2a i (m +
2
bxc
"i ( m + bxc
"i i2 2"i i ( m + bxc
ic )
ic )
ic ) + &i
2
2
2
2
= ymax (Xic ) am
ab xc 2abmxc + 2am ic a ic + 2abxc ic (a + "i ) i2 2 i (a +
2
"i )(m + bxc
"i ( m + bxc
ic )
ic ) + &i
=

+

1 ic

2
2 ic

+

3 xc ic

+ vi

(3)

where
= ymax (Xic ) am2 ab2 x2c 2abmxc , 1 = 2am;
2
vi = &i (a + "i ) i2 2 i (a + "i )(m + bxc
"i (m + bxc
ic )
ic ) :

2

= a;

3

= 2ab and

Derivation of equation (6)
Equation (3) allows us to estimate the optimal amount of trust, after having modelled
the heterogeneity of the group with which individuals interact and the sensitivity to trust
mistakes. The OLS estimation of equation (3) would deliver consistent estimates2 only
if individual trust ic were exogenous and there were no feedback from income to trust.
If, however, individuals optimally select their current trust— e.g. because there is some
learning and learning depends on income shocks— then OLS estimates are inconsistent as in
1

All the details about the properties of i and i are provided in the text.
Note that the estimates could be possibly ine¢ cient as the error term is heteroskedastic (Hildreth and
Houck, 1968).
2

30

standard selection models (Garen, 1984). To obtain consistent estimates of the parameters
in (3) we follow Garen’s (1984) selection correction model.
The methodology is a two equation system, where the main equation is the income
equation given in equation (3) together with a trust selection equation. The two equation
system is given below:
2
yic = + 1 ic
(4)
2 ic + 3 xc ic + vi
=
+
(1
)
+
ic
c
pic
i
We model the trust selection equation as a linear combination of three elements:
- the true trustworthiness of the country pool, c , which is in turn given by m + bxc (see
above)
- the individual prior, pic and
- a speci…c error component i containing the unobserved heterogeneity terms.
The individual prior is our exclusion restriction (see sections 3.2.2 and 4.1.2 in the
paper): the initial prior a¤ects the level of trust of the individual but it does not directly
enter the income equation.
This speci…cation yields a triangular system of equations with random parameters. If
the errors terms i were uncorrelated with vi , the system could be estimated consistently
with 2SLS using as an instrument pic (Kelejian, 1974). If instead the error vi and i were
correlated (for example as a result of some selection mechanism like the one described in
footnote 31), the 2SLS will not be consistent. Garen’s (1984) methodology precisely allows
us to produce consistent estimates.
The methodology works in two steps:
i) in the …rst, it uses the trust selection equation to obtain a consistent estimate of i ,
say bi .
ii) in the second step, this consistent estimate is used to replace the error term vi in
with a function of bi

Using the expression of vi it is possible to obtain E(vi j i ):

i; i)
E(vi j i ) = [ cov(&
var( i )

cov( i ; i )
var( i ) i ( c

ic )

a cov( i2 ; i ) a cov("i i2 ; i )
] i
var( i )
var( i )

i; i)
2a[ cov(
var( i ) +

cov("i i ; i )
var( i ) ] i ( c

ic )

2

This implies:
vi =

4 i

+

5 i( c

ic )

+

6 i( c

2
ic )

+

i

where
cov(&i ; i )
4 = [ var( i )
5

=

6

=

a cov( i2 ; i ) a cov("i i2 ; i )
]
var( i )
var( i )
cov( i ; i )
cov("i i ; i )
2a[ var( i ) + var( i ) ]
cov( i ; i )
var( i )

Using the consistent estimate of i , bi ; vi can be expressed as 4 bi +
2
b
b
b
6 i( c
i ) + i , where i is a pure error term possibly heteroskedastic.
31

b

5 i( c

i)

+

Substituting for vi in the income equation in (4), the equation that needs to be estimated
becomes:
2
2
b
b
b
b
yic = + 1 ic
2 ic + 3 xc ic + 4 i + 5 i (m + bxc
ic ) + 6 i (m + bx
ic ) + i

2
2b
2 2b
b
b
b
b
= + 1 ic
2 ic + 3 xc ic + 4 i + 5 m i + 5 bxc i
5 ic i + 6 m i + 6 b xc i +
2b
b 2 6 m ic bi 2 6 bxc ic bi + bi
6 ic i + 6 2bmxc i
2
2 b
b ( 5+
= + 1 ic
2 ic + 3 xc ic + ( 4 + 5 m + 6 m ) i + b( 5 + 6 2m)xc i
2
2
2
b
b
b
b
b
2 6 m) ic i + 6 b xc i + 6 ic i 2 6 bxc ic i + i
0
0
0
2
2 2b
2b
b
b
b
b b
= + 1 ic
2 ic + 3 xc ic + 4 i +b 5 xc i
5 ic i + 6 b xc i + 6 ic i 2 6 bxc ic i + i
0
0
2
where 4 = 4 + m 5 + m 6 ; 5 = 5 + 2m 6 :

32

