                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      FINANCIAL LITERACY AMONG THE YOUNG:
                 EVIDENCE AND IMPLICATIONS FOR CONSUMER POLICY

                                          Annamaria Lusardi
                                          Olivia S. Mitchell
                                             Vilsa Curto

                                         Working Paper 15352
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15352


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2009


The research reported herein was conducted pursuant to a grant from the U.S. Social Security Administration
(SSA) to the Michigan Retirement Research Center, funded as part of the Retirement Research Consortium.
We also received a generous grant from FINRA Investor Education Foundation. Additional support
was provided by the Pension Research Council and Boettner Center at the Wharton School of the University
of Pennsylvania. We are very grateful to Dan Black for his help with the data. We would also like
to thank Brenda Cude, Anna Paulson, Jack Tatom, and participants in the conference “Improving Financial
Literacy and Reshaping Financial Behavior” at the Networks Financial Institute at Indiana State University,
Indianapolis, IN, the symposium on “Improving the Effectiveness of Financial Education in the Classroom”
at the Take Charge America Institute at the University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, and the University
of Michigan Retirement Research Center research workshop, Ann Arbor, MI, for many helpful suggestions
and comments. Hiroaki Matsuura provided excellent research assistance. Opinions and errors are solely
those of the authors and not of the institutions with which the authors are affiliated. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Annamaria Lusardi, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Vilsa Curto. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Literacy among the Young: Evidence and Implications for Consumer Policy
Annamaria Lusardi, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Vilsa Curto
NBER Working Paper No. 15352
September 2009
JEL No. D91

                                             ABSTRACT

We examined financial literacy among the young using data from the 1997 National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth. We showed that financial literacy is low among the young; fewer than one-third
of young adults possess basic knowledge of interest rates, inflation, and risk diversification. Financial
literacy is strongly related to sociodemographic characteristics and family financial sophistication.
Specifically, a college-educated male whose parents had stocks and retirement savings is about 50
percentage points more likely to know about risk diversification than a female with less than a high
school education whose parents were not wealthy. These findings have implications for consumer
policy.


Annamaria Lusardi                                   Vilsa Curto
Department of Economics                             NBER
Dartmouth College                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Hanover, NH 03755                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                            vilsa.curto@post.harvard.edu
a.lusardi@dartmouth.edu

Olivia S. Mitchell
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School
3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu
                           Financial Literacy among the Young:
                      Evidence and Implications for Consumer Policy


       Consumers must confront complicated financial decisions at a young age in today’s

demanding financial environment, and financial mistakes made early in life can be costly. Young

people often find themselves carrying high amounts of student loans or credit card debt, and such

early entanglements can hinder young people’s ability to accumulate wealth. In order to aid

younger consumers, it is critical for researchers to explore how financially knowledgeable young

adults are. Understanding the factors that contribute to or detract from the acquisition of financial

knowledge can help policymakers design effective interventions targeted at the young

population.

       In order to examine how well equipped young people are to make financial decisions, we

analyzed financial literacy questions newly added to the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth

fielded in 2007-2008. We used this rich dataset to study the relationship between financial

literacy and respondents’ sociodemographic characteristics, family characteristics, and peer

characteristics. Our aim was to examine three key research questions: 1) How well equipped are

young people to make financial decisions? 2) What are the determinants of financial literacy

among young people? 3) How can this information aid policymakers seeking to devise

interventions aimed at young consumers?

       We found that most young adults are not well equipped to make financial decisions: only

27% of young people in our sample possessed knowledge of basic financial concepts including

inflation and risk diversification and could do simple interest rate calculations. Financial

illiteracy is not only widespread but is particularly acute among specific groups, such as women,

Blacks, Hispanics, and those with low educational attainment. Additionally, we linked financial



                                                                                                   3
literacy to cognitive ability, time preferences, teachers’ interest in students, parental background,

and peer characteristics.

       We found that both educational attainment and cognitive ability are important

determinants of financial literacy, but they are not the sole determinants. In fact, many variables

continued to be important predictors of financial literacy, even after accounting for education and

cognitive ability. Moreover, education and cognitive ability alone fail to account for the wide

variation in financial knowledge among the young. For this reason, researchers and policymakers

alike would benefit from gathering information on financial literacy; often-used indicators

thought to proxy for financial literacy, such as education, do a poor job of measuring

respondents’ financial knowledge. We also found that financial knowledge among the young is

strongly influenced by family background. Respondents whose mothers had a college education

were more likely to understand inflation. Moreover, young respondents whose parents had stocks

or retirement savings when they were teenagers were more likely to know about risk

diversification. Thus, financial knowledge can be passed on from parents to children. According

to our estimates, a college-educated male whose parents had stocks and retirement savings is

about 50 percentage points more likely to know about risk diversification than a female with less

than a high school education whose parents were not wealthy (did not own stocks or retirement

savings).

       These results should be of interest to policymakers concerned with financial well-being

and the balance between personal and institutional responsibility. First, financial knowledge

should not be taken for granted, even among the young. Second, financial illiteracy is

particularly severe among specific groups such as minorities and women. Young women are now

more likely to have a college degree than men and participate actively in the labor market, yet




                                                                                                      4
their level of financial literacy remains very low. Targeting financial education programs to the

groups that need them most could increase their effectiveness. Third, given the influence of

parents in shaping financial literacy, initiatives such as financial literacy courses in school may

be particularly helpful for those who do not have college-educated parents or whose parents do

not have experience investing in stocks and other complex assets. Information on factors that

influence the accumulation of financial knowledge reported in this paper can aid policymakers

trying to help younger consumers navigate today’s increasingly complex financial marketplace.

                                     LITERATURE REVIEW

       The financial situation of today’s young people is characterized increasingly by high

levels of debt. Between 1997 and 2007, average undergraduate student loan debt rose from

$9,250 to $19,200—a 58% increase after accounting for inflation. Average debt for college

students graduating with loans rose six percent in just one year between 2006 and 2007, from

$18,976 to $20,098 (Reed 2008). Additionally, median credit card debt among college students

grew from $946 in 2004 to $1,645 in 2009 (both figures in 2004 dollars), a 74% increase (Sallie

Mae 2009).

       Recent survey results also suggest that these debt loads are causing anxiety among young

people and influencing major labor decisions: a 2006 USA Today/National Endowment for

Financial Education (NEFE) poll of young adults ages 22 to 29 found that, of those with debt,

30% said they worried about it frequently; 29% had put off or decided against furthering their

education because of debt; and 22% had taken a job they would not have taken otherwise

because of debt. There are other potentially costly consequences of accumulating high levels of

debt early on, such as bankruptcy (Roberts and Jones 2001). For instance, the U.S. Senate

Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs reported in 2002 that the fastest-growing




                                                                                                      5
group of bankruptcy filers was those age 25 and younger. These high levels of debt may also

prevent young workers from taking advantage of employer-provided pensions, tax-favored

assets, or building up a buffer to insure against shocks: 55% of young adults report they are not

saving in either an individual retirement account (IRA) or a 401(k) account, and 40% do not

have a savings account that they contribute to regularly (USA Today/NEFE 2006).

       These debt loads are of particular concern given recent evidence that young people may

lack sufficient knowledge to successfully navigate their financial decisions: for instance, a

National Council on Economic Education study of high school students and working-age adults

showed widespread lack of knowledge among respondents regarding fundamental economic

concepts (NCEE 2005), confirming evidence provided by the Jump$tart Coalition for Personal

Financial Literacy (Mandell 2004). Policymakers have become so concerned about young

people’s finances that the Credit Card Accountability, Responsibility, and Disclosure (CARD)

Act of 2009 included several provisions specifically targeted at protecting younger credit card

consumers. For instance, credit cards will no longer be issued to young people under the age of

21 unless they have an adult co-signer or can show proof that they have the means to repay the

debt; college students will be required to receive permission from parents or guardians in order

to increase credit limits on joint accounts; and those under 21 will be protected from pre-

screened credit card offers unless they specifically opt in for the offers.

       Previous research has found that financial literacy can have important implications for

financial behavior: people with low financial literacy are more likely to have problems with debt

(Lusardi and Tufano 2009), less likely to participate in the stock market (van Rooij, Lusardi, and

Alessie 2007), less likely to choose mutual funds with lower fees (Hastings and Tejeda-Ashton

2008), less likely to accumulate wealth and manage wealth effectively (Stango and Zinman




                                                                                                    6
2007; Hilgert, Hogarth, and Beverly 2003), and less likely to plan for retirement (Lusardi and

Mitchell 2006, 2007a, 2009). Financial literacy is an important component of sound financial

decision-making, and many young people wish they had more financial knowledge: 84% of

college students said they needed more education on financial management topics, 64% would

have liked to receive information about financial management topics in high school, and 40%

would have liked to receive such information as college freshmen (Sallie Mae 2009).

Understanding financial literacy among young people is thus of critical importance for

policymakers in several arenas: it can aid those who wish to devise effective financial education

programs targeted at young people, and it can also aid those who wish to devise legislation to

protect younger consumers.

       Our study contributes to the literature in three important ways. First, we analyzed levels

of financial literacy among the young using a new nationally representative dataset: the latest

wave of the NLSY97. Second, we used this dataset to examine how levels of financial literacy

differed across a wide range of sociodemographic characteristics, family characteristics, and peer

characteristics. Third, we used multivariate analysis to identify several key determinants of

financial literacy among young people. In what follows, we describe our study of financial

literacy in a nationally representative sample of young people.

                                            DATASET

       The NLSY97 is a nationally representative sample of the U.S. youth population aged 12–

17 in 1997. The survey was designed to document young adults’ transition from school to work

and to identify defining characteristics of that transition. Consequently, the survey reports

extensive information on respondent labor market behavior, educational experience, and family

and community characteristics. In addition to the youth interview, the NLSY97 includes a




                                                                                                    7
separate interview with each youth’s parent, designed to provide detailed parental characteristics

as well as information about the home environment. We were able to include a small set of

financial literacy questions in Wave 11 of the survey, fielded in 2007-2008 when respondents

were 23-28 years old. To construct the final sample, we deleted observations with missing data

for some of the variables included in our analysis (specifically on smoking, teachers’ interest in

students, and peer characteristics). Our final sample included 7,138 respondents. As sample

weights for Wave 11 are currently unavailable, the statistics and findings below refer only to data

using the weights in the original 1997 sample. In what follows, we used both the nationally

representative sample of youths as well as the Black and Hispanic oversample. Summary

statistics for the variables employed are reported in Appendix Table 1.

                                        METHODOLOGY

       The three financial literacy questions included in wave 11 of the NLSY were the

questions that Lusardi and Mitchell (2006, 2008) originally designed for the 2004 HRS and that

have been added to many surveys in the United States and abroad. The wording of the questions

was as follows:

           •   Suppose you had $100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2% per

               year. After 5 years, how much do you think you would have in the account if you

               left the money to grow: more than $102, exactly $102, or less than $102? {Do not

               know; refuse to answer}

           •   Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year and

               inflation was 2% per year. After 1 year, would you be able to buy more than,

               exactly the same as, or less than today with the money in this account? {Do not

               know; refuse to answer}




                                                                                                     8
             •   Do you think that the following statement is true or false? “Buying a single

                 company stock usually provides a safer return than a stock mutual fund.” {Do not

                 know; refuse to answer}

       These questions tested the knowledge of basic but fundamental financial concepts. The

first two questions, which we refer to as the “interest rate” and “inflation” questions, tested

whether respondents were knowledgeable about inflation and possessed basic financial

numeracy. The third question, on “risk diversification,” evaluated respondents’ knowledge of

risk diversification, a crucial element of an informed investment decision. These questions have

been shown to differentiate well between naïve and sophisticated respondents (Lusardi and

Mitchell 2006, 2008). In what follows, we first report univariate analyses of the responses to the

three financial literacy questions across a wide range of characteristics. This allowed us to assess

which factors were associated with financial literacy. Subsequently, we performed a multivariate

analysis to determine which variables continued to have an impact on financial literacy later in

life, even when accounting for a wide range of characteristics.

       These survey data are unique in that they permitted us to link financial literacy later in

life to characteristics measured when respondents were teenagers. Several considerations guided

our selection of the variables for the empirical analysis. First, we were interested in variables that

could proxy for preferences, such as impatience, which might influence whether young people

invest in financial knowledge. Second, we considered variables related to costs and opportunities

for learning, such as cognitive ability, schooling, and exposure to financial knowledge via family

and peers.

       Researchers have hypothesized that financial knowledge may be related to a person’s

time preferences: that is, those who discount the future more heavily may be less willing to




                                                                                                    9
invest resources in acquiring financial knowledge, since such an investment has a delayed

payoff. For instance, a recent study found that it is disproportionately those who are patient who

self-select into financial education programs (Meier and Sprenger 2007). As a proxy for time

preference in this study, we used an indicator of whether a respondent had ever smoked. Prior

research has reported that impatience is associated with higher rates of smoking (Fuchs 1982),

and current smokers discount the value of delayed hypothetical monetary outcomes more than a

comparison group (Bickel, Odum, and Madden 1999). Benjamin, Brown, and Shapiro (2006)

also used smoking as a proxy for time preferences in their examination of NLSY79 data. We also

considered other demographic characteristics, such as gender and race/ethnicity, to account for

the many differences among the young.

       One advantage of the NLSY is that it administered the Armed Services Vocational

Aptitude Battery (ASVAB), which is commonly used as an indicator of cognitive ability. The

ASVAB consists of several subtests that measure vocational aptitude in twelve areas.1 The

ASVAB variable that we examined was an aggregated percentile score based on four subtests:

mathematical knowledge, arithmetic reasoning, word knowledge, and paragraph comprehension.

This variable was similar to the Armed Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT) score in the NLSY79

dataset that other researchers have used as a proxy for cognitive ability (see Benjamin, Brown,

and Shapiro 2006; Cole and Shastry 2009). During Round 1 of the NLSY97, 79.3% of

respondents completed the computer-adaptive form of the ASVAB (we accounted for those

lacking a score in our empirical work).2

       In addition to cognitive ability, we also included respondent educational attainment,

gathered from Wave 11.3 We were also interested in examining whether financial knowledge in




                                                                                                  10
young adulthood might be related to teachers during the grade school years. Accordingly, we

measured this by respondent reports as to whether their teachers were interested in the students.

       In addition to individual characteristics, we added family background variables to the

regressions. Much prior work has argued that individuals learn via interaction with others, in

particular, family and friends. For instance, Mandell (2008) reported that financially literate high

school students were disproportionately those whose parents had college degrees. Our analysis

therefore included the mother’s educational attainment.4 Sharing among family members can

also play an important role in household financial decisions; for instance, Li (2009) found that

people’s likelihood of entering the stock market within five years was 30 percent higher if their

parents or children had entered the market in the prior five years. Interestingly, the finding that

children are more likely to invest in stocks if the family of origin invested in stocks holds true

even among minorities (Chiteji and Stafford 1999). Because we were interested in the influences

of family financial circumstances, we also examined whether the respondent’s parent owned a

home, had retirement savings (pensions or retirement plans, tax-deferred plans such as

thrift/savings, 401(k)s, profit sharing or stock ownership plans, and IRAs or Keogh plans), was

banked or unbanked (had checking accounts, saving accounts, or money market mutual funds),

and owned stocks or mutual funds.5 The first two variables were indicators of family wealth,

while the latter two variables proxied for financial sophistication. In light of research by Hong,

Kubik, and Stein (2004) showing that churchgoers are more likely to invest in stocks, we also

looked at whether the respondent’s parents attended church regularly, as a proxy for social

interactions with non-family members. Our analysis improved upon previous work as it allowed

us to assess whether the interaction with others influences financial knowledge, which can in

turn affect financial behavior.




                                                                                                      11
       To pursue this issue further, we considered the influence not just of family or other

adults, but also of peers. In several studies of saving and financial decision-making, peers were

found to be one of the key contributors of information and financial advice (Hong, Kubik, and

Stein 2004; Brown et al. 2008). For example, when asked how they make financial decisions, a

high fraction of respondents reported consulting friends and colleagues (Lusardi and Mitchell

2006; van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie 2007). Peers were also important in decisions concerning

pension participation and contribution (Duflo and Saez 2003, 2004). This led us to investigate

the question of whether peer influences—even those that happen early in life—could be linked to

levels of financial knowledge later in life.

       We also included several peer characteristics: percentage of peers going to college (as a

proxy for peer educational attainment), percentage of peers attending church (as a proxy for peer

social involvement), and percentage of peers who smoked (as a proxy for peer time preferences).

These percentages were reported by the respondent. Note that the peers in this study were not

“current peers,” but rather peers from the respondent’s teenage years. Our results therefore

examined the long-term effects of high school peer influences on subsequent financial literacy

(as opposed to the influences of current peers).

                                    DESCRIPTIVE FINDINGS

       Panel A of Table 1 reports results from the three questions that measured respondent

levels of financial literacy. While nearly 80% of respondents answered the interest rate question

correctly, only 54% answered the inflation question correctly, and 15% responded that they did

not know the answer to the inflation question. Only 47% answered the risk diversification

question correctly, and 38% responded that they did not know the answer. The large “don’t

know” response rate was particularly troubling, as previous research has found that “don’t know”




                                                                                                 12
answers identified respondents with very low levels of financial knowledge (Lusardi and

Mitchell 2006, 2007a; Lusardi and Tufano 2009; van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie 2007). In any

case, the low correct response rates, particularly to the inflation and risk diversification

questions, indicated that many young people lack knowledge of basic financial concepts.

                                     [Insert Table 1 about here]

       Panel B of Table 1 shows that the correct answers to these three financial literacy

questions were highly positively correlated: those able to answer one of the financial literacy

questions correctly were also more likely to answer the other questions correctly. However, only

27% of respondents answered all three questions correctly, and only about 46% got the first two

questions right. Thus, our findings show that lack of financial knowledge is widespread among

the young.

                                   Who Is Financially Illiterate?

       While the overall level of financial knowledge was low among the young, there were

significant differences according to sociodemographic, family, and peer characteristics. Table 2

tabulates the proportions of correct answers to the three financial literacy questions according to

these characteristics. We highlight some of the more salient results below.

                                     [Insert Table 2 about here]

Sociodemographic Characteristics

       We found that there were large differences in financial literacy between women and men.

Women were less likely to respond correctly to each of the three questions, and there was a

nearly 13% gap for correct response rates to the inflation and risk diversification questions.

These differences between women and men were statistically significant. Lusardi and Mitchell

(2008) found similar sex differences among older HRS respondents. This finding is corroborated




                                                                                                  13
by Lusardi and Tufano (2009), who explored debt literacy for a representative U.S. sample; in

studies of narrower samples (Agnew and Szykman 2005; Lusardi, Keller, and Keller 2008); and

in studies of other countries (van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie 2007; Lusardi and Mitchell 2007b;

Smith and Stewart 2008). Consequently, there is now fairly robust evidence confirming that

women do not do well in financial calculations and do not have a firm grasp of inflation and risk

diversification.

       Table 2 also reveals differences in financial literacy according to race and ethnicity:

whites were more likely than Black and Hispanic respondents to answer all three financial

literacy questions correctly. The gap in the correct response rate between Black respondents and

white respondents was about 17% for the inflation question and nearly 12% for the risk

diversification question. The corresponding gaps for Hispanic respondents were about 12% and

7%. These differences were statistically significant. This finding was consistent with other

studies that have found differences in financial literacy according to racial and ethnic differences

among high school students (Mandell 2008) and other age groups (Lusardi and Mitchell 2007a;

Lusardi and Tufano 2009).

       Table 2 also reveals a strong association between financial literacy and cognitive ability.

Correct response rates increased substantially for higher levels of cognitive ability. The

difference between the third quartile (ASVAB: 50-75) and the fourth quartile (ASVAB: 75+)

was particularly notable: the correct response rate for the inflation and risk diversification

questions was about 21 percentage points higher for those who were in the fourth quartile instead

of the third, and the differences were statistically significant. Our finding that cognitive ability

was strongly linked to financial literacy corroborates preliminary findings from another survey of

financial literacy among young people.6 There were also large differences in financial literacy




                                                                                                       14
according to educational attainment, especially for those who attended college—their correct

response rates were over 20 percentage points higher than for those who graduated from high

school for the inflation and risk diversification questions, and the differences were statistically

significant.

Family Characteristics

        Mother’s education was strongly associated with financial literacy, especially if a

respondent’s mother graduated from college: those whose mothers graduated from college had

correct response rates that were about 19 percentage points higher for the inflation question and

18 percentage points higher for the risk diversification question with respect to those whose

mothers graduated from high school, and the differences were statistically significant. Each of

our proxies for family wealth and family financial sophistication was also associated with

financial literacy: for instance, the difference in correct response rates to the inflation and risk

diversification questions was at least 11 percentage points for each of these variables, and these

differences were statistically significant. Whether it was wealth, financial sophistication, or both

that mattered for respondents’ financial literacy was analyzed in more detail in the next section,

where we considered all of these variables together. Nevertheless, this simple univariate analysis

revealed the importance of considering family characteristics when analyzing financial literacy

among young people.

Peer Characteristics

        Table 2 also revealed associations between peer characteristics and financial literacy.

Those with a high percentage of peers who planned to attend college did about 7 percentage

points better on the inflation and risk diversification questions; those with a higher percentage of

peers who attended church did better on all three questions; and those with a low percentage of




                                                                                                       15
peers who smoked also did substantially better on each of the three questions, with correct

response rates about 9 percentage points higher for the inflation and risk diversification

questions. All of these differences were statistically significant (except with whether peers

attended church for the interest rate question). Thus, peer characteristics may also play a role in

explaining differences in financial literacy.

                                  MULTIVARIATE ANALYSIS

       In this section, we performed a multivariate analysis that permitted us to assess which

factors were still linked to financial literacy, even when controlling for many other

characteristics. We used three different specifications in the analysis: in specification I, we

considered only sociodemographic characteristics; in specification II, we considered

sociodemographic characteristics as well as family characteristics; and in specification III, we

considered sociodemographic characteristics, family characteristics, and peer characteristics.7

       Our underlying model was as follows:

                            ⎧1 if y* > 0
       y* = xβ + ε,       y=⎨
                            ⎩0 else

where y* is an unobservable characteristic: a respondent’s propensity to answer a financial

literacy question correctly, and y is a binary outcome variable indicating that a respondent gave

the correct response if his propensity to respond correctly was above zero. The vector x contains

respondent characteristics that depend on the specification, β is a vector of parameters to be

estimated, ε is a continuously distributed variable independent of x, and the distribution of ε is

symmetric about zero.

       We used a probit model for our analysis so that this gave rise to a binary response model

of the form:

       P( y = 1 | x) = Φ(xβ)


                                                                                                     16
where Φ is a cumulative distribution function (cdf). Our primary goal was to explain the effects

of the respondent characteristics xj on the probability of responding correctly to a financial

literacy question. In our model, if xK is a binary explanatory variable, then the marginal effect

from changing xK fom zero to one, holding all other variables fixed, is simply

        Φ ( β1 + β 2 x 2 + ... + β K −1 x K −1 + β K ) − Φ ( β 1 + β 2 x 2 + ... + β K −1 x K −1 ).

Note that this expression depends on all other values of the other xj. We calculated the marginal

effects by setting all of the other independent variables to their mean values. Our model therefore

allowed us to interpret the marginal effect from changing a discrete explanatory variable xK fom

zero to one as the change in the probability of responding correctly to the financial literacy

question. If xj is continuous, as is the case for the ASVAB variable, then

∂P ( y = 1 | x)                                           dΦ
                = g(xβ)βj,            where g ( z ) ≡        ( z ).
     ∂x j                                                 dz

However, Φ is a strictly increasing cdf, so that g(z) > 0 for all z. Therefore, the sign of the

marginal effect of a change in xj is given by the sign of βj. Our model closely followed the probit

model specified by Woolridge (2002). The marginal effects that we calculated are reported in

Table 3.

                                              [Insert Table 3 about here]

       Several important findings emerged from our estimates. Even after accounting for many

sociodemographic, family, and peer characteristics, women were still substantially less

financially literate than their male counterparts. Women were about 6 percentage points less

likely to answer the interest rate question correctly, 15 percentage points less likely to answer the

inflation question correctly, and nearly 16 percentage points less likely to answer the risk




                                                                                                      17
diversification question correctly. This result shows that sex is a strong predictor of financial

literacy, even after accounting for many characteristics.

         Financial literacy was also strongly associated with cognitive ability, and this relationship

was highly non-linear; financial literacy, as measured by each of the three questions, was a

convex function of the ASVAB score, which indicates that returns for financial literacy increased

sharply with increasing cognitive ability. These results showed that cognitive ability, even when

measured during a respondent’s teenage years, was a strong determinant of financial literacy.

         Teachers’ interest in students (as reported by the respondents) had a small but significant

positive effect on a respondent’s probability of answering the inflation question correctly, even

after controlling for cognitive ability and educational attainment. This suggests that the quality

and motivation of teachers influence financial literacy among young people, consistent with the

findings of Lusardi and Mitchell (2009) that those living in states that mandated financial literacy

and spent more on education per pupil were more likely to display higher financial knowledge

later in life.

         There was a strong positive relationship between educational attainment (measured in

wave 11 of the NLSY97) and financial literacy, in particular for those who had attended some

college: they were 6 percentage points more likely to answer the interest rate question correctly,

17 percentage points more likely to answer the inflation question correctly, and 18 percentage

points more likely to answer the risk diversification question correctly. Even having graduated

from high school made respondents more financially literate; for example, those who graduated

from high school were 7 percentage points more likely to answer the inflation question correctly.

Educational attainment was clearly a strong determinant of financial literacy.




                                                                                                     18
        Family characteristics were also found to be important determinants of financial literacy.

In particular, parents’ education was a strong predictor of financial literacy: those whose mothers

graduated from college were nearly 5 percentage points more likely to answer the inflation

question correctly. Family financial sophistication also played an important role: those whose

parents owned stocks were over 7 percentage points more likely to answer the risk diversification

question correctly, and those whose parents had retirement savings were 6 percentage points

more likely to answer this question correctly. Since retirement savings referred to 401(k)s, profit

sharing or stock ownership plans, IRA or Keogh plans, where individuals have to decide how to

allocate retirement wealth, this variable is likely to proxy for knowledge and experience in

dealing with stocks. Stocks and retirement savings were most likely not mere proxies for wealth;

we controlled for wealth in our specifications by including dummies for whether the parents

owned a home or had a checking account, two of the most common components of wealth

(Lusardi, Cossa, and Krupka 2001). The result that children whose parents owned stocks (either

in private wealth or retirement wealth) were more likely to understand risk diversification

suggests that some financial knowledge may be passed on directly from parents to their children,

as other papers have found (Chiteji and Stafford 1999; Li 2009).

        Finally, although peer characteristics were not strongly associated with financial literacy

after controlling for so many other variables, there was still a negative relationship between

having a high percentage of peers who smoked and answering the inflation question correctly.

This suggests that characteristics of peers when respondents were teenagers can influence

respondents’ levels of financial literacy later in life.

        Admittedly, the ten-year gap between the measurement of the dependent and independent

variables places some limitations on the interpretation of our results. For instance, it is difficult at




                                                                                                     19
times to assign a causal interpretation to our estimated coefficients. And one might note that the

low pseudo R-squared values in our regressions indicated that our explanatory variables left

much variation unaccounted for, a fact that is unsurprising given the many factors that could

influence the accumulation of financial knowledge, especially over the course of ten years.

Nonetheless, it is remarkable that many of the characteristics we examined, even when measured

at a young age, still determined, to some extent, an individual’s level of financial knowledge

later in life.

                                 WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED?

         As the complexity of financial decisions increases and individuals are put in charge of

making these decisions even at a young age, it is important to find ways to equip people with

adequate financial knowledge. Previous studies have shown that broad groups of the population

are not financially literate; these people may be particularly unlikely and unable to manage their

finances effectively, and to plan adequately for the future. This paper added to the existing

knowledge by exploring what younger adults know and do not know as determined by a set of

simple questions that assessed their financial literacy. We found that financial literacy was

severely lacking among young adults; only 27% of young adults know about inflation and risk

diversification and can do simple interest rate calculations. Moreover, women proved to be the

least financially literate. Sex differences between women and men persisted even after

accounting for many demographic characteristics, family background characteristics, and peer

characteristics. Prior work showed that women tended to display low financial literacy later in

life (Lusardi and Mitchell 2006, 2008). Thus, lack of financial literacy seems to persist for long

periods and sometimes throughout the lifetime. Given the strong link between financial literacy

and financial management and retirement planning found in other studies (Lusardi and Mitchell




                                                                                                   20
2007a, 2008; Hilgert, Hogarth, and Beverly 2003), it may be important to find ways to foster

financial knowledge in the population as a whole and among the groups who are more

disadvantaged. Similarly, it may be important to develop programs targeted specifically to

women, since they display not only much lower financial knowledge but also large differences in

investment and saving behavior (Hira and Loibl 2008; Lusardi, Keller, and Keller 2008).

       Our study also found an important channel through which young adults acquire financial

knowledge: parents. In both the univariate and multivariate analyses, those whose mothers had

high education or whose families had stocks or retirement savings were more financially literate,

specifically on questions related to advanced financial knowledge, such as the workings of risk

diversification. These findings confirmed the results of work analyzing financial knowledge

among high school students. The small fraction of students (7 percent) who were deemed

financially literate in the Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy survey in 2006

were disproportionately white males whose parents had college degrees (Mandell 2008). It also

confirmed findings of previous work among college students, where again parents were found to

play a role in students’ financial socialization (Cude et al. 2006).

       Lack of financial knowledge may also be traced back to impatience or discounting the

future heavily. In our study, we used smoking as a proxy for high rate of time preference. We

found that those respondents who smoked when they were teenagers or whose peers smoked

were less likely to be financially literate. Thus, in order to be effective, financial education

programs have to take into account the many differences that exist among individuals, not just in

terms of economic circumstances but also in terms of preferences. We also found that cognitive

ability was a strong predictor of financial literacy; those with higher cognitive ability, as

measured by ASVAB scores in high school, were more likely to display higher financial




                                                                                                   21
knowledge as young adults. However, many other variables remained statistically significant

after accounting for cognitive ability; thus, cognitive ability was not the sole determinant of

financial knowledge. In other words, there was a lot of heterogeneity in financial literacy, even

when examining a narrow age group in the population.

                           Implications for Researchers and Consumers

        Overall, the findings from this study have important implications for research related to

financial literacy and household financial security. As the government and employers continue to

shift the responsibility for saving and investing onto workers, it is becoming more and more

important to equip workers with some basic tools to make financial decisions. While young

workers face or will soon face decisions about mortgages, college funds, and retirement savings,

their financial knowledge seems dangerously low and potentially inadequate to deal with the

complexity of current financial markets and products. It is also important to recognize that the

population of young adults displays very large differences in financial knowledge. Thus, young

adults should not be considered one homogeneous group of consumers. Rather, the differences

by race, sex, educational attainment, and other observable characteristics should be taken into

account both in research and when considering public policy initiatives geared toward improving

financial literacy.

        Given the low levels of financial knowledge documented in this work, simplification of

financial decisions could be very beneficial to young people. For example, this study supports

the findings of Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2006) that simplifying the way in which workers

enroll into pension plans can foster pension participation, particularly among disadvantaged

groups, such as Blacks and low-income workers. It also supports the findings of Lusardi, Keller,

and Keller (2008) that providing a planning aid to new employees can more than double




                                                                                                   22
participation in supplementary retirement accounts. New employees at the not-for-profit

institution considered in that study were disproportionately young women who had very low

levels of financial literacy.

                           Implications for Financial Education Programs

        The findings from this study also have implications for financial education programs.

There were several findings in this paper supporting financial education in high school. First, if

financial knowledge is acquired from parents or via interaction with others, there are groups who

will not be able to benefit from these sources because their parents or friends do not have college

degrees or are not financially knowledgeable. In this respect, providing financial education in

high school may be particularly beneficial to children from disadvantaged backgrounds.

According to our estimates, respondents whose parents did not have a college degree and lacked

financial sophistication (did not have stocks or retirement savings) are approximately 15

percentage points less likely to know about risk diversification, an essential concept for making

saving and investment decisions.

        Second, financial literacy is not entirely determined by cognitive ability. While this

variable plays a role in explaining the differences in financial knowledge among the young, it is

not the only relevant factor. Thus there is a role for education in improving financial knowledge.

Third and most important, it is likely to be beneficial to provide financial education before

individuals engage in financial contracts and before they start making financial decisions. In this

respect, it may be important to find ways to improve the effectiveness of financial literacy

programs currently offered in high school.

        This study also illuminated the importance of parental influences on young people’s

acquisition of financial knowledge. Involving parents in a financial education program could be




                                                                                                  23
more effective than only involving young people. First, parents who are engaged in such a

program may take a more active role in guiding their children’s financial behaviors. Second,

such a program could aid those parents who lack sufficient financial knowledge to provide their

children with sound financial advice.

       Given the low level of financial knowledge displayed by young adults who are already

out of school, it may also be important to pursue other financial education initiatives. Several

firms, particularly those offering defined contribution pensions, have offered financial education

programs (Bernheim and Garrett 2003; Lusardi 2004). The findings from this study show that

young workers are particularly in need of these programs. Other studies also show that the young

are those more susceptible to making financial mistakes (Agarwal et al. 2007). Given the

substantial differences that exist among the young, “one-size-fits-all” programs are unlikely to be

effective. The results suggest that there may be substantial gains in financial literacy when

programs are targeted to women, minorities, such as Blacks and Hispanics, and those with low

educational attainment.

       We would also like to highlight, as already argued in Lyons and Neelakantan (2008), that

it may be particularly difficult to evaluate the effectiveness of financial education among the

young. For example, according to the life-cycle model of saving, young individuals facing an

upward-sloping age-earnings profile should borrow rather than save to smooth consumption over

the life-cycle. However, many financial education programs simply assess whether individuals

increase their saving after having been exposed to financial education programs. In this respect,

it is important to develop new ways to assess the impact of financial education on the young,

including examining levels of debt and borrowing behavior among the young.8




                                                                                                   24
                                           ENDNOTES


1. The areas were arithmetic reasoning, assembling objects, auto information, coding speed,

electronics information, general science, mathematics knowledge, mechanical comprehension,

numerical operations, paragraph comprehension, shop information, and word knowledge.

2. We did not have ASVAB responses for 1,128 of respondents so we included a missing

variable dummy for this group in all regressions.

3. Note that this was the only control variable measured during Wave 11; the remainder were

measured in Wave 1.

4. Similar results were obtained when we considered data about the father. Nevertheless, because

there were many missing observations for father’s education, we relied instead on mother’s

education for which the missing data problem was far less pervasive.

5. Parental information was missing for approximately 10% of the sample. Statistics reported in

the tables refer to the sample for which parents’ wealth was available. We added a dummy for

missing data about parents’ wealth in our regressions. For a detailed analysis of the wealth data

in the NLSY97, see Lusardi, Cossa, and Krupka (2001).

6. We thank Lewis Mandell for sharing with us preliminary results from the 2008 wave of the

Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy, where he linked financial literacy with the

score on the ACT or SAT exam. His preliminary findings indicated that these scores were very

powerful predictors of differences in financial literacy among high school seniors.

7. Because data were missing for family characteristics and respondent’s educational level, we

included dummies for missing observations in all of our regressions. For brevity, these estimates

are not reported in the tables, but are available upon request.




                                                                                                 25
8. See also the discussion of financial education programs and their evaluation in Lyons et al.

(2006).




                                                                                                  26
                                       REFERENCES

Agarwal, Sumit, John C. Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson. 2007. The Age of Reason:
      Financial Decisions over the Lifecycle. NBER Working Paper n. 13191.

Agnew, Julie, and Lisa Szykman. 2005. Asset Allocation and Information Overload: The
     Influence of Information Display, Asset Choice and Investor Experience. Journal of
     Behavioral Finance, 6: 57–70.

Benjamin, Daniel J., Sebastian A. Brown, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2006. Who Is “Behavioral”?
      Cognitive Ability and Anomalous Preferences. Mimeo, University of Chicago.

Bernheim, Douglas, and Daniel Garrett. 2003. The Effects of Financial Education in the
      Workplace: Evidence from a Survey of Households. Journal of Public Economics, 87:
      1487–1519.

Bickel, Warren K., Amy L. Odum, and Gregory J. Madden. 1999. Impulsivity and Cigarette
        Smoking: Delay Discounting in Current, Never, and Ex-Smokers. Psychopharmacology,
        146 (4):447-454.

Brown, Jeffrey, Zoran Ivkovich, Paul Smith, and Scott Weisbenner. 2008. Neighbors Matter:
      Causal Community Effects and Stock Market Participation. Journal of Finance, 63 (3):
      1509-1531.

Chiteji, Ngina and Frank Stafford. 1999. Portfolio Choices of Parents and Their Children as
        Young Adults: Asset Accumulation by African American Families. American Economic
        Review Papers and Proceedings, 89: 377-380

Choi, James, David Laibson, and Brigitte Madrian. 2006. Reducing the Complexity Costs of
       401(k) Participation Through Quick Enrollment (TM). NBER Working Paper n. 11979.

Cole, Shawn, and Gauri Kartini Shastry. 2009. Smart Money: The Effect of Education, Cognitive
       Ability, and Financial Literacy on Financial Market Participation. Harvard Business
       School Working Paper n. 09-071.

Cude, Brenda, Frances Lawrence, Angela Lyons, Kaci Metzger, Emily LeJeune, Loren Marks,
       and Krisanna Machtmes. 2006. College Students and Financial Literacy: What They
       Know and What We Need to Learn. Proceedings of the Eastern Family Economics and
       Resource Management Association, 102-109.

Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. The Role of Information and Social Interactions in
       Retirement Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment. Quarterly Journal
       of Economics, 118: 815–842.

Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez. 2004. Implications of Pension Plan Features, Information,
       and Social Interactions for Retirement Saving Decisions. In Pension Design and
       Structure: New Lessons from Behavioral Finance, edited by Olivia S. Mitchell and
       Stephen Utkus (137-153). Oxford: Oxford University Press.


                                                                                              27
Fuchs, Victor R. 1982. Time Preference and Health: An Exploratory Study. In Economic Aspects
       of Health, edited by Victor R. Fuchs (93-120). Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Hastings, Justine, and Lydia Tejeda-Ashton. 2008. Financial Literacy, Information, and Demand
       Elasticity: Survey and Experimental Evidence from Mexico. NBER Working Paper n.
       14538.

Hilgert, Marianne, Jeanne Hogarth, and Sondra Beverly. 2003. Household Financial
        Management: The Connection Between Knowledge and Behavior. Federal Reserve
        Bulletin, 309–322.

Hira, Tahira, and Cazilia Loibl. 2008. Gender Differences in Investment Behavior. In Handbook
       of Consumer Finance Research, edited by Jing Jian Xiao (253-270). New York: Springer.

Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey Kubik, and Jeremy Stein. 2004. Social Interaction and Stock Market
      Participation. Journal of Finance, 59: 137–163.

Li, Geng. 2009. Information Sharing and Stock Market Participation: Evidence from Extended
       Families. Mimeo, Federal Reserve Board.

Lusardi, Annamaria. 2004. Savings and the Effectiveness of Financial Education. In Pension
       Design and Structure: New Lessons from Behavioral Finance, edited by Olivia S.
       Mitchell and Stephen Utkus (157–184). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Lusardi, Annamaria, Ricardo Cossa, and Erin Krupka. 2001. Savings of Young Parents. Journal
       of Human Resources, 34: 762-794.

Lusardi, Annamaria, Punam Keller, and Adam Keller. 2008. New Ways to Make People Save: A
       Social Marketing Approach. In Overcoming the Saving Slump: How to Increase the
       Effectiveness of Financial Education and Saving Programs, edited by Annamaria Lusardi
       (209-236). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2006. Financial Literacy and Planning: Implications
       for Retirement Wellbeing. Working Paper, Pension Research Council, Wharton School,
       University of Pennsylvania.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2007a. Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The Role
       of Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth. Journal of Monetary Economics,
       54: 205–224.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2007b. Financial Literacy and Retirement
       Preparedness: Evidence and Implications for Financial Education. Business Economics,
       42 (1): 35–44.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2008. Planning and Financial Literacy: How Do
       Women Fare? American Economic Review, 98: 413-417.




                                                                                             28
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2009. How Ordinary People Make Complex
       Economics Decisions: Financial Literacy and Retirement Readiness, mimeo, Dartmouth
       College.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Peter Tufano. 2009. Debt Literacy, Financial Experiences, and
       Overindebtedness. NBER Working Paper n. 14808.

Lyons, Angela, Lance Palmer, Koralalage Jayaratne, and Erik Scherpf. 2006. Are We Making
       the Grade? A National Overview of Financial Education and Program Evaluation. The
       Journal of Consumer Affairs, 40 (2): 208-235.

Lyons, Angela, and Urvi Neelakantan. 2008. Potential and Pitfalls of Applying Theory to the
       Practice of Financial Education. The Journal of Consumer Affairs, 42 (1): 106-112.

Mandell, Lewis. 2004. Financial Literacy: Are We Improving? Results of the 2004 National
      Jump$tart Survey. Washington, D.C.: Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial
      Literacy.

Mandell, Lewis. 2008. Financial Literacy in High School. In Overcoming the Saving Slump:
      How to Increase the Effectiveness of Financial Education and Saving Programs, edited
      by Annamaria Lusardi (257-279). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Meier, Stephan, and Charles Sprenger. 2007. Selection into Financial Literacy Programs:
       Evidence from a Field Study. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Discussion Paper n. 07-5.

National Council on Economic Education. 2005. What American Teens and Adults Know About
       Economics. http://207.124.141.218/WhatAmericansKnowAboutEconomics_042605-
       3.pdf.

Reed, Matthew. 2008. Student Debt and the Class of 2007. The Project on Student Debt.
       http://projectonstudentdebt.org/files/pub/classof2007.pdf.

Roberts, James A., and Eli Jones. 2001. Money Attitudes, Credit Card Use, and Compulsive
       Buying Among American College Students. The Journal of Consumer Affairs, 35 (21):
       213-240.

Sallie Mae. 2009. How Undergraduate Students Use Credit Cards.
        http://www.salliemae.com/NR/rdonlyres/0BD600F1-9377-46EA-AB1F-
        6061FC763246/10744/SLMCreditCardUsageStudy41309FINAL2.pdf.

Smith, Barbara, and Fiona Stewart. 2008. Learning from the Experience of OECD Countries:
       Lessons for Policy, Programs, and Evaluations. In Overcoming the Saving Slump: How to
       Increase the Effectiveness of Financial Education and Saving Programs, edited by
       Annamaria Lusardi (345-367). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Stango, Victor, and Jonathan Zinman. 2007. Fuzzy Math and Red Ink: When the Opportunity
       Cost of Consumption Is Not What It Seems. Mimeo, Dartmouth College.



                                                                                              29
USA Today/National Endowment for Financial Education. 2006. Young Adults’ Finances Poll.
     http://www.nefe.org/Portals/0/NEFE_Files/USATodaySurvey.pdf.

van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie. 2007. Financial Literacy and Stock
      Market Participation. NBER Working Paper n. 13565.

Woolridge, Jeffrey M. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.
      Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.




                                                                                             30
TABLE 1
Patterns of Responses to Financial Literacy Questions
Panel A: Distribution of Responses to Financial Literacy Questions (%)
                               Correct                Incorrect            Don't Know
Interest Rate                    79.5                    14.6                  5.7
Inflation                        54.0                    30.7                 15.1
Risk Diversification             46.8                    15.8                 37.3
N=7138

Panel B: Correlation Between Correct Responses
                            If Correct on                                If Correct on Risk
                            Interest Rate         If Correct on            Diversification
                              Question         Inflation Question            Question
Probability Correct on
Interest Rate Question             100.0                 84.6                  84.5
Probability Correct on
Inflation Question                 57.5                 100.0                  66.7
Probability Correct on
Risk Diversification
Question                            49.7                 57.8                  100.0
Column N                           5,602                3,573                  3,185
Note: All statistics were calculated using sample weights.




                                                                                              31
TABLE 2
Percent Correct by Sociodemographic, Family, and Peer Characteristics
                                                         Interest Rate     Inflation Risk Diversification
Sociodemographic Characteristics
Female                                                        76.7           47.8              40.1
Male                                                          82.2           60.1              53.3
White                                                         80.8           58.5              49.6
Black                                                         77.3           41.4              37.9
Hispanic                                                      74.6           46.1              42.3
ASVAB: 0-25*                                                  69.9           33.8              32.9
ASVAB: 25-50                                                  76.9           46.6              40.5
ASVAB: 50-75                                                  81.4           58.9              47.3
ASVAB: 75+                                                    90.5           80.9              68.3
Teachers interested in students                               81.5           58.5              48.7
Teachers not interested in students                           78.8           52.6              46.2
Ever smoked cigarette                                         77.2           50.8              43.7
Never smoked cigarette                                        81.2           56.3              49.0
Educ: < HS*                                                   71.1           33.6              30.5
Educ: HS grad                                                 75.6           44.2              35.7
Educ: ≥ college                                               84.1           65.2              57.4
Family Characteristics
Parents attended church regularly*                            80.7           58.0              50.6
Parents did not attend church regularly                       79.3           52.4              44.9
Mother's educ:<HS*                                            74.2           40.6              36.9
Mother's educ: HS grad                                        78.3           50.4              43.2
Mother's educ: some college                                   80.2           58.0              48.7
Mother's educ: college grad+                                  85.6           69.7              61.0
Parents owned home*                                           81.6           58.6              50.8
Parents did not own home                                      76.0           45.3              38.7
Parents owned stocks*                                         84.8           66.5              62.7
Parents did not own stocks                                    78.7           51.9              43.7
Parents had retirement savings*                               82.0           61.6              54.2
Parents had no retirement savings                             77.2           45.8              38.0
Parents unbanked*                                             77.7           46.0              39.7
Parents banked                                                81.0           58.7              50.6
Peer Characteristics
High % of peers planned to attend college                     81.2           57.0              49.9
Low % of peers planned to attend college                      77.3           50.1              42.7
High % of peers attended church regularly                     81.0           58.3              50.7
Low % of peers attended church regularly                      79.0           52.6              45.5
High % of peers smoked                                        75.5           46.0              40.6
Low % of peers smoked                                         81.0           57.1              49.1
N=7138
Notes: All statistics were calculated using sample weights. For the characteristics denoted by an asterisk,
statistics were calculated on a smaller sample due to missing data.


                                                                                                              32
TABLE 3
Multivariate Analysis of Financial Literacy: Probit Marginal Effects of Association with Correct Answers
                                         Interest Rate                               Inflation                          Risk Diversification
                                 I            II             III            I           II           III         I               II            III
Female                     -0.0617***    -0.0618***      -0.0606***    -0.155***    -0.154***    -0.151***   -0.159***      -0.158***     -0.157***
                           (0.0102)      (0.0103)        (0.0103)      (0.0134)     (0.0134)     (0.0135)    (0.0132)       (0.0132)      (0.0133)
Black                      0.0195        0.0211*         0.0215*       -0.0348**    -0.0275      -0.0288     -0.0204        -0.00496      -0.00494
                           (0.0122)      (0.0127)        (0.0127)      (0.0169)     (0.0176)     (0.0177)    (0.0170)       (0.0178)      (0.0178)
Hispanic                   -0.0164       -0.0153         -0.0163       -0.0209      -0.0101      -0.0133     0.00508        0.0207        0.0200
                           (0.0135)      (0.0143)        (0.0144)      (0.0176)     (0.0187)     (0.0188)    (0.0177)       (0.0189)      (0.0189)
Mixed                      0.0309        0.0334          0.0337        -0.113*      -0.112*      -0.115*     -0.0146        -0.00611      -0.00634
                           (0.0461)      (0.0456)        (0.0457)      (0.0640)     (0.0639)     (0.0637)    (0.0637)       (0.0641)      (0.0641)
ASVAB score                -0.0268       -0.0169         -0.0193       -0.00896     -0.0250      -0.0312     -0.224**       -0.237**      -0.238**
                           (0.0787)      (0.0794)        (0.0793)      (0.106)      (0.107)      (0.107)     (0.104)        (0.105)       (0.105)
ASVAB score2               0.282***      0.271***        0.272***      0.570***     0.566***     0.572***    0.551***       0.533***      0.532***
                           (0.0774)      (0.0780)        (0.0781)      (0.104)      (0.105)      (0.105)     (0.0997)       (0.100)       (0.101)
Teachers int.              0.0109        0.0109          0.0101        0.0296*      0.0287*      0.0307*     -0.00413       -0.00637      -0.00713
                           (0.0119)      (0.0119)        (0.0121)      (0.0158)     (0.0158)     (0.0160)    (0.0156)       (0.0157)      (0.0159)
Ever smoked                -0.0114       -0.0117         -0.00991      0.00991      0.00965      0.0134      0.00645        0.00805       0.00976
                           (0.0107)      (0.0107)        (0.0109)      (0.0142)     (0.0143)     (0.0146)    (0.0141)       (0.0142)      (0.0144)
Educ: HS grad              0.0229        0.0243*         0.0236*       0.0761***    0.0704***    0.0696***   0.0441**       0.0347*       0.0342
                           (0.0142)      (0.0142)        (0.0142)      (0.0202)     (0.0204)     (0.0205)    (0.0208)       (0.0210)      (0.0210)
Educ: ≥ college            0.0603***     0.0618***       0.0607***     0.189***     0.173***     0.174***    0.209***       0.185***      0.184***
                           (0.0155)      (0.0160)        (0.0160)      (0.0204)     (0.0212)     (0.0213)    (0.0202)       (0.0211)      (0.0212)
Parents church                           -0.00997        -0.00986                   0.00604      0.00635                    0.0142        0.0143
                                         (0.0116)        (0.0116)                   (0.0151)     (0.0152)                   (0.0149)      (0.0150)
Mom's educ: HS                           -0.00291        -0.00290                   -0.00190     -0.000764                  -0.0150       -0.0150
                                         (0.0152)        (0.0152)                   (0.0210)     (0.0210)                   (0.0209)      (0.0209)
Mom's educ: some coll                    -0.00542        -0.00543                   0.0275       0.0300                     -0.000622     -0.000538
                                         (0.0173)        (0.0173)                   (0.0232)     (0.0232)                   (0.0230)      (0.0230)
Mom's educ: coll grad+                   0.00586         0.00575                    0.0436*      0.0464*                    0.0191        0.0190
                                         (0.0199)        (0.0200)                   (0.0261)     (0.0262)                   (0.0260)      (0.0261)
Parents owned home                       0.0137          0.0137                     -0.00235     -0.00204                   -0.00214      -0.00223
                                         (0.0129)        (0.0129)                   (0.0169)     (0.0170)                   (0.0168)      (0.0168)
Parents owned stocks                     0.0103          0.0101                     0.000325     0.00183                    0.0747***     0.0747***
                                         (0.0169)        (0.0169)                   (0.0220)     (0.0220)                   (0.0213)      (0.0213)
Parents ret savings                      -0.00555        -0.00603                   0.0237       0.0232                     0.0602***     0.0600***
                                         (0.0130)        (0.0130)                   (0.0173)     (0.0173)                   (0.0171)      (0.0171)
Parents unbanked                         0.0143          0.0141                     -0.00662     -0.00763                   0.00307       0.00293
                                         (0.0125)        (0.0125)                   (0.0170)     (0.0170)                   (0.0168)      (0.0168)
Peers college                                            0.00540                                 -0.0242*                                 0.000663
                                                         (0.0108)                                (0.0143)                                 (0.0142)
Peers church                                             -0.0110                                 -0.00752                                 -0.00130
                                                         (0.0125)                                (0.0163)                                 (0.0161)
Peers smoked                                             -0.0132                                 -0.0274*                                 -0.00979
                                                         (0.0120)                                (0.0160)                                 (0.0158)
Pseudo R-squared           0.0453        0.0468          0.0472        0.119        0.120        0.121       0.0811         0.0875        0.0875
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
N=7138
Note: Marginal effects were calculated at the means of the independent variables.
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01




                                                                                                                                           33
APPENDIX TABLE 1
Statistical Summary of Variables
                                                    Mean Std. Dev.
Responses to Financial Literacy Questions
Interest Rate: Correct Response                     0.80     0.40
Inflation: Correct Response                         0.54     0.50
Risk Diversification: Correct Response              0.47     0.50

Sociodemographic Characteristics
Female                                              0.49     0.50
Black                                               0.16     0.37
Hispanic                                            0.13     0.33
Mixed                                               0.01     0.11
ASVAB score                                         0.50     0.27
ASVAB score2                                        0.32     0.28
Teachers interested in students                     0.25     0.43
Ever smoked a cigarette                             0.42     0.49
Educ: HS grad                                       0.29     0.45
Educ: ≥ college                                     0.55     0.50

Family Characteristics
Parents attended church regularly                   0.33     0.47
Mother's Educ: HS                                   0.32     0.47
Mother's Educ: Some College                         0.23     0.42
Mother's Educ: College grad+                        0.20     0.40
Parents owned home                                  0.62     0.49
Parents owned stocks                                0.15     0.36
Parents had retirement savings                      0.48     0.50
Parents unbanked                                    0.30     0.46

Peer Characteristics
High % of peers planned to attend college            0.57    0.50
High % of peers attended church regularly            0.25    0.44
High % of peers smoked                               0.28    0.45
N=7138
Note: All statistics were calculated using sample weights.




                                                                     34
