                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      TOWARDS A COMMON EUROPEAN MONETARY UNION RISK FREE RATE

                                       Sergio Mayordomo
                                        Juan Ignacio Peña
                                       Eduardo S. Schwartz

                                       Working Paper 15353
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15353


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2009




This paper was partially drafted during the visit of Eduardo S. Schwartz to the Department of Business
Administration at Universidad Carlos III. We acknowledge financial support from the Program “Catedras
de Excelencia-Universidad Carlos III” financed by Banco Santander. The usual disclaimers apply.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Sergio Mayordomo, Juan Ignacio Peña, and Eduardo S. Schwartz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Towards a Common European Monetary Union Risk Free Rate
Sergio Mayordomo, Juan Ignacio Peña, and Eduardo S. Schwartz
NBER Working Paper No. 15353
September 2009
JEL No. E43,E44,G15

                                              ABSTRACT

A common European bond would yield a common European Monetary Union risk free rate. We present
tentative estimates of this common risk free for the European Monetary Union countries from 2004
to 2009 using variables motivated by a theoretical portfolio selection model. First, we analyze the
determinants of EMU sovereign yield spreads and find significant effects of the credit quality, macro,
correlation, and liquidity variables. However, their effects are different before and after the current
financial crisis, being stronger in the latter period. Robustness tests with different data frequencies,
benchmarks, liquidity variables, cross section regressions and balanced panels confirm the initial results.
We propose four different estimates of the common risk free rate and show that, in most cases, this
common rate could imply savings in borrowing costs for all the countries involved.


Sergio Mayordomo                                     Eduardo S. Schwartz
Universidad Carlos III                               Anderson Graduate School of Management
Madrid 126                                           UCLA
28903 Getafe                                         110 Westwood Plaza
Madrid, Spain                                        Los Angeles, CA 90095
smayordo@emp.uc3m.es                                 and NBER
                                                     eduardo.schwartz@anderson.ucla.edu
Juan Ignacio Peña
Universidad Carlos III
Madrid 126
28903 Getafe
Madrid, Spain
ypenya@eco.uc3m.es
We present tentative estimates of a new financial variable: the common risk free rate of

interest for the European Monetary Union (EMU) members. We show how to estimate

it for a given set of countries and discuss its uses for monetary policy management and

its implication for financial markets’ integration. The results suggest that this common

rate, in most cases, could imply savings in borrowing costs for all the countries

involved.



The possibility of a common European bond has attracted the interest of the financial

press and is receiving increased attention from policy makers1. There are potential wider

benefits for the Eurozone as well as specific benefits for market agents such as issuers,

dealers, and investors. A large common bond issue could have benefits even for

countries with low credit risk (Germany, France), as it could rival American’s treasuries

market for liquidity. Moreover a single issuer would make EMU bonds more attractive

to investors in large foreign-exchange reserves (China, Japan) and enhance the euro’s

standing as a reserve currency, as well as lowering borrowing costs for all countries that

took part in it2.



This common risk free rate can be used as a benchmark for measuring the benefits from

financial market integration in the EMU. We conjecture and provide some evidence that

our estimates of this rate would be close to what a common EMU-based single bond

would yield for a specified maturity. We can then compare actual rates offered by the

different EMU countries with sovereign bonds with this common rate. This allows us to

compute the savings in terms of financing cost per year for the different EMU members.


1
 EPDA(2008,2009)
2
 Additional technical advantages such as minimizing the possibilities of “squeezes” are discussed in
Pagano and Von Thadden (2004)


                                                                                                       2
Our results suggest that average savings in borrowing costs for all EMU countries are

positive irrespective of the common risk free rate measure employed. Of course, there

are many institutional design features that must be resolved (seniority, amount relative

to total debt issues, guarantee fund, etc.) before such a common bond can be launched.

But our paper provides a first insight into one central issue, namely, what should be the

required compensation a given country X should pay to the actual issuer (let’s assume

that the issuer is the ECB or other EMU-wide agency) to be allowed to share a given

issue of EMU-based single bonds. We argue that this compensation should be the

Credit Default Swap (CDS) spread on X’s sovereign bonds3. The benefits for country X

in using the common bond (instead of the sovereign bond) will be the enhanced rating

and liquidity the common bond would provide plus additional premiums for country

X’s macro fundamentals, and exposure to global risk



        Motivated by a simple theoretical portfolio selection model, we first analyze the

determinants of EMU sovereign yield spreads and find significant effects of the credit

quality, macro, correlation, and liquidity variables. We also find that these effects are

different before and after the current financial crisis, being stronger in the latter period.

Robustness tests with different data frequencies, benchmarks, liquidity variables, cross

section regressions and balanced panels confirm the initial results.



        We define the ‘Hedged Yield’ of the sovereign debt of a country as the

difference of actual yield and the corresponding CDS spread. Based on these hedged

yields we build four different estimates of the common risk free rate and show that, in




3
 As a matter of fact, the CDS spread should be the upper limit for the compensation because CDS market
spreads usually include counterparty risk that should be much lower if the insurance seller is the ECB.


                                                                                                     3
most cases, this common rate could imply savings in borrowing costs for all the

countries involved.



       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 1 reviews some

current literature on the subject; Section 2 introduces a theoretical model that allows us

to determine the main components of the sovereign bond yields. Section 3 describes the

data. Section 4 discusses the empirical results and the construction of the common risk

free rate; Section 5 discusses some policy implications. Section 6 presents some

robustness tests and Section 7 offers some concluding remarks and proposes future lines

of research.



1. Related Literature on EMU Sovereign Bond spreads

Since the formation of the European Monetary Union (EMU henceforth) the topic of the

determinants of the sovereign bonds’ yield spreads within the EMU has been the subject

of intense and increasing research. Researchers have tried to find out which are the

factors that explain the differences between sovereign yields in the EMU countries, but

so far no clear consensus has emerged. Codogno, Favero and Misale (2003) find that

for most EMU countries only international risk factors have explanatory power while

liquidity factors play a smaller role. Amira (2004) finds that sovereign yields increase

with maturity, issue size and gross fees and decrease with credit rating. Geyer,

Kossmeier and Pichler (2004) report that EMU government bond spreads are related to

common factors whereas they do not find evidence for a significant impact of

macroeconomic or liquidity related variables. Bernoth, von Hagen and Schuknecht

(2006) report that global risk factors as well as idiosyncratic macroeconomic factors

affect yield spreads, whereas liquidity plays a marginal role. Gomez-Puig (2008) finds




                                                                                        4
that idiosyncratic factors (credit risk and liquidity) mostly drive yield differentials but

systemic risk factors play only a marginal role. Favero, Pagano and Von Thadden

(2008) find that one aggregate risk factor is consistently priced, that liquidity

differentials are priced for a subset of countries, and that the interaction of liquidity

differentials with the risk factor is consistently priced. In all these papers the benchmark

for comparing the yield spreads is based on the German 10-year bund or German zero

coupon curves. Beber, Brandt and Kavajecz (2009), however, use as benchmark the

Euro-swap curve and show that the bulk of yield spread is explained by differences in

credit quality as measured by the CDS, whereas liquidity plays a nontrivial role

especially for low credit risk countries and in times of high market uncertainty. In

summary, most papers suggest that credit quality-related factors, common business

cycle factors (international or EMU), and, to a lower extent, liquidity-related factors are

critical drivers of sovereign yield differentials.



The selection of the appropriate benchmark reference, however, has not received

extensive attention in the literature. The most common view associates the benchmark

bond with the lowest yield. If that were all that mattered for benchmark status, then the

German market would provide, on average, the benchmark at all maturities. Analysts

who take this view accept that the appropriate criterion for benchmark status is that this

is the security against which others are priced, and they simply assume that the security

with lowest yield takes that role. A plausible alternative, however, is to interpret

benchmark to mean the most liquid security, which is therefore most capable of

providing a reference point for the market. But the Italian market, not the German, is

easily the most liquid for short-dated bonds;4 and perhaps the French is most liquid at


4
  Most of the trading for 10-year German bonds occurs on the futures market; this market is then more
liquid and deeper than the cash market.


                                                                                                        5
medium maturities.5 Dunne, Moore and Portes (2002) consider in detail the meaning of

the term “benchmark” bond. They investigate two possible criteria, using Granger-

causality and cointegration tests. They find rather different results with the two

methods, reflecting their different temporal focus. But with neither of them do they find

the unambiguous benchmark status for German securities that would come from a

simple focus on the securities with the lowest yield at a given maturity. They suggest

looking for benchmark portfolios rather than a single benchmark security. This may be

particularly appropriate in this partially integrated market and it is the approach we take

in this paper. We take the benchmark to be a weighted average of the total gross debt at

nominal value issued by the general governments of the different EMU members.




2. Theoretical Model

The model we use to motivate the explanatory variables employed in the empirical part

of the paper is an extension of the portfolio model of bond yield differentials developed

in Bernoth et al (2006). Consider a domestic (benchmark) investor allocating a fraction

θt (θ*t ) of his real wealth wt (w*t) to a domestic D (benchmark F) security and a fraction

1-θt (1-θ*t ) to a benchmark (domestic) security. Assume that both the domestic and

benchmark securities are subject to default risk. The default process is assumed to

follow a correlated bivariate Bernoulli process (xt , x*t ), with domestic (benchmark)

default probability 1-Pt (1-Pt*). In the event of default the investor receives a fraction τt

( τt* ) of his gross domestic (benchmark) payment, τt є [0,1+r) (τt* є [0,1+r*) ) where r

(r* ) is the interest rate on the domestic (benchmark) bond. There are proportional

transaction costs lt (l*t) decreasing with domestic (benchmark) market liquidity. To

5
 Favero, et al. (2008) set the French bond as the benchmark for the five-year maturity. This choice is
supported by the evidence in Dunne, Moore and Portes (2002) and by the fact that traders view the French



                                                                                                      6
simplify the presentation the coefficient of risk aversion ρ is assumed to be the same for

both investors. Let St be the total supply of bond issued by the domestic government

and assuming that the market clears, market equilibrium requires that

                                                           S t = θˆt wt + θˆt* wt*   (1)

where the first term in the right hand side denotes the optimal amount of domestic

bonds held by the domestic investor and the second term denotes the optimal amount of

domestic bonds held by the benchmark investor. Assuming that the investors maximize

a one period mean-variance utility function it is possible to solve for the interest rate

differential between the two economies (details of the model can be found in Appendix

I):

                                     ρ                                                        ρ
rt − rt* = (l t − l t* ) + S t
                                     2
                                               [                                         ]
                                         Var (1 + rt − τ t ) x t − (1 + rt* − τ t* ) x t* −
                                                                                              2
                                                                                                              [                    *        *
                                                                                                  ( wt + wt* ) (1 + rt* − τ t* ) 2 Pt (1 − Pt )   ]
      ρ ( wt + wt* )
+
            2
                       [(1 + r  t                                            ]                                                         *
                                    − τ t )(1 + rt* − τ t* )Cov ( x t , x t* ) + (1 + rt − τ t )(1 − Pt ) − (1 + rt* − τ t* )(1 − Pt ) (2)



Defining

k = (1 + rt − τ t )
k * = (1 + rt* − τ t* )



The model can then be written:

                                           [           ]                             [                ]                  [
rt − rt* = kE [1 − xt ] − k * E 1 − xt + (lt − l t* ) + A1 S tVar kxt − k * xt* + A2 (kk *Cov xt , xt* − (k * ) 2 Var xt* )
                                                   *
                                                                                                                                  ]                   [ ]
              (3)
 where

          ρ
A1 =
     2
                [
A2 = A1 w t + w t*          ]



bond as the most liquid for that maturity.


                                                                                                                                       7
Equation (3) decomposes the yield spread into four components. The first two terms are

the default risk premium which is related with individual (country-specific) default

probabilities. The higher is the domestic (benchmark) country-specific default

probability the higher (lower) is the spread. Also, the riskier the domestic bond is in

comparison with the benchmark, the greater will be the premium. Overall the effect of

increases in the default risk premium will tend to increase yield spreads6. The third term

on the right hand side is the liquidity premium. The less liquid the domestic bond is in

comparison with the benchmark’ liquidity, the greater will be this premium. The fourth

term depends on the total debt St (which we later proxy with macro factors like budget

and trade balances), the volatility of the differences in the default processes, and their

interaction. The last term in the equation is a measure of covariance risk (or global risk)

in excess of the volatility of the benchmark’s default risk.



To test this model empirically we need to specify proxies for the components in

equation (3). We use the CDS spreads as a proxy of the default risk premium as

suggested in Beber et al. (2009)7. As a measure of liquidity we use the bond’s daily

turnover volume; the difference between the domestic and benchmark economy serves

to estimate the liquidity premium8. We also include two macro measures directly

related with the total supply of bond issued by domestic government and the health of

the trade sector: total debt over GDP and net trade balance over GDP, both of them in

deviations from the benchmark. Also, we use the interaction between the total debt over


6
  In the domestic (benchmark) cases the default risk premium decreases (increases) with an increase in the
recovery rates in case of default τt ( τt* ).
7
  To deal with possible endogeneity problems we use the one day-lagged CDS spread
8
   We realize that there is no generally held definition of liquidity. Many other measures have been
suggested in the literature. In fact there is a close relationship between many of the measures and actual
transactions costs, and the assumption that liquidity proxies measure liquidity seems to be granted, see
Goyenko, Holden and Trzcinka (2008). Moreover, volume and other liquidity measures are usually
employed in policy analysis, see European Central Bank (2009). In Section 6.4 we perform some
robustness tests with respect to different specifications of the liquidity variable.


                                                                                                        8
GDP and the volatility of the differences between the domestic and benchmark yields9

as a measure of both the total supply of debt and its relative risk. Since the overall

investor’s risk attitude is not observable we proxy the global risk aversion with the

Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index VIX10. Finally, the correlation

between the domestic bond yield and the benchmark bond yield is used as a proxy for

country-specific covariance risk.



3. Data

The data consists of daily sovereign yields with maturities of 3, 5, 7, and 10 years for

eleven EMU countries from January, 1 2004 to February 27, 2009. We also split the

sample into two sub samples to take into account the effects of the ongoing financial

crisis. The first sample covers the period from January 1, 2004 to August, 8, 2007 and

the second from August 9, 2007 to February 27, 2009. Appendix II provides additional

details about the definition, sources, and timing of the data used in the study. Table 1

provides data on the total gross government debt for the EMU countries and each

country market’s share. The three largest issuers are Germany (25%), Italy (25%) and

France (21%) and the smallest are Austria (2.7%), Portugal (1.6%) and Ireland (1.1%).

Table A.1, panels 1 to 12 provides descriptive statistics by country and for the

benchmark.

In all cases the yields increase and the volatilities decrease with maturity. In general

average trading volume decreased in the second sub sample11 suggesting that

transaction costs increased across the board in the crisis period as well as CDS spreads



9
  The volatility of the differences between the domestic and benchmark yields accounts for the differences
in the default processes.
10
   The VIX is often used as a proxy for investor’s attitude toward risk and appears to explain movements
of the bond spreads in recent years, see Hartelius et al. (2008) and Pan and Singleton (2007).
11
   There are slight increases in Belgium, Ireland and the Netherlands


                                                                                                        9
and yield volatilities12. There is also evidence of an overall worsening of the trade

balance across countries after the crisis started13 as well as a decrease of the ratio of debt

to GDP14.



For the 3, 5, 7, and 10 year sovereign yields, and for the full sample, the lowest

averages are 3.30, 3.51, 3.70 and 3.91 respectively for Germany; the highest averages

are 3.56, 3.82, 4.02, and 4.28 for Greece. Both the standard deviations and the minimum

and maximum values indicate that there can be significant time-series variation in the

sovereign yields. For example, 3-year yield for Italy ranges from 2.29 to 5.02 during the

sample period.



Average daily trading volume (in millions of Euros) also presents wide variation

ranging from the high volumes for Germany (16,813) and Italy (11,772) to the low

volumes for Finland (239) and Ireland (130).



Average CDS rates vary substantially across countries. The lowest average in the whole

sample is 8.41 basis points for Germany; the highest average is 40.25 basis points for

Greece15. The macro factors also vary widely across countries. For instance the country

with highest average Debt/GDP ratio is Italy (104%) and the lowest Ireland (27%) and

the country with worse average trade balance is Greece (-6.5%) and the best one is


12
   It is interesting to note that some countries viewed by the market as having very little average sovereign
risk (CDS spread around 2 basis points) before the crisis, like Germany, Austria, Belgium, France, or The
Netherlands, were penalized in different ways once the crisis unfolds, being Germany (16 b.p.) and
France (20 b.p.) viewed as the safest, then The Netherlands (25 b.p.) and finally Belgium (33 b.p.) and
Austria (37 b.p.). However all countries experienced, in specific days, very high CDS premium, for
instance Germany (91.8 b.p.), France (96 b.p.) or Austria (272 b.p.)
13
   The only exception being Italy whose (negative) external balance does not change.
14
   Portugal is the only exception with a ratio of 63% after the crisis in comparison with 61% before it.
15
    Both the standard deviations and the minimum and maximum values indicate that there can also be
significant time-series variation in the sovereign CDS premium. For example, the cost of credit protection
for Ireland ranges from 2.80 to 395.80 basis points during the sample period.


                                                                                                         10
Ireland (+5.6%). Regarding the average interaction debt factor, which measures not

only the total debt outstanding but also its risk with respect to the benchmark, varies

between 10 for Greece and 2 for Ireland, increasing markedly once the crisis starts to 16

and 4 respectively16. Finally, the average correlation between the domestic 10-year

government yield and the benchmark is highest for Germany (0.98) and lowest for

Austria (0.87) decreasing in all countries in the second sub sample, with France being

the highest (0.96) and Greece the lowest (0.76). This decrease in the correlations could

reflect a decrease in the degree of integration in the sovereign bond market of the EMU

area in time periods of financial distress17



4. Empirical Results

Having established the factors to be used as explanatory variables for the sovereign

yields spreads (as suggested by the theoretical model), we now turn our attention to

examine the economic and statistical significance of the variables in explaining both the

cross-section as well as the time series of yields spreads. We group the data by country

(11 countries) and maturity (3, 5, 7 and 10 years) totaling 44 groups which form an

unbalanced panel.18 We first fit a panel regression to the whole sample period. We then

examine whether the relative influence of these explanatory variables differs between

the relative calmer first sub period and the second sub period of heightened market

uncertainty.




16
   Similar increases are also observed in all other countries.
17
   Analyses of financial integration in the Euro Area sovereign bond market can be found in Adam et al.
(2002), Adjaouté and Danthine (2003) Baele et al. (2004) and Schulz and Wolff (2008) among others.
They conclude that despite the great convergence between yields, yield differentials have not disappeared
completely under EMU and so, European sovereign bonds are still not perfect substitutes.
18
   The panel is unbalanced because we do not have information on some variables from the beginning of
the sample. However, there are no missing values once we include the first realization of the series.




                                                                                                      11
Average correlations among dependent and explanatory variables are presented19 in

Table 2. As expected, sovereign yields spreads are positively related to CDSs lagged by

one day. This is consistent with our theoretical model’s prediction that increases in

default risk premiums are associated with increases in yield spreads. The negative

correlation between yield spreads and the liquidity variable is in agreement with the

theoretical prediction that the less liquid the domestic bond market is in comparison

with the benchmark’ liquidity, the greater will be the yield spread. The positive

correlations for the Debt/GDP, Interaction variable and global risk suggest that as they

each increase, sovereign yield spreads increase. The negative correlation for the Trade

balance variable suggests that trade deficit increase government yield spreads. Overall,

the signs are again in agreement with the ones suggested by the theoretical model; our

main objective, however, is to examine the joint effect of these explanatory variables on

the yield spreads.



4.1. Unbalanced Panel Regression

We regress the difference between the sovereign yield in EMU country i and the

benchmark portfolio yield onto differences in country i’s credit quality, liquidity and

macro measures from their respective cross-sectional weighted averages (or benchmark

values) and onto global risk measures. We employ a Prais-Winsten regression with

correlated panels, corrected standard errors (PCSEs) and robust to heteroskedasticity,

contemporaneous correlation across panels and serial autocorrelation within panels. The

correlation within panels is treated as a first-order autocorrelation AR(1) and the




19
  All the variables, with the exception of the measure of global risk and the correlation between the
domestic Government and benchmark yields, are in deviations from the benchmark


                                                                                                        12
coefficient of this process common20 to all the panels.21 Our panel regression model is

described by the equation:

(4)

                    K                                  M
rit − rit* = α + ∑ β k ( X k ,i ,t − X k , BNCH ,t ) + ∑ γ j D j ,t + χ Yi ,t + δ Z t + ψ C i ,t + ε i ,t
                   k =1                                j =1




where the dependent variable is the spread between the government bond’s yield of

country i, rit at four different maturities (3,5,7,and 10 years) and the benchmark yield

r*it , at the same maturities. The benchmark yields are obtained as the weighted average

of the Government yields of the EMU countries in the sample for the corresponding

maturity (3, 5, 7, and 10 years). The weights are proportional to the portion of debt

outstanding by each country with respect to the total amount outstanding by all these

countries22. The Xk,i,t are credit risk, liquidity and macro explanatory variables (CDSt-1 ,

Volume, Total debt/GDP, Trade Balance/GDP) and XBNCH,t are their respective

weighted averages over the eleven countries,                        obtained using the same procedure

employed to build the benchmark yield23. Notice that we specify the credit, liquidity

and macro variables as differences from their cross-sectional weighted averages (or

benchmark value). This approach stresses the fact that credit risk; liquidity and macro

variables are relative concepts. The Dj,t are dummy variables to take into account the

maturity effect in bond yields (3,5, and 7 years). The Yi, t is the interaction term of total

debt/GDP of country i times the volatility of the difference between domestic yield and

benchmark yield. The Zt is the global risk factor measured as the log of the VIX index

20
   Better fit, as measured by the Schwarz Information Criteria, is obtained using an AR(1) autocorrelation
structure common to all panels instead of a panel-specific AR(1) autocorrelation structure.
21
   Each element in the covariance matrix of the disturbances is computed with all available observations
that are common to the two panels contributing to the covariance.
22
   To gain a better perspective of the dependent variable, it is worth mentioning that its maximum
(minimum) average value is equal to 21.5 (-8.9) basis points for Greece (Germany).




                                                                                                            13
and Ci,t is the correlation between the country i yield (for its corresponding maturity)

and the benchmark’s yield.



The results of the panel regressions are reported in Table 3. Column 1 gives the results

for the whole sample period, Column 2 for the period before the financial crisis, and

Column 3 for the crisis period. The explanatory power of the regressions, reflected in

their adjusted R2 , are 20% ,12% and 25% respectively. Consistent with intuition as

well as with our theoretical model and the previous literature, the CDS lagged one

period has a strong positive impact on sovereign yield spread which indicates that a

lower credit quality increases the yield spread.                  The liquidity differential is also

significant. The negative coefficient suggests that higher than average liquidity is

associated with lower yield spreads. However the impact of the liquidity is insignificant

in the first sub- sample (the period before the financial crisis). In the second sub-sample

(the period during the crisis) the effect of liquidity is significant, consistent with Beber

et al. (2009). The two macro factors (relative to GDP) and the global risk factor have

also a positive and significant impact in the sovereign yield spread. The effect of the

term measuring the interaction of total debt relative to GDP and the standard deviation

of the domestic yield minus the benchmark yield is positive and significant. Recall that

this variable measures both the total supply of debt and its relative risk against the

benchmark. Therefore the economic meaning of this variable is that, for a given debt

level, an increase in the volatility of the difference of the domestic yield and benchmark

yield increases yield spreads. The more the two rates grow apart the higher the effect on

yield spreads. This could be the case in a situation where a given country’s spreads

tends to diverge from the benchmark behavior and then the market penalizes this


23
  Notice that the CDS variable is different for different maturities, whereas the other variables are the
same for all maturities.


                                                                                                            14
divergence demanding higher yield spreads. If two countries present the same

divergence from the benchmark yield behavior, the penalization is higher for the

country with the higher level of debt relative to GDP. Finally the dummy variables

coefficients reflect the decreasing premium for longer maturities.



A comparison of Columns 2 and 3 of Table 3 suggests that the financial crisis has

penalized more heavily country’s sovereign yields with relatively high credit risk, lower

liquidity, higher indebtness, and with higher exposure to global risk.



Since there is a potential endogeneity between a country’s sovereign yields and its CDS

rates, in the panel regression results reported in Table 3 we have used a one period (day)

lag in the CDS explanatory variable. This is a standard procedure to deal with potential

endogeneity. To further address this issue, we have run and identical panel regression

but omitting the CDS explanatory variable. These results are reported in Table 4 for the

whole sample period (Column1) and for the two sub-periods (Columns 2 and 3). As can

be seen from this table the results are qualitatively very similar to those in Table 3,

confirming the significance of the other explanatory variables and suggesting that

endogeneity is not a serious issue in our case. As expected, the explanatory power of

the panel regressions is lower given that we are omitting a powerful explanatory

variable (CDS). In Section 4.2 we will further investigate this issue by running panel

regression of “hedged yields” (the difference between actual yields and the

corresponding CDS spreads) on the other explanatory variables.



Finally, we analyze the effect of the cross-sectional dispersion between countries in the

explanatory variables on the dependent variable. For this aim, we first calculate the




                                                                                       15
standard deviation of each dependent variable across countries at each date t. Then, we

compute the average of these standard deviations for the whole sample, the first sub

sample (period before the crisis) and the second sub sample (crisis period) and finally,

we multiply this average by the corresponding coefficient depending on the sample

period employed for its estimation (see Table 3). In Table 5 we report the results of this

sensitivity analysis of the determinants of the yield spreads. Specifically, we report the

magnitude of the change, in basis points, of the dependent variable given a change equal

to the average of the standard deviations across countries of a given explanatory

variable over all dates.24 We focus on the cross-sectional dimension of the panel and
                                                                                                 25
employ the time-series dimension to calculate the average effect across time.                         This

allows us to evaluate how the different macro or risk factors of the countries under

study affect the yield spreads.



For the whole sample the largest effect on yield spreads is caused by deviations between

the countries’ CDSs spreads (4.94 b.p.). However these effects are very different in the

two sub samples. In the first one the changes in the dependent variable are usually

small, around 1.4 b.p., whereas in the second sub sample the changes are more

substantial, around 12.2 b.p. It seems that the sensitivity of yield spreads to changes in

CDS increased noticeably once the crisis started which supports the idea of a flight to

quality in terms of Beber et al. (2009) terminology.




24
   The standard deviation of the following variables: CDS spread (lagged one day); interaction of total
debt divided by GDP and the standard deviation of the difference between domestic and benchmark
yields; and the correlation between domestic Government yield and benchmark yield are calculated for
the five year’s maturity.
25
   We repeat the sensitivity analysis focused on the time-series dimension of the panel. By means of this
analysis, we estimate the change in the dependent variable after a change of one standard deviation in a
given explanatory variable across time and countries. Results are in line with the ones in Table 5 but are
not reported in this paper given that our aim is to focus on how the differences between countries affect
the deviations in the yield spreads and so, we focus in the cross-section dimension.


                                                                                                       16
The variable with the second strongest effect is the total debt issued relative to GDP. In

the whole sample the average change in the dependent variable is 3.59 b.p. and, as it

occurs with the rest of explanatory variables, its effect is very different in the two sub

samples being almost three times higher in the sample corresponding to the crisis

period. Given the economic interpretation discussed above, it seems that increased

divergence from the average behaviour is substantially (and possibly non-linearly)

penalized by the market.



A similar effect to the one found in the CDSs, but with a lower order of magnitude, is

found with respect to the liquidity variable. Before the crisis the effect is negligible but

during the crisis the effect is significant and leads to a decrease of 4.55 b.p. This

suggests the existence of a flight to liquidity during the crisis period.



The effects of the rest of variables show again fairly large differences in the two sub

samples.26 Both the interaction of total debt relative to GDP and the standard deviation

of the domestic yield minus the benchmark yield, and the correlation between the

government yield and benchmark yield increased their effect to a considerable extent in

the second sub sample in comparison with the first one.



Summarizing the results, the effect of the explanatory variables varies widely between

the sub samples, being generally stronger in the crisis period. The effect is also stronger

when the deviations from the average take place in the credit quality position (CDSs).




26
  The Global Risk Measure (VIX Index) is not included in this sensitivity analysis as it is the same for all
the countries in the sample.


                                                                                                         17
4.2 Computing Common Risk Free Rates

The results in the previous section motivate the following question. What should be the

yield of a common eurozone bond, free, at least to some extent, from the effect of the

risk factors (credit, liquidity, macro, correlation) that influence the yield of individual

sovereign bonds? The existence of a common European bond would imply the existence

of a common European interest rate27. In this section, we attempt to provide some

alternative measures for this rate and discuss the hypothetical benefits that it would

yield. A common risk free rate could produce benefits for every EMU country because

of the enhanced rating and liquidity of the common bond and from the reduction of the

effects associated with macro fundamentals and global risk.



It seems reasonable to suggest that to be allowed to profit from the reduction in

borrowing costs this common rate would provide, each EMU country interested in

participating in an issue of common bonds should compensate the bond issuer for the

specific country’s credit risk. As a starting point for this analysis we suggest that the

CDSs on its sovereign bonds is the best proxy publicly available to measure the country

risk and so, the CDS spreads represent the compensation that a given country should

pay in order to be allowed to participate in the issuance of common bonds. In what

follows we refer to the ‘Hedged Yield’ of the sovereign debt of a country as the

difference of actual yield and the corresponding CDS spread.



In what follows we propose four possible alternatives for a common risk free rate.




                                                                                        18
1) The first one we propose, which we call Common Risk-Free Rate 1, is the Hedged

     Yield free of liquidity, correlation and macro risk effects28, computed in the

     following steps:

     a) We run the following Prais-Winsten regression:

      (5)

                            K                M
     rit − CDS it = α + ∑ β k X k ,i ,t + ∑ γ j D j ,t + χYi ,t + δZ i ,t + ε i ,t   i = 1,... 44
                            k =1             j =1



     where the dependent variable is the Hedged Yield of country i (i=1,…,11) at four

     different maturities (3, 5, 7 and 10 years). The Xk,i,t are liquidity and macro

     explanatory variables (Volume, Total debt/GDP, Trade Balance/GDP) of country i.

     The Dj,t are dummy variables to take into account the maturity effect in bond yields

     (3,5, and 7 years). The Yi,t is the interaction term of total debt relative to GDP times

     the volatility of the difference between domestic yield and benchmark yield. The Zi,t

     is the global risk factor measured as the logarithm of VIX.

     This regression is similar to the one in (4) with the exception that the dependent

     variable is the hedged yield and the liquidity and macro variables are not deviations

     from the benchmark.

     b) We define the Common Risk Free Rate 1 (CRFR1) at time t for the

         corresponding maturity according to:

                                CRFR1t = αˆ + γˆ j + εˆt         j = 1, 2, 3. (6)

     where α̂ is the estimated constant, γˆ j is the estimate of the dummy parameter for

     the maturities of 3, 5 and 7 years, respectively, and εˆt is the average cross-sectional

27
  As Galati and Tsatsaronis (2001) remark, the most vivid illustration of the shortcomings of the
Government bond market is the absence of a single established reference yield curve for the new
currency.




                                                                                                    19
       residual among the eleven EMU countries at time t. α̂ gives the average common

       hedged risk free rate without the effect of the other variables, γˆ j gives the term

       structure effect and εˆt gives the time series variation in interest rates.



The second risk free rate we propose, which we call Common Risk-Free Rate 2, is

defined as Common Risk-Free Rate 1 but using weights in the Prais-Winsten regression

according to the debt outstanding by each EMU member relative to the total debt

outstanding. The steps are the same as in the computation of Common Risk Free Rate

129.



For purposes of comparison, we also propose two common risk free rates that do not

adjust for liquidity, correlation and macro effects. “Benchmark Hedged Yield” is the

weighted average of the individual Hedged Yields. The weights are proportional to the

portion of debt outstanding by each of the EMU countries with respect to the total

amount outstanding by all these countries. Finally, “Minimum Hedged Yield” is the

minimum Hedged Yield across the eleven EMU members. To compute this measure,

we first select the country with the minimum weekly average yield and then, using its

daily yields during the corresponding week we compute the Minimum Hedged Yield.

We would expect that, in general, the Common Risk Free Rate measures would be

lower than the Hedged Yield measures since, in addition to adjusting for the risk of

default (CDSs), they also adjust for liquidity, correlation and macro effects30.




28
   The impact of these effects is estimated by means of a Prais-Winsten regression with correlated panels
corrected standard errors (PCSEs) and robust to heteroskedasticity, contemporaneous correlation across
panels and serial autocorrelation.
29
   Detailed results on the computation of Common Risk Free Rates 1 and 2 are available on request.




                                                                                                       20
The four different estimates of the common 5-year risk free rate are shown in Figure 1.

Note that the four measures are closely related but none of them is consistently below

the others. In the first part of the sample the lowest rate is the Common Risk Free rate 1

but, near the end of the sample, the lowest rate is the Minimum Hedged Yield.



5. Policy Implications: Savings in Borrowing Costs

 The four measures previously defined can be used to estimate the possible savings in

borrowing costs from the issuance of common bonds in the EMU. We obtain these

savings for a given country and maturity by subtracting from the corresponding yield

the CDS spread and the four estimates of the common risk free rate. The results are

reported in Table 6, Panel A gives the results for the whole sample period, Panel B for

the period before the financial crisis, and Panel C for the crisis period. In the whole

sample, average savings in borrowing costs are usually positive irrespective of the

common risk free rate measure employed31. However savings, as expected, are

substantially higher with Common Risk Free Rates 1 and 2. The country that, on

average, gets the biggest decrease in financing costs is Greece while Ireland32 is the one

getting the smallest decrease.33 This is also the case in the period before the crisis, but in

the crisis period Finland and Greece reaps the biggest savings.34 On average, the savings

associated with the Common Risk Free 1 (Common Risk Free 2 and Min. Hedged

Yield) are around 35 (23 and 16) basis points a year for all maturities in the whole


30
   Strictly speaking only Common Risk free rates 1 and 2 are truly risk free rates because they are
unrelated with the risk factors by construction.
31
   As expected, in the case of the Benchmark Yield, there are very low average savings. In contrast with
the results for the other three rates, not every country will benefit from using the Benchmark Yield
32
   The reason for the low decrease in financing costs for Ireland is the high CDS spread of this country
given that this spread represents the compensation that Ireland should pay in order to participate in the
issuance of common bonds.
33
   For some maturities, the savings for Finland are higher than for Greece. However, we have only 202
observations for Finland in comparison with the almost 900 observations for Greece.
34
   It is important to remember that the number of observations for Finland during the crisis period is 202
while for the rest of the countries this number is equal to 392.


                                                                                                         21
sample. Countries above (below) the average are Belgium, Finland, France, Greece,

Italy and Portugal (Austria, Germany, Ireland, Spain, and Netherlands)35.



Adjaouté and Danthine (2003) argue that a unified market is Pareto superior to a

fragmented market given that yields will be lower in the former. As Adjaouté and

Danthine (2003) point out, the pricing differences between yields reflect a failure of

integration and imply costs to the euro-area Treasuries. They estimate that at the debt

levels in the euro area in 2000 the annual cost may be as high as €5 billion which could

be saved with a common bond.36 They consider that the integration could occur simply

by the establishment of a centralized agency in charge of issuing debt on behalf of the

euro area’s governments.37 However, they do not give additional details about how to

achieve this integration and how to estimate the common rates derived from the

centralized debt issuance. According to our estimations of the common risk free rate,

the average savings could be higher than in Adjaouté and Danthine (2003).                              Our

estimations suggest that the average annual savings for the EMU in the period that

spans from September 2005 to February 2009 might be around €21.25 (€13.71, €8.38

and €0.07) billions if the common rate is defined as the Common Risk Free Rate 1

(Common Risk Free Rate 2, Min. Hedged Yield and Benchmark Yield).38 As Favero


35
   In the first period the savings are somewhat bigger being CRFR1 (CRFR2) 39 (27) and lower for MHY
(6). In the second period average savings are lower with CRFR1 (CRFR2) 29 (17) and higher for MHY
(22) perhaps reflecting heightened systemic risk.
36
   Adjaouté and Danthine (2003) estimate this amount by multiplying the outstanding debt of the Euro
area minus Germany in 2000 (2,470 billion) by the average difference of the yields with respect to
German yield which is employed as the benchmark (20 basis points).
37
   Such a proposal was made in 1999 with a view of harmonizing the maturity structures, delivering a true
and single benchmark curve and helping reduce the cost that some member states have to pay to primary
dealers in order to promote their debt outside the country (Favero et al., 2000). Adjaouté and Danthine
(2003) proposal was met with considerable skepticism, because such a set-up implies some collective
responsibility for national debts, which runs contrary to the Maastricht Treaty but they also argue that the
debate on the establishment of a multilateral agency should be reopened.
38
   The annual average savings are obtained by multiplying the annual average debt outstanding in the
EMU during the period 2003-2008 by the average annual profits in terms of yields for the period 2004-
2009 (see Panel A of Table 6). The average yield value is obtained as the average of the four different
maturities.


                                                                                                        22
and Von Thadden (2004) state, the possibility of joint bond issuance by euro-area

countries has been repeatedly considered because of its ability to exploit fully the

liquidity benefits, among others, of a unified market. They also suggest that this scheme

has been discarded because it would generate an implicit debt guarantee by some

countries in favour of others. Our tentative evidence, based on hedged yields, suggests

that a common bond market with a common yield would reap liquidity benefits for all

countries involved.



6. Robustness Tests

In this section, we report the results of several checks on the basic results. The

robustness tests consider cross-section regressions, changes in the benchmark, using

balance panel regressions and alternative liquidity measures, and employing alternative

data frequencies. In all cases the results are robust to the alternative specifications.


6.1. Cross Section Regressions

As a first robustness test we run a cross-section regression every day and then we test

for the significance of the time series of coefficients, see Fama and Macbeth (1973).

Equation (7) details our cross-section regression model:

(7)

                       K                                         M
rit − rit* = α t + ∑ β k ,t ( X k ,i ,t − X k , BNCH ,t ) + ∑ γ j ,t D j ,t + χ i ,t Yi ,t + δ i ,t Z i ,t + ε i ,t   i = 1,...44
                      k =1                                       j =1

                                                                                                               t = 1,...,1294

where the dependent variable is the spread between the government bond’s yield of

country i (i=1,…,11)                  rit at four different maturities (3,5,7,and 10 years) and the

benchmark yield r*it , at the same maturities. The benchmark yields are obtained as the

weighted average of the Government yields of the EMU countries in the sample for the




                                                                                                                                23
corresponding maturity (3, 5, 7, and 10 years). The weights are proportional to the

portion of debt outstanding by each country with respect to the total amount outstanding

by all these countries. The Xk,i,t are credit risk, liquidity and macro explanatory variables

(CDSt-1 , Volume, Total debt/GDP, Trade Balance/GDP) and Xk,BNCH,t are their

respective weighted averages over the eleven countries. Notice that we specify the

credit, liquidity and macro variables as differences from their cross-sectional weighted

averages. This approach stresses that credit risk; liquidity and macro stance are relative

concepts. The Dj,t are dummy variables to take into account the maturity effect in bond

yields (3, 5, and 7 years). The Yi,t is the interaction term of total debt relative to GDP

times the volatility of the difference between domestic yield and benchmark yield. The

Zi,t is the global risk factor .39



In order to estimate the cross-sectional effects of the above variables, we run a cross-

sectional regression by OLS for every date in the sample (1294 in total) and compute

the average coefficient for the whole sample and for the two subsamples. Petersen

(2009) states that the Fama-MacBeth standard errors are biased in exactly the same way

as the OLS estimates and the magnitude of the bias is a function of the serial correlation

of both the independent variable and the residual within a cluster and the number of

time periods per firm (or cluster). Thus, we must adjust the standard errors for the




39
   This is measured, in this case, as the standard deviation of the difference between the domestic
Government yield and the EMU benchmark Government yield, because in equation (7), neither the VIX
index nor the variable defined from the correlation between the domestic and the benchmark yields can be
employed in the regression analysis. The reason is that the former variable is the same for all countries
while the last one causes multicollinearity problems.




                                                                                                      24
autocorrelation of the estimated slope coefficients.40 We employ the Fama-MacBeth

methodology with Newey-West standard errors.41



The results of the cross section regressions are reported in Table 7. Column 1 gives the

results for the whole sample period, Column 2 for the period before the financial crisis,

and Column 3 for the crisis period. The average R2 of the cross-sectional regressions are

73%, 69% and 83% respectively42. The magnitude of the regression coefficient suggests

that a one standard deviation increase in the CDS above the weighted average is

associated with an average increase in the sovereign yield spread of 6.4, 3.4 and 13

basis points respectively. These are the most significant economic effects found for the

explanatory variables. The two macro factors (relative to GDP) have a significant

impact in the sovereign yield spread. One standard deviation increase in the total debt

and the net trade balance, both above the weighted average, is associated with an

average increase in the sovereign yield spread of 2.2, 0.7 and 5.8 basis points and a

decrease of 1, 0.5 and 0.9 basis points respectively.



The effect of the term measuring the interaction of total debt and the standard deviation

of the domestic yield minus the benchmark yield is positive and significant. One

standard deviation increase in this variable is associated with an average increase in the

sovereign yield spread of 1.6, 0.8 and 3.5 basis points respectively.




40
   As Petersen (2009) states, when there is only a time effect, the correlation of the estimated slope
coefficients across years is zero and the standard errors estimated by the Fama-MacBeth are unbiased.
41
   In order to find an unbiased t-statistic, we regress the estimated coefficients on a constant using the
Newey-West adjustment to control for serial correlation. This methodology is also employed in
Davydenko and Strebulaev (2007).
42
   To gain a better understanding of the effects of the explanatory variables on the dependent variable, it
is worth noting that the maximum (minimum) average value by country for the deviation between the
Government yield and the benchmark yield is equal to 21.5 (-8.9) basis points for Greece (Germany).


                                                                                                       25
The relative riskiness of a given country as measured by the volatility of the difference

between the domestic Government yield and the EMU benchmark is not significant in

any of the three samples. With respect to the liquidity differential variable the negative

coefficient suggests that higher than weighted average liquidity is associated with lower

yield spreads. The economic impact of the liquidity differential is the lowest of all the

explanatory variables in the analysis for the whole sample and almost the lowest for the

first subsample. However, in the analysis for the crisis period the impact of the liquidity

differential increases considerably and is the third most important after CDSt-1 and Total

debt/GDP. One standard deviation increase in liquidity above the average in the crisis

period is associated with an average change in the sovereign yield spread of -4.9 basis

points. Finally the dummy variables coefficients reflect the decreasing premium for

longer maturities.



Overall the results of the cross sectional regressions are consistent with the ones given

by the unbalanced panel regression reported in Section 4.1 indicating that the main

results of the analysis are robust to different specifications of the regressions. The

sensitivity analysis’ results for the cross-sectional regression are also similar to those

reported in Table 5 for the panel regressions.



6.2 Changing the Benchmark

We next address the issue of how robust are our results to the choice of benchmark. In

particular, as is common in the literature, we use the German bond as a benchmark.

Table 8 presents the results of estimating the panel regression equation (4) using two

different benchmarks. Besides the benchmark used in this study, which is obtained from

the relative weights calculated from the total debt outstanding by each country over the




                                                                                        26
total amount in the EMU, we present the results obtained using the German bond as the

benchmark. As can be seen from the Table, our main results are not very sensitive to the

choice of benchmark.



6.3 Balanced Panel

To be able to use as much of the data as possible and deal with missing observations the

panel regressions estimated in this paper have been unbalanced. In this section we look

at the robustness of our results to the use of a balanced panel.



Table 9 presents the results of fitting equation (4) to a balanced panel data formed by

ten of the eleven countries and ranging from March 2006 to February 2009.43 The

estimation is done by means of Generalized Least Squares (GLS). The GLS procedure

allows estimation in the presence of AR(1) autocorrelation within panels and cross-

sectional correlation and heteroskedasticity across panels. Even though the data used in

this regression is somewhat different, the results obtained are similar to those obtained

for the unbalanced panel. In fact, the magnitude and significance of the explanatory

variables provides stronger support for the specification used.



6.4 Liquidity measures

We also analyze the robustness of our results to alternative specifications of the

liquidity measure. Table 10 presents the results of fitting model (4) to the full sample

using three alternative liquidity measures: total daily turnover volume, bid-ask spreads




43
  We exclude Finland and the observations before the 27th of March, 2006 in order to have a balanced
panel. The reason is that for some countries, the CDSs series present missing values before that date. In
the case of Finland there are only 202 observations on CDSs.


                                                                                                        27
and average daily turnover volume.44 In all cases the liquidity coefficients have the

expected signs and are significant and the results for the other variables do not change

materially.



6.5 Data frequency

Some macro series (Gross Debt outstanding) have annual frequency; other series (GDP)

have quarterly frequency while others (Net Trade Balance) have monthly frequency. In

fact these are the data frequencies employed in Curto et al. (2008) or Codogno et al.

(2003) among others. As an additional robustness test we analyze the regression in

equation (4) using data with a monthly and quarterly frequency. In both cases the

number of observations decreases substantially with respect to the case where we use

daily frequency. However, results are in line with the ones obtained using a daily data

and are available on request. Overall the above outcomes suggest that our main findings

are not sensitive to the data’s time frequency45.



7. Summary and Conclusions

In this paper we study the determinants of EMU sovereign bonds yields and then

present estimations of the hypothetical risk free rate a common bond would yield. To

model the determinants of yield spreads we first propose a theoretical portfolio selection

model to motivate the variable selection. Then for the period 2004 to 2009 we fit an

unbalanced panel model, using as a benchmark a weighted average of the total gross

debt issued by the governments of the different EMU members. We find that credit

44
   This average volume is calculated as the ratio between the total daily turnover volume and the number
of bonds issued by the corresponding country.
45
   Gomez-Puig (2007) transforms the macro variables employed in her analysis into variables with a daily
frequency. For this transformation, she extrapolates the corresponding variable assuming a daily constant
rate of increase. We find that the results obtained after extrapolating the macro variables, assuming a
constant rate of increase between two different values of the corresponding variable, are equivalent to the
ones obtained in Table 3.


                                                                                                       28
quality, macro, correlation, and liquidity variables have a significant effects on EMU

sovereign yield spreads. However, their effects are different before and after the current

financial crisis, being stronger in the latter period. Robustness tests with different data

frequency, benchmarks, liquidity variables, cross section regressions and balanced panel

confirm the initial results.



Motivated by the these results we try to answer the following question: What should be

the yield of a common eurozone bond, free, at least to some extent, from the effect of

the risk factors (credit, liquidity, macro, correlation) that influence the yield of

individual sovereign bonds? We present four different estimations of this hypothetical

common risk free rate and show that, in most cases, average savings in borrowing costs

for all EMU countries are positive irrespective of the common risk free rate measure

employed.



We realize that there are many complex institutional design features that must be

resolved before an actual common bond issue for the eurozone could be a reality, but

our paper provides a first insight into one central issue. Namely, what should be the

required compensation a given country should pay to the formal issuer to be allowed to

share a given issue of EMU-based single bonds. We argue that this compensation

should be the CDS spread on a given country sovereign bonds. The benefits for a given

country in using the common bond (instead of the sovereign) will be the enhanced

rating and liquidity the common bond would provide plus additional premiums for

country macro fundamentals, and exposure to global risk.




                                                                                        29
Our results may be interpreted as tentative evidence in favour of the hypothesis that a

common bond and a common risk free rate in the EMU could produce substantial

savings in borrowing costs for all the countries involved. Looking forward, we expect

more conclusive evidence on other common risk free rate measures as well as in other

market segments. The procedures of this paper can also be applied to other sovereign

bonds and common currency areas.




                                                                                    30
References

Adam, K., Jappelli, T., Menichini, A., Padula, M., and Pagano, M. (2002) Analyse, Compare,
and Apply Alternative Indicators and Monitoring Methodologies to Measure the Evolution of
Capital Market Integration in the European Union, mimeo, University of Salerno.

Adjaouté, K. and Danthine, J. P. (2003) European Financial Integration and Equity Returns: A
Theory-Based Assessment, FAME Working Paper No. 84.

Amira, K. (2004) Determinants of sovereign eurobonds yield spread. Journal of Business
Finance & Accounting, 31, 5-6, 795-821.

Baele L., Ferrando, A., Hördahl, P., Krylova, E., and Monnet, C. (2004) “Measuring Financial
Integration in the Euro Area”, Occasional Paper Series, No. 14, European Central Bank, 1-93.

Bernoth, K., von Hagen J. and Schuknecht, L. (2006) Sovereign Risk Premiums in the European
Government Bond Market. GESY Discussion paper 151.

Beber, A., Brandt, M.W. and Kavajecz, K.A. (2009) Flight-to-quality or flight-to-liquidity?
Evidence from the Euro-area bond market. Review of Financial Studies, (forthcoming)
doi:10.1093/rfs/hhm088.

Codogno, L., Favero, C. and Missale, A. (2003) Government bond spreads. Economic Policy,
18, 504-532.

Curto, J. D., Nunes, J. P. and Oliveira, L. (2008) “The Determinants of Sovereign Credit Spread
Changes in the Euro-Zone”, Working Paper ISCTE Business School.

Davydenko, S. A. and Strebulaev, I. A. (2007) Strategic Actions and Credit Spreads: An
Empirical Investigation. Journal of Finance, 62, 2633-2671.

Dunne, P.G., Moore, M.J., and Portes, R. (2002) Defining benchmark status: an application
using euro-area bonds. CEPR Discussion Paper Nº 3490.

European Primary Dealers Association (2008) A common European government bond.
http://www.sifma.org/research/pdf/EPDA-SIFMA-Common-Bond-Report_0810.pdf

European Primary Dealers Association (2009) Towards a common European T-Bill.
http://europe.sifma.org/epda/pdf/EPDA-Note-Towards-Common-European-T-Bill.pdf

European Central Bank (2009) Financial Integration in Europe. April 2009 report.

Fama, E., and MacBeth, J. (1973) Risk, Return and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests. Journal of
Political Economy, 81, 607-636.

Favero, C., Missale, A., and Piga, G. (2000) EMU and Public Debt Management: One Money,
One Debt? CEPR policy paper, no. 3.

Favero, C., Pagano, M. and Von Thadden E.-L. (2009) How Does Liquidity Affect Government
Bond Yields?. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis (forthcoming)

Favero, C., and Von Thadden, E.-L. (2004) The European Bond Markets Under EMU, Oxford
Review of Economic Policy, 4, 531-554.




                                                                                            31
Hartelius, K., Kashiwase, K., Kodres, L.E. (2008) Emerging market spread compression: Is it
real or is it liquidity? Working Paper 08/10, International Monetary Fund, Washington D.C.

Galati, G. and Tsatsaronis, K. (2001) The Impact of the Euro on Europe’s Financial Markets.
Working Paper No. 100, Bank of International Settlements (BIS).

Geyer, A. Kossmeier, S. and Pichler, S. (2004) Measuring Systematic Risk in EMU
Government Yield Spreads. Review of Finance, 8, 171–197.

Gomez-Puig, M. (2007) “The Impact of Monetary Union on EU-15 Sovereign Debt Yield
Spreads”, Working Papers in Economics 147, Universitat de Barcelona.

Gomez-Puig, M. (2008) Monetary integration and the cost of borrowing. Journal of
International Money and Finance, 27, 455-479

Goyenko, R.Y, Holden, C.W.and Trzcinka, C. A. (2008) Do Liquidity Measures Measure
Liquidity?. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1108553

Pagano, M. and Von Thadden , E-L (2004) The European Bond Markets under the EMU.
Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 20, 531-554.

Pan, J., and K. J. Singleton (2007) Default and Recovery Implicit in the Term Structure of
Sovereign CDS Spreads, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Petersen, M. A. (2009) Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets: Comparing
Approaches. Review of Financial Studies, 22, 435-480.

Pisani-Perry, J. and Posen, A.S. (editors) (2009) The Euro at Ten: The Next Global Currency?.
Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Schulz, A. and Wolff, G. (2008) Sovereign bond market integration: the euro, trading platforms
and globalization, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper (Series 1) 12.




                                                                                           32
Appendix I

We consider a domestic (benchmark) investor allocating a fraction θt (θ*t ) of his real
wealth wt (w*t) to a domestic D (benchmark, F) security and a fraction 1-θt (1-θ*t ) to a
benchmark (domestic) security. We assume that both the domestic and benchmark
securities are subject to default risk. The default process is assumed to follow a
correlated bivariate Bernoulli process (xt , x*t ), with domestic (benchmark) default
probability 1-Pt (1-Pt*). In the event of default the investor receives a fraction τt ( τt* )
of his gross domestic (benchmark) payment, τt є [0,1+r) (τt* є [0,1+r*) ) where r (r* ) is
the interest rate on the domestic (benchmark) bond. There are proportional transaction
costs lt (l*t) decreasing with domestic (benchmark) market liquidity. The coefficient of
risk aversion ρ is the same for both investors. The utility function of both the domestic
and foreign investors depends positively on the expected real wealth, E t [wt +1 ] and
negatively on its variance Vart [wt +1 ] . The domestic investor maximizes the following
mean-variance utility function:
                                                                         ρ
                                                        E t [wt +1 ] −
                                             Vart [wt +1 ]                     (A.1)
                                           2
where according to the previous notation, the expected wealth and variance of wealth
are, respectively:

E t [wt +1 ] = (1 + rt )θ t wt Pt + τ t θ t wt (1 − Pt ) − θ t wt l t +
                                                            *
                    + (1 + rt* )(1 − θ t ) wt Pt * + τ t (1 − θ t ) wt (1 − Pt * ) − (1 − θ t ) wt l t*
                                                                                                                      ( A.2)
Vart [wt +1 ] = (1 + rt − τ t ) θ w Pt (1 − Pt ) + (1 + rt − τ ) (1 − θ t ) w Pt (1 − Pt ) +
                                       2
                                           t
                                            2   2
                                                t
                                                                             *      * 2
                                                                                    t
                                                                                                  2   2
                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                          *       *


                    + 2 wt2θ t (1 − θ t )(1 + rt − τ t )(1 + rt* − τ t* )Cov ( x t , x t* )

The domestic investor maximizes his corresponding utility function to obtain the
optimal fraction of his wealth to allocate to the domestic bond, θˆt :

        (1 + rt ) Pt + τ t (1 − Pt ) − l t − (1 + rt* ) Pt * − τ * (1 − Pt * ) + l t* +
θˆt =
                [
          ρwt (1 + rt − τ t )2 Pt (1 − Pt ) + (1 + rt* − τ t* ) Pt * (1 − Pt* )
                                                                         2


                                                                                                                         ( A.3)
                          *      * 2       *        *                                     *       *           *
        + ρwt (1 + rt − τ ) Pt (1 − Pt ) − ρwt (1 + rt − τ t )(1 + rt − τ )Cov ( x t , x )
                                 t                                                                t           t

                                                        (                )
                          − 2(1 + rt − τ t ) 1 + rt* − τ t* Cov ( x t , x t* )                ]

The foreign investor maximizes his corresponding mean-variance utility function:
                                                                         ρ
                                                            [ ]
                                                        E t wt*+1 −
                                                                         2
                                                                                      [ ]
                                                                                 Vart wt*+1                           (A.4)




The foreign investor’s expected wealth and variance of wealth are the following:




                                                                                                                           33
    [ ]
E t wt*+1 = (1 + rt )θ t* wt* Pt + τ t θ t* wt* (1 − Pt ) − θ t* wt* l t +
               + (1 + rt* )(1 − θ t* ) wt* Pt * + τ t* (1 − θ t* ) wt* (1 − Pt * ) − (1 − θ t* ) wt* l t*
                                                                                                                                     ( A.5)
Vart w[ ] = (1 + r
          *
          t +1              t
                                         2    *2     *2                       *       * 2        * 2
                                − τ t ) θ w Pt (1 − Pt ) + (1 + rt − τ ) (1 − θ ) w Pt (1 − Pt ) +
                                             t       t                                t         t
                                                                                                         *2
                                                                                                         t
                                                                                                              *         *


                     + 2 wt*2θ t* (1 − θ t* )(1 + rt − τ t )(1 + rt* − τ t* )Cov ( x t , x t* )

The foreign investor maximizes his utility function to obtain the optimal fraction of his
wealth to allocate to the domestic bond, θˆt* :

         (1 + rt ) Pt + τ t (1 − Pt ) − l t − (1 + rt* ) Pt * − τ * (1 − Pt * ) + l t* +
θˆt* =
                     [
           ρwt* (1 + rt − τ t )2 Pt (1 − Pt ) + (1 + rt* − τ t* ) Pt * (1 − Pt * )
                                                                          2


                                                                                                                                       ( A.6)
                 *          *       * 2      *            *       *                         *    *                 *
         + ρw (1 + rt − τ ) Pt (1 − Pt ) − ρw (1 + rt − τ t )(1 + rt − τ )Cov ( x t , x )
                 t                  t                             t                              t                 t

                                                              (          )
                          − 2(1 + rt − τ t ) 1 + r − τ t* Cov ( x t , x t* )
                                                                  t
                                                                    *
                                                                                            ]

After imposing market clearing equation (1) and rearranging terms we get the final
expression:

                                     ρ                                                          ρ
rt − rt* = (l t − l t* ) + S t
                                     2
                                                 [
                                          Var (1 + rt − τ t ) x t − (1 + rt* − τ t* ) x t* −]   2
                                                                                                                  [                                 ]
                                                                                                     ( wt + wt* ) (1 + rt* − τ t* ) 2 Pt * (1 − Pt * ) +

                                                                                                                                         ( A.7)
                     *
    ρ ( wt + w )
+
           2
                     t
                         [(1 + rt                                                 ]
                                    − τ t )(1 + rt* − τ t* )Cov ( x t , x t* ) + (1 + rt − τ t )(1 − Pt ) − (1 + rt* − τ t* )(1 − P *t )




                                                                                                                                           34
Appendix II

This appendix provides additional details about the definition, sources, and timing of the data used in the
study.46

1. Sovereign Yields Spreads. 3, 5, 7 and 10 years daily sovereign yields are obtained from Datastream.
The dependent variable in equation (4) is defined as the difference between the domestic sovereign yield
and the benchmark yield. The benchmark yield is defined as the weighted average of the EMU
Government yields. The weights are proportional to the portion of debt outstanding by each of the EMU
countries with respect to the total amount outstanding in the EMU. The general governments gross debt
data employed to form the weights are reported in Table 1 and are obtained from the AMECO database.

2. Liquidity (total bond daily turnover volume). Liquidity is proxied by the total daily turnover volume
reported in Datastream. The total turnover volume is obtained as the sum of the turnover volumes of all
the sovereign bonds issued by a given country. This volume is reported in terms of monthly information
on the average daily turnover volume per bond during a given month by Datastream. The turnover
volume for the total number of bonds issued by a given Government derives from trades entered into
TRAX. In equation (4), we employ the deviation of the logarithm of the domestic total bond daily
turnover volume, in million of Euros, from the log of the benchmark total bond daily turnover volume, in
million of Euros.

3. CDS. The daily CDS spreads in the study are obtained from the Datastream system. These CDS
spreads are midmarket indicative prices for three, five, seven and ten year CDS contracts. In all cases, the
CDS contract references the sovereign (as opposed to a central bank or some other entity). For all
countries CDSs are Euro-denominated. CDSs quotes are given in basis points. In equation (4) the
explanatory variable referent to CDSs is obtained as the difference between the domestic and benchmark
(weighted average) CDS spreads lagged one day, in percentages.

4. Debt/GDP. This variable is the ratio between the general Government gross debt at nominal value and
the GDP, obtained from Ecowin. As the frequency of the gross debt is annual, the frequency of this ratio
is also annual. In equation (4), we employ the difference between the domestic and benchmark Debt/GDP
ratios as explanatory variable.

5. Interact.(Debt). This variable is an interaction term representing the product of Debt/GDP and the
monthly standard deviation of the domestic yield minus the benchmark yield. This variable has monthly
frequency.

6. Trade Balance/GDP. This variable is the ratio between the net trade balances at the end of every
month divided by the GDP. The net trade balance data as well as GDP data are obtained from Ecowin.
The frequency of this ratio is monthly. The explanatory variable of equation (4) is obtained as the
deviation of the domestic Trade Balance/GDP ratio from the benchmark equivalent ratio.

7. VIX (Global risk). This variable represents the overall global risk and it is proxied by the Chicago
Board Options Exchange Volatility Index (VIX) (it is a measure of the implied volatility of S&P 500
index options). VIX is obtained from the Reuters system. We take the logarithm of VIX when we employ
it as an explanatory variable. VIX has daily frequency.

8. Corr (domestic, benchmark). This variable is the monthly correlation between the domestic
Government bond yield and the EMU benchmark bond yield. This correlation is reported for the 3, 5, 7
and 10 years maturities. The frequency of this variable is monthly.

9. Yield – CDS. This variable is the difference between the Government yield minus the CDS spread for
the same maturity (3, 5, 7 and 10 years). The deviation of this variable from the benchmark equivalent
measure is employed as dependent variable in equation (5). This variable has daily frequency.



46
  For yearly, quarterly and monthly data we use end of previous year (quarter or month) data. For instance, in the
case of the Debt/GDP variable which has yearly frequency, we use the value at the end of 2004 for the whole year
2005. Thus, we are assuming that investors at any time in 2005 know the value of Debt/GDP variable at the end of
2004 but do not know its 2005 end-of-year value.



                                                                                                              35
                                                 Table A.1: Summary Statistics by country
This table reports the summary statistics of the variables employed in the paper for eleven EMU countries and for the benchmark.
Yield 3y, Yield 5y, Yield 7y and Yield 10y refer to the Government bond yield for a constant maturity of 3, 5, 7 and 10 years, res-
pectively, and they are reported in percentage. Liquidity refers to the total bond daily turnover volume which is measured in millions
of Euros. CDS(-1) is the Credit Default Swap spread (in basis points) lagged one day. Debt/GDP represents the total gross debt
outstanding at the end of the year divided by the GDP at that moment and it is measured in percentage. Interact (Debt) is the pro-
duct of Debt/GDP and the standard deviation of the domestic yield minus the benchmark yield. Trade Balance/GDP refers to the
net trade balance at the end of every month divided by the GDP at that moment and it is reported in percentage. Global Risk is a
measure of the overall risk which is obtained from the Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index (VIX) and it is a measure
of the implied volatility of S&P 500 index options. Corr(domestic, benchmark) represents the monthly correlation between the do-
mestic Government bond yield and the EMU benchmark bond yield. This correlation is obtained for the 3, 5, 7 and 10 years ma-
turities although we only report the correlation corresponding to a maturity of 10 years. (Yield - CDS3y), (Yield - CDS5y), (Yield -
CDS7y), (Yield - CDS10y) are the difference, reported in percentage, between the Government yield and the CDS spread, both
of them with the same constant maturity equal to 3, 5, 7 and 10 years, respectively. For the CDS(-1), (Yield - CDS3y), (Yield -
CDS5y), (Yield - CDS7y) and (Yield - CDS10y), we report the summary statistics after the 5th of September 2005. The reason is
that for some countries these variables present missing values before the previous date. This homogenization of the sample allows
us to compare these variables between different countries and also the benchmark.

Panel 1: Summary statistics for Austria
                                             Obs.      Mean        Std. Dev. Median       Skewness Kurtosis       Max.     Min.
Yield 3y:                      Total           1294      3.380        0.653    3.346        0.189    1.946           4.813    2.224
                                1st period      902      3.213        0.598    3.049        0.490    2.314           4.627    2.224
                               2nd period       392      3.766        0.611    3.941        -0.577   2.577           4.813    2.339
Yield 5y:                      Total           1294      3.593        0.534    3.635        0.064    2.347           4.833    2.500
                                1st period      902      3.444        0.503    3.446        0.247    2.541           4.673    2.500
                               2nd period       392      3.938        0.438    4.027        -0.119   2.352           4.833    3.048
Yield 7y:                      Total           1294      3.781        0.453    3.797        -0.110   2.535           4.816    2.796
                                1st period      902      3.645        0.430    3.723        0.057    2.542           4.717    2.796
                               2nd period       392      4.095        0.330    4.131        0.081    2.572           4.816    3.417
Yield 10y:                     Total           1294      3.982        0.415    4.034        -0.336   2.479           4.886    2.936
                                1st period      902      3.844        0.397    3.897        -0.102   2.306           4.754    2.936
                               2nd period       392      4.299        0.247    4.303        0.105    3.073           4.886    3.711
Liquidity:                      Total          1294       622          206      564         1.156    4.683           1434      311
                                1st period      902       622          190      567         0.811    3.249           1156      328
                               2nd period       392       623          240      545         1.497    5.505           1434      311
CDS(-1):                       Total            877     17.782       42.114    2.300        3.289   13.907         272.270    0.500
                                1st period      485      1.928        0.579    1.900        3.579   23.658           6.400    0.500
                               2nd period       392     37.398       57.233   10.100        1.895    5.819         272.270    2.200
Debt/GDP:                      Total           1294     62.973        2.206   63.700        -0.498   1.814          65.500  59.500
                                1st period      902     64.206        1.203   64.800        -0.699   2.306          65.500  62.000
                               2nd period       392     60.138        1.091   59.500        1.124    2.262          62.000  59.500
Interact. (Debt):               Total          1294      6.034        2.701    5.745        1.175    3.720          13.286    2.551
                                1st period      902      4.943        1.525    4.782        0.469    2.863           9.048    2.551
                               2nd period       392      8.544        3.117    7.824        0.140    1.537          13.286    3.627
Trade Balance/GDP:               Total         1294     -0.002        0.004   -0.001        -0.512   2.736           0.007   -0.012
                                1st period      902     -0.001        0.004   -0.001        -0.570   3.117           0.007   -0.012
                               2nd period       392     -0.003        0.005   -0.002        -0.254   2.107           0.006   -0.012
Global Risk (VIX):                Total        1294     19.092       11.685   14.915        2.616   10.126          80.860    9.890
                                1st period      902     13.711        2.446   13.230        1.077    4.635          25.160    9.890
                               2nd period       392     31.475       14.737   24.985        1.366    3.827          80.860  16.120
Corr(domestic, benchmark):       Total         1294      0.872       0.133     0.917        -2.118   6.970          0.987     0.413
                                1st period      902      0.886        0.096    0.918        -1.685   4.987          0.987     0.597
                               2nd period       392      0.841        0.190    0.904        -1.549   3.789          0.987     0.413
Yield - CDS 3y:                Total            877      3.513       0.834     3.680        -1.484   5.526          4.743     0.011
                                1st period      485      3.575       0.545     3.640        -0.269   2.540          4.618     2.326
                               2nd period       392      3.436        1.085    3.883        -1.304   3.714          4.743     0.011
Yield - CDS 5y:                Total            877      3.621       0.728     3.757        -1.409   5.394          4.745     0.501
                                1st period      485      3.667       0.492     3.714        -0.209   2.658          4.661     2.545
                               2nd period       392      3.564        0.939    3.940        -1.301   3.785          4.745     0.501
Yield - CDS 7y:                Total            877      3.732       0.632     3.842        -1.312   5.043          4.703     1.107
                                1st period      485      3.750       0.437     3.772        -0.072   2.648          4.701     2.792
                               2nd period       392      3.709        0.810    4.011        -1.320   3.749          4.703     1.107
Yield - CDS 10y:               Total            877      3.863       0.554     3.969        -1.181   4.538          4.732     1.670
                                1st period     485       3.837       0.390     3.881        0.043    2.631          4.732     3.032
                               2nd period      392       3.894       0.706     4.173        -1.384   3.803          4.724     1.670




                                                                                                                               36
Panel 2: Summary statistics for Belgium
                                          Obs.    Mean    Std. Dev.   Median   Skewness Kurtosis    Max.       Min.
Yield 3y:                   Total         1294    3.379     0.679      3.395     0.184   1.900      4.963     2.190
                            1st period    902     3.181     0.618      3.004     0.506   2.218      4.588     2.190
                           2nd period     392     3.835     0.588      3.978    -0.549   2.736      4.963     2.403
Yield 5y:                   Total         1294    3.613     0.552      3.634     0.072   2.324      4.968     2.508
                            1st period    902     3.431     0.505      3.410     0.297   2.543      4.654     2.508
                           2nd period     392     4.030     0.411      4.090     0.007   2.433      4.968     3.181
Yield 7y:                   Total         1294    3.798     0.471      3.810    -0.096   2.484      4.924     2.770
                            1st period    902     3.630     0.429      3.700     0.112   2.644      4.689     2.770
                           2nd period     392     4.185     0.305      4.198     0.185   2.574      4.924     3.570
Yield 10y:                  Total         1294    4.014     0.442      4.073    -0.196   2.350      5.043     3.067
                            1st period    902     3.840     0.392      3.891    -0.025   2.279      4.737     3.067
                           2nd period     392     4.412     0.254      4.390     0.164   3.430      5.043     3.402
Liquidity:                   Total        1294    1402       353       1312      0.853   3.803      2803       853
                            1st period    902     1381       354       1274      1.140   4.721      2803       853
                           2nd period     392     1451       346       1400      0.195   2.098      2253       876
CDS(-1):                    Total         877    16.136    28.400      2.500     2.792  10.753     157.750    1.000
                            1st period    485     2.091     0.343      2.000     1.161   8.472      4.500     1.000
                           2nd period     392    33.514    35.489     20.300     1.696   5.038     157.750    2.500
Debt/GDP:                   Total         1294   91.077     5.183     92.100    -0.005   1.769     98.700    83.900
                            1st period    902    93.763     3.666     94.300    -0.100   2.086     98.700    87.800
                           2nd period     392    84.895     1.702     83.900     1.124   2.262     87.800    83.900
Interact. (Debt):            Total        1294    8.725     3.790      8.112     0.986   3.293     17.919     3.589
                            1st period    902     7.104     2.312      6.943     0.596   3.157     13.669    3.589
                           2nd period     392    12.454     3.896     11.673     0.142   1.530     17.919    7.146
Trade Balance/GDP:            Total       1294    0.013     0.010      0.013    -0.585   2.749      0.029    -0.013
                            1st period    902     0.016     0.008      0.018    -0.555   2.435      0.029    -0.003
                           2nd period     392     0.007     0.010      0.008    -0.210   2.464      0.023    -0.013
Global Risk (VIX):             Total      1294   19.092    11.685     14.915     2.616  10.126     80.860     9.890
                            1st period    902    13.711     2.446     13.230     1.077   4.635     25.160    9.890
                           2nd period     392    31.475    14.737     24.985     1.366   3.827     80.860    16.120
Corr(domestic, benchmark):    Total       1294    0.952     0.069      0.977    -2.245   6.705      0.997     0.721
                            1st period    902     0.980     0.012      0.980    -0.955   3.505      0.997     0.949
                           2nd period     392     0.888     0.097      0.925    -0.455   1.563      0.990     0.721
Yield - CDS 3y:             Total         796     3.654     0.691      3.739    -1.465   5.726      4.807     0.960
                            1st period    404     3.747     0.418      3.683     0.096   2.656      4.582     2.833
                           2nd period     392     3.557     0.879      3.911    -1.204   3.693      4.807     0.960
Yield - CDS 5y:             Total         877     3.681     0.595      3.768    -0.763   3.400      4.786     1.652
                            1st period    485     3.669     0.492      3.707    -0.212   2.649      4.632     2.507
                           2nd period     392     3.695     0.702      3.955    -0.980   3.210      4.786     1.652
Yield - CDS 7y:             Total         796     3.851     0.479      3.901    -0.919   4.032      4.709     2.154
                            1st period    404     3.881     0.347      3.855     0.223   3.039      4.653     3.086
                           2nd period     392     3.820     0.583      4.035    -0.982   3.099      4.709     2.154
Yield - CDS 10y:            Total         796     3.987     0.418      4.001    -0.667   3.580      4.776     2.418
                            1st period    404     3.947     0.328      3.925     0.320   3.021      4.692     3.226
                           2nd period     392     4.028     0.491      4.175    -1.073   3.534      4.776     2.418




                                                                                                       37
Panel 3: Summary statistics for Finland
                                          Obs.    Mean    Std. Dev.   Median   Skewness Kurtosis    Max.      Min.
Yield 3y:                   Total         1294    3.351     0.676      3.313     0.185   1.876      4.885    2.080
                            1st period     902    3.194     0.621      3.013     0.535   2.247      4.601    2.195
                           2nd period      392    3.711     0.661      3.912    -0.689   2.675      4.885    2.080
Yield 5y:                   Total         1294    3.565     0.549      3.592     0.111   2.222      4.881    2.467
                            1st period     902    3.423     0.516      3.381     0.320   2.496      4.653    2.467
                           2nd period      392    3.891     0.479      4.000    -0.301   2.412      4.881    2.819
Yield 7y:                   Total         1294    3.739     0.471      3.767    -0.058   2.405      4.827    2.739
                            1st period     902    3.604     0.441      3.681     0.080   2.539      4.670    2.739
                           2nd period      392    4.050     0.383      4.124    -0.282   2.526      4.827    3.219
Yield 10y:                  Total         1294    3.947     0.415      3.989    -0.249   2.365      4.984    3.013
                            1st period     902    3.826     0.402      3.873    -0.062   2.193      4.714    3.013
                           2nd period      392    4.225     0.294      4.257    -0.166   2.855      4.984    3.506
Liquidity:                   Total        1294     239       89         231      1.177   5.381       637      90
                            1st period     902     251       94         234      1.202   5.218       637      99
                           2nd period      392     211       71         202      0.535   2.867       361      90
CDS(-1):                    Total          202   30.879    24.558     18.400     0.661   2.096     93.920    6.500
                            1st period      0       .          .         .          .      .           .        .
                           2nd period      202   30.879    24.558     18.400     0.661   2.096     93.920    6.500
Debt/GDP:                   Total         1294   40.603     3.506     41.300    -0.470   1.805     44.300   35.100
                            1st period     902   42.540     1.961     44.100    -0.574   1.764     44.300   39.200
                           2nd period      392   36.146     1.790     35.100     1.124   2.262     39.200   35.100
Interact. (Debt):            Total        1294    3.940     1.724      3.728     1.062   3.692      8.656    1.691
                            1st period     902    3.218     1.047      3.224     0.370   2.477      5.880    1.691
                           2nd period      392    5.599     1.829      4.720     0.346   1.648      8.656    3.290
Trade Balance/GDP:            Total       1294    0.015     0.009      0.015     0.767   4.271      0.045   -0.003
                            1st period     902    0.017     0.009      0.016     1.011   4.792      0.045    0.000
                           2nd period      392    0.009     0.007      0.006     0.502   2.163      0.023   -0.003
Global Risk (VIX):             Total      1294   19.092    11.685     14.915     2.616  10.126     80.860   9.890
                            1st period     902   13.711     2.446     13.230     1.077   4.635     25.160    9.890
                           2nd period      392   31.475    14.737     24.985     1.366   3.827     80.860   16.120
Corr(domestic, benchmark):    Total       1294    0.961     0.039      0.975    -2.115   7.318      0.995    0.813
                            1st period     902    0.974     0.021      0.977    -2.191   8.657      0.995    0.890
                           2nd period      392    0.931     0.052      0.948    -1.004   2.857      0.988    0.813
Yield - CDS 3y:             Total          202    3.314     1.029      3.408    -0.205   1.571      4.819    1.427
                            1st period      0       .          .         .          .      .           .        .
                           2nd period      202    3.314     1.029      3.408    -0.205   1.571      4.819    1.427
Yield - CDS 5y:             Total          202    3.518     0.841      3.732    -0.181   1.594      4.797    1.903
                            1st period      0       .          .         .          .      .           .        .
                           2nd period      202    3.518     0.841      3.732    -0.181   1.594      4.797    1.903
Yield - CDS 7y:             Total          202    3.674     0.723      3.897    -0.211   1.567      4.724    2.354
                            1st period      0       .          .         .          .      .           .        .
                           2nd period      202    3.674     0.723      3.897    -0.211   1.567      4.724    2.354
Yield - CDS 10y:            Total          202    3.874     0.604      4.074    -0.324   1.670      4.854    2.789
                            1st period      0       .          .         .          .      .           .        .
                           2nd period      202    3.874     0.604      4.074    -0.324   1.670      4.854    2.789




                                                                                                     38
Panel 4: Summary statistics for France
                                         Obs.    Mean    Std. Dev.   Median   Skewness Kurtosis    Max.      Min.
Yield 3y:                   Total        1294    3.332     0.691      3.326     0.137   1.858      4.821   1.900
                            1st period    902    3.175     0.615      2.974     0.550   2.219      4.592   2.216
                           2nd period     392    3.693     0.721      3.954    -0.896   2.913      4.821    1.900
Yield 5y:                   Total        1294    3.556     0.551      3.587     0.095   2.148      4.836    2.524
                            1st period    902    3.427     0.495      3.409     0.341   2.550      4.644    2.540
                           2nd period     392    3.854     0.558      4.012    -0.711   2.756      4.836    2.524
Yield 7y:                   Total        1294    3.742     0.468      3.791    -0.046   2.349      4.864    2.774
                            1st period    902    3.630     0.433      3.718     0.051   2.521      4.687    2.774
                           2nd period     392    4.002     0.441      4.099    -0.514   2.675      4.864    3.018
Yield 10y:                  Total        1294    3.958     0.416      4.006    -0.213   2.275      4.896    3.025
                            1st period    902    3.855     0.408      3.897    -0.062   2.116      4.738    3.025
                           2nd period     392    4.194     0.331      4.248    -0.312   2.792      4.896    3.390
Liquidity:                   Total       1294    4927      1149       5018     -0.210   2.260      7249     2602
                            1st period    902    5024      1149       5036     -0.258   2.264      7249     2602
                           2nd period     392    4702      1120       4772     -0.135   2.279      6732     2725
CDS(-1):                    Total         877   10.220    17.438      2.400     2.716   9.898     96.930    0.500
                            1st period    485    1.954     0.525      1.900     2.796  16.221      5.400    0.500
                           2nd period     392   20.446    22.167     11.000     1.546   4.299     96.930    1.100
Debt/GDP:                   Total        1294   64.338     1.195     63.900     0.638   2.164     66.400   62.900
                            1st period    902   64.562     1.370     64.900     0.142   1.533     66.400   62.900
                           2nd period     392   63.823     0.131     63.900    -1.124   2.262     63.900   63.600
Interact. (Debt):            Total       1294    6.012     3.240      5.106     1.195   3.505     15.143    2.339
                            1st period    902    4.441     1.465      4.254     0.366   1.968      7.400    2.339
                           2nd period     392    9.627     3.312     11.511    -0.067   1.569     15.143   4.840
Trade Balance/GDP:            Total      1294   -0.006     0.004     -0.006     0.016   2.455      0.003   -0.015
                            1st period    902   -0.005     0.003     -0.005     0.190   2.526      0.003   -0.011
                           2nd period     392   -0.011     0.003     -0.010     0.068   1.834     -0.006   -0.015
Global Risk (VIX):             Total     1294   19.092    11.685     14.915     2.616  10.126     80.860   9.890
                            1st period    902   13.711    2.446      13.230     1.077   4.635     25.160   9.890
                           2nd period     392   31.475    14.737     24.985     1.366   3.827     80.860   16.120
Corr(domestic, benchmark):    Total      1294    0.975     0.021      0.980    -2.245   9.125      0.996   0.892
                            1st period    902    0.978    0.018       0.983    -2.352  10.546      0.996   0.904
                           2nd period     392    0.969    0.026       0.973    -1.780   6.097      0.994   0.892
Yield - CDS 3y:             Total         877    3.548     0.725      3.674    -1.017   3.809      4.743    1.137
                            1st period    485    3.569     0.552      3.637    -0.251   2.435      4.586   2.315
                           2nd period     392    3.522     0.894      3.891    -1.089   3.133      4.743   1.137
Yield - CDS 5y:             Total         877    3.655     0.622      3.731    -0.900   3.584      4.746    1.585
                            1st period    485    3.659     0.487      3.699    -0.183   2.564      4.629   2.551
                           2nd period     392    3.650     0.758      3.926    -1.045   3.087      4.746   1.585
Yield - CDS 7y:             Total         877    3.756     0.532      3.838    -0.694   3.137      4.757    2.075
                            1st period    485    3.735     0.438      3.771    -0.086   2.640      4.662   2.746
                           2nd period     392    3.781     0.630      3.991    -0.967   2.967      4.757   2.075
Yield - CDS 10y:            Total         877    3.886     0.452      3.952    -0.483   2.719      4.766   2.599
                            1st period    485    3.831     0.392      3.870     0.057   2.648      4.707   2.990
                           2nd period     392    3.956     0.510      4.103    -0.955   3.007      4.766   2.599




                                                                                                    39
Panel 5: Summary statistics for Germany
                                          Obs.    Mean    Std. Dev.   Median   Skewness Kurtosis    Max.      Min.
Yield 3y:                   Total         1294    3.300     0.696      3.281    -0.019   2.011      4.660    1.613
                            1st period    902     3.187     0.607      2.986     0.530   2.139      4.542    2.255
                           2nd period     392     3.558     0.811      3.872    -1.000   2.860      4.660    1.613
Yield 5y:                   Total         1294    3.519     0.553      3.576    -0.115   2.272      4.655    2.164
                            1st period    902     3.439     0.493      3.402     0.285   2.410      4.607    2.556
                           2nd period     392     3.702     0.635      3.915    -0.922   2.892      4.655    2.164
Yield 7y:                   Total         1294    3.703     0.465      3.771    -0.235   2.369      4.673    2.619
                            1st period    902     3.641     0.433      3.720    -0.015   2.440      4.661    2.767
                           2nd period     392     3.844     0.504      3.984    -0.827   2.902      4.673    2.619
Yield 10y:                  Total         1294    3.919     0.403      3.982    -0.295   2.249      4.728    3.004
                            1st period    902     3.863     0.403      3.914    -0.135   2.187      4.723    3.004
                           2nd period     392     4.047     0.373      4.119    -0.696   2.909      4.728    3.097
Liquidity:                   Total        1294   16813      3878      16668     -0.005   2.441     26414     9037
                            1st period    902    17531      4067      18232     -0.221   2.396     26414     9037
                           2nd period     392    15161      2772      15620     -0.330   1.943     19361     9920
CDS(-1):                    Total         877     8.417    14.874     2.800      3.128  12.961     91.850   0.600
                            1st period    485     2.013     0.491      2.000     0.497   2.923      3.800    0.600
                           2nd period     392    16.340    19.533      7.000     1.855   5.730     91.850   1.600
Debt/GDP:                   Total         1294   65.970     1.501     65.600    -0.009   1.549     67.800   63.800
                            1st period    902    66.071     1.637     65.600    -0.256   1.474     67.800   63.800
                           2nd period     392    65.738     1.091     65.100     1.124   2.262     67.600   65.100
Interact. (Debt):            Total        1294    6.383     3.338      5.887     1.369   4.258     16.735    2.458
                            1st period    902     4.783     1.452      4.635     0.255   1.954      7.868    2.458
                           2nd period     392    10.065     3.533     10.804     0.256   1.813     16.735   5.265
Trade Balance/GDP:            Total       1294    0.026     0.004      0.025     0.003   2.917      0.034    0.015
                            1st period    902     0.025     0.003      0.025     0.614   3.046      0.033    0.020
                           2nd period     392     0.027     0.005      0.028    -0.833   2.891      0.034    0.015
Global Risk (VIX):             Total      1294   19.092    11.685     14.915     2.616  10.126     80.860    9.890
                            1st period    902    13.711     2.446     13.230     1.077   4.635     25.160   9.890
                           2nd period     392    31.475    14.737     24.985     1.366   3.827     80.860   16.120
Corr(domestic, benchmark):    Total       1294    0.981     0.036      0.994    -2.781   9.384      0.999    0.856
                            1st period    902     0.994     0.005      0.995    -1.876   6.817      0.999    0.978
                           2nd period     392     0.952     0.054      0.985    -0.901   2.090      0.997    0.856
Yield - CDS 3y:             Total         877     3.508     0.769      3.683    -1.289   4.531      4.615    0.822
                            1st period    485     3.579     0.538      3.641    -0.297   2.424      4.537    2.342
                           2nd period     392     3.419     0.975      3.832    -1.164   3.179      4.615    0.822
Yield - CDS 5y:             Total         877     3.616     0.653      3.748    -1.232   4.516      4.600    1.283
                            1st period    485     3.679     0.475      3.730    -0.284   2.606      4.597    2.556
                           2nd period     392     3.539     0.815      3.859    -1.161   3.307      4.600    1.283
Yield - CDS 7y:             Total         877     3.719     0.558      3.839    -1.088   4.211      4.646    1.756
                            1st period    485     3.762     0.431      3.812    -0.216   2.666      4.646    2.741
                           2nd period     392     3.667     0.680      3.905    -1.140   3.364      4.605    1.756
Yield - CDS 10y:            Total         877     3.856     0.462      3.947    -0.835   3.614      4.704    2.303
                            1st period    485     3.856     0.387      3.899    -0.060   2.621      4.704    2.973
                           2nd period     392     3.855     0.540      4.025    -1.141   3.464      4.640    2.303




                                                                                                       40
Panel 6: Summary statistics for Greece
                                         Obs.    Mean    Std. Dev.   Median   Skewness Kurtosis     Max.      Min.
Yield 3y:                   Total        1294    3.562     0.736      3.692     0.034   1.789       5.212    2.281
                            1st period    902    3.250     0.630      3.046     0.515   2.122       4.666    2.281
                           2nd period     392    4.280     0.366      4.253     0.293   3.070       5.212    3.470
Yield 5y:                   Total        1294    3.823     0.652      3.825     0.248   2.464       5.962    2.620
                            1st period    902    3.538     0.509      3.488     0.287   2.396       4.748    2.620
                           2nd period     392    4.478     0.439      4.384     0.498   2.837       5.962    3.627
Yield 7y:                   Total        1294    4.024     0.579      4.029     0.304   2.927       6.045    2.878
                            1st period    902    3.762     0.430      3.854     0.003   2.448       4.800    2.878
                           2nd period     392    4.625     0.404      4.528     0.869   3.320       6.045    3.963
Yield 10y:                  Total        1294    4.283     0.514      4.305     0.325   3.142       6.113    3.230
                            1st period    902    4.053     0.384      4.087    -0.066   2.207       4.917    3.230
                           2nd period     392    4.810     0.365      4.707     1.177   4.001       6.113    4.332
Liquidity:                   Total       1294    2872      1560       3143      0.607   3.189       7370      430
                            1st period    902    3494      1355       3431      0.826   3.717       7370     1135
                           2nd period     392    1441       934       1082      1.381   4.164       3808      430
CDS(-1):                    Total         877   40.251    63.893     13.500     2.584   8.690     292.300    4.400
                            1st period    485   10.109     3.610     11.000    -0.135   1.474     16.000     4.400
                           2nd period     392   77.542    81.295     50.000     1.404   3.525     292.300    7.100
Debt/GDP:                   Total        1294   97.123     1.613     97.900    -0.368   1.412      98.800   94.800
                            1st period    902   98.010     1.016     98.600    -1.335   3.297     98.800    95.900
                           2nd period     392   95.081     0.480     94.800     1.124   2.262     95.900    94.800
Interact. (Debt):            Total       1294   10.123     5.657      8.385     1.707   5.854      30.906    3.992
                            1st period    902    7.533     2.258      7.373     0.466   2.450     13.035     3.992
                           2nd period     392   16.082     6.559     14.743     0.566   2.704     30.906     7.389
Trade Balance/GDP:            Total      1294   -0.065    0.008      -0.064    -0.212   2.483      -0.048   -0.083
                            1st period    902   -0.064     0.008     -0.062    -0.484   2.764      -0.048   -0.083
                           2nd period     392   -0.066     0.008     -0.068     0.382   2.500      -0.049   -0.079
Global Risk (VIX):             Total     1294   19.092    11.685     14.915     2.616  10.126      80.860    9.890
                            1st period    902   13.711     2.446     13.230     1.077   4.635     25.160     9.890
                           2nd period     392   31.475    14.737     24.985     1.366   3.827     80.860    16.120
Corr(domestic, benchmark):    Total      1294    0.900     0.189      0.980    -3.281  15.033       0.996   -0.033
                            1st period    902    0.960     0.068      0.985    -2.584   8.125       0.996    0.730
                           2nd period     392    0.764     0.283      0.915    -1.676   5.102       0.994   -0.033
Yield - CDS 3y:             Total         877    3.621     0.674      3.727    -0.765   3.158       4.802    1.515
                            1st period    485    3.621     0.562      3.679    -0.260   2.460       4.643    2.311
                           2nd period     392    3.622     0.791      3.942    -0.945   2.956       4.802    1.515
Yield - CDS 5y:             Total         877    3.707     0.575      3.787    -0.521   2.765       4.800    1.839
                            1st period    485    3.711     0.510      3.756    -0.236   2.589       4.704    2.514
                           2nd period     392    3.702     0.646      3.927    -0.669   2.617       4.800    1.839
Yield - CDS 7y:             Total         877    3.784     0.529      3.857    -0.617   3.037       4.739    1.905
                            1st period    485    3.764     0.464      3.811    -0.180   2.588       4.729    2.707
                           2nd period     392    3.808     0.599      4.023    -0.895   3.098       4.739    1.905
Yield - CDS 10y:            Total         877    3.927     0.479      4.009    -0.864   3.729       4.807    2.069
                            1st period    485    3.900     0.401      3.946    -0.042   2.560       4.807    2.997
                           2nd period     392    3.960     0.559      4.176    -1.283   3.933       4.695    2.069




                                                                                                  41
Panel 7: Summary statistics for Ireland
                                          Obs.    Mean    Std. Dev.   Median   Skewness Kurtosis     Max.      Min.
Yield 3y:                   Total         1294    3.414    0.615       3.448     0.104   1.973       4.889    2.273
                            1st period     902    3.207    0.568       3.044     0.468   2.228       4.566    2.273
                           2nd period      392    3.891    0.427       3.955    -0.052   2.324       4.889    2.599
Yield 5y:                   Total         1294    3.645    0.569       3.668     0.079   2.425       5.125    2.488
                            1st period     902    3.435    0.510       3.447     0.409   3.031       4.833    2.488
                           2nd period      392    4.128    0.371       4.121     0.195   2.453       5.125    3.431
Yield 7y:                   Total         1294    3.806    0.521       3.826     0.107   2.928       5.822    2.719
                            1st period     902    3.604    0.445       3.688     0.091   2.700       4.732    2.719
                           2nd period      392    4.271    0.361       4.237     0.948   4.109       5.822    3.668
Yield 10y:                  Total         1294    3.986    0.484       4.052     0.287   3.538       5.839    3.016
                            1st period     902    3.788    0.384       3.833    -0.179   1.938       4.553    3.016
                           2nd period      392    4.444    0.364       4.381     1.534   5.371       5.839    3.887
Liquidity:                   Total        1294     130       61         117      2.385  10.714        407      58
                            1st period     902     118       42         109      1.198   4.466        296      58
                           2nd period      392     160       83         143      1.920   6.191        407      64
CDS(-1):                    Total          877   31.985    67.372      7.978     3.258  13.546     395.800    1.500
                            1st period     485    4.968    3.933       2.500     1.226   3.392      16.578    1.500
                           2nd period      392   65.413    90.134     27.000     1.921   5.776     395.800    2.800
Debt/GDP:                   Total         1294   27.352    2.511      27.300     0.262   1.502      31.100   24.700
                            1st period     902   28.472    2.213      29.400    -0.412   1.999     31.100    24.700
                           2nd period      392   24.774    0.044      24.800    -1.124   2.262     24.800    24.700
Interact. (Debt):            Total        1294    2.781    1.435       2.410     1.517   5.799       8.026    1.047
                            1st period     902    2.162    0.788       2.155     0.791   3.233       4.105    1.047
                           2nd period      392    4.206    1.570       3.402     0.960   3.590       8.026    1.851
Trade Balance/GDP:            Total       1294    0.056    0.013       0.055     0.466   3.742       0.097    0.023
                            1st period     902    0.058    0.013       0.058     0.596   3.319       0.097    0.035
                           2nd period      392    0.051    0.011       0.050    -0.426   3.505       0.070    0.023
Global Risk (VIX):             Total      1294   19.092    11.685     14.915     2.616  10.126     80.860     9.890
                            1st period     902   13.711    2.446      13.230     1.077   4.635      25.160    9.890
                           2nd period      392   31.475    14.737     24.985     1.366   3.827      80.860   16.120
Corr(domestic, benchmark):    Total       1294    0.899    0.136       0.951    -2.833  12.018       0.994   0.263
                            1st period     902    0.937    0.062       0.959    -2.347   7.966       0.987    0.707
                           2nd period      392    0.810    0.203       0.896    -1.427   4.321       0.994    0.263
Yield - CDS 3y:             Total          877    3.445    0.823       3.684    -1.710   6.459       4.663   -0.127
                            1st period     485    3.546    0.497       3.638    -0.335   2.814       4.551    2.316
                           2nd period      392    3.320    1.088       3.811    -1.346   3.895       4.663   -0.127
Yield - CDS 5y:             Total          877    3.571    0.743       3.697    -1.359   5.484       4.813    0.507
                            1st period     485    3.650    0.484       3.676     0.149   3.225       4.813    2.479
                           2nd period      392    3.474    0.964       3.797    -1.190   3.520       4.743    0.507
Yield - CDS 7y:             Total          877    3.656    0.625       3.759    -1.290   5.087       4.707    1.302
                            1st period     485    3.700    0.428       3.723     0.089   3.031       4.707    2.681
                           2nd period      392    3.602    0.802       3.877    -1.241   3.533       4.630    1.302
Yield - CDS 10y:            Total          877    3.747    0.516       3.852    -1.404   5.161       4.555    1.795
                            1st period     485    3.740    0.346       3.774    -0.223   2.381       4.471    2.964
                           2nd period      392    3.755    0.671       4.030    -1.429   3.937       4.555    1.795




                                                                                                     42
Panel 8: Summary statistics for Italy
                                         Obs.     Mean    Std. Dev.   Median Skewness Kurtosis     Max.       Min.
Yield 3y:                   Total        1294     3.451     0.690       3.521  0.171   1.844       5.024     2.297
                            1st period    902     3.224     0.616       3.016  0.542   2.160       4.622     2.297
                           2nd period     392     3.974     0.557       4.093 -0.649   3.228       5.024     2.569
Yield 5y:                   Total        1294     3.712     0.569       3.769  0.087   2.235       5.094     2.632
                            1st period    902     3.507     0.506       3.456  0.335   2.391       4.718    2.632
                           2nd period     392     4.184     0.402       4.207  0.029   2.876       5.094    3.275
Yield 7y:                   Total        1294     3.931     0.499       3.992 -0.090   2.494       5.169    2.872
                            1st period    902     3.740     0.444       3.821  0.061   2.400       4.801    2.872
                           2nd period     392    4.370      0.305       4.332  0.678   3.021       5.169    3.841
Yield 10y:                  Total        1294     4.189     0.458       4.261 -0.262   2.398       5.243    3.150
                            1st period    902     4.009     0.409       4.060 -0.113   2.145       4.903    3.150
                           2nd period     392    4.604      0.247       4.564  0.663   3.064       5.243    4.132
Liquidity:                   Total       1294    11772      7520       10137   0.887   3.056      33001      2504
                            1st period    902    14029      7513       12919   0.617   2.769      33001      3088
                           2nd period     392     6579      4262        5096   2.082   6.653      20595      2504
CDS(-1):                    Total         877    31.212    44.519      10.800  2.441   7.937     198.400    5.300
                            1st period    485     9.289     2.158       9.000  0.248   2.362      13.800    5.300
                           2nd period     392    58.336    55.685      39.400  1.295   3.233     198.400    7.800
Debt/GDP:                   Total        1294   104.995    1.183      104.400  0.580   1.677     106.900   103.800
                            1st period    902   105.074    1.157      104.400  0.340   1.576     106.900   103.800
                           2nd period     392   104.814     1.222     104.100  1.124   2.262     106.900   104.100
Interact. (Debt):            Total       1294    9.311     4.191        8.310  0.991   3.136      20.199    3.492
                            1st period    902    7.379     2.281        7.136  0.500   2.636     12.672     3.492
                           2nd period     392    13.757     4.204      14.847 -0.135   1.698      20.199    7.447
Trade Balance/GDP:            Total      1294    -0.003    0.005       -0.003  0.339   3.709       0.010    -0.013
                            1st period    902    -0.003    0.004       -0.003  0.531   3.999       0.010    -0.012
                           2nd period     392    -0.003     0.005      -0.003 -0.014   3.066       0.006    -0.013
Global Risk (VIX):             Total     1294    19.092    11.685      14.915  2.616  10.126      80.860    9.890
                            1st period    902    13.711     2.446      13.230  1.077   4.635      25.160     9.890
                           2nd period     392    31.475    14.737      24.985  1.366   3.827      80.860    16.120
Corr(domestic, benchmark):    Total      1294     0.969     0.066       0.992 -3.165  12.300       0.999     0.678
                            1st period    902     0.992     0.007       0.994 -1.541   4.842       0.999    0.970
                           2nd period     392     0.917     0.103       0.978 -1.203   3.035       0.993    0.678
Yield - CDS 3y:             Total         877     3.546     0.790       3.693 -1.303   4.678       4.734    0.774
                            1st period    485     3.581     0.553       3.638 -0.240   2.446       4.594    2.306
                           2nd period     392    3.502      1.008       3.955 -1.267   3.458       4.734    0.774
Yield - CDS 5y:             Total         877     3.650     0.689       3.768 -1.143   4.191       4.784    1.307
                            1st period    485     3.690     0.494       3.731 -0.208   2.594       4.662    2.544
                           2nd period     392    3.601      0.871       3.976 -1.108   3.093       4.784    1.307
Yield - CDS 7y:             Total         877     3.762     0.588       3.862 -0.880   3.504       4.816    1.899
                            1st period    485     3.775     0.451       3.815 -0.152   2.674       4.718    2.727
                           2nd period     392    3.746      0.722       4.037 -0.979   2.862       4.816    1.899
Yield - CDS 10y:            Total         877     3.899     0.489       3.967 -0.558   2.823       4.828    2.472
                            1st period    485     3.863     0.411       3.909 -0.003   2.644       4.786    2.941
                           2nd period     392    3.943      0.568       4.157 -0.908   2.809       4.828    2.472




                                                                                                 43
Panel 9: Summary statistics for Netherlands
                                              Obs.    Mean    Std. Dev.   Median   Skewness Kurtosis    Max.       Min.
Yield 3y:                   Total             1294    3.339     0.660     3.375      0.124   1.876      4.796    2.048
                            1st period        902     3.177     0.609     3.004      0.523   2.248      4.596    2.217
                           2nd period         392     3.712     0.623     3.893     -0.891   3.236      4.796    2.048
Yield 5y:                   Total             1294    3.556     0.533     3.599      0.091   2.249      4.815    2.515
                            1st period        902     3.423     0.500     3.406      0.302   2.547      4.655    2.515
                           2nd period         392     3.860     0.480      3.965    -0.414   2.597      4.815     2.722
Yield 7y:                   Total             1294    3.747     0.455      3.772    -0.016   2.455      4.904     2.779
                            1st period        902     3.631     0.428      3.707     0.074   2.567      4.682     2.779
                           2nd period         392     4.014     0.400      4.089    -0.238   2.503      4.904     3.145
Yield 10y:                  Total             1294    3.970     0.409      4.032    -0.289   2.340      4.854     3.061
                            1st period        902     3.845     0.399      3.901    -0.026   2.205      4.774     3.061
                           2nd period         392     4.256     0.263      4.265    -0.178   3.078      4.854     3.513
Liquidity:                   Total            1294    1166       287       1225     -0.056   2.480      1892       547
                            1st period        902     1111       271       1120      0.081   2.573      1892       547
                           2nd period         392     1292       284       1331     -0.546   3.066      1842       578
CDS(-1):                    Total             877    12.279    25.174      2.750     3.071  11.592     131.000    1.000
                            1st period        485     1.939     0.767      1.690     2.452   9.440      5.230     1.000
                           2nd period         392    25.071    33.502      9.500     1.755   4.697     131.000    1.900
Debt/GDP:                   Total             1294   49.719     2.817     51.800    -0.417   1.327     52.400    45.700
                            1st period        902    51.277     1.768     52.000    -1.693   3.985     52.400    47.400
                           2nd period         392    46.134     0.742     45.700     1.124   2.262     47.400    45.700
Interact. (Debt):            Total            1294    4.852     2.191      4.402     0.941   3.186     10.610     1.920
                            1st period        902     3.866     1.262      3.612     0.360   2.290      6.855     1.920
                           2nd period         392     7.122     2.191      7.317    -0.024   1.725     10.610     3.909
Trade Balance/GDP:            Total           1294    0.024     0.005      0.024     0.169   2.482      0.036     0.013
                            1st period        902     0.023     0.005      0.023     0.178   2.454      0.034     0.013
                           2nd period         392     0.025     0.005      0.025     0.074   2.459      0.036     0.014
Global Risk (VIX):             Total          1294   19.092    11.685     14.915     2.616  10.126     80.860     9.890
                            1st period        902    13.711     2.446     13.230     1.077   4.635     25.160    9.890
                           2nd period         392    31.475    14.737     24.985     1.366   3.827     80.860    16.120
Corr(domestic, benchmark):    Total           1294    0.937     0.049      0.946    -1.581   5.750      0.991     0.765
                            1st period        902     0.940     0.044      0.952    -1.437   4.643      0.988     0.808
                           2nd period         392     0.929     0.057      0.935    -1.538   5.574      0.991     0.765
Yield - CDS 3y:             Total             877     3.531     0.728      3.666    -1.249   4.770      4.718     0.863
                            1st period        485     3.560     0.548      3.625    -0.266   2.510      4.583     2.296
                           2nd period         392     3.495     0.901      3.832    -1.324   3.907      4.718     0.863
Yield - CDS 5y:             Total             877     3.636     0.632      3.738    -0.999   3.933      4.720     1.466
                            1st period        485     3.657     0.490      3.700    -0.200   2.639      4.639     2.528
                           2nd period         392     3.610     0.773      3.876    -1.104   3.276      4.720     1.466
Yield - CDS 7y:             Total             877     3.742     0.561      3.825    -0.830   3.414      4.784     2.011
                            1st period        485     3.739     0.439      3.768    -0.073   2.627      4.663     2.749
                           2nd period         392     3.747     0.683      3.995    -1.020   2.958      4.784     2.011
Yield - CDS 10y:            Total             877     3.899     0.469      3.990    -0.726   3.213      4.750     2.398
                            1st period        485     3.840     0.395      3.887     0.113   2.589      4.750     3.026
                           2nd period         392     3.972     0.540      4.133    -1.314   3.782      4.704     2.398




                                                                                                           44
Panel 10: Summary statistics for Portugal
                                            Obs.    Mean    Std. Dev.   Median   Skewness Kurtosis     Max.      Min.
Yield 3y:                   Total           1294    3.431     0.683      3.506     0.134   1.878       4.981    2.225
                            1st period       902    3.212     0.628      3.004     0.489   2.104       4.636    2.225
                           2nd period        392    3.934     0.520      4.048    -0.383   2.870       4.981    2.650
Yield 5y:                   Total           1294    3.661     0.551      3.715    -0.034   2.313       4.965    2.547
                            1st period       902    3.471     0.511      3.445     0.244   2.397       4.680    2.547
                           2nd period        392    4.099     0.357      4.117     0.316   2.742       4.965    3.418
Yield 7y:                   Total           1294    3.839     0.477      3.897    -0.198   2.428       4.957    2.781
                            1st period       902    3.667     0.440      3.751     0.044   2.428       4.699    2.781
                           2nd period        392    4.236     0.280      4.242     0.347   2.888       4.957    3.638
Yield 10y:                  Total           1294    4.118     0.446      4.189    -0.275   2.365       5.128    3.011
                            1st period       902    3.942     0.399      3.994    -0.100   2.227       4.833    3.011
                           2nd period        392    4.524     0.237      4.507     0.367   2.997       5.128    3.913
Liquidity:                   Total          1294     467       187        456      0.324   2.252        888      159
                            1st period       902     493       178        476      0.326   2.372        888      201
                           2nd period        392     406       192        368      0.547   2.146        801      159
CDS(-1):                    Total            877   24.101    32.091      8.200     2.183   7.245     163.200    3.400
                            1st period       485    6.171     1.700      6.000     0.101   1.615       9.500    3.400
                           2nd period        392   46.285    37.569     37.000     1.208   3.509     163.200    6.600
Debt/GDP:                   Total           1294   61.518     3.137     63.600    -0.483   1.388      64.700   56.900
                            1st period       902   60.491     3.246     58.300     0.166   1.178     64.700    56.900
                           2nd period        392   63.881     0.480     63.600     1.124   2.262     64.700    63.600
Interact. (Debt):            Total          1294    5.897     2.868      5.453     1.085   3.445      13.741    1.796
                            1st period       902    4.516     1.468      4.295     0.435   2.413       7.710    1.796
                           2nd period        392    9.076     2.775      8.828     0.114   1.632     13.741     5.274
Trade Balance/GDP:            Total         1294   -0.049    0.007      -0.049     0.140   2.474      -0.033   -0.063
                            1st period       902   -0.046     0.006     -0.048     0.558   2.709      -0.033   -0.055
                           2nd period        392   -0.056     0.006     -0.057     1.278   4.195      -0.040   -0.063
Global Risk (VIX):             Total        1294   19.092    11.685     14.915     2.616  10.126      80.860    9.890
                            1st period       902   13.711     2.446     13.230     1.077   4.635     25.160     9.890
                           2nd period        392   31.475    14.737     24.985     1.366   3.827     80.860    16.120
Corr(domestic, benchmark):    Total         1294    0.922     0.096      0.945    -2.987  12.274       0.998    0.513
                            1st period       902    0.942     0.044      0.952    -0.706   2.729       0.998   0.831
                           2nd period        392    0.875     0.152      0.935    -1.608   3.961       0.988   0.513
Yield - CDS 3y:             Total            877    3.583     0.685      3.719    -0.985   3.823       4.727    1.166
                            1st period       485    3.597     0.553      3.676    -0.327   2.514       4.614    2.295
                           2nd period        392    3.565     0.820      3.895    -1.127   3.438       4.727    1.166
Yield - CDS 5y:             Total            877    3.661     0.566      3.759    -0.652   2.966       4.667    1.839
                            1st period       485    3.681     0.493      3.734    -0.276   2.671       4.638    2.498
                           2nd period        392    3.636     0.645      3.857    -0.787   2.706       4.667    1.839
Yield - CDS 7y:             Total            877    3.731     0.494      3.797    -0.481   2.574       4.640    2.453
                            1st period       485    3.730     0.450      3.761    -0.119   2.578       4.640    2.711
                           2nd period        392    3.732     0.543      3.923    -0.727   2.435       4.555    2.453
Yield - CDS 10y:            Total            877    3.928     0.421      3.967    -0.342   2.447       4.749    2.706
                            1st period       485    3.880     0.398      3.921     0.048   2.558       4.749    3.032
                           2nd period        392    3.988     0.441      4.118    -0.785   2.716       4.663    2.706




                                                                                                     45
Panel 11: Summary statistics for Spain
                                         Obs.    Mean    Std. Dev.   Median   Skewness Kurtosis     Max.      Min.
Yield 3y:                   Total        1294    3.368    0.679       3.416     0.188   1.870       4.891    2.205
                            1st period    902    3.167    0.622       2.972     0.538   2.229       4.591    2.205
                           2nd period     392    3.831    0.568       3.980    -0.520   2.664       4.891    2.504
Yield 5y:                   Total        1294    3.602    0.547       3.628     0.075   2.293       4.891    2.525
                            1st period    902    3.424    0.505       3.393     0.332   2.526       4.655    2.525
                           2nd period     392    4.011    0.400       4.085     0.058   2.360       4.891    3.275
Yield 7y:                   Total        1294    3.786    0.470       3.816    -0.097   2.454       4.909    2.785
                            1st period    902    3.626    0.434       3.707     0.093   2.529       4.692    2.785
                           2nd period     392    4.153    0.321       4.185     0.084   2.581       4.909    3.519
Yield 10y:                  Total        1294    4.001    0.437       4.057    -0.252   2.322       4.958    3.044
                            1st period    902    3.835    0.397       3.878    -0.022   2.245       4.742    3.044
                           2nd period     392    4.385    0.238       4.367     0.307   2.795       4.958    3.850
Liquidity:                   Total       1294    3140      2010       3679      0.330   2.270       8418      429
                            1st period    902    3958      1777       3997     -0.021   3.016       8418      703
                           2nd period     392    1255       987        941      2.280   7.197       4431      429
CDS(-1):                    Total         877   22.516    34.635      4.600     2.231   7.501     170.000    1.500
                            1st period    485    3.022    0.866       2.750     1.248   3.888       5.800    1.500
                           2nd period     392   46.636    40.397     35.800     1.286   3.677     170.000    3.200
Debt/GDP:                   Total        1294   42.497    4.533      43.000    -0.069   1.618     48.700    36.200
                            1st period    902   44.857    3.183      46.200    -0.327   1.877     48.700    39.600
                           2nd period     392   37.067    1.484      36.200     1.124   2.262     39.600    36.200
Interact. (Debt):            Total       1294    3.781    1.650       3.567     1.156   4.442       9.063    1.230
                            1st period    902    3.245    1.114       3.289     0.162   2.062       5.333    1.230
                           2nd period     392    5.013    1.990       4.185     0.645   2.176       9.063    2.656
Trade Balance/GDP:            Total      1294   -0.029    0.004      -0.029     0.618   3.526      -0.016   -0.037
                            1st period    902   -0.028    0.004      -0.029     0.612   3.437      -0.017   -0.037
                           2nd period     392   -0.030    0.005      -0.029     0.842   3.796      -0.016   -0.037
Global Risk (VIX):             Total     1294   19.092    11.685     14.915     2.616  10.126     80.860     9.890
                            1st period    902   13.711    2.446      13.230     1.077   4.635      25.160    9.890
                           2nd period     392   31.475    14.737     24.985     1.366   3.827      80.860   16.120
Corr(domestic, benchmark):    Total      1294    0.948    0.071       0.972    -2.746   9.864       0.996    0.684
                            1st period    902    0.964    0.055       0.981    -4.419  22.769       0.996    0.684
                           2nd period     392    0.909    0.086       0.947    -1.509   4.010       0.985    0.691
Yield - CDS 3y:             Total         877    3.510    0.731       3.660    -1.128   4.164       4.627    0.943
                            1st period    485    3.556    0.558       3.645    -0.290   2.502       4.560    2.269
                           2nd period     392    3.452    0.898       3.831    -1.160   3.332       4.627    0.943
Yield - CDS 5y:             Total         877    3.602    0.610       3.723    -0.845   3.366       4.621    1.579
                            1st period    485    3.649    0.493       3.694    -0.213   2.602       4.621    2.524
                           2nd period     392    3.545    0.726       3.830    -0.913   2.761       4.577    1.579
Yield - CDS 7y:             Total         877    3.686    0.530       3.790    -0.744   3.121       4.640    2.037
                            1st period    485    3.716    0.438       3.753    -0.079   2.581       4.640    2.747
                           2nd period     392    3.648    0.623       3.881    -0.898   2.632       4.509    2.037
Yield - CDS 10y:            Total         877    3.824    0.446       3.890    -0.649   3.070       4.667    2.395
                            1st period    485    3.805    0.386       3.838     0.114   2.556       4.667    2.998
                           2nd period     392    3.846    0.510       4.031    -1.089   3.168       4.547    2.395




                                                                                                    46
Panel 12: Summary statistics for the benchmark
                                           Obs.    Mean    Std. Dev.   Median   Skewness Kurtosis     Max.      Min.
Yield 3y:                      Total       1294    3.373    0.676       3.385     0.174   1.820       4.836    2.229
                               1st period   902    3.196    0.613       2.996     0.534   2.179       4.589    2.253
                              2nd period    392    3.780    0.639       3.977    -0.766   2.868       4.836    2.229
Yield 5y:                      Total       1294    3.608    0.542       3.646     0.102   2.193       4.873    2.571
                               1st period   902    3.457    0.500       3.424     0.313   2.460       4.660    2.571
                              2nd period    392    3.954    0.470       4.055    -0.388   2.593       4.873    2.898
Yield 7y:                      Total       1294    3.802    0.461       3.830    -0.082   2.476       4.899    2.805
                               1st period   902    3.668    0.435       3.749     0.041   2.474       4.714   2.805
                              2nd period    392    4.110    0.361       4.160    -0.069   2.534       4.899   3.376
Yield 10y:                     Total       1294    4.031    0.413       4.086    -0.308   2.463       4.956   3.068
                               1st period   902    3.903    0.402       3.962    -0.098   2.174       4.786   3.068
                              2nd period    392    4.325    0.260       4.329     0.311   2.776       4.956   3.766
Liquidity:                      Total      1294    9109      3178       9088      0.363   2.635      17573     3973
                               1st period   902   10047      3148      10433      0.015   2.813      17573     4041
                              2nd period    392    6950      1964       6844      0.837   3.419      12102     3973
CDS(-1):                       Total        877   18.331    28.873      5.360     2.614   9.022     145.582    2.541
                               1st period   485    4.450    0.730       4.379    -0.026   2.496       5.904   2.541
                              2nd period    392   35.506    36.500     21.425     1.452   3.781     145.582   4.349
Debt/GDP:                      Total       1294   75.235    1.396      75.562    -0.648   2.400     77.014    72.229
                               1st period   902   75.911    0.730      75.562     0.621   1.802      77.014   75.143
                              2nd period    392   73.680    1.317      73.034     0.997   2.223      75.891   72.229
Interact. (Debt):               Total      1294    1.439    1.498       0.938     3.040  12.103       7.509    0.479
                               1st period   902    0.816    0.283       0.796     1.476   6.031       1.817    0.479
                              2nd period    392    2.871    2.070       2.063     1.495   3.703       7.509    1.158
Trade Balance/GDP:               Total     1294    0.002    0.002       0.002    -0.018   2.842       0.008   -0.003
                               1st period   902    0.003    0.002       0.003     0.104   2.955       0.008   -0.003
                              2nd period    392    0.001    0.002       0.001    -0.215   1.819       0.005   -0.003
Global Risk (VIX):                Total    1294   19.092    11.685     14.915     2.616  10.126      80.860    9.890
                               1st period   902   13.711    2.446      13.230     1.077   4.635      25.160    9.890
                              2nd period    392   31.475    14.737     24.985     1.366   3.827      80.860   16.120
Corr(domestic, benchmark):       Total     1294    0.922    0.096       0.945    -2.987  12.274       0.998   0.513
                               1st period   902    0.942    0.044       0.952    -0.706   2.729       0.998    0.831
                              2nd period    392    0.875    0.152       0.935    -1.608   3.961       0.988    0.513
Yield - CDS 3y:                Total        877    3.536    0.751       3.680    -1.189   4.326       4.686   0.921
                               1st period   485    3.576    0.549       3.640    -0.268   2.453       4.574   2.315
                              2nd period    392    3.486    0.942       3.888    -1.181   3.315       4.686   0.921
Yield - CDS 5y:                Total        877    3.641    0.643       3.748    -1.032   3.917       4.694   1.448
                               1st period   485    3.675    0.487       3.723    -0.224   2.603       4.632   2.546
                              2nd period    392    3.599    0.794       3.913    -1.069   3.097       4.694   1.448
Yield - CDS 7y:                Total        877    3.743    0.553       3.839    -0.849   3.446       4.694   1.971
                               1st period   485    3.753    0.441       3.795    -0.146   2.649       4.672   2.737
                              2nd period    392    3.730    0.666       3.980    -1.004   2.963       4.694   1.971
Yield - CDS 10y:               Total        877    3.880    0.465       3.948    -0.630   2.973       4.728    2.497
                               1st period   485    3.847    0.396       3.893     0.006   2.615       4.728   2.975
                              2nd period    392    3.920    0.536       4.105    -1.027   3.073       4.695   2.497




                                                                                                      47
                                      Table 1: General Government Gross Debt
This table reports the total gross government debt outstanding at the end of the year for eleven EMU members
for the period 2003-2008 in billions (milliards) of Euros. It also reports the proportion of the total debt outstanding
by each of the EMU members.

                               2003         2004            2005       2006                      2007           2008
Austria:     Amount outs.     150.7        155.8           159.5        161                      176.4          193.2
            % of the total    2.78%        2.75%           2.75%      2.73%                     2.76%          2.77%
Belgium:    Amount outs.      273.2        278.6           279.7       281.2                     308.7          325.7
            % of the total    5.04%        4.91%           4.82%      4.77%                     4.83%          4.68%
Finland:    Amount outs.      67.24        65.05           65.54       63.03                     62.14          71.61
            % of the total    1.24%        1.15%           1.13%      1.07%                     0.97%          1.03%
France:     Amount outs.     1076.9       1145.4          1149.9      1208.8                    1327.1         1531.6
            % of the total   19.87%       20.20%          19.83%     20.50%                     20.78%        21.99%
Germany: Amount outs.        1451.1       1521.9            1569      1576.6                    1641.8         1752.7
           % of the total    26.77%       26.83%          27.05%     26.74%                     25.71%        25.17%
Greece:    Amount outs.       183.2        195.3           204.4       216.4                     237.2          254.1
          % of the total      3.38%        3.44%           3.52%      3.67%                     3.71%          3.65%
Ireland:    Amount outs.       43.9         44.6            44.2       47.6                       80.3          102.1
          % of the total      0.81%        0.79%           0.76%      0.81%                     1.26%          1.47%
Italy:     Amount outs.      1444.6       1512.8            1582       1599                     1663.6         1732.1
          % of the total     26.65%       26.67%          27.28%     27.12%                     26.05%        24.87%
Netherlands: Amount outs.     257.6        266.1           255.9       258.8                     346.2          332.2
           % of the total     4.75%        4.69%           4.41%      4.39%                     5.42%          4.77%
Portugal:   Amount outs.        84          94.8           100.5       103.7                     110.4          123.4
           % of the total     1.55%        1.67%           1.73%      1.76%                     1.73%          1.77%
Spain:      Amount outs.      388.4          391           389.4       380.7                     432.5          545.4
           % of the total     7.16%        6.89%           6.71%      6.46%                     6.77%          7.83%
Total:      Amount outs.    5420.84      5671.35         5800.04     5896.83                   6386.34        6964.11
           % of the total   100.00%      100.00%         100.00%    100.00%                    100.00%        100.00%
Source: Ameco Database. Economic and Financial Affairs, European Commission.




                                                                                                                  48
                                                                    Table 2: Correlation between explanatory variables
This table reports the correlation between the dependent and explanatory variables employed in equations (4), (5) and (7). Gov. Yield refers to the difference between the domestic
Government yield and the benchmark yield. CDS(-1) refers to the difference between the domestic and benchmark CDS spreads (in percentage) lagged one day. Liquidity
represents the deviation of the logarithm of the domestic total bond daily turnover volume, in millions of Euros, from the log of the benchmark total bond daily turnover volume
Debt/GDP refers to the difference between the domestic and benchmark total gross debt outstanding at the end of the year divided by the corresponding GDP at that moment.
GDP at that moment. Inter. (Debt) is an interaction term that represents the product of Debt/GDP and the standard deviation of the domestic yield minus the benchmark yield.
Trade Balance/GDP refers to the deviation of the domestic net trade balance at the end of every month divided by the GDP from the benchmark equivalent measure. Global Risk
is a measure of the overall risk which is obtained from the Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index (VIX) and it is a measure of the implied volatility of S&P 500 index options.
Corr( dom. & bnchmk y.) is the monthly correlation between the domestic Government bond yield and the EMU benchmark bond yield. Yield - CDS refers to the deviation of the
domestic Government yield minus the CDS spread for the same maturity from the benchmark equivalent measure. Gov. Yield is employed as dependent variable in equations
(4) and (7) while Yield - CDS is the dependent variable in equation (5). Panel 1 reports the correlations for the whole sample while Panel 2 and 3 report the correlations before
09/08/2007 and after this date, respectively.

Panel 1
Observations = 44062               Gov. Yield        CDS(-1)           Liquidity       Debt/GDP         Inter. (Debt)   Trade Bal./GDP     Global Risk    Corr(dom&bchmk)       Yield - CDS
Gov. Yield
CDS(-1)                              0.849
Liquidity                            -0.014           -0.073
Debt/GDP                              0.290            0.142             0.600
Inter. (Debt)                        0.608             0.535            -0.016           0.180
Trade Bal./GDP                       -0.275           -0.144            -0.210           -0.476            -0.170
Global Risk: log(VIX)                 0.224            0.192             0.024           -0.045             0.540            0.011
Corr( dom. & bnchmk y.)              -0.398           -0.481             0.241           0.137             -0.725           -0.045            -0.333
Yield - CDS                          0.311            -0.219             0.073           0.245              0.169           -0.208            0.053              0.115

Panel 2
Observations = 27574               Gov. Yield        CDS(-1)           Liquidity       Debt/GDP         Inter. (Debt)   Trade Bal./GDP     Global Risk    Corr(dom&bchmk)       Yield - CDS
Gov. Yield
CDS(-1)                              0.607
Liquidity                             0.316            0.180
Debt/GDP                              0.600            0.486             0.638
Inter. (Debt)                        0.184             0.019            -0.152           0.190
Trade Bal./GDP                       -0.498           -0.426            -0.329           -0.504            -0.245
Global Risk: log(VIX)                 0.077            0.008             0.013           0.035              0.119            0.020
Corr( dom. & bnchmk y.)              0.147             0.082             0.378           0.300             -0.548           -0.136            0.072
Yield - CDS                          0.710             0.013             0.217           0.369              0.272           -0.273            0.121              0.096

Panel 3
Observations = 16488               Gov. Yield        CDS(-1)           Liquidity       Debt/GDP         Inter. (Debt)   Trade Bal./GDP     Global Risk    Corr(dom&bchmk)       Yield - CDS
Gov. Yield
CDS(-1)                              0.865
Liquidity                            -0.172           -0.181
Debt/GDP                              0.297            0.163           0.5349
Inter. (Debt)                        0.631             0.546           -0.0098           0.330
Trade Bal./GDP                       -0.295           -0.164           0.0394            -0.428            -0.247
Global Risk: log(VIX)                 0.192            0.163           -0.0153           -0.018             0.448            0.041
Corr( dom. & bnchmk y.)              -0.461           -0.533           0.2294             0.039            -0.758            0.002            -0.370
Yield - CDS                          0.269            -0.242           0.0142            0.249              0.175           -0.234            0.066              0.125




                                                                                                                                                                  49
         Table 3: Determinants of the deviations between the Government Yield and the Benchmark Yield
This table reports the results of the unbalanced panel regressions. The dependent variable is the deviations between
the Government yields and the Benchmark yields which are obtained as the weighted average of the Governments
yields of the different European Monetary Union countries in the sample. The weights are proportional to the portion
of debt outstanding by each of the EMU countries with respect to the total amount outstanding by all these countries.
Our database is formed by eleven EMU countries and spans from January 2004 to February 2009. All the variables
(dependent and explanatory) except the measure of global risk and the measure of correlation between the domestic
Government and benchmark yields are presented in deviations from the value of the same variable for the benchmark.
We group the panels by country and maturity (3, 5, 7 and 10 years) such that we have, at most, 44 groups which
form an overall unbalanced panel. We estimate the coefficients of the determinants of deviations between yields by
means of a Prais-Winsten regression with correlated panels corrected standard errors (PCSEs) and robust to hete-
roskedasticity, contemporaneous correlation across panels and serial autocorrelation within panels. The correlation
within panels is treated as a first-order autocorrelation AR(1) and the coefficient of this process common to all the
panels. Each element in the covariance matrix of the disturbances is computed with all available observations that
are common to the two panels contributing to the covariance. Column (1) reports the results for the whole sample,
Column (2) reports the results for the period before the crisis (January 2004 - August 2007) and Column (3) includes
the results for the crisis period (August 2007 - February 2009). The results presented correspond to the estimated
coefficient and the t-statistic (between brackets).
                                                                             (1)                  (2)             (3)
CDS(-1)                                                                    0.540                0.401           0.548
                                                                         (40.27)               (12.70)        (25.78)
Log (Total bond daily turnover volume)                                    -0.011                0.000          -0.032
                                                                          (-5.92)               (0.11)         (-5.95)
Total debt issued divided by GDP                                           0.145                0.093           0.262
                                                                         (12.20)               (16.45)          (8.72)
Interation of total debt divided by GDP and the standard de-               1.254                0.488           1.219
   viation of the domestic yield minus the benchmark yield               (12.78)                (2.62)          (6.97)
Net Trade Balance divided by GDP                                         -49.427              -41.960         -69.228
                                                                          (-6.42)             (-12.12)         (-3.54)
Global risk measure: log(VIX index)                                        0.014                0.007           0.017
                                                                           (4.97)               (3.32)          (2.55)
Correlation between domestic Government yield and EMU                      0.077                0.009           0.092
  benchmark Government Yield                                               (4.56)               (0.51)          (2.85)
Dummy for the 3-year yield                                                 0.013                0.020          -0.003
                                                                           (3.99)              (14.18)         (-0.33)
Dummy for the 5-year yield                                                 0.012                0.014           0.007
                                                                           (4.28)               (9.61)          (0.98)
Dummy for the 7-year yield                                                 0.005                0.005           0.002
                                                                           (2.23)               (4.06)          (0.50)
Constant                                                                  -0.137               -0.039          -0.162
                                                                          (-7.41)              (-2.14)         (-4.08)
Autorregressive (AR(1)) coefficient                                        0.899                0.833           0.894
R-squared                                                                  0.199                0.119           0.253
Observations                                                              47904                 31416          16488
Number of groups                                                              44                  40              44
Observations per group                               Minimum                 202                 485             202
                                                           Average          1089                 785             375
                                                          Maximum           1294                 902             392
Wald chi2 (10 df)                                                       2820.880             1307.570        1155.960
Prob. > chi2                                                                  0                    0               0




                                                                                                              50
                       Table 4: Determinants of the deviations between the Government Yield
                                    and the Benchmark Yield without including CDSs
This table reports the results of the unbalanced panel regression excluding the CDS variable, that is, the variables
employed in this table are the same as in Table 3 with the exception of the deviation of the domestic CDS spread
from the benchmark which is now excluded. All the variables (dependent and explanatory) except the measure of
global risk and the measure of correlation between the domestic Government and benchmark yields are presented
in deviations from the value of the same variable for the benchmark. We group the panels by country and maturity
(3, 5, 7 and 10 years) such that we have, at most, 44 groups which form an overall unbalanced panel. We estimate
the coefficients of the determinants of deviations between yields by means of a Prais-Winsten regression with corre-
lated panels corrected standard errors (PCSEs) and robust to heteroskedasticity, contemporaneous correlation
across panels and serial autocorrelation within panels. The correlation within panels is treated as a first-order
autocorrelation AR(1) and the coefficient of this process common to all the panels. Each element in the covariance
matrix of the disturbances is computed with all available observations that are common to the two panels contribu-
ting to the covariance. Column (1) reports the results for the whole sample, Column (2) reports the results for the
period before the crisis (January 2004 - August 2007) and Column (3) includes the results obtained for the crisis
period (August 2007 - February 2009). The results presented correspond to the estimated coefficient and the t-sta-
tistic (between brackets).
                                                                           (1)                  (2)               (3)
Log (Total bond daily turnover volume)                                  -0.016               -0.002             -0.036
                                                                        (-6.12)              (-2.61)            (-4.49)
Total debt issued divided by GDP                                         0.222                0.124              0.404
                                                                        (11.91)             (22.04)             (7.73)
Interation of total debt divided by GDP and the standard de-             1.205                0.175              0.948
   viation of the domestic yield minus the benchmark yield              (11.18)               (0.95)            (4.93)
Net Trade Balance divided by GDP                                       -45.276              -47.545            -70.116
                                                                        (-4.38)             (-12.63)            (-2.41)
Global risk measure: log(VIX index)                                      0.016                0.006              0.016
                                                                         (5.42)               (2.29)            (2.33)
Correlation between domestic Government yield and EMU                    0.039               -0.009              0.034
   benchmark Government Yield                                            (2.16)              (-0.51)            (0.94)
Dummy for the 3-year yield                                               0.019                0.025              0.001
                                                                         (4.03)             (19.44)             (0.08)
Dummy for the 5-year yield                                               0.016                0.017              0.011
                                                                         (4.18)             (13.35)             (0.94)
Dummy for the 7-year yield                                               0.008                0.007              0.007
                                                                         (2.72)               (6.80)            (0.75)
Constant                                                                -0.098               -0.021             -0.054
                                                                        (-4.81)               (-1.1)            (-1.21)
Autorregressive (AR(1)) coefficient                                      0.940                0.852              0.945
R-squared                                                                0.024                0.079              0.026
Observations                                                             56936               39688              17248
Number of groups                                                           44                   44                 44
Observations per group                              Minimum               1294                 902                392
                                                          Average         1294                 902                392
                                                        Maximum           1294                 902                392
Wald chi2 (10 df)                                                      448.030             1202.400            135.210
Prob. > chi2                                                                0                    0                  0




                                                                                                                  51
              Table 5: Sensitivity Analysis of the Determinants of the deviations between
                              the Government Yield and the Benchmark Yield
This table provides the sensitivity analysis of the determinants of the deviations between the Govern-
ment yields and the Benchmark yields. All the variables (dependent and explanatory) except the
correlation between the domestic and benchmark yields are presented in deviations from the value of
the variable for the benchmark. Column (1) reports the results for the whole sample, Column (2) reports
the results for the period before the crisis (January 2004 - August 2007) and Column (3) includes the
results for the crisis period (August 2007 - February 2009). Each column reports the response, in
basis points, of the dependent variable (deviation of the domestic Government yield from the bench-
mark yield) to a change equal to the average of the standard deviations of a given explanatory variable
across countries over all dates. For this aim, we first calculate the standard deviation of each depen-
dent variable across countries at each date t. Then, we compute the average of these standard devia-
tions for the whole sample, the first subsample (period before de crisis) and the second subsample
(crisis period) and finally we multiply this average by the corresponding coefficient depending on
the sample period employed for its estimation (see Table 3). The standard deviation of variables: CDS
spread (lagged one period); interaction of total debt divided by GDP and yield S.D.; and correlation
between Gov. yield and benchmark yield are presented for a maturity of five years.
                                                                         (1)           (2)           (3)
CDS (lagged one period) spread                                          4.94          1.39         12.19
Total bond daily turnover volume                                       -1.72          0.01         -4.55
Total debt issued divided by GDP                                       3.59          2.29          6.64
Interation of total debt divided by GDP and the yield S.D.             1.29          0.22          2.87
Net Trade Balance divided by GDP                                       -1.75         -1.48         -2.47
Correlation between Gov. yield and benchmark yield                     0.45           0.03          0.99




                                                                                                      52
                                                            Table 6: Savings in borrowing costs derived from a single EMU bond for different maturities
This table reports the estimated average benefits by country and the overall EMU average benefits, in basis points, for the maturities of 3, 5, 7 and 10 years derived from the existence of a single EMU bond
market. In Panel A, we report the average benefits for the period that spans from September 7th, 2005 to February 27th, 2009. The beginning of the sample is set in September 2005 in order to facilitate
comparisons between countries due to the lack of CDSs data for some maturities before that date. CDSs are necessary to obtain the hedged yield which enables us to estimate the savings in borrowing costs.
In Panel B, we report the potential average benefits for the period before the subprime crisis (September 2005 - August 2007) and Panel C includes average benefits during the crisis period (August 2007 -
February 2009). We report the potential benefits obtained under different versions of the Common risk-free rate. Common Risk-Free Rate 1 denotes the rate estimated by excluding the effect of country
specific and global risk factors, the liquidity factor and macro factors from the hedged yield. The effect of the previous factors is estimated by means of a iso regression with correlated panels
corrected standard errors (PCSEs) and robust to heteroskedasticity, contemporaneous correlation across panels and serial autocorrelation (AR(1)) within panels. The dependent variable in the previous
regression is the hedged yield, and the explanatory variables are the same as those in Table 4 but in absolute terms instead of deviations from the benchmark. The Common Risk-Free Rate 2 is equivalent to the
previous rate and it is obtained after excluding the same factors from the hedged yield but the effect of this factors is now estimated with a weighted Prais-Winsten regression similar to the previous one but
with the weights defined from the ratio between the debt outstanding by a given country and the total debt outstanding by the 11 EMU countries. Min. Hedged Yield denotes the minimum hedged yield day
among all the daily hedged yields of the 11 EMU countries for the maturities of 3, 5, 7 and 10 years. Benchmark Yield refers to the hedged yield of the benchmark which is obtained as the weighted average of
the Governments yields of the different EMU countries in the sample. The weights are proportional to the portion of debt outstanding by each of the EMU countries with respect to the total amount
outstanding by all these countries. Finally, in the last column we show the average profits (in basis points) in terms of yields for the overall EMU derived from the existence of a single EMU bond for the
different maturities.
Panel A: September 2005 - February 2009
                                            Austria        Belgium        Finland      France        Germany          Greece          Ireland        Italy      Netherlands     Portugal        Spain       Average
3y        Common Risk-Free Rate 1             32.5          37.9            38.8        36.0            32.0            43.3            25.7        35.8            34.3          39.5          32.2         35.3
          Common Risk-Free Rate 2             20.0          25.3            26.8        23.5            19.4            30.8            13.2        23.2            21.8          26.9          19.6         22.8
              Min. Hedged Yield               10.6          17.2            45.0        14.1            10.0            21.4            3.8         13.8            12.4          17.5          10.2         16.0
               Benchmark Yield                -2.3           3.4            15.2         1.2            -2.8            8.5             -9.1          1.0           -0.5           4.7           -2.6         1.5
5y        Common Risk-Free Rate 1             33.2          39.2            41.0        36.6            32.7            41.8            28.2        36.1            34.7          37.2          31.3         35.7
          Common Risk-Free Rate 2             20.7          26.6            29.2        24.1            20.2            29.3            15.7        23.6            22.2          24.6          18.8         23.2
              Min. Hedged Yield               11.0          17.0            45.2        14.4            10.5            19.6            6.0         13.9            12.5          15.0            9.1        15.9
               Benchmark Yield                -2.0           4.0            17.7         1.4            -2.5            6.6             -7.0          0.9           -0.5           2.0           -3.9         1.5
7y        Common Risk-Free Rate 1             34.6          39.5            40.5        37.0            33.3            39.8            27.1        37.6            35.7          34.5          30.0         35.4
          Common Risk-Free Rate 2             22.1          27.0            28.7        24.5            20.8            27.3            14.5        25.1            23.1          22.0          17.5         23.0
              Min. Hedged Yield               11.6          17.7            42.1        14.0            10.4            16.8            4.1         14.6            12.7          11.5            7.0        14.8
               Benchmark Yield                -1.1           4.1            15.1         1.3            -2.3            4.1             -8.6          1.9            0.0           -1.2          -5.7         0.7
10y       Common Risk-Free Rate 1             33.7          39.8            37.3        36.1            33.0            40.1            22.1        37.3            37.4          40.3          29.8         35.2
          Common Risk-Free Rate 2             21.2          27.3            25.5        23.6            20.5            27.6            9.6         24.8            24.9          27.8          17.3         22.8
              Min. Hedged Yield               14.1          21.5            39.1        16.5            13.4            20.5            2.5         17.7            17.7          20.6          10.2         17.6
               Benchmark Yield                -1.7           4.6            10.9         0.7            -2.4            4.7            -13.3          1.9            1.9           4.9           -5.6         0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                             53
Panel B: September 2005 - August 2007
                                        Austria   Belgium   Finland   France   Germany   Greece    Ireland    Italy    Netherlands Portugal    Spain    Average
3y         Common Risk-Free Rate 1       39.8      40.0        -       39.1      40.2     44.3       36.8     40.3        38.2      41.9       37.8      39.9
           Common Risk-Free Rate 2       27.0      27.2        -       26.4      27.4     31.6       24.1     27.6        25.5      29.2       25.1      27.1
              Min. Hedged Yield           6.9        7.4       -        6.2       7.3     11.4        3.9      7.5         5.4        9.1        5.0       7.0
               Benchmark Yield           -0.1       -0.2       -       -0.8       0.3      4.4       -3.1      0.5        -1.6        2.1       -2.0      -0.1
5y         Common Risk-Free Rate 1       39.9      40.1        -       39.1      41.0     44.3       38.1     42.2        38.9      41.2       38.0      40.3
           Common Risk-Free Rate 2       27.1      27.3        -       26.3      28.3     31.5       25.4     29.4        26.1      28.5       25.3      27.5
              Min. Hedged Yield           6.8        7.0       -        6.0       8.0     11.2        5.1      9.1         5.8        8.2        5.0       7.2
               Benchmark Yield           -0.8       -0.6       -       -1.6       0.4      3.6       -2.5      1.5        -1.8        0.6       -2.7      -0.4
7y         Common Risk-Free Rate 1       40.7      40.7        -       39.2      41.8     42.0       35.7     43.1        39.5      38.7       37.3      39.9
           Common Risk-Free Rate 2       27.9      27.9        -       26.4      29.1     29.3       22.9     30.4        26.8      25.9       24.5      27.1
              Min. Hedged Yield           7.5        7.9       -        6.1       8.7      8.9        2.6     10.0         6.4        5.6        4.2       6.8
               Benchmark Yield           -0.4       -0.8       -       -1.9       0.8      1.0       -5.4      2.1        -1.5       -2.4       -3.8      -1.2
10y        Common Risk-Free Rate 1       39.7      39.8        -       39.0      41.6     45.9       29.9     42.2        40.0      44.0       36.5      39.9
           Common Risk-Free Rate 2       26.9      27.0        -       26.2      28.8     33.2       17.1     29.4        27.2      31.2       23.7      27.1
              Min. Hedged Yield          10.4      11.2        -        9.7      12.3     16.6        0.6     12.9        10.7      14.7         7.2     10.6
               Benchmark Yield           -1.1       -1.5       -       -1.8      0.8      5.2       -10.9      1.5        -0.8        3.2       -4.3      -1.0
Panel C: August 2007 - February 2009
                                       Austria    Belgium   Finland   France   Germany   Greece   Ireland    Italy    Netherlands Portugal    Spain    Average
3y         Common Risk-Free Rate 1      23.5       35.7      38.8      32.2      21.9     42.2      12.0     30.2        29.5      36.5       25.2      29.8
           Common Risk-Free Rate 2      11.2       23.4      26.8      19.9       9.6     29.8      -0.4     17.8        17.2      24.1       12.8      17.5
              Min. Hedged Yield         15.1       27.2      45.0      23.7      13.4     33.7       3.5     21.7        21.0      28.0       16.7      22.6
              Benchmark Yield           -5.1        7.1      15.2       3.6      -6.7     13.5     -16.6      1.5         0.9       7.8        -3.4      1.6
5y         Common Risk-Free Rate 1      25.0       38.1      41.0      33.6      22.5     38.8      16.0     28.7        29.6      32.2       23.1      29.9
           Common Risk-Free Rate 2      12.7       25.8      29.2      21.3      10.2     26.6       3.7     16.4        17.3      19.9       10.8      17.6
              Min. Hedged Yield         16.2       29.4      45.2      24.9      13.7     30.1       7.3     19.9        20.8      23.4       14.3      22.3
              Benchmark Yield           -3.6        9.5      17.7       5.1      -6.1     10.3     -12.5      0.1         1.0       3.6        -5.5      1.8
7y         Common Risk-Free Rate 1      27.1       38.2      40.5      34.3      22.8     37.0      16.4     30.8        30.9      29.3       21.0      29.8
           Common Risk-Free Rate 2      14.9       26.0      28.7      22.1      10.6     24.8       4.2     18.6        18.7      17.1         8.8     17.7
              Min. Hedged Yield         16.7       27.8      42.1      23.9      12.4     26.6       6.0     20.4        20.5      18.9       10.6      20.5
              Benchmark Yield           -2.1        9.0      15.1       5.1      -6.3      7.8     -12.8      1.6         1.7       0.2        -8.2      1.0
10y        Common Risk-Free Rate 1      26.4       39.7      37.3      32.5      22.5     32.9      12.5     31.3        34.1      35.7       21.6      29.7
           Common Risk-Free Rate 2      14.2       27.6      25.5      20.4      10.3     20.8       0.3     19.1        22.0      23.6         9.4     17.6
              Min. Hedged Yield         18.7       32.0      39.1      24.8      14.8     25.2       4.7     23.6        26.4      28.0       13.9      22.8
              Benchmark Yield           -2.6       10.7      10.9       3.5      -6.5      3.9     -16.5      2.3         5.1       6.7        -7.4      0.9




                                                                                                                                                         54
           Table 7: Determinants of the deviations between the Government Yield and the Benchmark Yield (Cross Section Analysis)
This table reports the results of the cross-sectional regrassions. All the variables (dependent and explanatory) are presented in deviations from
the value of the variable for the benchmark. We run a cross-sectional regression by OLS for every date (1294) in the sample and calculate the
average coefficient for the 1294 regressions which is reported in the first column. We find that the estimated slope coefficients present autocor-
relation and for this reason, in the second column we report the t-statistic obtained from the Newey-West adjusted standard errors. These errors
are obtained after regressing with Newey-West standard errors adjustment the loadings on each factor, which are shown in the first column, on
a constant. Intercept that was included at the first stage is not reported. The third column reports the portion of cross-sectional regressions
where the sign of the coefficient is the same as the expected sign. The fourth column shows the change in the dependent variable after a change
in the explanatory variable equal to the standard deviation of this variable. Last column reports the portion of variance in the dependent variable
explained by the corresponding explanatory variable. This portion is calculated after multiplying the coefficient by the ratio of the standard devia-
tions of the independent variable and the dependent variable. Panel A reports the results for the whole sample, Panel B reports the results for
the period before the crisis (January 2004 - August 2007) and Panel C includes the results for the crisis period (August 2007 - February 2009).



Panel A
                                                                  Coefficient   Corrected t-stat   Right Sign (%)   1 S.D. change Explained var. (%)
CDS spread lagged one period                                        0.970           20.54              0.983             0.064           0.282
Log (Total bond daily bond turnover volume)                        -0.010            -3.85             0.556            -0.011           0.000
Total debt issued divided by GDP                                    0.100            7.48              0.760            0.022            0.040
Interaction of total debt divided by GDP and the standard de-
                                                                    1.619            6.93              0.688             0.016              0.011
   viation of the domestic yield minus the benchmark yield
Net Trade Balance divided by GDP                                   -30.447           -4.91             0.693             -0.010             0.010
Dummy for the 3-year yield                                          0.016             4.47             0.705              0.007             0.007
Dummy for the 5-year yield                                          0.013             3.15             0.635              0.005             0.003
Dummy for the 7-year yield                                          0.007             2.57             0.610              0.003             0.001
Std. Dev. of the difference between the domestic Govern-
                                                                    0.524            0.70              0.516             0.002              0.001
    ment yield and EMU benchmark Government yield
Constant                                                            -0.029           -5.27             0.693
Average R-squared                                                    0.733
Cross-Sections with Condition Matrix Above 30                         27




                                                                                                                                                        55
Panel B
                                                                Coefficient   Corrected t-stat   Right Sign (%)   1 S.D. change Explained var. (%)
CDS spread lagged one period                                      1.106           18.21              0.976            0.034            0.285
Log (Total bond daily bond turnover volume)                       0.004            3.58              0.351            0.004            0.004
Total debt issued divided by GDP                                  0.031            4.30              0.671            0.007            0.011
Interaction of total debt divided by GDP and the standard de-
                                                                  1.934            6.19              0.712           0.008             0.013
   viation of the domestic yield minus the benchmark yield
Net Trade Balance divided by GDP                                 -16.795           -3.19             0.672           -0.005            0.010
Dummy for the 3-year yield                                        0.022             8.52             0.821            0.009            0.019
Dummy for the 5-year yield                                        0.015             5.40             0.712            0.006            0.007
Dummy for the 7-year yield                                        0.008             4.96             0.704            0.003            0.003
Std. Dev. of the difference between the domestic Govern-
                                                                  1.023            1.27              0.542           0.001             0.001
    ment yield and EMU benchmark Government yield
Constant                                                          -0.025           -7.02             0.736
Average R-squared                                                  0.691
Cross-Sections with Condition Matrix Above 30                       27

Panel C
                                                                Coefficient   Corrected t-stat   Right Sign (%)   1 S.D. change Explained var. (%)
CDS spread lagged one period                                      0.697           15.100             0.997             0.130           0.276
Log (Total bond daily bond turnover volume)                      -0.037           -7.300             0.964            -0.049           0.063
Total debt issued divided by GDP                                  0.238            9.770             0.939             0.058           0.174
Interaction of total debt divided by GDP and the standard de-
                                                                  0.989            3.410             0.642           0.035             0.007
   viation of the domestic yield minus the benchmark yield
Net Trade Balance divided by GDP                                 -57.821          -4.040             0.737           -0.019            0.008
Dummy for the 3-year yield                                        0.004            0.470             0.527            0.002            0.002
Dummy for the 5-year yield                                        0.009            0.830             0.517            0.004            0.001
Dummy for the 7-year yield                                        0.004            0.560             0.578            0.002            0.001
Std. Dev. of the difference between the domestic Govern-
                                                                  -0.477          -0.310             0.465           -0.011            0.000
    ment yield and EMU benchmark Government yield
Constant                                                          -0.036          -2.430             0.606
Average R-squared                                                  0.831
Cross-Sections with Condition Matrix Above 30                        0




                                                                                                                                                     56
                      Table 8: Determinants of the deviations between the Government Yield and
                                      the Benchmark Yield for different benchmarks
This table reports the results of the unbalanced panel regressions using an alternative benchmark: the German bond
yield. All the variables (dependent and explanatory) except the measure of global risk and the measure of correlation
between the domestic Government and benchmark yields are presented in deviations from the value of the variable
for the benchmark. We group the panels by country and maturity (3, 5, 7 and 10 years) such that we have, at most,
44 groups which form an overall unbalanced panel. We estimate the coefficients of the determinants of deviations
between yields by means of a Prais-Winsten regression with correlated panels corrected standard errors (PCSEs)
and robust to heteroskedasticity, contemporaneous correlation across panels and serial autocorrelation within pa-
nels. The correlation within panels is treated as a first-order autocorrelation AR(1) and the coefficient of this process
common to all the panels. Each element in the covariance matrix of the disturbances is computed with all available
observations that are common to the two panels contributing to the covariance. Column (1) reports the results for the
benchmark employed in Table 3 and it is equivalent to the first column of that table. The results in Column (2) are
obtained by using the values of Germany as the benchmark. The results presented correspond to the estimated
coefficient and the t-statistic (between brackets).
                                                                                            (1)                     (2)
CDS(-1)                                                                                   0.540                  0.608
                                                                                        (40.27)                 (37.30)
Log (Total bond daily turnover volume)                                                   -0.011                  -0.002
                                                                                         (-5.92)                (-0.67)
Total debt issued divided by GDP                                                          0.145                   0.063
                                                                                        (12.20)                  (3.68)
Interation of total debt divided by GDP and the standard deviation of the                 1.254                   1.552
   domestic yield minus the benchmark yield                                             (12.78)                 (12.58)
Net Trade Balance divided by GDP                                                        -49.427                -40.363
                                                                                         (-6.42)                (-4.25)
Global risk measure: log(VIX index)                                                       0.014                   0.059
                                                                                          (4.97)                 (6.51)
Correlation between domestic Government yield and EMU benchmark                           0.077                   0.056
  Government Yield                                                                        (4.56)                 (2.53)
Dummy for the 3-year yield                                                                0.013                  -0.029
                                                                                          (3.99)                (-3.75)
Dummy for the 5-year yield                                                                0.012                  -0.011
                                                                                          (4.28)                (-2.09)
Dummy for the 7-year yield                                                                0.005                  -0.007
                                                                                          (2.23)                (-1.92)
Constant                                                                                 -0.137                  -0.192
                                                                                         (-7.41)                  (-5.5)
Autorregressive (AR(1)) coefficient                                                       0.899                   0.903
R-squared                                                                                 0.199                   0.289
Observations                                                                             47904                   42728
Number of groups                                                                            44                      40
Observations per group                                           Minimum                    202                    202
                                                                       Average             1089                   1068
                                                                      Maximum              1294                   1294
Wald chi2 (10 df)                                                                      2820.880               2736.250
Prob. > chi2                                                                                 0                       0




                                                                                                                 57
                        Table 9: Determinants of the deviations between the Government Yield
                                    and the Benchmark Yield using a balanced panel
This table reports the results of the balanced panel regressions. The data includes only ten of the eleven EMU coun-
tries and spans the period from March 2006 to February 2009. In order to have a balanced panel Finland and the
observations before the 27th of March are excluded. All the variables (dependent and explanatory) except the mea-
sure of global risk and the measure of correlation between the domestic Government and benchmark yields are pre-
sented in deviations from the value of the variable for the benchmark. We group the panels by country and maturity
(3, 5, 7, and 10 years) such that we have, at most 40 groups which form a balanced panel. The estimation is done
using Generalized Least Squares. The GLS procedure that we employ allows estimation in the presence of AR(1)
autocorrelation within panels and cross-sectional correlation and heteroskedasticity across panels. Column (1) re-
ports the results for the whole sample, Column (2) reports the results for the period before the crisis (March 2006 -
August 2007) and Column (3) includes the results for the crisis period (August 2007 - February 2009). The results
presented correspond to the estimated coefficient and the t-statistic which is reported between brackets.
                                                                             (1)                (2)                (3)
CDS(-1)                                                                    0.443              0.307              0.425
                                                                         (47.51)             (15.16)           (33.07)
Log (Total bond daily turnover volume)                                    -0.013             -0.002             -0.028
                                                                          (-8.19)            (-4.23)            (-8.28)
Total debt issued divided by GDP                                           0.211              0.145              0.283
                                                                         (20.87)             (39.09)           (14.67)
Interation of total debt divided by GDP and the standard de-               0.251              0.086              0.303
   viation of the domestic yield minus the benchmark yield               (13.61)              (7.23)           (11.65)
Net Trade Balance divided by GDP                                         -39.408            -52.877            -31.654
                                                                          (-6.53)           (-24.24)            (-2.72)
Global risk measure: log(VIX index)                                        0.007              0.002              0.006
                                                                           (7.81)             (4.53)             (3.78)
Correlation between domestic Government yield and EMU                      0.011              0.001              0.022
   benchmark Government Yield                                              (3.76)             (0.65)             (5.84)
Dummy for the 3-year yield                                                 0.003              0.015             -0.003
                                                                           (6.81)            (89.17)            (-3.68)
Dummy for the 5-year yield                                                 0.004              0.010              0.001
                                                                         (11.89)             (89.86)             (2.03)
Dummy for the 7-year yield                                                 0.001              0.001              0.000
                                                                           (2.73)            (33.06)            (-0.36)
Constant                                                                  -0.034             -0.014             -0.037
                                                                          (-8.57)            (-7.87)            (-5.81)
Autorregressive (AR(1)) coefficient                                        0.896              0.802              0.897
Log likelihood                                                           105533               74407             43017
Observations                                                              35040               19360             15680
Number of groups                                                             40                 40                 40
Time Periods                                                                876                484                392
Wald chi2 (10 df)                                                       4270.960          14834.930           2014.640
Prob. > chi2                                                                  0                  0                  0




                                                                                                                 58
                       Table 10: Determinants of the deviations between the Government Yield
                               and the Benchmark Yield using different liquidity measures
This table reports the results of the unbalanced panel regression using altermative liquidity measures. Column (1)
reports the results for the whole sample using as liquidity proxy the total daily turnover volume, Column (2) reports
the results obtained after using the bid-ask spread as the liquidity measure and Column (3) shows the results
obtained if we employ as a proxy for liquidity the average daily turnover volume. This average volume is calculated
as the ratio between the total daily turnover volume and the number of bonds issued by the corresponding country.
The results presented correspond to the estimated coefficient and the t-statistic (between brackets). We estimate
the coefficients of the determinants of deviations between yields by means of a Prais-Winsten regression with cor-
related panels corrected standard errors (PCSEs) and robust to heteroskedasticity, contemporaneous correlation
across panels and serial autocorrelation within panels. The correlation within panels is treated as a first-order auto-
correlation AR(1) and the coefficient of this process common to all the panels. Each element in the covariance ma-
trix of the disturbances is computed with all available observations that are common to the two panels contributing
to the covariance.
                                                                            (1)                  (2)               (3)
CDS(-1)                                                                   0.540                0.366             0.540
                                                                         (40.27)             (11.51)           (40.14)
Liquidity                                                                 -0.011              23.193            -0.012
                                                                         (-5.92)               (6.09)           (-4.74)
Total debt issued divided by GDP                                          0.145                0.087             0.132
                                                                         (12.20)              (15.29)          (11.25)
Interation of total debt divided by GDP and the standard de-               1.254               0.431             1.242
    viation of the domestic yield minus the benchmark yield              (12.78)               (2.43)          (12.64)
Net Trade Balance divided by GDP                                        -49.427              -43.260           -50.583
                                                                         (-6.42)             (-12.27)           (-6.51)
Global risk measure: log(VIX index)                                       0.014                0.006             0.014
                                                                          (4.97)               (3.15)           (4.98)
Correlation between domestic Government yield and EMU                     0.077                0.011             0.075
   benchmark Government Yield                                             (4.56)               (0.66)           (4.41)
Dummy for the 3-year yield                                                0.013                0.020             0.014
                                                                          (3.99)             (14.18)            (3.96)
Dummy for the 5-year yield                                                0.012                0.013             0.012
                                                                          (4.28)               (9.53)           (4.26)
Dummy for the 7-year yield                                                0.005                0.005             0.005
                                                                          (2.23)               (3.94)           (2.22)
Constant                                                                 -0.137               -0.041            -0.131
                                                                         (-7.41)              (-2.25)            (-7.1)
Autorregressive (AR(1)) coefficient                                       0.899                0.833             0.900
R-squared                                                                 0.199                0.122             0.195
Observations                                                              47904                31416            47904
Number of groups                                                             44                  40                44
Observations per group                              Minimum                 202                 485               202
                                                         Average           1089                 785              1089
                                                        Maximum            1294                 902              1294
Wald chi2 (10 df)                                                      2820.880             1167.780          2748.060
Prob. > chi2                                                                  0                   0                 0




                                                                                                               59
                                      Figure 1: Common Risk-Free Rates

            5
           4.5
            4                                                                                       Benchmark
                                                                                                    Hedged
           3.5                                                                                      Yield
            3                                                                                       Min. Hedged
                                                                                                    Yield
   %




           2.5
            2                                                                                       Common
           1.5                                                                                      Risk-Free
                                                                                                    Rate 2
            1
                                                                                                    Common
           0.5                                                                                      Risk-Free
            0                                                                                       Rate 1
         /0 04
         /0 04
         /1 04
         /0 04
         /0 05
         /0 05
         /1 05
         /0 05
         /0 06
         /0 06
         /1 06
         /0 06
         /0 07
         /0 07
         /1 07
         /0 07
         /0 08
         /0 08
         /1 08
         /0 08
                09
       26 /20
       26 /20
       26 /20
       26 /20
       26 /20
       26 /20
       26 /20
       26 /20
       26 /20
       26 20
       26 /20
       26 /20
       26 /20
       26 20
       26 /20
       26 /20
       26 20
       26 /20
       26 /20
       26 /20
              20
            4/




            4/




            1/




            1/
            1
            4
            7
            0
            1
            4
            7
            0
            1


            7
            0
            1


            7
            0


            4
            7
            0
         /0
       26




                                                    Date


The figure shows the four proposed alternatives for a 5-year common risk free rate in the EMU area. These al-
ternatives according to the order of the legend are (i) Benchmark Hedged Yield obtained as a weighted average
of the hedged yield, which is defined as the difference between the sovereign yield and the corresponding CDS,
whose weights are proportional to the debt outstanding by each of the EMU countries with respect to the total
amount outstanding by all these countries. (ii) Min. Hedged Yield obtained as the minimum hedged yield among
the eleven EMU members. First, we find the country with the minimum average weekly hedged yield and we
employ the daily hedged yields of that country during the corresponding week, when its hedged yield is the
minimum, to form the Min. Hedged Yield. (iii) Common Risk-Free Rate 2 defined as the hedged yield exempt
of liquidity, risk and macro effects such that the influence of these effects is estimated by means of a Prais-
Winsten regression with correlated panels corrected standard errors (PCSEs) and robust to heteroskedasticity,
contemporaneous correlation across panels and serial autocorrelation and using weights proportional to the debt
outstanding by each EMU member. (iv) Common Risk-Free Rate 1 obtained as Common Risk-Free Rate 2 but
without using weights.




                                                                                                                  60
