                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        CROSS-COUNTRY CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCES OF THE 2008 CRISIS:
                           EARLY WARNING

                                            Andrew K. Rose
                                            Mark M. Spiegel

                                         Working Paper 15357
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15357


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2009




Rose is B.T. Rocca Jr. Professor of International Trade and Economic Analysis and Policy in the
Haas School of Business at the University of California, Berkeley, NBER Research Associate and
CEPR Research Fellow. Spiegel is Vice President, Economic Research, Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco. We thank Haibin Zhu for sharing his real estate data. Helpful comments were received
from: Joshua Aizenman, David Cook, Mike Dooley, Marcel Fratzscher, Sophia Rabe-Hesketh, Kadee
Russ, and seminar participants at the BIS and the APEA. Rose thanks the Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco for hospitality during the course of this research. Christopher Candelaria provided excellent
research assistance. The views expressed below do not represent those of the Federal Reserve Bank
of San Francisco, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. A current version of this paper, key output, and the main STATA data set used
in the paper are available at http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/arose.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Andrew K. Rose and Mark M. Spiegel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Cross-Country Causes and Consequences of the 2008 Crisis: Early Warning
Andrew K. Rose and Mark M. Spiegel
NBER Working Paper No. 15357
September 2009
JEL No. E65,F30

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper models the causes of the 2008 financial crisis together with its manifestations, using a Multiple
Indicator Multiple Cause (MIMIC) model. Our analysis is conducted on a cross-section of 107 countries;
we focus on national causes and consequences of the crisis, ignoring cross-country “contagion” effects.
Our model of the incidence of the crisis combines 2008 changes in real GDP, the stock market, country
credit ratings, and the exchange rate. We explore the linkages between these manifestations of the
crisis and a number of its possible causes from 2006 and earlier. We include over sixty potential causes
of the crisis, covering such categories as: financial system policies and conditions; asset price appreciation
in real estate and equity markets; international imbalances and foreign reserve adequacy; macroeconomic
policies; and institutional and geographic features. Despite the fact that we use a wide number of possible
causes in a flexible statistical framework, we are unable to link most of the commonly-cited causes
of the crisis to its incidence across countries. This negative finding in the cross-section makes us skeptical
of the accuracy of “early warning” systems of potential crises, which must also predict their timing.


Andrew K. Rose
Haas School of Business Administration
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
arose@haas.berkeley.edu

Mark M. Spiegel
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
mark.spiegel@sf.frb.org
       “we agree … that the FSB [Financial Stability Board] should collaborate with the IMF to provide early
       warning of macroeconomic and financial risks and the actions needed to address them”
           • Final Communiqué G-20 Summit April 2, 20091

       “Any early warning system to detect impending dangers to the world economy must find a way of
       bringing together the scatter of international and national macrofinancial expertise. We at the
       Fund have already begun intensifying our early warning capabilities and will be strengthening our
       collaboration with others involved in this area.”
            • Dominique Strauss-Kahn2



I: Motivation


       The 2008 global financial crisis is notable for a number of reasons, including most

obviously its severity and speed. The international span of the crisis has also been remarkable;

essentially all the industrialized countries have been affected, as well as a large number of

developing and emerging economies. In this paper we seek to deepen our understanding of the

international breadth of the crisis; we are particularly interested in modeling the causes of the

crisis, and why its severity differs across countries.


       We are interested in understanding the causes of 2008 the crisis both out of intrinsic

interest, and to investigate the feasibility of modeling financial crises like this empirically.

Economists do not have a particularly good track record at predicting the timing of crises, which

is one of the objectives of an early warning system.3 Historically however, the profession has

had some success at modeling the incidence of crises across firms, banks, and/or countries.4

That is, we find cross-sectional analysis easier than time-series analysis. In this paper, we

attempt to model empirically the cross-country incidence of the financial crisis of 2008. Ours is

an exploratory approach; we view it as a first step toward creating an international early-warning

system, which necessarily includes both time-series and cross-sectional elements. Our objectives

are: a) to determine whether the data patterns can be fitted within sample; and b) to provide




                                                       1
preliminary evidence on which causes of the financial crisis seem to predict its ex post incidence

across countries.


       We conduct a non-structural exercise, using a “MIMIC” (Multiple-Indicator Multiple

Cause) model, which we apply to a cross-sectional data set of 107 countries. Our MIMIC

specification explicitly acknowledges that the severity of a financial crisis is a continuous, rather

than a discrete phenomenon, and one that can only be observed with error. It treats the severity

of the financial crisis as a latent variable, observed only imperfectly in terms of such 2008

manifestations as equity market collapses, exchange rate depreciations, recessionary growth, and

declines in the perceptions of a country’s creditworthiness. The MIMIC methodology (described

in more detail below) simultaneously links these “indicators” of a financial crisis with potential

“causes” of the crisis. In the process, we obtain estimates of the severity of each country’s crisis

experience, as well as estimates of the impact of potential causes of the crisis.


       Our data analysis yields a plausible set of estimates for the incidence and severity of the

crisis across countries. That is, we can model empirically the fact that Iceland and Estonia were

hit more severely in 2008 than say China. However, we have less success in linking crisis

severity to its causes (dated from 2006 and earlier). Many hypotheses have been advanced in the

literature regarding potential causes of the 2008 credit crisis; few emerge empirically as robust

predictors of the severity of the crisis. Indeed, we find that only one variable – the size of the

equity market run-up prior to the crisis – is a robust predictor of crisis severity.5 While the

performance of this variable is intuitive, we find it surprising that other equally plausible

variables fail to perform well (such as the magnitude of real estate price appreciation or the

quality of the regulatory environment). Succinctly, we can reasonably model the severity of the

crisis across countries, but we are unable to link it empirically to country-specific causes.

                                                  2
       A successful early warning system must predict (out of sample) both the cross-country

incidence of crises as well as their timing. Thus our analysis bodes poorly for the ability of early

warning models to forecast future financial crises. After all, ours should be a (relatively) easy

first step; we know now that a crisis took place in 2008, and which countries were affected.


       There can be three reasons for our predictive failure, assuming that we have not missed or

grossly mis-measured one or more important causes of the crisis. First, it might simply be the

case that the causes of the 2008 crisis differ across countries. If the cause of each country’s

crisis is different, one would not expect to find any commonality when pooling the data across

countries. Since the timing of the crisis coincided closely across countries, this “explanation”

seems strained. Alternatively, the 2008 crisis might be the result of a truly global shock, so long

as its incidence varied across countries in a way that is unrelated to the regulatory, financial, and

macroeconomic “fundamentals” we consider. Finally, the shock might be a national one

(plausibly originating in the United States) that spread contagiously across countries. We do not

model international linkages between countries in our analysis, which could “explain” our poor

findings. Under the last two interpretations, our negative results indicate that the susceptibility

of a country to succumb to a common or contagious shock is unrelated to the fundamentals that

we consider.


       All these interpretations seem like ominous warnings for early-warning models. If the

causes of the crises differ across countries, there is little hope of finding a common statistical

model to predict them. The same holds if common or contagious shocks are critical but a

country’s ability to withstand a global or spreading shock is unrelated to fundamentals. We

conclude that our negative results show that constructing a plausible statistical model that can

predict financial crises (similar to that of 2008) will be challenging.

                                                  3
II: Determinants of the Crisis


        There has been little work on the 2008 crisis that seeks to understand its cross-country

incidence. One exception is Ehrmann, et al (2009), who find a role for current accounts and

foreign exchange reserves in determining equity portfolio returns for a cross section of countries,

after conditioning for exposure to the United States.6 Still, most of the analysis has been

conducted on a purely national basis, often analyzing only American data. In this section, we

review the large literature that has already emerged concerning potential determinants of relative

performance during the global financial crisis. Anticipating the empirical work done below, we

organize our review by grouping together theories of the crisis’ origin.


Size and Income


        We start with size and income levels, both factors used in the literature as crisis correlates

(e.g. Reinhart and Reinhart, 2009 and Calvo and Loo-Kung, 2009).

        We condition on size throughout our analysis because it has been generally observed that

smaller countries have fared poorly in the crisis. The importance of size was felt most strongly

among smaller nations who had experienced exceptional economic growth and domestic credit

expansion during the boom years. A notable example is Iceland, a country whose status as a

global financial center left it facing liabilities far in excess of its gross domestic product after the

collapse.7 However, a number of smaller countries with their own currencies also had exposed

financial sectors large relative to their domestic governments and economies (Buiter and Sibert,

2008). Size is also negatively correlated with openness; smaller countries tend to be open to

international trade. Small countries were thus also heavily exposed to the collapse of


                                                   4
international trade and trade credit, other features of the 2008 crisis.8 For such reasons, we

always include the natural logarithm of a country’s population in our analysis of potential causes

of the 2008 crisis (data sources are described in an appendix).

       We also condition on income, as measured by the (log-) level of real GDP per capita.

The 2008 crisis hit developed and emerging-market economies alike. It might seem that richer

countries had advantages over poorer ones in responding to the crisis. For instance, the ability of

a government to assist troubled financial institutions credibly seems clearly a function of

domestic wealth. Nevertheless, this ability may have been correlated with the degree of

exposure that domestic private agents took during the boom years, leaving rich nations as or

more vulnerable than those of lower income. We consider the matter to be an empirical one, and

accordingly, we condition on income throughout.

       We now turn to other potential causes of the financial crisis, beginning with regulatory

and financial policy.

Financial Policies


       The first major broad category of potential causes of the 2008 crisis that has drawn

attention from the literature is the set of weaknesses exposed in national and international

financial regulatory frameworks. Bernanke (2009) notes that the crisis revealed the need for

improvement in supervisory practices and internal communication, particularly the need for

maintaining strong risk-management practices in good times as well as bad.


       Buiter (2007) points to a number of flaws in the financial system that existed at the peak

of the boom. These include excessive securitization, as well as investors and regulators placing

too much faith in the opinions of private rating agencies. Spence (2008) argues that the asset

price bubble was fuelled by a combination of excessive leverage and a widespread

                                                 5
underestimation of increased systemic risk. Coval et al, (2009) argue that the excessively high

ratings received by structured instruments are attributable to the excessive confidence that rating

agencies had in their own abilities to assess risk


       Existing regulatory structures may also have encouraged “procyclicality” into lending

behavior through the Basel capital requirements. Basel I contributed to the growth of

securitization by assigning lower capital charges to securitized assets, thereby encouraging banks

to move assets into off-balance sheet vehicles, Demirguc-Kunt and Serven, (2009). Coval et al,

(2009) also argue that the process of securitization substitutes systematic risks for diversifiable

risks. However, securitization could not have been the only source of regulatory weakness. Hall

and Woodward (2009) point out that the United Kingdom lacked extensive securitization activity

yet experienced a worse economic crisis than that in the United States.


       In addition to its preferential treatment of securitized assets, regulatory frameworks may

have encouraged risk taking through the (implicit) designation of larger financial institutions as

“too big to fail.” These guarantees likely encouraged these institutions to expose themselves to

greater risk than they otherwise would have. Moreover, the guarantees themselves came to

represent government liabilities as the likelihood increased that bailouts would be required,

further raising systemic concerns and exacerbating the severity of a country’s economic position,

e.g. Demirguc-Kunt and Serven (2009).


       In addition to formal regulatory weaknesses, Bernanke (2009) argues that flaws also

existed in the structure of competition and the improper incentives for risk-taking in financial

institutions. He called for reforms ensuring that bonuses and other forms of compensation

aligned the incentives of employees with those of their institutions. Institutional changes along



                                                     6
these lines have been highlights to proposed reforms of the global financial system under Basel

II [Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2009)]. Buiter (2009) argues that as the economic

boom persisted, regulatory capture and corruption became commonplace.


       It should be stressed that these regulatory weaknesses were not confined to the United

States. Buiter (2007) faults the regulatory structure of the Financial Services Agency and

deficient banking insolvency laws for throwing Britain’s financial sector into disarray. He

argues that the separation of power in Britain’s financial regulatory institutions left the agency

that had the best information about financial sector difficulties (the FSA) incapable of

conducting lender of last resort activity. However, Gieve (2009) argues that there were benefits

to getting insurance and securities dealing under the same regulator at a time when the lines

between these activities was breaking down.


       The deterioration in institutions also extended beyond the formal regulation of the

financial system. Krugman noted that as the boom continued, the share of financial transactions

outside the umbrella of traditional banking regulation increased.9 Many have also argued that

the quality of corporate governance also deteriorated over the boom years; Buiter (2009) refers to

a “… steady erosion in business ethics and moral standards.” As in the case of poor financial

regulation, as long as firms were increasing markedly in market valuation, there was little

incentive for equity or other stakeholders to rein in the activities of corporations. The extent of

poor practices was revealed only after the bubble burst.


       While the crisis revealed weaknesses in the financial regulatory regime, technological

advances in financial engineering exacerbated the process. In particular, asset securitization

carved mortgage-backed (and other) securities into more-complicated structured products,



                                                  7
leaving assets more opaque. Mishkin (2008) argues that advances in information technology and

financial innovations contributed to a “democratization of credit” that initially brought benefits

to consumers, but eventually contributed to the financial crisis. Trichet (2009a) notes that while

securitization brought the potential to increase diversification and enhance the management of

risk, in practice it also allowed loan originators to sell credit immediately after it had been

extended, effectively eliminating the incentives for proper risk management.


       Moreover, securitization reduced overall transparency by reducing incentives to collect

and disseminate information about counterparty risk (Buiter, 2007). Another difficulty with

securitization was that it broke the link between those who had originated the loan and those who

were bearing the risk, reducing the incentives for loan originators to conduct proper due

diligence prior to extending credit (De Michelis, 2009).


       We wish to account (albeit imperfectly) for the quality of the regulatory regime in our

empirics below. Accordingly, we introduce a number of measures of the regulatory regime

commonly used in the literature. Our measures include a number of variables from the

Economic Freedom of the World database (EFW) including Bank Ownership (the share of bank

deposits held in privately owned banks), Foreign Bank Competition (the denial rate of foreign

bank license applications), Interest Rate Controls/ Negative Real Interest Rate (which measures

credit market controls), and finally Credit Market Regulation (a summary score on the quality of

regulation in credit markets). As is the case for all the potential crisis causes we investigate,

these data are dated from 2006 (or sometimes earlier). We also include a number of measures

dated 2003 from the Barth, Caprio and Levine (2005) data set (hereafter “BCL”), including

measures of Overall Capital Stringency, Ability to Take Prompt Corrective Action, a Capital



                                                  8
Regulatory Index, Official Supervisory Power, Restructuring Power, and a measure of the Power

to Declare Insolvency.10


Financial Conditions


        At the end of the boom in 2008 many countries found themselves in precarious financial

positions, in part because of regulatory policies, but also because of the natural “pro-cyclicality”

of bank lending behavior. De Gregorio (2009) concludes that the ultimate cause of the crisis was

increased fragility in the United States financial system. Brunnermeier (2009) also describes a

decline in lending standards during the run-up to the crisis. Weak banks do not resist a financial

crisis well.


        Certain financial market practices exposed the banking sector to potential deep financial

distress. For example, Cecchetti (2008) notes that banks typically maintained short-term balance

sheets in interbank lending markets. This allowed them to adjust the size and composition of

their assets quickly during normal periods. However, when these markets seized up, banks

found themselves illiquid. Moreover, bank lending practices became riskier. Feldstein (2009)

notes that mortgage loan contracts in America gradually evolved from 70 to 80 percent of

appraised value at origination, to 90 to 100 percent. White (2008) argues that some of the

expansion of sub-prime and other risky mortgages was policy-induced, encouraged by Congress’

strengthening of the Community Reinvestment Act, the loosening of down-payment standards by

the Federal Housing Administration, and pressure on lenders from the U.S. Department of

Housing and Urban Development to extend mortgages to a broader set of potential borrowers.

That is, not all of the weaknesses may have been unintentional.




                                                  9
       Weaknesses in the financial sector manifested themselves in a number of dimensions that

left economies exposed when conditions began to turn. During the boom, many countries

experienced dramatic increases in the extension of domestic credit, both for investment and

consumption, and the leverage of firms and households exploded. With the abrupt decline in the

terms of credit extension, consumers and firms found themselves in need of dramatic de-

leveraging, leading to declines in both of these important components of GDP (Boone, Johnson

and Kwak, 2009).


       Because we are interested in understanding the cross-country incidence of the crisis, we

accordingly include a number of variables that measure the conditions of national financial

sectors shortly before the crisis actually began. Of course, some of these variables are

themselves outcomes of government policies, including the financial policies discussed above,

and may therefore be endogenous to some of the policy variables listed above.


       As measures of relative domestic credit growth, we include Private Sector Domestic

Credit as a share of GDP, Domestic Bank Credit as a share of GDP, and a measure of the share

of domestic credit consumed by the Private Sector. As measures of bank strength going into the

crisis, we include Bank Liquid Reserves as a share of assets, the share of Non-Performing Loans,

Bank Capital as a share of assets, and Bank Claims as a share of deposits.


Asset Price Appreciation


       Every discussion of the causes of the global financial crisis includes the run-up in real

estate values in the United States and elsewhere (e.g. Feldstein, 2009, and Teslik, 2009). Hall

and Woodward (2009) claim that the collapse of spending on home building and the resulting

recession was the “most important fact” about the American economy at the start of 2009.


                                                10
Feldstein (2008) argues that until housing prices stabilize, it will be impossible for the private

sector to properly value mortgage-backed securities. Reinhart and Rogoff (2008) note that

American housing price appreciation prior to this crisis exceeded those in the previous “Big

Five” postwar crises.11 Noting parallels with Japan’s experience, Shirakawa (2009) recalls the

“irrational frenzy” that occurred in land prices in Japan prior to their collapse, and notes

similarities among real estate values in Western economies prior to the 2008 crisis.


       One reason that the real estate boom is perceived as a source of fragility is that it

channeled investment away from more productive areas into “unproductive residential

construction” (Buiter, 2009). Another is that as the housing market cooled, household balance

sheets deteriorated and many homeowners found themselves with negative housing equity

(Feldstein, 2009). U.S. Mortgage delinquencies have been highest in the areas that experienced

the greatest rate of price appreciation during the boom (Doms, et al, 2007).


       It is widely agreed that the magnitude of the real estate boom was increased by loose

financial conditions. For example, Bernanke (2009a) notes that the housing boom was fueled in

“large part” by a rapid expansion in mortgage lending. De Michelis (2009) notes that the boom

in sub-prime lending coincided with the real estate boom. Mian and Sufi (2008) find that zip

codes with high latent demand for housing experienced large decreases in mortgage denial rates

between 2001 and 2005, even though these areas experienced poor economic performance over

this period. This suggests that sub-prime mortgages facilitated the run-up in real estate prices in

these areas. Moreover, Mayer, et al, (2009) note that mortgage defaults and delinquencies were

particularly concentrated among mortgages that were classified as “subprime or near-prime.”

However, U.S. real estate appreciation was not exorbitant relative to other OECD countries,



                                                 11
suggesting that sub-prime lending alone, alone cannot explain the run-up in real estate prices (De

Michelis, 2009); this was exceptionally prevalent in the United States.


       For all these reasons, run-ups in real estate prices are commonly considered important

factors in determining relative economic vulnerability in the global financial crisis.


       The bubble in real estate values was paralleled by a run-up in other asset prices,

especially in equity. It is widely thought that these “bubbles” were fueled by easy monetary

policy and an underestimation of underlying risks in financial markets (Frankel, 2008). Reinhart

and Rogoff (2008) demonstrate that equity price appreciation in the United States was even more

dramatic than appreciations experienced during the “Big Five” post-war debt crises, and

speculate that the cause was the “extraordinary amount” of stimulus provided by the Federal

Reserve during the run-up to the crisis. As global economic activity slowed and equity prices

fell, those countries that had experienced the greatest increases in equity prices during the boom

period found themselves most vulnerable.


       We therefore include a number of measures of real estate and equity price appreciation.

We include the Percentage Change in Real Estate Prices, based on data from the BIS and

augmented by an Asia-specific study by Glindro, et al (2008). As measures of equity market

appreciation, we include: Market Capitalization as a share of GDP; the value of Stocks Traded

relative to GDP; and Stock Market Growth.


International Imbalances


       Many countries built up precarious international financial positions over the boom years

that became unsustainable when easy credit extension ceased (Buiter, 2009). The sources of

these imbalances are controversial. Many observers, such as Buiter (2007) and Wolf (Teslik,

                                                 12
2009), identify the efforts by Asian and oil-exporting governments to build up large currency

reserves as a source of the major global imbalances and subsequent excessive asset price

appreciation in the west.


        This particularly includes China, which ran huge trade surpluses with developed

countries and accumulated over $1 trillion in foreign reserves. However, Buiter (2009) also

argues that the western nations were complicit in fueling these current account deficits through

lax macroeconomic policies. In fact, those who point to monetary policy in the United States as

a prominent factor in causing the crisis often argue that the imbalances would have been there

even with a more flexible Chinese exchange rate (e.g. Mohan, 2009).12


        Fratzscher (2009) finds that countries with worse than average current account positions

experienced greater than average exchange rate depreciations during 2008. He also finds that

countries with larger than average liabilities towards the United States also suffered larger than

average exchange rate depreciations that year. He conjectures that US investors in need of dollar

liquidity were reluctant to roll those credit extensions over during the most turbulent period of

the financial crisis.


        Given a country’s current account position, its ability to manage that position is likely to

be a function of its “war chest” of international reserves. Obstfeld, et al (2009) find that

inadequate holdings of foreign exchange reserves relative to estimated “required” levels based on

their theoretical specification was an important predictor of exchange rate depreciation in 2008.

Fratzscher (2009) finds that adequate holdings of foreign exchange reserves significantly

affected the exchange rate experiences of countries in 2008. He finds that countries with below-




                                                 13
average reserve holdings experienced a 23% average exchange rate depreciation against the

dollar, while those with above-average holdings only experienced a 7% depreciation on average.


       We therefore include both measures of the severity of current account imbalances and the

adequacy of holdings of foreign reserves. As measures of the external balance position, we

include both stock and flow measures: the Net External Position, the Current Account (both

measured as percentages of GDP, Debt Service as a percent of exports, External Debt as a

percentage of gross national income, Gross Financing in International Capital Markets as a

percent of GDP, and the Real Effective Exchange Rate (normalized to be 100 in the year 2000).

As measures of the adequacy of foreign reserve holdings, we include Total Reserves as a percent

of external debt, Short-Term Debt as a Percent of Reserves, Total Reserves over the Value of a

Month of Imports, M2 as a percent of Total Reserves minus Gold, and M2 as a percent of

Central Bank Foreign Assets.


Macroeconomic Policies


       Many have blamed easy have blamed lax macroeconomic policies for exacerbating

current account imbalances and fueling the boom. Taylor-Rule based simulations indicate that

the Federal Funds rate was below levels consistent with a 2% inflation target between 2003 and

2006, sometimes by as much as 200 basis points (e.g. White, 2008). However, this viewpoint is

not universal. For example, Hall and Woodward (2009) argue that the easy monetary policy at

the start of the decade represented “responsible” monetary policy to head off deflation rather

than an “… irresponsible contribution to a housing bubble.”




                                                14
       In addition to expansionary monetary policy, others (e.g. De Long, 2009) point to the

perception that the Federal Reserve stood ready to step in to support asset prices (the so-called

Greenspan and Bernanke “puts”) as a cause for excessive asset price appreciation.


       Analysts have also pointed to lax fiscal policy as a source of vulnerability. Buiter (2009)

argues that countries such as the United States and the United Kingdom pursued unsustainable

fiscal deficits that exacerbated the expansion of current account deficits. Moreover, he argues

that lax fiscal policy has resulted in a loss of fiscal credibility in government’s capacity to

address the global crisis. Large deficits have raised concerns that current expansionary fiscal

policies will be resolved either by monetization or default. In turn, this concern has pushed up

long-term interest rates, reducing the effectiveness of fiscal policy as a counter-cyclical

instrument. Alternatively, some speculate that such concerns may encourage governments to

resist fiscal easing, thereby exacerbating the economic downturns.


       As measures of cross-sectional differences in monetary regimes, we include a dummy

indicating if a country is a Currency Union member, the Aggregate GDP of a Country’s

Monetary Zone, a dummy indicating countries that are members of the European Union, but not

the European Monetary Union, a dummy indicating of a country is an Inflation Targeter, M2 as

a percent of GDP, and M3 as a percent of GDP. As measures of cross-sectional differences in

fiscal policies, we include the Government Budget Surplus/Deficit as a share of GDP, the stock

of Central Government Debt as a share of GDP, the stock of Total Debt as share of GDP, and the

Debt Service Burden as a share of GDP. We also control for cross-country differences in

macroeconomic conditions going into the crisis by including a measure of CPI Inflation and a

measure of GDP Growth.13



                                                  15
Institutional Factors


       We also search for the effects of institutional features across countries in crisis severity.

Acemoglu, et al (2003) find that countries with inferior institutional features suffer from

increased macroeconomic volatility, to the extent that after controlling for institutional

differences, macroeconomic policy differences only play a limited role in explaining cross-

country volatility differences.


       To control for institutional differences, we include the EFW index of

Credit/Labor/Business Regulation, the Polity index, a measure of Constraints on the Executive

(also taken from the Polity data set), a measure of Overall Economic Freedom, a dummy

indicating a Common Law country, indices of Control of Corruption, Regulatory Quality, the

quality of enforcement of the Rule of Law, Political Rights, Civil Liberties, and the EFW

measures of Government Size, Security of Property Rights, and Sound Money Access.


Geography


       Our final set of considerations is geographic; such features may have played a role in

relative performance as well. Iceland’s proximity to the United Kingdom and the Netherlands

made it an attractive destination for British and Dutch depositors, perhaps contributing to the

expansion of its financial sector (Danielsson, 2008). Similarly, Eastern Europe experienced

waves of investment during the boom not enjoyed by more remote economies. While these

investments initially promoted rapid expansion of these proximate economies, they left these

countries more exposed to a reversal of fortune in the wake of a global “sudden stop” in credit

extension.




                                                 16
        To control for geographic differences, we include the Log of Latitude, and dummies for

East Asian countries, Central/Eastern Europe, Central Asian countries, Commodity Exporters,

and English Speaking countries.


        We now turn to empirical evidence concerning the causes and consequences of the 2008

financial crisis.




III: Empirical Strategy


        We examine an international cross-section, using country-specific information. Thus we

ignore linkages between countries almost completely; these would be relevant if the crisis spread

“contagiously.” However, even if the shocks that precipitated the crisis were common and/or

spread contagiously, national fundamentals may help determine the actual incidence of the crisis

across countries. Accordingly, we model the severity of the financial crisis as a function of the

economic, political, and institutional characteristics of a country.14


The Sample of Data


        We are interested in examining a broad cross-section of countries and territories.15 We

wish to include all the countries that have been dramatically affected by the crisis as well as a

number of other countries that have not been affected as badly (as controls). Since the incidence

of the crisis was notable among high-income countries, we include all of them as well as a large

number of developing countries. In particular, we examine all countries with real GDP per

capita of at least $10,000 in 2003. To this set of countries, we add those with real GDP per




                                                  17
capita of at least $4,000 and a population of at least one million.16 We are left with a sample of

107 countries; their names are tabulated in an appendix.17


       We wish to use only data series that would be available for creators and users of early

warning systems. Thus, we restrict ourselves to series that are publicly accessible for a

reasonable number of countries and a reasonable span of time. Clearly much more data exists,

but we doubt that secret or idiosyncratic data would find its way into useful quantitative early

warning models.


Identifying Cross-sectional Differences in Crisis Severity


       Identifying the incidence of a financial crisis (currency, asset, banking, or other) across

countries is no simple matter, let alone determining its severity (e.g. Berg, et al, 2004). Any

reasonable methodology should take into account the fact that potentially serious measurement

error is inherently present.


       We begin with a simple non-structural approach. In particular, we consider four

observable indicators of the crisis, and model the incidence and severity of the crisis as being a

latent variable that can be linked to these variables. When measuring these manifestations of the

crisis, we restrict ourselves insofar as possible to data from 2008 (we sometimes use data from

early 2009).18


       Our first measure of the 2008 crisis is real GDP growth over 2008, as estimated by the

Economic Intelligence Unit (EIU) in early March 2009.19 We also consider a broad range of

financial variables covering stocks, bonds, and international finance. Above and beyond growth,

we include: 1) the percentage change in a broad measure of the national stock market over the

2008 calendar year (collected from national sources); 2) the percentage change in the SDR

                                                 18
(multilateral) exchange rate over 2008 (measured as the domestic currency price of a Special

Drawing Right and taken from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics); and 3) the change in

the country credit rating from Institutional Investor. The latter are ratings created by

Institutional Investor that rank 177 countries on a scale between 0 and 100 where 100 represents

the least likelihood of default (as of March 2009, Switzerland was the most highly rated country

with a score of 94.0, while Zimbabwe brought up the rear at 4.6).20 Institutional Investor

publishes these rankings biannually in March and September; we use the change between March

2008 and March 2009.21 We also use an analogue from Euromoney for sensitivity analysis. Our

four measures of the consequences/manifestations of the crisis are presented for forty key

countries of interest in Table 1. The four indicators are not particularly tightly related, as shown

by the correlation matrix of Appendix Table A3.


       How should these four factors be combined appropriately? Perhaps the most

straightforward way to proceed is to extract a common component from the four variables using

purely statistical techniques and examine its characteristics. Accordingly, we estimate a single

factor using conventional factor analysis; estimates for the “top-40” countries are presented in

Table 2. Our default factor is estimated using the method of principal factors on our four

variables, with regression scoring (because of missing data, the estimates are actually derived

from 85 observations).22 Three variants of the factor are also included for sensitivity analysis:

one replaces the change in the Institutional Investor country credit rating with the analogue from

Euromoney; another drops the exchange rate (since some countries use the exchange rate as an

objective or instrument of monetary policy); and a final variant estimates the factor via

maximum likelihood.




                                                 19
       Our four different variables measuring the severity of the crisis are strongly positively

correlated with each other and deliver broadly similar rankings. A number of countries have

been particularly hard hit by the crisis, and these show up at the top of our list. These include

Iceland most especially; Iceland’s fall from grace was particularly striking and has been much

noted (as of March 2009, Icelandic GDP was forecast by the EIU to shrink by 12% in 2009).

However, a number of other countries have also been hit hard including the Baltic countries

(Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania), the Ukraine, Ireland, Korea, New Zealand, the UK, and

Hungary. All these countries appear towards the top of our list of crisis countries; the

plausibility of the extreme cases lends credibility to this exercise.


       While most of the results in Table 2 seem plausible, our cross-section also includes some

surprising results. For instance, we find Japan – whose GDP decline was particularly severe in

the 4th quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009 – is characterized as relatively unaffected by

the global crisis. In part, this performance is likely explained by the appreciation of the yen, an

idiosyncratic event associated with the unwinding of the yen “carry trade” that was part of the

financial crisis. While one can explain such phenomena, we interpret such mis-characterizations

not as outliers that should be expunged, but as warnings that should make one cautious. In

practice, even determining which countries have been more or less affected by crises can rarely

be determined by a simple mechanistic manipulation of standard economic variables.


Linking Incidence and Causes: First Pass


       Given an estimate of the incidence of the crisis across countries, one can then attempt to

link crisis incidence to its potential causes. We do this by using a host of possible determinants

of the crisis related to the voluminous literature cited above. To avoid endogeneity issues as



                                                  20
much as possible with such an exercise, as well as speak to the potential performances of early

warning models, we restrict ourselves to data from 2006 and earlier for our crisis causes.


       We begin with a simple examination of whether our crude measures of crisis incidence

can be linked to the size and income of a country.23 Figure 1 presents scatter-plots of our four

different measures of crisis incidence (on the ordinate); each is graphed against the natural

logarithm of 2006 population (on the abscissa; this is taken from the World Bank’s World

Development Indicators). Our default measure is portrayed in the top-left graph, and shows only

a cloud of data with a small negative relationship between crisis intensity and size (Iceland is

visible as a small country hit hard by the crisis). The other three variants include a non-

parametric data smoother, and also show a slight negative correlation between crisis incidence

and size. That is, the intensity of the crisis does not seem to be strongly linked to country size.


       By way of contrast, a country’s income is more strongly (negatively) correlated with

crisis intensity. Figure 2 shows that the negative relationship is present for all four variants of

the crisis measure, measuring income with the log of real 2006 GDP per capita (the relationship

is somewhat weaker when the factor is estimated with maximum likelihood).24


       The impressions given in Figures 1 and 2 are graphical in nature and accordingly

informal. However, they can easily be corroborated more rigorously with standard statistical

techniques. Table 3 provides estimates of OLS coefficients from a regression of our default

factor on the natural logarithms of 2006 population and real income per capita; standard errors

robust to the presence of heteroskedasticity are presented parenthetically. Size has a negligible

effect on factor incidence, but income seems to have a sizeable negative effect which is

significantly different from zero at conventional confidence levels. This conclusion does not



                                                  21
depend on the exact way that the factor is estimated, and is consistent with the graphical

evidence of Figures 1 and 2. This tentative evidence points toward an income effect on crisis

incidence but no clear size effect. Nevertheless, we continue to include both effects as controls

in our analysis below.


       A different tack on these issues is to examine the effect of income and regional

groupings. The World Bank splits countries into eight bins, and we use these to create simple

binary variables. There are two groups of high-income countries, OECD and non-OECD.

Developing countries are divided into six regional groupings: East Asia and Pacific; Eastern

Europe and Central Asia; Latin America and the Caribbean; South Asia; Sub-Saharan Africa;

and the Middle East and North Africa. We drop the last region and add seven appropriately

constructed dummies to our regressions in place of population and size. These show much the

same pattern. First, income matters negatively: the OECD dummy is quite negative, the

coefficient on high-income non-OECD less so, and not all the developing country coefficients

are statistically significant. The estimates indicate that Eastern Europe and Central Asian

countries have been quite adversely affected by the crisis. We also obtain statistically significant

negative coefficients for the Sub-Saharan countries and the developing South-Asian countries.


       One way to proceed next would be to run regressions of our extracted factor(s) on a host

of possible causes of the crisis (controlling for size and income). For instance, we include a

measure of the buildup in the stock market in the final column at the extreme right of Table 3 (it

has a statistically insignificant coefficient). However, given that we have a large number of

potential causes and indicators without a directly observable measure of the crisis, we prefer to

model these features collectively and explicitly with a Multiple Indicator Multiple Cause

(MIMIC) model.

                                                 22
The MIMIC Model


        The Multiple Indicators Multiple Causes (MIMIC) model was introduced to econometrics

by Goldberger (1972). Aigner et al (1984) provide a general introduction to latent variable

models, while Gertler (1988) has a nice exposition and empirical application; we follow Gertler’s

exposition below.


        The MIMIC model consists of two sets of equations:


                                           yi , j = β jξi + υ i                                       (1)


                                          ξi = γ k xi ,k + ζ i                                        (2)


where: yi,j is an observation on crisis indicator j for country i, xi,k is an observation for potential

crisis cause k for country i; ξi is a latent variable representing the severity of the crisis for

country i (or lack thereof in our case); β and γ are vectors of coefficients, and ν and ζ are well-

behaved disturbances.25 Equation (1) links J consequences and manifestations of the crisis

(denoted by y) to the unobservable measure of crisis severity. In practice, we model this

measurement equation using our ( J = 4 ) indications of the crisis (the 2008 national changes in:

a) real GDP, b) the stock market, c) the credit rating, and d) the exchange rate). The second

equation models the determination of the crisis as a function of K causes (x’s, dated 2006 or

earlier).


        By substituting (2) into (1), we can derive a model which is no longer a function of the

latent variable ξ. This MIMIC model is a system of J equations with right-hand-sides restricted

to be proportional to each another. These proportionality restrictions constrain the structure to be

a “one-factor” model of the latent variable; with the addition of a normalization, they achieve

                                                   23
identification of the parameters in (1) and (2). One of the features of the MIMIC model is that it

explicitly incorporates measurement error about a key variable – the incidence and severity of

the crisis – in a non-trivial and plausible way.26 Indeed, this is one of the chief attractions of the

MIMIC model to us.27


       We estimate our MIMIC models in STATA with GLLAMM; Rabe-Hesketh et al (2004a,

b) provide further details. The iterative estimation technique begins with adaptive quadrature

which is followed by Newton-Raphson.28 We normalize and achieve identification by imposing

a factor loading of unity on the stock market change.29


       In Table 4 we report estimates of γ when we include only the logs of 2006 population and

real GDP per capita as potential causes in (2); it is thus roughly analogous to Table 3. Following

Table 3, we also provide sensitivity analysis by using three different versions of our latent

variables. We include our four default indicators as measures of the crisis (the same as those

used in Table 3 and tabulated in Table 1). Using a MIMIC model, we estimate our latent

variable from the four underlying crisis indicators and simultaneously link it to size and income

as causes of the crisis; we tabulate estimates of the impact of size and income on this latent

variable in Table 4. These results mirror those from the factor analysis of Table 3. The other

two measures are variants for sensitivity analysis: one replaces the Institutional Investor country

credit rating with its analogue from Euromoney while the second drops the exchange rate

indicator. It is reassuring to see that size has no significant impact on the incidence of crises

across countries, while income has a significantly negative impact. With this robustness check

passed, we proceed on to investigate the cross-country determinants of the financial crisis.




                                                  24
IV: Causes of the Financial Crisis


       We add each of our potential causes to the default MIMIC model of Table 4 one by one,

and report the estimates in Table 5, retaining size and income as causes throughout. Thus the

top-left cell in Table 5 is the (γ) coefficient for the effect of private bank ownership on the latent

variable of crisis incidence (ξ). As with all other cells in the column, the estimate is taken from

our default MIMIC model; four crisis indicators are used to model ξ, while size and income are

included as causes ( x ’s), but not recorded so as to conserve on space.30 Thus each row in the

column tabulates the effect of adding a single extra cause to our MIMIC model, conditional on

including size and income.31, 32


       We also include in Table 5 four other columns of sensitivity analysis. Each is

constructed analogously to our column of default results, but perturbs the methodology in some

way so as to show the sensitivity of our results. The first column to the right of the default uses

the Euromoney country credit ranking in place of that from Institutional Investor, while the

second drops the exchange rate change as a crisis indicator. Another uses a different MIMIC

model estimator (replacing adapative quadrature with Gauss-Hermite quadrature); a fourth

substitutes the income and regional dummy variables of Table 3 in place of the continuous

measures of (log) population and income.


       The results are disappointing and weak in the sense that relatively few of the potential

causes we investigate have a statistically significant impact on crisis incidence (conditional, as

always, on size and income effects). For instance, countries that have experienced a run-up in

real estate prices are often viewed as those that have suffered most severely in the crisis.

However, when we include the percentage change in real estate prices between 2003 and 2006 as


                                                  25
a potential cause of the crisis, it does not have an effect that is statistically different from zero at

conventional levels.33 The same is true of almost all of the (over sixty) additional causes that we

add in the remainder of the table.


        It should be stressed that this observed weakness is not simply an artifact of the MIMIC

framework. As an example, Figure 3a plots one of our measures of the adequacy of the financial

regulatory framework – the capital regulatory index of Barth, Caprio and Levine (2003) – against

each of the four crisis indicator variables. Regulatory conditions are commonly cited as

determinants of the relative performance of the exposure of countries to the economic crisis.

However, even in a simple scatter plot without any control variables, it is clear that there is no

systematic relationship between this commonly-cited causal variable and our crisis indicators.

Indeed, only one of the scatter plots displays a positive correlation between the measure and

subsequent performance, and this relationship is completely insignificant.34


        We obtain similar results for most of the other variables that we investigate as potential

crisis determinants; Figures 3b-3h are analogues to Figure 3a that portray a number of other

potentially important crisis determinants. With the exception of the equity market appreciation

variable (portrayed in Figure 3b) which exhibits its expected negative correlation, there appears

to be little or no correlation between our measures of crisis determinants and crisis

manifestations.


        Figure 4 repeats this exercise but graphs twelve potential causal variables against our

estimated latent crisis variable (not the four underlying indicators of the crisis). We again see

modest negative correlations for the log of real GDP per capita and equity market appreciations,

but little else. In particular, nations’ current account positions, which entered positively in the



                                                   26
univariate specifications with regional dummies excluded, are now insignificant as well.

Possible exceptions include our measures of financial conditions, including domestic bank credit

(relative to GDP) and bank capital (as a percent of total assets); both exhibit modest negative

relationship with our latent variable.


       There are a few exceptions to our generally weak results. Countries that experienced a

large run-up in the stock market (measured relative to output) between 2003 and 2006 were more

likely to be hit by the 2008 crisis. Countries with larger current account deficits and fewer

reserves (measured relative to short-term debt) were also more vulnerable. There is weaker

evidence that countries with high credit growth and a more levered banking sector are also

associated with the severity of the crisis. We also know that some of the Eastern European and

Baltic countries have been hard-hit, and this is apparent when we include geographic dummies.


       Nevertheless, few of our potential causes have strong effects that are robust across

slightly different specifications of our MIMIC model. For instance, a dummy variable that

identifies large commodity exporters is typically statistically insignificant.35 Our results clearly

suggest that measurable pre-existing conditions across countries had little common impact on the

relative severity of these countries’ crisis experiences, as observed within our MIMIC

framework.


       It may be the case that the results in Table 5 are weak because they add causes to our

basic MIMIC model one by one rather than simultaneously. While we are skeptical of this

interpretation, we investigate it further in Table 6. This takes our default MIMIC model and

adds a set of eleven causes simultaneously (above and beyond size and income). Unfortunately

our results here are even worse than those obtained in Table 5; almost none of the coefficients



                                                 27
are statistically significant, with the exception of the stock market variable and the Central-

Eastern Europe/Central Asia dummy. Both of these enter at statistically significant levels when

the short-term debt/reserves variable is excluded.36


       Overall, it must be concluded that the variables we investigate as potential determinants

of the financial crisis of 2008 deliver only disappointing results. While many seem like they

should be empirically relevant determinants, in practice they are simply not closely linked to

crisis severity. These results indicate that creating an empirically viable early warning system

will be challenging; such a system must conquer all the problems we faced, while also being able

to predict the timing of future crises out of sample.




V: Conclusion


       This paper examines the causes and consequences of the global financial crisis of 2008.

We use a MIMIC (Multiple Indicator Multiple Cause) model that exploits a cross-section of

aggregate data from 107 countries. Our approach explicitly acknowledges that the severity of

the crisis is a continuous variable that is only observed with error. We investigate the

importance of a broad set of potential causes of the crisis in a relatively unstructured empirical

specification, thereby allowing the data to speak as loudly as possible. Our reasoning is that

success in a cross-sectional approach is a necessary (but far from sufficient) condition for any

reliable early warning system, which must also confront additional problems such as predicting

the timing of crises out of sample. We examine a large number of potential explanatory

variables for the crisis that have been discussed in the literature; these cover a host of

“fundamentals” including the regulatory framework, financial conditions, and the


                                                  28
macroeconomic, institutional, and geographic features of a country. However, we found almost

none of our posited variables seem to be statistically significant determinants of crisis severity;

they simply do not account for the incidence of the crisis across countries. While we can model

the incidence of the crisis reasonably well, we have been unable to link the severity of the crisis

across countries to its causes.


       One potential reason why our results are weak may be that we have poor measures of the

fundamental determinants of the crisis, or of its incidence. Our data on crisis manifestations

were collected in the early Spring of 2009, and may not adequately capture the full extent of the

financial crisis. Still, our measures of crisis incidence and severity seem intuitive and

reasonable; our problem seems to be explaining the crisis of 2008, not measuring it.


       However, there are two other possible reasons for the weakness of our results, both of

which bode poorly for the performance of early warning models. First, a potentially serious

problem with our approach is that we model the cross-country incidence of the crisis as being

due to national characteristics. This is inappropriate if the fundamental causes of the crisis are

international in nature, for instance because the crisis spreads contagiously or is the result of a

common shock. Still, our negative results imply that even if the crisis was transmitted across

countries through one or more channels, its incidence seems unrelated to national fundamentals.


       Alternatively, a plausible interpretation for our weak results is that it is quite difficult to

model the determinants of crises. Perhaps the causes of the 2008 crisis were idiosyncratic and

lack a common explanation; perhaps the linkages exist but are opaque and cannot be easily

quantified with observable data. Essentially what we have shown here is that the cross-country

causes of the financial crisis are hard to pin down with standard econometric techniques.



                                                  29
       Negative results like ours in a cross-section make us dubious about the accuracy of an

early warning model that will have all the problems we have encountered and, in addition, the

problem of predicting the timing of future crises. So, with the caveat that the data we use

represent only early evidence concerning the manifestations of the global financial crisis, we

conclude that our paper provides an early warning that model-based early warning systems are

unlikely to predict future crises accurately.




                                                30
Table 1: Consequences and Manifestations of the Crisis, Top 40 Countries

% Changes, 2008:       Real GDP         II Rating      Stock Market      Price of SDR
Iceland                  -4.7              -32.5           -90.0              90.0
Ukraine                   2.1              -12.1           -74.3             48.6
Estonia                  -2.8               -9.4           -63.0               1.7
Argentina                  6               -13.6           -49.8              6.9
Latvia                   -4.6               -8.3           -55.1               -.3
Ireland                  -2.8               -7.8           -66.1               3.1
Korea                     2.6               -7.3           -40.7             30.9
New Zealand               -.9               -5.4           -37.4             30.4
UK                         .7               -5.5           -31.5              33.9
Hungary                    .4               -7.6           -53.2              6.1
Kazakhstan                3.2               -8.9           -65.7              -2.1
Lithuania                 3.7               -7.9           -66.0              1.3
Australia                 2.1               -4.5           -43.0             24.0
South Africa              3.1               -4.7           -26.3             33.2
Turkey                    1.5               -3.0           -52.4             27.6
Bulgaria                  5.4               -6.6           -79.7              1.6
Italy                     -.6               -4.7           -49.5              3.1
Sweden                     .5               -3.5           -42.0              18.7
Russia                    5.6               -4.8           -64.9             16.7
Norway                    1.5               -2.1           -52.6             26.1
Romania                   7.7               -5.9           -70.5             12.5
Austria                   1.6               -4.6           -61.2              3.1
Portugal                   0                -4.3           -51.2              3.1
Canada                     .6               -3.0           -35.0              20.8
Greece                     3                -4.6           -65.5              3.1
Mexico                    1.5               -3.6           -24.1             21.4
United States             1.2               -5.8           -38.5              -2.5
Belgium                   1.1               -3.8           -53.8              3.1
Croatia                   2.2               -3.7           -67.1                .8
Namibia                   3.3               -1.1           -40.1             33.2
Spain                     1.1               -4.2           -39.4              3.1
Luxembourg                 .6               -2.6           -59.5              3.1
Denmark                   -.9               -2.6           -48.6              1.5
Singapore                 1.2               -3.8           -48.9              -2.7
Swaziland                 2.7               -2.6            3.9              33.2
Finland                   1.4               -2.6           -53.4              3.1
Japan                     -.5               -5.7           -42.1             -22.4
France                     .7               -2.6           -42.7              3.1
Netherlands                2                -2.5           -52.3              3.1
Thailand                   3                -3.5           -47.6              1.3
Poland                    4.8               -1.5           -51.1             18.6
Estimates of GDP 2008 Growth from Economist Intelligence Unit; change in country credit ratings between 3/2007
and 3/2008 from Institutional Investor; 2008 percentage change in stock market from major market indices; 2008
change in domestic price of SDR from IFS.




                                                      31
Table 2: First Principal Factor for Top 40 Countries

                    Default         EuroMoney            Drop              MLE
                                      not II         Exchange Rate        Estimate
Iceland              -5.5              -3.3               -4.2              -6.7
Ukraine              -1.9               -.7              -1.4               -2.0
Estonia              -1.1               -2.               -1.4              -1.4
Argentina            -1.1                .4                -.9              -2.3
Latvia               -1.0              -1.5               -1.3              -1.1
Ireland              -1.0              -1.2               -1.2              -1.0
Korea                 -.9               -.1                -.4               -.9
New Zealand           -.8              -1.0                -.5               -.5
UK                    -.7               -.8                -.3               -.5
Hungary               -.7              -1.2                -.8              -1.0
Kazakhstan            -.7                .0                -.9              -1.3
Lithuania             -.6               -.6                -.7              -1.0
Australia             -.5               -.5                -.2               -.3
South Africa          -.5               -.1                 .1               -.3
Turkey                -.5               -.2                -.2                .1
Bulgaria              -.4                .0                -.6               -.7
Italy                 -.4               -.8                -.5               -.3
Sweden                -.4               -.7                -.2               -.0
Russia                -.3                .5                -.2               -.3
Norway                -.3               -.4                -.1                .3
Romania               -.3                .4                -.3               -.6
Austria               -.3               -.6                -.5               -.3
Portugal              -.3               -.8                -.5               -.2
Canada                -.3               -.6                -.1                .1
Greece                -.3               -.2                -.4               -.3
Mexico                -.2               -.3                 .1               -.1
United States         -.2               -.3                -.4               -.5
Belgium               -.2               -.6                -.4               -.1
Croatia               -.2               -.2                -.4               -.1
Namibia               -.1                .8                 .3                .5
Spain                 -.1               -.6                -.2               -.2
Luxembourg            -.1               -.7                -.4                .2
Denmark               -.1               -.7                -.3                .2
Singapore             -.1               -.2                -.3               -.1
Swaziland             -.0                .2                 .6                .2
Finland               -.0               -.4                -.2                .2
Japan                 -.0               -.4                -.5               -.5
France                .0                -.6                -.1                .2
Netherlands           .0                -.4                -.1                .2
Thailand              .0                -.1                -.1               -.0
Poland                .1                 .1                .2                .4
Default estimate is of first principal factor from 2008 growth, Institutional Investor country credit rating change,
stock market change and exchange rate change, estimated with principal factors (not rotated), cross-section of 85
observations; eigenvalue=1.33 (second eigenvalue=.11).




                                                          32
Table 3: Regressions of Principal Factor on Size and Income

Crisis Measure:                   Default      EuroM        No ER         MLE         Default      Default
Log (2006 Population)               -.01         .01          -.02          -.00                     .03
                                   (.08)        (.05)        (.06)         (.10)                    (.08)
Log (2006 Real GDP per            -.28**       -.44**       -.37**        -.26**                   -.38**
capita)                            (.08)        (.08)        (.07)         (.10)                    (.10)
OECD Dummy                                                                            -1.08**
                                                                                        (.24)
High-Income, non-                                                                       -.22*
OECD Dummy                                                                              (.09)
Developing East Asia,                                                                    -.13
Pacific Dummy                                                                           (.16)
Developing Eastern                                                                     -.93**
Europe, Central Asia                                                                    (.19)
Dummy
Developing Latin                                                                         -.23
American, Caribbean                                                                     (.14)
Dummy
Developing South Asia                                                                  -.17**
Dummy                                                                                   (.03)
Developing Sub-Saharan                                                                 -.58**
Africa Dummy                                                                            (.15)
Stock Market Growth,                                                                                  -.23
2003-6                                                                                               (.12)
Coefficients, with robust standard errors in parentheses. Coefficients significantly different from zero at .05 (.01)
significance level marked by one (two) asterisk(s).
Regressand is first factor (largest eigenvalue) from default specification. Intercept included but not recorded. 85
observations for default factor without stock market growth.




Table 4: The Effect of Size and Income in the MIMIC Model

                                        Default                Euromoney instead of             Drop SDR Exchange
                                                               Institutional Investor                   Rate
Log(2006 Population)                      -.98                          -1.05                          -2.08
                                          (.95)                          (.98)                         (1.12)
Log(2006 Real GDP                       -7.79**                        -7.80**                        -10.1**
per capita)                              (2.44)                         (2.46)                         (2.66)
Coefficients, with standard error displayed in parentheses. Coefficients significantly different from zero at .05 (.01)
significance level marked by one (two) asterisk(s).
Each column represents MIMC estimation on cross-section. Default: 4 consequences (2008 change in Stocks, 2008
Growth, 1-year change in Institutional rating, 2008 Exchange Rate change), fixed loading on stocks. Adaptive
quadrature estimation.

                                                          33
Table 5: Adding Causes to the MIMIC Model, One by One

          Extra Cause               Default    Euromoney,       Drop        Different   Region/Income
                                                 not II     Exchange Rate   Estimator     Dummies
Financial Policies
           Overall Capital            1.87         1.26           .82         1.04           1.00
          Stringency, 2003           (1.40)       (1.31)        (1.35)       (1.22)         (1.25)
         Capital Regulatory           1.19          .78           .84          .51           -.55
             Index, 2003             (1.25)       (1.42)        (1.19)       (1.26)         (1.11)
        Official Supervisory           .62       -.0006           .13          .65         -.0004
             Power, 2003              (.61)      (.0010)         (.61)        (.51)        (.0007)
      Ability to Take Prompt           .70          .58           .16          .66         1.57**
      Corrective Action, 2003         (.91)        (.81)         (.87)        (.78)          (.54)
            Restructuring             1.11          .98           .68         1.85           2.01
             Power, 2003             (2.41)       (2.40)        (2.26)       (1.94)         (2.22)
        Declaring Insolvency         -1.65        -1.70         -1.84         -.34           -.25
             Power, 2003             (3.06)       (3.05)        (2.95)       (3.71)         (2.80)
            Credit Market              .35          .65          1.38          .45           3.74
          Regulation, 2006           (2.44)       (2.47)        (2.59)       (2.31)         (2.16)
            Private Bank               .04          .11           .30          .04           1.38
          Ownership, 2006             (.94)        (.95)        (1.12)        (.95)          (.84)
            Foreign Bank               .81          .87          1.77         1.05           1.13
         Competition, 2006           (1.63)       (1.64)        (1.69)       (1.49)         (1.52)
  Interest Rate Controls/negative      .72          .83           .48         -.55           1.22
       real interest rate, 2006      (2.82)       (2.86)        (3.08)       (2.52)         (2.48)
Financial Conditions
 Domestic Credit Private Sector,      -.06         -.05          -.05          -.05        -.091*
             %GDP 2006                (.05)       (.04)         (.04)         (.03)        (.045)
      Domestic Bank Credit,           -.06        -.06*          -.02        -.056*         -.09*
             %GDP 2006                (.04)       (.03)         (.04)        (.025)         (.04)
            Private Sector            -.34         -.15          .25           -.28          .68
        Credit Access, 2006          (1.66)      (1.68)        (1.80)        (2.63)        (1.51)
       Bank Non-Performing           -1.00        -1.04         -1.00        -1.10*          n/a
       Loans, % Loans 2006            (.53)       (.53)         (.53)         (.42)
      Bank Liquid Reserves,            .03         .05           .01           .05          -.06
           %Assets 2006               (.11)       (.06)         (.10)         (.06)         (.08)
            Bank Capital,              .21         .24           .61           .21          -.19
           %Assets 2006               (.69)       (.62)         (.89)         (.60)         (.76)
            Bank Claims,             -9.1*       -6.39*        -8.53*         -6.2*          .01
          %Deposits 2006              (4.3)      (2.92)        (3.94)         (2.7)         (.01)
Asset Price Appreciation
     % Chg Real Estate Prices,        -2.96       -3.28         -11.4         -2.96         -3.42
                2003-6                (5.37)      (5.41)         (5.8)        (5.37)       (5.34)
        % Chg Market Cap,           -10.20**     -10.5**       -10.5**       -10.6**       -7.2**
           %GDP 2003-6                (1.99)      (1.90)         (2.1)        (1.84)        (2.0)
       Stock Market Growth,            -.06        -.11          -.08          -.11          -.03
                 2006                  (.10)       (.07)         (.13)         (.06)        (.08)
             Market Cap,                .01        -.00           .01          -.00          -.02
             %GDP 2006                 (.03)       (.03)         (.04)         (.03)        (.03)
           Stocks Traded,               .02         .02           .02           .02          -.02
             %GDP2006                  (.03)       (.03)         (.03)         (.03)        (.03)
International Imbalances
       Net External Position,         4.23       5.07*           3.36        5.07*           2.1
             %GDP 2004               (2.58)      (2.11)         (2.66)       (2.12)         (3.6)
          Current Account,           .56**       .57**          .41**        .54**          -.08
            %GDP 2006                 (.17)       (.18)          (.17)        (.16)         (.16)
            Debt Service,             -.17        -.17           -.36         -.01           n/a
          % Exports 2006              (.42)       (.41)          (.38)        (.16)
           External Debt,             -.01        -.01            n/a        .24**           n/a
             %GNI 2006                (.18)       (.17)                       (.06)


                                                     34
 Gross Financing via international    2.32**       .0000      -.84      2.20**        n/a
  capital markets, % GDP 2006          (.31)      (.0002)     (.63)       (.31)
     Real Effective Exchange           -.22         -.22      -.23        -.19        n/a
      Rate 2006 (2000=100)             (.13)        (.13)     (.15)       (.10)
          Total Reserves,              -.00       -.028**      .01       -.002      -.013*
       %external debt 2006             (.01)       (.007)     (.01)      (.004)     (.005)
         Short-Term Debt,             .36**      .00010*       -.10      .13**      .36**
          %Reserves 2006               (.08)     (.00002)     (.10)       (.03)      (.04)
          Total Reserves,               .36          .40       .14         .40        -.15
        import months 2006             (.43)        (.33)     (.38)       (.35)      (.36)
                 M2,                     0       -.000001      .26     -.00001         .02
   %(total reserves – gold) 2006                 (.00003)     (.17)    (.00006)      (.14)
       M2, %(Central Bank             1.7e-7          0         .09         0         .-02
       foreign assets) 2006          (1.6e-6)                 (.05)                  (.05)
Macroeconomic Policies
          Currency Union                 9.1       11.9*      5.15       12.2**       -.01
           member, 2006                 (5.1)      (4.4)     (4.97)      (4.23)      (.01)
         GDP of Monetary             -2.9e-13    -3.0e-13       0       2.9e-13    -2.2e-13
             Zone, 2006              (2.7e-13)   (2.0e-13)             (2.7e-13)   (1.6e-13)
         EU but non-EMU                 -10.8     -11.4*     -14.2**     -10.6*     -10.6*
           Member, 2006                 (5.8)      (5.1)       (5.1)       (5.4)     (5.3)
         Inflation Targeter,             .02        .02         .57         .02       -5.9
                 2006                   (.02)      (.03)       (4.9)       (.02)     (8.6)
                 M2,                  -9.8e-7       n/a         -.00    -.00002       -.04
            %GDP 2006                 (6.3e-6)                 (.05)   (.00002)      (.06)
                 M3,                  -8.3e-7    -1.1e-6        -.01    -.00001        n/a
            %GDP 2006                 (4.7e-6)   (6.1e-6)      (.05)   (.00004)
            Gov’t Budget                 .22        .23          .12       .65*       -.34
  Surplus/Deficit, % GDP 2006           (.52)      (.52)       (.52)       (.31)     (.49)
       Central Gov’t Debt,               -.01       -.01        -.03       -.02      -.00
            %GDP 2006                   (.07)      (.08)       (.08)       (.07)     (.09)
                Debt,                    .09        .08       -.35**      .22**        n/a
            %GNP 2006                   (.20)      (.20)       (.13)       (.06)
            Debt Service,              -1.81*     -1.76*        -.97    -2.61**       n/a
            % GDP 2006                  (.71)      (.70)       (.56)       (.29)
            CPI Inflation,               .32        .36         .11         -.18      .46
                 2006                   (.72)      (.72)       (.69)       (.65)     (.70)
           GDP Growth,                   -.15      -.10        -1.25       -.72      -.29
                 2006                   (.74)      (.74)       (.81)       (.61)     (.81)
Institutions
      Credit/Labor/Business            2.14        2.39       3.41       1.04        3.52
      Regulation, EFW 2006            (2.73)      (2.75)     (2.82)     (2.33)      (2.20)
                Polity,                -.25        -.36       -.35       -.34        -.39
                 2006                  (.33)       (.24)      (.26)      (.23)       (.39)
           Constraints on             -1.58       -1.57       1.58      -1.49       -1.75
          Executive, 2006             (1.12)      (1.12)     (1.12)      (.89)      (1.29)
         Overall Economic              2.64        3.34       3.90       1.75        2.78
           Freedom, 2006              (1.53)      (3.61)     (3.77)     (2.92)      (3.09)
           Common Law                  2.98        5.57       8.49       3.21        .002
              Country                 (4.79)     (10.31)     (4.72)     (8.17)      (.004)
             Control of                 .56         .44       6.20       -.35        -3.8
             Corruption               (3.34)      (4.40)     (3.47)     (4.48)       (4.8)
             Regulatory                 .88        1.09        .21       1.27        -.97
               Quality                (3.53)      (4.98)      (3.7)     (4.72)       (3.4)
               Rule of                 -.51        -.68       2,77       -.11       -3.40
                 Law                  (3.80)      (3.80)     (3.98)     (4.30)      (3.36)
              Political                1.22        1.24        .92       1.58        1.36
            Rights, 2006              (1.12)      (1.12)     (1.15)      (.93)      (1.26)
                 Civil                 1.36        1.40        .88       1.47        1.08
           Liberties, 2006            (1.35)      (1.35)     (1.38)     (1.08)      (1.49)


                                                      35
   Government Size,            2.64             2.85             3.26*              2.69               1.68
           2006               (1.53)           (1.53)            (1.59)            (1.64)             (1.41)
Legal Security of Property     .03               .21              1.33              -.04               -.15
      Rights, 2006            (2.24)           (2.26)            (2.33)            (1.57)             (2.07)
      Sound Money              -.24             -.20              -.78               .56                .80
      Access, 2006            (2.02)           (2.05)            (2.18)            (1.71)             (2.00)
Geography
          Log of                -4.8           -5.67*           -7.54**            -5.7**              -.56
         Latitude               (2.5)          (1.95)            (2.70)             (1.9)             (2.45)
           East                  3.9             .75              -3.6              -.004               n/a
          Asian                 (6.8)           (7.9)            (6.65)            (.003)
Central/Eastern European      -16.7**         -16.9**           -22.0**           -16.2**              n/a
    or Central Asian            (5.2)           (5.4)            (4.73)             (5.3)
       Commodity                 1.5             .73              5.58               -1.9              1.67
        Exporter                (4.7)          (4.55)            (4.37)             (4.8)             (4.11)
         English                6.23            6.33            12.8**              8.46               4.37
        Language               (4.71)          (4.70)             (4.3)            (6.76)             (4.61)
Coefficients, with standard error displayed in parentheses. Coefficients significantly different from zero at .05 (.01)
significance level marked by one (two) asterisk(s).
Each cell represents MIMC estimation on cross-section. Default: 4 consequences (2008 change in Stocks, 2008
Growth, 1-year change in Institutional rating, 2008 Exchange Rate change), fixed loading on stocks. Two control
causes (log 2006 population and log 2006 real GDP p/c) included in all runs but not recorded. Adaptive quadrature
estimation.




                                                          36
Table 6: Adding Causes to the MIMIC Model Simultaneously

          Extra Cause                  Default         Without        Drop Poor         Drop Small       Drop Size,
                                                       ST Debt       (GDPpc<$5k)        (Pop<1m)          Income
Financial Policies
          Overall Capital                  1.8             1.1               .1               1.8              .6
         Stringency, 2003                (1.9)           (1.2)            (1.8)             (1.9)            (2.0)
Financial Conditions
     Domestic Bank Credit,                 .04             .00              .01               .04             -.04
            %GDP 2006                    (.07)           (.04)            (.06)             (.07)            (.07)
     Bank Claims/Deposits,                 9.4             1.7            10.8               10.8              8.9
                2006                     (8.9)           (4.4)            (7.6)             (8.9)            (9.8)
Asset Price Appreciation
       % Chg Market Cap,                 -5.6*          -6.6**             -2.3              -5.6           -6.0*
          %GDP 2003-6                    (2.4)           (2.0)            (2.3)             (2.4)            (2.6)
International Imbalances
        Current Account,                   .43             .01              .04               .46             -.64
            %GDP 2006                    (.64)           (.24)            (.57)             (.64)            (.52)
        Short-Term Debt,                  -.08                             -.07              -.09             -.14
        %/Reserves 2006                  (.10)                            (.08)             (.10)            (.10)
Macroeconomic Policies
    Currency Union member,                10.9            -2.8            18.5               12.3            17.4
                2006                     (9.3)           (4.9)            (9.2)             (9.2)            (9.8)
   EU but non-EMU member,                  1.0            -9.3              1.1               1.1             -9.6
                2006                    (10.4)           (6.4)            (9.7)            (10.4)           (10.3)
Institutions
               Polity,                     .19            -.22              .04               .21             -.28
                2006                     (.56)           (.43)            (.54)             (.56)            (.57)
Geography
               Log of                      3.6             1.0              2.8               4.4              3.9
              Latitude                   (4.4)           (2.7)            (4.1)             (4.4)            (4.7)
    Central/Eastern European             -19.8          -15.4*          -37.0**             -20.3          -26.0*
         or Central Asian               (10.8)           (6.9)           (10.1)            (10.8)           (11.6)
Observations                               40              68               32                39               39
Coefficients, with standard error displayed in parentheses. Coefficients significantly different from zero at .05 (.01)
significance level marked by one (two) asterisk(s). Each column represents MIMC estimation on cross-section. 4
consequences (2008 change in Stocks, 2008 Growth, 1-year change in Institutional rating, 2008 Exchange Rate
change), fixed loading on stocks. Two control causes (log 2006 population and log 2006 real GDP p/c) included but
not recorded except where noted. Adaptive quadrature estimation.




                                                          37
Figure 1
       2                                                                                                   2
                           Qatar         Slovakia
                                          Papua Ne
                  Barbados          Oman    Libya
                                            El Salva      Peru
                   Bahamas   Trinidad
                         Bahrain     Panama
                                         Kyrgyz
                                       Costa
                                      Lebanon
                                    Kuwait      RiR Saudi
                                                TunisiaVenezuel
                                                         Morocco
                                                             Ar Egypt
                                                                  Iran Brazil
                                                           Colombia                      China
                             Mauritiu
                          Cyprus
                      Malta     Slovenia
                               Macedoni
                              Botswana        Israel
                                             SwitzerlSri Lank
                                                       Malaysia          Indonesi
                                   Jamaica
                            Swazilan       Hong
                                      United    A Ecuador
                                               Czech
                                          Finland
                                      Singapor     Kon Taiwan
                                                     Chile
                                                       Re
                                                    Netherla    Germany,
                                                           Poland
                                                               Thailand
                                                               France Japan
       0             Luxembou    Namibia Denmark
                                        Croatia
                                         Norway Belgium
                                                 Greece
                                                Portugal
                                               Austria
                                               Sweden
                                             BulgariaRomania Spain
                                                          Canada    MexicoUnited S
                                                                    Af Russia
                                                                Italy
                                                            South
                                                      Australi  Turkey
                                     Lithuani Hungary
                                                   Kazakhst      UK
                             Estonia
                                      New    Zeal
                                        Ireland
                                   Latvia                    Korea
                                                           Argentin                                        0
                                                             Ukraine
      -2

                                                                                                           -2
      -4

                   Iceland
      -6                                                                                                   -4
           11                                     16                                      21                    11               16               21

                                 Default                                                                             Euromoney, not II
       2
                                                                                                           0

       0


                                                                                                           -5
      -2



      -4                                                                                                  -10
           11                                     16                                      21                    11               16               21

                 Drop Exchange Rate                                                                             Maximum Likelihood, not PF
                                     Factors (y) against log Population (x)


Figure 2
       2                                                                                                   2
                 Papua Ne                                     Slovakia          Qatar
                                             Peru
                                      El Colombia
                                         Salva              Barbados
                                                          Libya
                Kyrgyz R       Morocco
                                     Egypt
                                    China
                               Sri Lank    Tunisia  IranRi Oman
                                                 Panama
                                                Costa
                                                   Venezuel
                                                Lebanon
                                                   Mauritiu
                                                Brazil
                                                                  Trinidad
                                                                Bahamas
                                                                  Bahrain
                                                                  Saudi  Kuwait
                                                                         Ar Switzerl
                                                                      Israel
                             Indonesi       Macedoni
                                           Ecuador    Malaysia
                                                      Botswana
                                                         Chile       Slovenia
                                                                      Cyprus
                                                                   Malta
                                                                  Taiwan
                                                                 Czech   Re
                                         Jamaica           Poland            Hong
                                                                         Germany,
                                                                              UnitedKon
                                                                                      A
       0                            NamibiaThailand
                                   Swazilan
                                                  Romania Croatia
                                                      Mexico
                                                                             Netherla
                                                                          France
                                                                           Japan
                                                                           Finland
                                                                                 Singapor
                                                                           Denmark
                                                                         Spain
                                                                           Belgium
                                                                          GreeceUnited
                                                                             Canada
                                                                 PortugalItaly
                                                                             Austria    S Luxembou
                                               South   AfRussia
                                                  Bulgaria
                                                     Turkey
                                                Kazakhst    Lithuani
                                                                           Sweden
                                                                           AustraliNorway
                                                               Hungary        UK
                                                            Latvia
                                                     Argentin
                                                                     New
                                                                    Korea
                                                                Estonia
                                                                          Zeal Ireland                     0
                                        Ukraine
      -2

                                                                                                           -2
      -4

                                                                           Iceland
      -6                                                                                                   -4
           7                                      9                                   11                        7                9           11

                                 Default                                                                             Euromoney, not II
       2
                                                                                                           0

       0


                                                                                                           -5
      -2



      -4                                                                                                  -10
           7                                      9                                   11                        7                9           11

                 Drop Exchange Rate                                                                             Maximum Likelihood, not PF
                     Factors (y) against log real GDP per capita (x)



                                                                                                     38
Figure 3a

   2008 Crisis Manifestations against Capital Regulatory Index
                    Stock Market Change                             Depreciation against SDR




                                                      100
     0




                                                      50
     -50




                                                      0
     -100




                                                      -50
            2           4         6         8               2             4         6          8



                Country Credit Rating Change                           GDP Growth Rate
     10




                                                      15
     -10




                                                      5
     -30




                                                      -5
            2           4         6         8               2             4         6          8


                    Barth, Caprio and Levine 2003 Capital Regulatory Index



Figure 3b

      2008 Crisis Manifestations against Stock Market Runup
                    Stock Market Change                             Depreciation against SDR
                                                      100
     0




                                                      50
     -50




                                                      0
     -100




                                                      -50




                0        200      400      600                  0          200      400        600



            Country Credit Rating Change                               GDP Growth Rate
     10




                                                      15
     -10




                                                      5
     -30




                                                      -5




                0        200      400      600                  0          200      400        600


                       2003-06 Change in Market Capital (%GDP), WDI




                                                 39
Figure 3c

   2008 Crisis Manifestations against Domestic Credit Growth
                     Stock Market Change                           Depreciation against SDR




                                                      100
     0




                                                      50
     -50




                                                      0
     -100




                                                      -50
            -100       0     100    200    300              -100       0     100    200       300



                 Country Credit Rating Change                         GDP Growth Rate
     10




                                                      15
     -10




                                                      5
     -30




                                                      -5
            -100       0     100    200    300              -100       0     100    200       300


                           2006 Domestic Bank Credit (%GDP), WDI



Figure 3d

  2008 Crisis Manifestations against Bank Claim/Deposit Ratio
                    Stock Market Change                            Depreciation against SDR
                                                      100
     0




                                                      50
     -50




                                                      0
     -100




                                                      -50




             0         1      2      3      4                0         1      2      3          4



                 Country Credit Rating Change                         GDP Growth Rate
     10




                                                      15
     -10




                                                      5
     -30




                                                      -5




             0         1      2      3      4                0         1      2      3          4


                              2006 Bank Claims (%Deposits), IFS




                                                 40
Figure 3e

   2008 Crisis Manifestations against Real Estate Price Runup
                 Stock Market Change                               Depreciation against SDR




                                                         100
     0




                                                         50
     -50




                                                         0
     -100




                                                         -50
             0           50        100        150              0             50        100    150



            Country Credit Rating Change                              GDP Growth Rate
     10




                                                         15
     -10




                                                         5
     -30




                                                         -5
             0           50        100        150              0             50        100    150


                         2003-06 Change in Real Real Estate Prices


Figure 3f

    2008 Crisis Manifestations against Bank Capital Adequacy
                 Stock Market Change                               Depreciation against SDR
                                                         100
     0




                                                         50
     -50




                                                         0
     -100




                                                         -50




             5      10        15         20   25               5        10        15     20   25



            Country Credit Rating Change                              GDP Growth Rate
     10




                                                         15
     -10




                                                         5
     -30




                                                         -5




             5      10        15         20   25               5        10        15     20   25


                              2006 Bank Capital (%Assets), WDI




                                                    41
Figure 3g

             2008 Crisis Manifestations against Current Account
                  Stock Market Change                               Depreciation against SDR




                                                        100
     0




                                                        50
     -50




                                                        0
     -100




                                                        -50
            -40   -20       0     20    40    60              -40     -20       0   20    40    60



              Country Credit Rating Change                             GDP Growth Rate
     10




                                                        15
     -10




                                                        5
     -30




                                                        -5
            -40   -20       0     20    40    60              -40     -20       0   20    40    60


                                2006 Current Account (%GDP), WDI



Figure 3h

      2008 Crisis Manifestations against Government Budget
                  Stock Market Change                               Depreciation against SDR
                                                        100
     0




                                                        50
     -50




                                                        0
     -100




                                                        -50




            -10         0          10        20               -10           0        10        20



              Country Credit Rating Change                             GDP Growth Rate
     10




                                                        15
     -10




                                                        5
     -30




                                                        -5




            -10         0          10        20               -10           0        10        20


                            2006 Budget Surplus/Deficit (%GDP), WDI



                                                   42
Figure 4


                                 Latent Crisis Variable against Potential Causes
                                                                                  2006 Causes unless noted
                         Log Population                                Log Real GDP per capita                                    Real Estate Price Runup                                   Stock Market Runup
                                                                                                                                        2003-06 price change                                       2003-06 price change
         2




                                                               2




                                                                                                                   2




                                                                                                                                                                             2
         0




                                                               0




                                                                                                                   -6 -4 -2 0




                                                                                                                                                                             -6 -4 -2 0
         -2




                                                               -2
         -4




                                                               -4
         -6




                                                               -6
                    10               15               20                    7      8        9      10        11                     0            .5         1        1.5                       0          2         4        6



              Overall Capital Stringency                                    Domestic Bank Credit                                          Bank Capital                                     Bank Claims/Deposits
                                 2003                                                      %GDP                                                %Assets




                                                                                                                                                                             2
     2




                                                               2




                                                                                                                     2




                                                                                                                                                                             0
     -6 -4 -2 0




                                                               -6 -4 -2 0




                                                                                                                     -6 -4 -2 0




                                                                                                                                                                             -2
                                                                                                                                                                             -4
                                                                                                                                                                             -6
                   1     2       3        4       5        6                0     100       200        300   400                    5       10        15        20   25                    0          1       2         3    4



                   Capital Regulatory Index                                     Government Budget                                        Current Account                                  Real Eff. Exchange Rate
                                 2003                                                      %GDP                                                  %GDP                                               REER=100 in 2000
      2




                                                               2




                                                                                                                     2




                                                                                                                                                                           2
      -6 -4 -2 0




                                                               -6 -4 -2 0




                                                                                                                     -6 -4 -2 0




                                                                                                                                                                           -6 -4 -2 0
                    2        4                6            8                -10        0          10         20                   -40    -20      0    20       40   60                        80     100     120   140     160
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James Robinson, and Yunyong Thaicharoen, (2003),
“Institutional Causes, Macroeconomic Symptoms: Volatility, Crises and Growth,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 50, 49-123.

Aigner, Dennis J., Cheng Hsiao, Arie Kapetyn, and Tom Wansbreek (2004) “Latent Variable
Models in Econometrics” in Handbook of Econometrics II (Z. Griliches and M.D. Intriligator,
eds) Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, 1321-1393.

Barth, James, Gerard Caprio, and Ross Levine, (2005), Rethinking Bank Regulation: Till Angels
Govern, Cambridge University Press.

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, (2009), “Proposed Enhancements to the Basel II
Framework,” Consultative document, Bank for International Settlements, January.

Berg, Andrew, Eduardo Borensztein, and Catherine Patillo, (2004), “Assessing Early Warning
Systems: How Have They Worked in Practice?” IMF Working Paper no. WP/04/52, March.

Berg, Andrew, and Catherine Patillo, (1999), "Are Currency Crises Predictable? A Test,"
International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, Vol. 46, Issue 2 (June), pp. 107–38.

Bernanke, Ben S., (2009a), “Four Questions about the Financial Crisis,” speech at Morehouse
College, Atlanta, Georgia, April 14.

Bernanke, Ben S., (2009b), “Lessons of the Financial Crisis for Banking Supervision,” speech at
the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, Chicago,
Illinois, May 7.

Boone, Peter, Simon Johnson, and James Kwak, (2009), “Baseline Scenario, April 7, 2009,”
http://baselinescenario.com/2009/04/07/baseline-scenario-april-7-2009/

Breusch, Trevor (2005) “Estimating the Underground Economy Using MIMIC Models” ANU
working paper.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., (2009), “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007,” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 23(1), Winter, 77-100.

Buiter, Willem, (2007), “Lessons from the 2007 Financial Crisis,” Background Paper Submitted
to the UK Treasury Select Committee, December 11, 2007.

Buiter, Willem, (2009), “Fiscal Expansions in Submerging Markets; the Case of the USA and the
UK,” ft.com/maverecon, February 5, http://blogs.ft.com/maverecon/2009/02/fiscal-expansions-
in-submerging-markets-the-case-of-the-usa-and-the-uk/.
Calvo, Guillermo and Ruby Look-Kung, “Rapid and Large Liquidity funding for Emerging
Markets,” in Felton, Andrew and Carmen M. Reinhart, eds., The First Global Crisis of the 21st
Century, Part II: June-December 2008 VoxEU.org, 37-41

Cecchetti, Stephen G., (2009), “Crisis and Responses: The Federal Reserve in the Early Stages of
the Financial Crisis,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(1), Winter, 51-76.

Coval, Joshua, Jacob Jurek, and Erik Stafford, (2009), “The Economics of Structured Finance,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(1), Winter, 3-25.

Danielsson, Jon, (2008), “The First Casualty of the Crisis: Iceland,” in Andrew Felton and
Carmen M. Reinhart, eds. The First Global Financial Crisis of the 21st Century, Part II, June-
December 2008, voxeu.org, 9-13.

De Gregorio, José, (2009), “Chile and the Global Recession of 2009,” speech at the seminar Los
temas del 2009, organized by the Instituto de Politicas Públicas Expansiva – UDP and Libertad
y Desarollo, Santiago, Chile, March 20.

De Long, J. Bradford, (2009), “The Financial Crisis of 2007-2009: Understanding its Causes,
Consequences – and its Possible Cures,” MTI-CSC Economics Speaker Series Lecture,
Singapore, January 5, http://www.scribd.com/doc/9719227/null.

De Michelis, Andrea, (2009) “Overcoming the Financial Crisis in the United States,” OECD
Economics Department Working Paper no. 669, February.

Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Luis Serven, (2009), “Are the Sacred Cows Dead?: Implications of the
Financial Crisis for Macro and Financial Policies,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
no. 4807, January. [DKL]

Doms, Mark, Fred Furlong and John Krainer, (2007), “Subprime Mortgage Delinquency Rates,”
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2007-33, November.

Egert, B and D Mihaljek (2007) “Determinants of House Prices in Central and Eastern
Europe”, BIS Working Paper, no 236.

Ehrmann, Michael, Marcel Fratzscher and Arnaud Mehl, (2009), “What Has Made the Current
Financial Crisis Truly Global?,” mimeo, European Central Bank.

Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew K. Rose and Charles Wyplosz (1996) “Exchange Market Mayhem:
The Antecedents and Aftermath of Speculative Attacks” Economic Policy 10(21), 251-312.

Foroohar, Rana (2008), “Keeping Economics Real,” Newsweek, October 27.

Feldstein, Martin, (2008), “The Problem is Still Falling House Prices: The Bailout Bill Doesn’t
Get at the Root of the Credit Crunch,” Wall Street Journal, October 4.


                                                1
Feldstein, Martin, (2009), “The Economic Stimulus and Sustained Economic Growth,” Full
Statement for the House Democratic Steering and Policy Committee, January 7.

Frankel, Jeffrey, (2008), “Origins of the Economic Crisis – In One Chart!,” Jeff Frankel’s
Weblog: Views on the Economy and the World, December 5,
http://content.ksg.harvard.edu/blog/jeff_frankels_weblog/category/financial-crisis/.

Fratzscher, Marcel, (2009), “What Explains Global Exchange Rate Movements During the
Financial Crisis?, European Central Bank Working Paper, April 8.

Gertler, Paul J. (1988) “A Latent Variable Model of Quality Determination” Journal of Business
and Economic Statistics 6, 97-107.

Gieve, Sir John, “Seven Lessons from the Last Three Years,” (2009), London School of
Economics. London, United Kingdom, February.

Glindro, Eloisa T., Tientip Subhanji, Jessica Szato, and Haibin Zhu, (2008), “Determinants of
House Prices in Nine Asia-Pacific Economies,” Bureau of International Settlements Working
Paper no. 263.

Goldberger, Arthur S. (1972) "Structural Equation Methods in the Social Sciences"
Econometrica, 40, 979-1001.

Hall, Robert E., and Susan E. Woodward, (2009), “The Financial Crisis and the Recession:
What is Happening and What the Government Should Do,” Financial Crisis and Recession,
January 1, http://woodwardhall.wordpress.com/.

Kaminsky, Graciela L., Saúl Lizondo, and Carmen M. Reinhart, (1998), "Leading Indicators of
Currency Crises," International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 45(1), 1–48.

Lane Philip, (2008), “Iceland: The Future is in the EU,” in Andrew Felton and Carmen M.
Reinhart, eds. The First Global Financial Crisis of the 21st Century, Part II, June-December
2008, voxeu.org, 15-17.

Mayer, Christopher, Karen Pence, and Shane M. Sherlund, (2009), “The Rise in Mortgage
Defaults,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(1), Winter, 27-50.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, (2008), “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence
from the 2007 Mortgage Default Crisis,” NBER Working Paper no. 13936, April.

Mishkin, Frederic S., (2008), “Global Financial Turmoil and the World Economy,” Caesarea
Forum of the Israel Democracy Institute, Eilat, Israel, July 2.




                                                2
Mohan, Dr. Rakesh, (2009), “Global financial Crisis – Causes, Impact, Policy Responses and
Lessons,” speech at the 7th Annual India Business Forum conference, London Business School,
London, United Kingdom, April 23.

Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor, (2009), “Financial Instability,
Reserves, and Central Bank Swap Lines in the Panic of 2008,” NBER Working Paper no. 14826,
March.

Rabe-Hesketh, Sophia, Anders Skrondal, and Andrew Pickles (2004a) “Generalized Multilevel
Structural Equation Modeling” Psychometrika 69 (2), 167-190.

Rabe-Hesketh, Sophia, Anders Skrondal, and Andrew Pickles (2004b) “GLLAMM Manual” UC
Berkeley Biostatistics Working Paper 160.

Reinhart, Carmen M. And Vincent Reinhart, (2009), “From Capital Flow Bonanza to Financial
Crash,” in Felton, Andrew and Carmen M. Reinhart, eds., The First Global Crisis of the 21st
Century, Part II: June-December 2008 VoxEU.org, 31-37.

Reinhart, Carmen M. And Kenneth S. Rogoff, (2008), “Is the 2007 US Sub-Prime Crisis So
Different? An International Historical Comparison, American Economic Review: Papers and
Proceedings, 98:2, 339-344.

Shirakawa, Masaaki, (2009), “Way Out of Economic and Financial Crisis – Lessons and Policy
Actions,” Japan Society, New York, April 23.

Spence, Michael, (2008), “Balance Sheets and Income Statements: Breaking the Downward
Spiral,” ft.com/economists forum, November 24,
http://blogs.ft.com/economistsforum/2008/11/balance-sheets-and-income-statements-breaking-
the-downward-spiral/

Teslik, Lee Hudson, (2008), “Interview, Martin Wolf, The Deep Roots of the Financial Crisis,”
Council on Foreign Relations, http://www.cfr.org/publication/17553/.

Trichet, Jean-Claude, (2009a), “What Lessons Can be Learned from the Economic and Financial
Crisis?,” speech at the 5e Recontres de l’Entreprise Européenne, Paris, France, March 17.

Trichet, Jean Claude, (2009b), “The Global Dimension of the Crisis,” speech at the Foreign
Correspondents’ Club of Japan, Tokyo, Japan, April 18.

White, Lawrence H., (2008), “How Did We Get Into This Financial Mess?,” CATO Institute
Briefing Paper no. 110, November 18.




                                               3
Appendix Table A1: List of Countries and Territories

Albania               Dominican Republic       Kyrgyzstan             Romania
Algeria               Ecuador                  Latvia                 Russia
Antigua               Egypt                    Lebanon                Saudi Arabia
Argentina             El Salvador              Libya                  Seychelles
Armenia               Equatorial Guinea        Lithuania              Singapore
Australia             Estonia                  Luxembourg             Slovak Republic
Austria               Finland                  Macao                  Slovenia
Bahamas               France                   Macedonia              South Africa
Bahrain               Gabon                    Malaysia               Spain
Barbados              Georgia                  Malta                  Sri Lanka
Belarus               Germany                  Mauritius              St. Kitts & Nevis
Belgium               Greece                   Mexico                 Swaziland
Bermuda               Guyana                   Morocco                Sweden
Botswana              Haiti                    Namibia                Switzerland
Brazil                Hong Kong                Netherlands            Taiwan
Brunei                Hungary                  Netherlands Antilles   Thailand
Bulgaria              Iceland                  New Zealand            Trinidad &Tobago
Canada                Indonesia                Norway                 Tunisia
Chile                 Iran                     Oman                   Turkey
China                 Ireland                  Panama                 Turkmenistan
Colombia              Israel                   Papua New Guinea       Ukraine
Costa Rica            Italy                    Paraguay               United Arab Emirates
Croatia               Jamaica                  Peru                   United Kingdom
Cuba                  Japan                    Poland                 United States
Cyprus                Kazakhstan               Portugal               Uruguay
Czech Republic        Korea, Republic of       Puerto Rico            Venezuela
Denmark               Kuwait                   Qatar




                                           4
Appendix Table A2: Key Data Sources

Many of our data series were extracted in early 2009 from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.37
Other key data sets are listed below. The entire (STATA 10.0) data set is available at
http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/arose/MIMICData.zip.

Economist Intelligence Unit, Country Reports
   • 2008 growth estimate as of 3/2009

National Sources
    • Percentage change in 2008 broad stock market index

Euromoney and Institutional Investor magazines
    • Country credit ratings

International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics
     • Percentage change in2008 SDR exchange rate; bank claims/deposits; M2/total (non-gold) reserves;
         M2/Central Bank Foreign assets

Heritage Foundation, Economic Freedom of the World 2008 Dataset (available at
http://www.freetheworld.com/2008/2008Dataset.xls)
     • Private sector credit access ; bank ownership ; foreign bank competition; interest rate controls/negative
         interest rate; credit market regulation; credit/labor/business regulation; economic freedom; government
         size; legal security of property rights; access to sound money

Barth, Caprio and Levine data set on bank regulation and supervision (available at
http://econ.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/EXTRESEARCH/0,,contentMDK:20345037~pagePK:
64214825~piPK:64214943~theSitePK:469382,00.html)
     • Overall capital stringency; ability to take prompt corrective action; capital regulatory index; official
          supervisory power; restructuring power; declaring insolvency power;

Lane and Milesi-Ferretti “External Wealth of Nations Mark II” (available at
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=18942.0)
     • Net External Position, percentage GDP 2004

Rose-Spiegel Data set from “Offshore Financial Centers” Economic Journal 2007
    • English language dummy; common law; log latitude; currency union; control of corruption; regulatory
        quality; rule of law

Freedom House (available at http://www.freedomhouse.org/uploads/fiw/FIWAllScores.xls)
    • Political rights; civil liberties

Polity IV Data Set (available at http://www.systemicpeace.org/polity/polity4.htm)
     • Polity; constraints on executive

World Bank, Global Development Finance
   • Debt/GNP; Debt Service/Export; Short/Total Debt

BIS Cross-Country Database and Glindro, et al data set from “Determinants of House Prices in Nine Asia-Pacific
Economies,” BIS Working Paper no. 263, 2008.

    •   Real Estate Price Appreciation




                                                         5
Appendix Table A3: Correlations between Crisis Indicators

% Changes, 2008:    Stock Market       Real GDP        Price of SDR   II Rating
 Stock Market           1.00
   Real GDP               .18             1.00
 Price of SDR            -.13             -.31              1.00
   II Rating              .42              .40              -.53        1.00
85 Observations




                                           6
Endnotes
1
   Point 15, p3 of Final Communiqué G-20 Summit April 2, 2009, available at
http://www.g20.org/Documents/final-communique.pdf. See also Declaration on Strengthening the
Financial System (http://www.g20.org/Documents/Fin_Deps_Fin_Reg_Annex_020409_-_1615_final.pdf)
2
   http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pr/2008/pr08278.htm
3
   Early efforts at early warning systems include Kaminsky, Lizondo and Reinhart (1998) and Berg and Patillo
(1999).
4
   For instance, Berg, et al (2004).
5
   We also find a geographic dummy that identifies countries from Eastern Europe and Central Asia to robustly be
correlated with the incidence of crises. However, we interpret the strong performance of this geographic variable in
the presence of other variables representing the various hypotheses put forward in the literature as primarily a
demonstration of the poor performance of these hypotheses empirically.
6
   The specification in Ehrmann, et al (2009) exploits the fact that exposure to American assets is ex post associated
with problems. The origins (common or otherwise) of the next crisis (global or not) are currently unknown.
7
  A number of analysts (e.g. Buiter and Sibert, 2008) predicted prior to the collapse of its economy that Iceland
faced a choice between adopting the euro or moving its large financial center offshore. Some have argued (e.g.
Danielsson, 2008) that Iceland’s problems were not due to size alone, but also to its inflation-targeting monetary
policy, which kept interest rates high during the boom years and encouraged excessive capital inflows and exchange
rate appreciation. Subsequent to its collapse, the call for Iceland to adopt the euro became more prominent, e.g.
Lane (2008).
8
   Concerns about the impact of these flows on emerging economies led to “sudden stops” in credit, raising balance
of payments concerns that had commonly been thought to be a “…thing of the past” (Trichet, 2009b).
9
   See, e.g. Foroohar (2008).
10
    See Table 5 for years used in causal measures.
11
    The “Big Five” postwar crises include Spain (1977), Norway (1987), Finland (1991), Sweden (1991), and Japan
(1992).
12
    One would also like to have measures of international integration on both the real (trade) and financial sides; we
plan to pursue this in future analysis.
13
    Kadee Russ has suggested using the steepness of the yield curve; we are grateful to her for this suggestion and
plan to pursue it in future research.
14
    Expressed alternatively, our cross-sectional approach can be viewed as a test of the no “pure contagion or
common shock” hypothesis, i.e. No exposure to global shocks whose impact is invariant to national fundamentals.
Ehrmann et al (2009) investigate contagion with some success. They also note (on p2): “If investors focus on
reducing macroeconomic risks, or country risk, which may be closely related to macroeconomic policies and
fundamentals, this would imply that countries with weaker fundamentals have been more severely affected via
capital outflows and equity price declines during the crisis.”
15
    We refer below to all these entities as “countries” simply for the sake of convenience.
16
    We use 2003 since we used the Penn World Table Mark 6.2 which ends in 2004 and has a number of missing
values for that year. Our measure of income in the PWT6.2 is “rgdpl”.
17
    The list of 81 countries with PWT6.2 data that are omitted from our sample is: Afghanistan, Angola, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, Dem. Rep., Congo, Republic of, Cote
d`Ivoire, Djibouti, Dominica, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, The, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Honduras, India, Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Korea, Dem. Rep., Laos, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar,
Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Micronesia, Fed. Sts., Moldova, Mongolia, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Palau, Philippines, Rwanda, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, St. Lucia, St. Vincent & Grenadines, Sudan, Suriname,
Syria, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Togo, Tonga, Uganda, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Vietnam, Yemen, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.
18
    Using 2008 seems like a reasonable choice to us. Though some of the real effects of the crisis began before 2008
(the NBER Dating Committee uses December 2007 as the cyclic peak for the United States), the dramatic
downturns took place in the latter part of 2008. Similarly while some financial distress began in the late summer of
2007 (or somewhat earlier), restricting our analysis to the larger events of 2008 seems reasonable, given that our
focus is cross-country in nature. But we restrict our attention to crisis causes from 2006 and earlier to avoid any
overlap between causes and consequences of the crisis.


                                                          7
19
   The EIU forecast of 2009 growth is highly positively correlated across countries with their 2008 estimates. Since
countries have differing underlying growth rates, one would prefer to account for this by e.g., using the size of the
output gap, but we know of no source for such data. Below, we check for differences in growth rates crudely by
replacing 2008 growth rates with the difference between 2008 and 2006 growth rates; this makes no difference to
our results in practice.
20
   Institutional Investor states that their ratings “… are based on information provided by senior economists and
sovereign-risk analysts at leading global banks and money management and securities firm”; further details are
available at: http://www.iimagazinerankings.com/rankingsRankCCMaGlobal09/methodology.asp.
21
   We note in passing that we gathered data on changes in sovereign ratings (short- and long-term on both domestic
and foreign debt, as relevant) from Standard and Poor’s, Moody’s and Fitch. However, these ratings change little
over the course of 2008, so we were unable to integrate sovereign rating changes sensibly into our measure of crisis
incidence.
22
   In this exercise, the eigenvalues for this exercise fall off quickly in size (while the first eigenvalue is 1.33, the
second is only.11 and the final two are negative).
23
   Size is of special interest, since some believe that a key message of the crisis is that some countries are too small
to “go it alone.” However, the fact that the crisis first hit primarily rich countries is also the subject of considerable
discussion.
24
   We use 2006 WDI data on real GDP per capita, measured in PPP-adjusted terms.
25
   Our normalization implies that the latent variable estimate should be interpreted as decreasing in crisis severity.
26
   We only examine a single latent variable, which we interpret as crisis severity. Consistent with our factor
analysis results, we have looked without success for a second latent variable, which might represent a different
dimension of the crisis; this might be an interesting topic for future work.
27
   Much of the previous literature on the determinants of financial crises (e.g. Kaminsky, Lizondo and Reinhart,
1998) and Berg and Patillo, 1999) follow Eichengreen et al (1996) and use discrete characterizations of economies
as being in or out of crisis, either in an ad hoc way or based on some objective criteria; this variable as then treated
as observed without error. In actuality, the severity of a crisis is like to be a continuous variable, and one that is only
observed with error. The MIMIC framework accounts for both measurement error and continuity.
28
   Occasionally we use a different iterative technique to achieve convergence.
29
   We follow Breusch (2005) in choosing to load first on the stock market because it delivers the best fit in a
bivariate regression than any of our other three crisis indicators.
30
   As other causes are added to the MIMIC model, the effect of size remains economically and statistically small
essentially throughout, while income continues to have a mostly negative and significant effect on crisis incidence.
31
   The number of observations available varies by cause because of data availability. When we include real estate
appreciation, the number of observations in our sample decreases to 36. We also note in passing that an additional
source of data is available that contains housing price appreciation data from 2002-2006 for eight Eastern European
countries (Egert and Mihaljek, 2007). While the timing does not exactly match our housing data (which runs from
2003-2006), we have added these observations to the sample, thereby increasing our sample size to 44. However,
real estate price appreciation continues to enter as statistically insignificant.
32
   We add our causes measured on a country by country format, not as differentials with respect to (e.g., ) the
United States. It is conceivable that this may partially explain the poor performance of macroeconomic
fundamentals in our analysis.
33
   Since real estate prices are available for a smaller set of countries, the inclusion of our real estate variable does
cut down our sample and it may be the sample truncation that is precluding statistical significance for real estate
appreciation.
34
   The regression yields a t-statistic of 0.8.
35
   We define big commodity exporters as: a) all past or present OPEC countries; b) Norway, Russia, Mexico and
Kazakhstan, all big non-OPEC oil exporters; c) the Chen-Rogoff C-3 countries: Australia, Canada, and New
Zealand; d) any country listed in the CIA World Factbook (https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/fields/2049.html) as having >50% exports from commodities; and e) any country listed in Cashin et al
(http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2003/03/cash.htm).
36
   When we substitute the 2009 growth forecasts from the EIU (as reported in early March 2009) for the 2008
estimates, our results change in economically and statistically trivial ways. The same is true if we replace 2008
growth by the difference between 2008 and 2006 growth rates.
37
   This includes series on: population; real GDP per capita; non-performing loans/loans; bank capital/assets; current
account/GDP; central government debt/GDP; CPI Inflation; Real GDP growth; total debt service/GDP; M2/GDP;

                                                            8
M3/GDP; bank liquid reserves/assets; domestic bank credit/GDP; domestic credit to private sector/GDP; external
debt/GNI; real effective exchange rate; total reserves/imports; gross financing via international capital
markets/GDP; government budget surplus/deficit/GDP; short-term debt/reserves; reserves/debt; stock market
capitalization/GDP; S&P/EMDB index change; and stocks traded/GDP.




                                                       9
