                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              SYSTEMIC RISK AND THE REFINANCING RATCHET EFFECT

                                          Amir E. Khandani
                                           Andrew W. Lo
                                          Robert C. Merton

                                        Working Paper 15362
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15362


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2009




The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors only, and do not necessarily
represent the views and opinions of AlphaSimplex Group, Harvard University, MIT, any of their affiliates
and employees, or any of the individuals acknowledged below. We thank Jim Kennedy for sharing
his data, and Terry Belton, Conan Crum, Jayna Cummings, Arnout Eikeboom, David Geltner, Will
Goetzmann, Jacob Goldfield, Ben Golub, Matt Jozoff, Jim Kennedy, Atif Mian, Amir Sufi, Bill Wheaton,
Matt Zames and participants at the Market Design and Structure Workshop at the Santa Fe Institute
for helpful comments and discussion. Research support from the MIT Laboratory for Financial Engineering
and its sponsors is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Amir E. Khandani, Andrew W. Lo, and Robert C. Merton. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Systemic Risk and the Refinancing Ratchet Effect
Amir E. Khandani, Andrew W. Lo, and Robert C. Merton
NBER Working Paper No. 15362
September 2009
JEL No. E17,E37,E47,E6,F47,G01,G12,G13,G18,R15,R21,R28

                                              ABSTRACT

The confluence of three trends in the U.S. residential housing market---rising home prices, declining
interest rates, and near-frictionless refinancing opportunities---led to vastly increased systemic risk
in the financial system. Individually, each of these trends is benign, but when they occur simultaneously,
as they did over the past decade, they impose an unintentional synchronization of homeowner leverage.
This synchronization, coupled with the indivisibility of residential real estate that prevents homeowners
from deleveraging when property values decline and homeowner equity deteriorates, conspire to create
a "ratchet" effect in which homeowner leverage is maintained or increased during good times without
the ability to decrease leverage during bad times. If refinancing-facilitated homeowner-equity extraction
is sufficiently widespread---as it was during the years leading up to the peak of the U.S. residential
real-estate market---the inadvertent coordination of leverage during a market rise implies higher correlation
of defaults during a market drop. To measure the systemic impact of this ratchet effect, we simulate
the U.S. housing market with and without equity extractions, and estimate the losses absorbed by mortgage
lenders by valuing the embedded put-option in non-recourse mortgages. Our simulations generate
loss estimates of $1.5 trillion from June 2006 to December 2008 under historical market conditions,
compared to simulated losses of $280 billion in the absence of equity extractions.


Amir E. Khandani                                      Robert C. Merton
Laboratory for Financial Engineering                  Graduate School of Business Administration
MIT Sloan School of Management                        Harvard University, Baker Library 353
One Broadway, Bldg E70-800                            Soldiers Field Road
Cambridge, MA 02142                                   Boston, MA 02163
khandani@mit.edu                                      and NBER
                                                      rmerton@hbs.edu
Andrew W. Lo
Sloan School of Management
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
alo@mit.edu
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                                                    1

2 Literature Review                                                                                                               5

3 Simulating the U.S. Mortgage Market                                                                                              9
  3.1 Basic Facts About the U.S. Mortgage Market              .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    9
  3.2 Simulation Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   14
  3.3 Single-Home Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   20
  3.4 Aggregate Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   21

4 Calibrating the Simulation                                                                                                      23
  4.1 Input Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                          23
  4.2 Calibration Reference Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                          26
  4.3 Calibration Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                         26

5 Measuring the Refinancing Ratchet Effect                                                                                        32
  5.1 Aggregate Loan-to-Value Ratios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                            32
  5.2 Option-Implied Losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                           33
  5.3 Option-Implied Sensitivities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                          42

6 Discussion                                                                                                                      44
  6.1 Heuristic vs. General Equilibrium Analysis      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   44
  6.2 Lending Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   45
  6.3 Market Risk vs. Systemic Risk . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   46
  6.4 Welfare Implications . . . . . . . . . . . .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   47

7 Conclusions                                                                                                                     47

A Appendix                                                                                                                        51
  A.1 Components of Gross Equity Extractions Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                               51
  A.2 Estimating Home Sales from 1919 to 1962 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                               53
  A.3 Calibrating Other Refinancing Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                             54

References                                                                                                                        60
1         Introduction
Home mortgage loans—one of the most widely used financial products by consumers in the
United States—are collateralized mainly by the value of the underlying real estate.1 This
feature makes the market value of that collateral very important in measuring the risk of a
mortgage.2 To reduce the risk of default, mortgage lenders usually ask for a down payment
of 10% to 20% of the value of the home from the borrower, creating an “equity buffer” that
absorbs the first losses from home-price declines . Any event that reduces the value of this
buffer, e.g., an equity extraction or a drop in home values, increases the risk to the lending
institution.
        Over the past two decades, institutional changes in the U.S. mortgage market, including
the increased efficiency of the refinancing process and the growth of the refinancing business,
have made it much easier for homeowners to refinance their mortgages to take advantage
of declining interest rates, increasing housing prices, or both. Some of the consequences of
this institutional change have been documented by Greenspan and Kennedy (2008, p. 120),
who observe that “. . . since the mid-1980s, mortgage debt has grown more rapidly than
home values, resulting in a decline in housing wealth as a share of the value of homes”.
They attribute most of this effect to discretionary equity extractions via home sales, “cash-
out” refinancing (where the homeowner receives cash after the refinancing), and home-equity
loans.
        In this paper, we focus on a previously unstudied dimension of risk in the mortgage
market: the interplay among the growth of the refinancing business, the decline in interest
rates, and the appreciation of property values. Each of these three trends is systemically
neutral or positive when considered in isolation, but when they occur simultaneously as
they did over the past decade, the results can be explosive. In particular, we show that
    1
      Although most models of household finance assume that residential mortgages are non-recourse loans,
the legal procedure for foreclosure and obtaining a deficiency judgment is complex, varying greatly from state
to state. In fact, Ghent and Kudlyak (2009, Table 1) observe that home mortgages are explicitly non-recourse
in only 11 states. Not surprisingly, some of those states are experiencing severe foreclosure problems in the
current crisis, such as Arizona and California. However, in certain populous states with recourse, generous
homestead-exemption laws can make it virtually impossible for lenders to collect on deficiency judgments
because borrowers can easily shield their assets, e.g., Florida and Texas. Ghent and Kudlyak (2009) study
the effect of lender recourse on mortgage defaults across the U.S. and conclude that recourse does decrease
the probability of default for homeowners who have negative equity.
    2
      See, for example, Danis and Pennington-Cross (2005), Downing, Stanton and Wallace (2005), Gerardi,
Shapiro and Willen (2007), Doms, Furlong, and Krainer (2007), Bajari, Chu and Park (2008), Bhardwaj
and Sengupta (2008a), and Gerardi et al. (2008).


                                                      1
refinancing-facilitated home-equity extractions alone can account for the dramatic increase
in systemic risk posed by the U.S. residential housing market, which was the epicenter of the
Financial Crisis of 2007–2008.
       It is obvious that the value of collateral is an important feature of any risky loan, and
it has been suggested that the loan-to-value ratio should be incorporated into risk-based
capital requirements for home mortgages (Calem and LaCour-Little, 2004). However, two
particular features of refinancing activity have far-reaching implications for systemic risk
in the U.S. residential housing market. The first is the unintentional synchronization that
refinancing activity imposes on homeowner leverage and mortgage duration, and the second
is the fact that refinancing-related increases in leverage cannot be symmetrically reduced
when property values decline because homes are indivisible.
       Although refinancing activity is not new, it naturally becomes more widespread and
competitive during periods of falling interest rates and rising home prices, inadvertently in-
creasing the leverage and duration of borrowers in a coordinated fashion and at the same
point in time. Once property values decline, a wave of defaults becomes unavoidable be-
cause mortgage lenders have no mechanism such as a margin call to compel homeowners to
add more equity to maintain their leverage ratio, nor can homeowners reduce their leverage
in incremental steps by selling a portion of their homes and using the proceeds to reduce
their debt. This self-synchronizing “ratchet effect” of the refinancing market can create
significant systemic risk in an otherwise geographically and temporally diverse pool of mort-
gages, steadily increasing the aggregate leverage of the housing market until it reaches a
systemically critical threshold.
       The impact of indivisibility can be seen more clearly by contrasting an investment in
residential real estate with a leveraged investment in a typical exchange-traded instrument
such as common stock. The latter is subject to an initial margin requirement, a maintenance
margin requirement, and margin calls by lenders that, if unanswered, can trigger forced
liquidations of some or all of the investor’s position. Therefore, indivisibility in residential
housing is also related to type of debt used to finance such purchases.3 Nevertheless, the fact
   3
    It is hard to imagine homeowners willing to finance large capital purchases using short-term debt like
margin accounts. In fact, long-term debt has become the standard method for financing home purchases
precisely because of the indivisible nature of the collateral. The indivisibility problem is also related to the
fact that, in contrast to commercial real-estate, residences are typically owned by a single equityholder, i.e.,
the homeowner. Also, due to the U.S. Constitution’s 13th amendment prohibiting involuntary servitude,
and unlike corporations, homeowners cannot raise additional capital by issuing equity if they become over-


                                                       2
that it is impossible to liquidate a portion of one’s home and use the proceeds to reduce the
mortgage creates an important asymmetry in the housing market that does not exist in most
financial markets. While over-leveraged homeowners can decide to sell their homes, recognize
their capital losses, and move into less expensive properties that satisfy lenders’ minimum
loan-to-value ratio requirements, the enormous costs—both financial and psychological—of
such a transaction make it a highly impractical (and generally unenforceable) response to
incremental and frequent increases in homeowner leverage during housing-market downturns.
   The refinancing ratchet effect is most clearly illustrated by the hypothetical scenario in
which all homeowners decide to maximize their leverage by reducing their home equity to the
lowest possible levels via refinancing, and suppose the refinancing market is so competitive,
i.e., refinancing costs are so low and capital is so plentiful, that homeowners are able to
extract any equity above the minimum each month. In such an extreme case, during periods
of rising home prices and falling interest rates, cash-out refinancing has the same effect as
if all mortgages were re-originated at the peak of the housing market, with homeowners
extracting all their capital gains, ratcheting up their leverage at successively lower interest
rates, and resetting the duration of their loans to the maximum levels allowable during the
housing-price run-up. Then, as home prices fall and interest rates rise, the ratchet “locks”
because homeowners cannot easily unwind their real-estate positions and de-leverage due
to indivisibility and illiquidity. The unintentional synchronization of leverage and duration
during the market’s rise naturally leads to an apparent shift in regime during the market’s
decline, in which historically uncorrelated defaults now become almost perfectly correlated.4
This refinancing ratchet effect can lead to a destructive feedback loop of correlated foreclo-
sures, forced sales, and ultimately, a market crash. And the most insidious aspect of this
phenomenon is its origin in three benign market conditions, each of which is usually con-
sidered a harbinger of economic growth. In fact, lower interest rates, higher home prices,
and easier access to mortgage loans have appeared separately in various political platforms
and government policy objectives over the years, and their role in fostering economic growth
makes it virtually impossible to address the refinancing ratchet effect within the current
regulatory framework.
leveraged.
   4
     Of course, if mortgages were recourse loans and borrowers had uncorrelated sources of income, the
aggregate risk of the mortgage market would be lower. However, as discussed in footnote 1, recourse does
not exist in all states, hence this diversification channel is not always available.



                                                   3
   In this paper, we propose to gauge the magnitude of the refinancing ratchet effect by
creating a numerical simulation of the U.S. mortgage market. By calibrating our simulation
to the existing stock of real estate, and by specifying reasonable behavioral rules for the
typical homeowner’s equity extraction decision, our simulation can match some of the major
trends in this market over the past decade such as the rapid rise in the amount of mortgages
outstanding and the massive equity extractions from U.S. residential mortgages during this
period.
   We then use this simulation to document the effect of equity extractions on the aggregate
amount of equity in the U.S. residential housing system after the decline in prices started
in mid-2006, and on the cross-sectional distribution of loan-to-value ratios. In our simula-
tions, approximately 18% of all mortgage loans exhibit negative equity as of December 2008,
which is nearly identical to the actual figure reported by industry sources. The comparable
simulated percentage in the absence of equity extractions during the housing boom would
have been about 3%, implying that the 15-percentage-point difference may be attributed to
the refinancing ratchet effect.
   Using a simple derivative pricing model, we construct an estimate of losses absorbed by
mortgage lenders—banks, asset management firms, and GSEs—due to the decline in real-
estate prices over the last two years, and compare these estimates with the scenario of no
equity extractions over the same period. Our simulation yields an approximate loss of $1.5
trillion from the housing-market decline since June 2006 under historical equity-extraction
rules, compared to a loss of $280 billion if no equity had been extracted from U.S. residential
real estate during the boom.
   While we have attempted to construct as realistic a simulation as possible, we acknowl-
edge at the outset that our approach is intended to capture “reduced-form” relations, and
is not based on a general equilibrium model of households and mortgage lenders. An empir-
ically accurate stochastic dynamic general equilibrium model of the housing and mortgage
markets is currently computationally intractable, hence our choice to simulate simple heuris-
tics calibrated to the data instead. Also, we do not model the supply of refinancing and the
behavior of lenders, but assume that households can refinance as much as they wish at pre-
vailing historical interest rates. While this may have been close to reality during the decade
leading up to the peak of the housing market in June 2006, our motivation for this assumption
is to study the impact of the refinancing ratchet effect by itself. Although lending behavior


                                              4
no doubt contributed significantly to the magnitude of the Financial Crisis of 2007–2008,
the focus of this paper is different. We show that systemic risk in the housing and mortgage
markets can arise quite naturally from the confluence of three apparently salutary economic
conditions, a more subtle form of systemic risk that is not simply the result of dysfunctional
individual and institutional behavior such as excessive borrowing or lending.
    We begin in Section 2 with a brief review of the literature. In Section 3, we outline
the design of our simulation and describe the various time series that we use to calibrate
the simulation’s parameters. Section 4 contains the results of our simulation, including a
comparison of the time series produced by the simulation with their historical counterparts.
We will show that even a relatively simple simulation can capture the observed trends in the
U.S. mortgage market surprisingly well. We use the results of this simulation in Section 5
to estimate the impact of mortgage refinancing on the aggregate risk of the U.S. mortgage
market as home prices declined from 2006 to 2008. We provide some qualifications for and
discussion of our results in Section 6, and conclude in Section 7.


2     Literature Review
We start by reviewing the literature on the modeling of aggregate and microeconomic risks
of residential mortgages, and then turn to several studies that support our hypothesis of
technological and institutional forces that changed the behavior of mortgage borrowers in
the last two decades.
    Given the magnitude of the subprime mortgage crisis in 2007–2008, a number of recent
papers have attempted to trace the root causes of the crisis. For example, the impact of the
decline in housing prices on delinquency and default rates after 2007 has been studied exten-
sively (see footnote 2 for references). Similarly, the contribution of lax lending standards and
greater availability of credit to the current crisis has been considered by Dell’Ariccia, Igan,
and Laeven (2008), Demyanyk and Van Hemert (2008), Bhardwaj and Sengupta (2008b),
and Keys et al. (2008).
    The impact of institutional changes and market structure have also been considered. For
example, Mian and Sufi (2008) find that “the expansion in mortgage credit to subprime
zip codes and its dissociation from income growth is closely correlated with the increase
in securitization of subprime mortgages”. Dell’Ariccia, Igan and Laeven (2008) show that
“lending standards declined more in areas with higher mortgage securitization rates” and

                                               5
“underlying market structure mattered, with entry of new, large lenders triggering declines in
lending standards by incumbent banks.” And using household data on debt and defaults from
1997 to 2008, Mian and Sufi (2009) show that borrowing against home equity is responsible
for a significant fraction of the sharp rise in household leverage from 2002 to 2006 and
the increase in defaults from 2006 to 2008. They also find that “[m]oney extracted from
increased home equity is not used to purchase new real estate or pay down high credit card
debt, which suggests that real outlays (i.e., consumption or home improvement) are likely
uses of borrowed funds”. However, none of these studies have considered the implications
of refinancing and depreciating collateral values on aggregate or systemic risk in the U.S.
residential mortgage market.
      The uncertain durations of mortgages—due to prepayment or default by the borrower—
make their risks different from other fixed-income products. The decision by the borrower
to prepay or default on a non-recourse mortgage can be modeled as an option written by the
lender and held by the borrower. Prepayment may be viewed as a call option that allows the
borrower to buy back the remaining mortgage payments from the lender at the prevailing
mortgage rate, while default may be viewed as a put option that gives the borrower the
right to terminate his or her mortgage by transferring the collateral property to the lender.
LaCour-Little (2008) provides a recent review of literature dealing with sources of mortgage
termination risk.5
      The approach to modeling these embedded options can be divided into two categories:
structural and reduced-form models. Structural models focus on the underlying dynamics
of the collateral value and the interest rates paid for new mortgages should the borrower
decide to refinance. Default or prepayment events are triggered by random movements in
the home price or interest rates. By modeling the dynamics of asset prices and interest rates,
and the optimizing behavior of agents, the structural approach links option-exercise events
to the underlying fundamentals faced by the borrower. Kau, Keenan, Muller and Epperson
(1992, 1995) are examples of this approach, and Kau and Keenan (1995) provide a review
of option-theoretic pricing models of mortgages.
      In the reduced-form approach, an atheoretical relation between the decision to prepay or
default and various input variables summarizing general economic conditions is hypothesized
and estimated, e.g., Schwartz and Torous (1989), Deng, Quigley and Van Order (2000), and
  5
      See, also, Quercia and Stegman (1992) and Vandell (1993) for a review of earlier research on this topic.


                                                       6
Deng and Quigley (2002). While this flexible approach may be successful in fitting the
historical data, the lack of structure may reduce its out-of-sample predictive power. For this
reason, we adopt a structural approach in this paper.
       The earliest structural models adopted simplifying assumptions that yielded elegant
closed-form solutions, but at the expense of certain stylized facts of the U.S. mortgage
market that could not be captured by those assumptions (Schwartz and Torous, 1989). For
example, consider the decision to default on a mortgage. The value of the underlying real
estate is obviously the most important factor in driving this decision,6 however, while neg-
ative equity may be a necessary condition to trigger default, it is apparently not sufficient
(Foote, Gerardi, and Willen, 2008). The notion that a homeowner would continue mak-
ing monthly mortgage payments after the market value of his house has fallen below the
remaining balance seems odd at first, and has been attributed to the owner’s sentimental
attachment to the home, moving costs, a desire to preserve reputational capital, or default
penalties. The combined effect of these factors has been termed “transactions costs”.7 On
the other hand, homeowners seeking to refinance into a lower interest-rate mortgage when
rates decline may be constrained by their financial circumstances or insufficient amounts of
equity in their homes.8
       While such frictions and financial constraints certainly influence the homeowner’s deci-
sion to default or prepay a mortgage, these factors do not provide a complete picture of
all the economic forces behind such decisions. As argued by Kau, Keenan and Kim (1994),
the decision to terminate a mortgage results in the loss of the option to default or prepay
in the future. Therefore, the value of a house must fall below zero equity before a rational
homeowner would decide to default. Gerardi, Shapiro, and Willen (2007) propose a model
that retains the basic structure of rational decision-making, but yields the intuitive pre-
diction that financially strapped borrowers are more likely to default. Foote, Gerardi, and
Willen (2008) incorporate the impact of actual or imputed income from not defaulting on a
homeowner’s decision to default, and argue that most homeowners with negative equity will
probably not end up losing their homes. Moreover, according to Gent and Kudlyak (2009),
the legal structure of the foreclosure process and the ability of the lender to obtain deficiency
   6
     See, for example, Downing, Stanton and Wallace (2005) and the references in footnote 2.
   7
     Stanton (1995) and Downing, Stanton and Wallace (2005) incorporate these costs into models of mort-
gage termination.
   8
     Archer, Ling, and McGill (1997) and Peristiani et al. (1997) consider the impact of household financial
conditions such as income, credit history, and the amount of homeowner’s equity on the ability to refinance.


                                                     7
judgments seem to have a detectable impact on the behavior of borrowers.
       The invention of new mortgage products and corresponding institutional, social, and
political changes over the last decade also contributed to the increase in the systemic risk in
the mortgage system. For example, the so-called “subprime” and “Alt-A” mortgage products
were designed to allow households with lower credit scores, smaller down-payments, and
little documentation of income to purchase homes. However, as Mayer and Pence (2008, p.
1) observe, “. . . these new products not only allowed new buyers to access credit, but also
made it easier for homeowners to refinance loans and withdraw cash from houses that had
appreciated in value”.9 Moreover, some of the more exotic products such as non- or negative-
amortization mortgages are contractual equivalents to dynamic strategies involving frequent
cash-out refinancings to maintain a desired leverage ratio.10 These product innovations
may have facilitated large-scale equity extractions by making refinancing significantly easier,
cheaper, and virtually automatic.11
       By comparing the refinancing decision of homeowners in the 1980’s relative to the 1990’s,
Bennett, Peach, and Peristiani (2001) find evidence that over time, a combination of tech-
nological, regulatory, and structural changes has reduced the net benefit needed to trigger
a refinancing decision.12 They conjecture that homeowners’ familiarity with the refinancing
   9
     They go on to point out that “subprime mortgages are used a bit more for refinancing than home
purchase” and “almost all subprime refinances are cash-out refinances” (Mayer and Pence, 2008, p. 10).
Similarly, Gerardi, Shapiro, and Willen (2007, p. 4) highlight the use of subprime mortgages for (cash-out)
refinancing of mortgages that were originally classified as prime at the time of purchase, and observe that
“[a]pproximately 30 percent of the 2006 and 2007 foreclosures in Massachusetts were traced to homeowners
who used a subprime mortgage to purchase their house. However, almost 44 percent of the foreclosures were
of homeowners whose last mortgage was originated by a subprime lender. Of this 44 percent, approximately
60 percent initially financed their purchase with a mortgage from a prime lender.”
  10
     See, for example, Haugh and Lo (2001) for more general applications of derivatives to implement dynamic
portfolio strategies.
  11
     Many of these innovations may also have important tax or transaction-cost benefits to the borrower,
hence they may have been demand-driven rather than the result of overly aggressive mortgage lenders. In
fact, these products may be essential to achieving optimal risk-sharing. For example, in their theoretical
study of optimal mortgage design, Piskorski and Tchistyi (2006) find that the “optimal allocation can be
implemented using either a combination of an interest-only mortgage with a home equity line of credit or
an option adjustable-rate mortgage”. See Chomsisengphet, Murphy and Pennington-Cross (2008) for an
empirical analysis of the factors that determine the type of loan used to finance home purchases.
  12
      Specifically, they compare the refinancing behavior during two major refinancing cycles: 1986–1987
and 1992–1993. They find that measurable transactions costs such as points and fees are quite important
in the refinancing decision, and these costs have declined over time due to competition and growth in the
refinancing market. However, even after controlling for these costs and other factors that are known to
impact the refinancing decision, the estimated refinancing probability is still considerably higher in the later
part of their sample (9% vs. 14%; see Bennett, Peach, and Peristiani, 2001, pp. 970–971). Motivated by this
analysis, we will propose refinancing rules with a structural break in the year 1988 (see Section 4.3).



                                                       8
process and their increased financial sophistication are possible drivers behind this phe-
nomenon.
    The behavioral and social aspects of the decision to default on a residential mortgage is
considered by Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2009) using surveys of American households in
late 2008 and early 2009. They find that those who consider it immoral to default are 77%
less likely to declare their intention to do so. They also find that households who have been
exposed to defaults are more willing to default strategically, i.e., to default even though they
can afford their mortgage payments. For example, holding social stigma constant, individuals
who know someone who defaulted strategically are 82% more likely to declare their intention
to do so. And as defaults become more common within a given social network, the social
stigma of default is likely to decline, lowering the threshold for new defaults to occur.
    Perhaps a similar set of forces were at play during the most recent cash-out refinancing
boom. Institutional changes, heightened competition, and technological advances made it
materially easier and cheaper for consumers to engage in mortgage refinancing, and increased
awareness of and familiarity with the refinancing process made it more popular. Even though
many homeowners were undoubtedly aware of the potential dangers of equity extractions,
the fact that many of their neighbors or co-workers were extracting equity from their homes
made it socially more acceptable to do so in the midst of the height of the housing boom.


3     Simulating the U.S. Mortgage Market
This section outlines our approach to simulating the behavior of the entire U.S. residential
mortgage market for the period from 1919 to 2008. We begin in Section 3.1 with some basic
empirical facts about the U.S. mortgage market that are most relevant for our simulations.
The overall design of our simulation is described in Section 3.2. The simulation of the
dynamics of a single home is outlined in Section 3.3, and in Section 3.4 we describe the
process by which the single-home simulations are aggregated.

3.1    Basic Facts About the U.S. Mortgage Market
We begin with some basic facts about the overall size and trends of the U.S. mortgage
market that are most relevant for our simulation. Figure 1 shows the time series of conven-
tional 30-year fixed-rate mortgage rates, and purchase and refinancing mortgage-origination


                                               9
volumes in the U.S. from the first quarter of 1991 (1991Q1) to the fourth quarter of 2008
(2008Q4). The data depicted in this figure were obtained from a number of public sources.
The interest-rate data is the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (“Freddie Mac”) 30-
Year fixed-rate mortgages series.13 The Mortgage Origination Volume data is obtained from
Mortgage Bankers Association (MBA) publications.14 The data collected by the Mortgage
Bankers Association breaks down origination volume into two components: origination of
loans intended for new purchase, and those intended for refinancing purposes. Refinancing
volume can be further broken down by loan type based on the data collected by the U.S.
Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), formerly the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise
Oversight (OFHEO). In particular, FHFA data classifies loans into the following three cate-
gories: Purchase, Cash-Out Refinancing, and Rate/Term Refinancing (where the homeowner
receives no cash from the refinancing, but merely changes the terms and/or reduces the in-
terest rate to be paid on the remaining balance of the mortgage).15 We have used this data
to break down the refinancing volume reported by the MBA into Cash-Out Refinancing and
Rate/Term Refinancing volume.16
       Several prominent themes emerge from Figure 1. While purchase volume is highly sea-
sonal, the increase and subsequent decline closely matches the trend in overall real-estate
prices. There is also a clear relationship between decline in mortgage rates and rate refi-
nancing volume. For example, the decline in interest rates in the early 1990’s is followed by
a period of high rate-refinancing activity from 1992 to 1993. The next period of increased
rate refinancing occurs in 1998, again coinciding with a drop in mortgage rates. However,
  13
       See http://www.freddiemac.com/pmms/.
  14
       See the page “MBA Mortgage Origination Estimates” at the website:

               http : //www.mbaa.org/ResearchandForecasts/EconomicOutlookandForecasts.

This data is available quarterly from 1990Q1 to 2008Q4 at the time of this study.
   15
      This data is available at http://www.fhfa.gov/Default.aspx?Page=87, in the section titled “Loan
Purposes by Quarter”, and is available from 1991Q1 through 2008Q4 at the time of this study. Similar data
is available from a number of public sources and the values reported can differ substantially on occasion (see
Chang and Nothaft, 2007, for further discussion).
   16
      The three categories reported in this FHFA data—Purchase, Cash-Out Refinancing, and Rate/Term
Refinancing—account for about 98% of all originations. To calculate the Cash-Out and Rate/Term Refi-
nancing volume, we use the relative ratio reported in the FHFA to breakdown the refinance volume reported
in the MBA data. For example, for 1991Q1 the MBA reports $32B in refinance volume and the FHFA data
indicates that 3.8% of the total volume was due to Cash-Out Refinancing and 27.0% was due to Rate/Term
Refinancing, hence we conclude that $32 billion × 3.8/(3.8 + 27.0) = $3.95 billion is the appropriate figure
for Cash-Out Refinance volume and $32 billion × 27.0/(3.8 + 27) = $28.05 billion is the corresponding figure
for Rate/Term Refinancing volume.


                                                     10
the most active period of rate refinancing takes place in 2001Q4 through 2003Q3, where the
average volume is $342 billion per quarter, far exceeding the peak of each of the previous two
refinancing booms. There is also indirect evidence that mortgage-lending competition in-
creased during this period—according to Freddie Mac’s surveys (see www.freddiemac.com),
the average number of points associated with conventional 30-year fixed-rate mortgages de-
clined from 1.8 in December 1997 to 1.0 in December 1998 to 0.6 in December 2002, and is
0.7 in the most current weekly survey of June 25, 2009.
       Home-equity extraction is a process in which a homeowner converts a portion of the
equity in the home into cash by retiring the existing loan and taking out a new and larger
loan. Such loans are categorized as “cash-out” refinancing in the FHFA data set, and it is
not surprising that equity extraction is more common in a rising real-estate market because
during such periods, homeowners’ equity increases dollar-for-dollar with home prices, giving
homeowners more equity to extract. Figure 1 documents a seemingly permanent increase
in cash-out refinance volume in the second half of the sample. The first peak in cash-
out refinancings occurs in 1998Q4, when volume surpasses $100 billion for the first time.
Although the volume in the following 9 quarters (1999Q1 to 2001Q1) was less than $100
billion per quarter, the average value of cash-out refinancings per quarter was $204 billion
in the subsequent 30 quarters (2001Q2 to 2008Q3), far exceeding the average value in the
preceding 41 quarters from 1991Q1 to 2001Q1.17 Not surprisingly, as home prices fell from
2006 to 2008, cash-out refinancing volume rapidly subsided, declining to only $84 billion in
the last quarter of 2008.
       Figure 2 shows the relation between gross equity extraction and aggregate U.S. home
prices during the period from 1991Q1 to 2008Q4.18 The increase and subsequent decline
in the gross equity extraction closely mirrors the pattern of aggregate U.S. residential real-
estate prices. According to this estimate, U.S. homeowners extracted an average of $160
billion in each of the 32 quarters between 1999Q3 to 2007Q2, far outstripping the $87 billion
extracted during the previous peak in 1998Q4.
       Other things equal, equity extraction leads to a larger mortgage on a given home, implying
a link between the amount of equity extracted and the volume of mortgages outstanding that
  17
     Of course, aggregate refinancing activity is expected to grow as the economy grows. However, the time
period of interest is sufficiently short that even as a percentage of GDP, the total housing stock, or other
macroeconomic variables, the qualitative patterns of cash-out refinancing are similar.
  18
     The estimates of gross equity extractions are from Greenspan and Kennedy (2005). We are grateful to
Jim Kennedy for providing us with updated estimates.


                                                    11
                                                             $600                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1200




                                                             $500                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1000
                      Quarterly Origination Volume ($Bil)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         30 Year Fixed Mortgage Rate (bps)
                                                             $400                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         800




                                                             $300                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         600




                                                             $200                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         400




                                                             $100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         200




                                                              $-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                              3/1/1991


                                                                                                    3/1/1992


                                                                                                                           3/1/1993


                                                                                                                                                  3/1/1994


                                                                                                                                                                        3/1/1995


                                                                                                                                                                                              3/1/1996


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3/1/1997


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3/1/1998


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3/1/1999


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3/1/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3/1/2001


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3/1/2002


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3/1/2003


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3/1/2004


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3/1/2005


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3/1/2006


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3/1/2007


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3/1/2008
                                                                                                               Quarterly Origination for Purchase ($Bil-Left)                                                                                                                                                   Quarterly Origination for Cash-Out Refinance ($Bil-Left)
                                                                                                               Quarterly Origination for Rate-Term Refinance ($Bil-Left)                                                                                                                                        30 Year Fixed Rate Mortgage (bps-Right)



Figure 1: 30-year fixed-rate mortgage rates, and purchase, cash-out refinancing, and rate-
refinancing origination volume from 1991Q1 to 2008Q4.
                                                            250                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   $280




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Quarterly Gross Equity Extraction ($Bil)
                                                            200                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   $210
        Case-Shiller Index Level




                                                            150                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   $140



                                                            100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   $70



                                                             50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   $-



                                                              0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   $(70)
                                                                   3/1/1991

                                                                                         3/1/1992

                                                                                                                3/1/1993

                                                                                                                                       3/1/1994

                                                                                                                                                             3/1/1995

                                                                                                                                                                                   3/1/1996

                                                                                                                                                                                                         3/1/1997

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3/1/1998

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3/1/2000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3/1/2001

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3/1/2002

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3/1/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3/1/2005

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3/1/2006

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3/1/2007

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3/1/2008




                                                                                                                                      Gross Equity Extraction per Quarter ($Bil-Right)                                                                                                                           Case-Shiller Composite-10 Index (Left)




Figure 2: The appreciation in and subsequent decline of U.S. residential real-estate values, as
measured by the Case-Shiller Composite 10 Index, and the corresponding growth of equity
extractions from 1991Q1 to 2008Q4. The equity extraction data is based on Greenspan and
Kennedy (2005).



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
is confirmed in Figure 3. This figure shows that outstanding mortgages grew from $2,648
billion in 1991Q1 to its peak of $11,142 billion in 2008Q1. During this period, homeowners
extracted $6,720 billion in equity. These figures suggest that equity extractions represent
a non-trivial portion of outstanding mortgages, and the risk transferred from homeowners
to the financial sector due to these extractions may have had a significant impact on the
overall risk exposure of this sector to real-estate prices. The objective of the simulation in
this paper is to quantify this effect.


                                              $12,000                                                                                                                                                                                                         $7,200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cumulative Equity Extractions ($Bil)
         Total Outstanding Mortgages ($Bil)




                                              $10,000                                                                                                                                                                                                         $6,000


                                               $8,000                                                                                                                                                                                                         $4,800


                                               $6,000                                                                                                                                                                                                         $3,600


                                               $4,000                                                                                                                                                                                                         $2,400


                                               $2,000                                                                                                                                                                                                         $1,200


                                                  $-                                                                                                                                                                                                          $-
                                                        3/1/1991

                                                                   3/1/1992

                                                                              3/1/1993

                                                                                         3/1/1994

                                                                                                    3/1/1995

                                                                                                               3/1/1996

                                                                                                                          3/1/1997

                                                                                                                                     3/1/1998

                                                                                                                                                3/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                           3/1/2000

                                                                                                                                                                      3/1/2001

                                                                                                                                                                                 3/1/2002

                                                                                                                                                                                            3/1/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                       3/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3/1/2005

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3/1/2006

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3/1/2007

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3/1/2008
                                                                                                    Cumulative Gross Equity Extraction Since 1991Q1 ($Bil-Right)
                                                                                                    Outstanding Mortgages ($Bil-Left)




Figure 3: Cumulative equity extractions and the growth in the volume of U.S. residential
mortgages outstanding from 1991Q1 to 2008Q4. The equity extraction data is based on
Greenspan and Kennedy (2005), and outstanding residential-mortgage volume is reported
by the Federal Reserve as “Personal Sector Home Mortgages Liability”.

   An important issue affecting the link between equity extractions and risk is what home-
owners do with the equity they extract. If, for example, the extracted equity is invested in
liquid assets that are not highly correlated with property values, then indivisibility may be
less of an issue and the ratchet effect may not be nearly as pronounced. A subsequent decline
in home prices will still increase homeowner leverage, but the homeowner can easily liquidate
a portion of the invested equity that was previously extracted to pay down the mortgage or
to make mortgage payments. However, using the credit files of a sample of almost 70,000
individuals from a national consumer credit rating agency, Mian and Sufi (2009) conclude
that equity extractions are used primarily for consumption or home improvement, neither of

                                                                                                                                                    13
which reduces the risks inherent in cash-out refinancing.

3.2       Simulation Design
To design a simulation of the behavior of homeowners in the face of changing interest rates
and home prices, we propose a two-step procedure. First, we calibrate our simulation to
be representative of the actual stock of homes in the U.S. by using data on new home
construction and sales, and the average prices of new homes sold. Each house enters our
simulation when it is first sold, and stays in our simulation until its mortgage is fully paid. In
the process, the house may be refinanced one or more times. We parameterize the refinancing
decision—for example, as a function of the loan-to-value ratio—and seek to calibrate this
decision rule to reproduce related observable macroeconomic data such as the total value of
residential mortgages outstanding or the total value of equity extracted from homes during
this period.
       As in Figure 1, our simulation also distinguishes between two types of refinancing: rate
and cash-out refinancing. In the former case, the homeowner refinances to take advantage
of lower interest rates by reducing the monthly payment without altering the maturity of
the mortgage or the mortgage amount, and in the latter case, the owner refinances to take
advantage of capital appreciation, in which case the newly originated mortgage will reflect
a larger principal amount than that of the existing mortgage, with the difference paid out
to the homeowner.19 Even this relatively simple set of refinancing decisions, and the corre-
sponding impact on aggregate risk exposures, poses significant computational challenges. To
see why, consider the computational complexity involved in determining the amount of loans
outstanding N years after a single cohort of homeowners purchase their homes in a given year
(we shall refer to this cohort as a single “vintage”). In the simplest case, we assume that all
homes in this vintage are purchased at the same initial loan-to-value ratio—this will be 85%
in our simulations—using conventional 30-year fixed-rate mortgages. In addition, assume
that homeowners do not move, refinancing is possible only once a year, homeowners extract
the maximum amount of equity if they do decide to refinance, and if they refinance, their
new mortgages are also conventional 30-year fixed-rate mortgages. In this highly simplified
  19
     Another possible refinancing arrangement is for the homeowner to extract an amount of equity and
increase his mortgage so as to maintain the same level of monthly payments. However, the amount of equity
that can be extracted in this manner is typically very small, and not enough to explain the massive rise in
mortgages outstanding and equity extractions shown in Figure 3. For this reason, and to keep our simulations
as simple as possible, we limit our analysis to the two refinancing arrangements described above.

                                                    14
world, the refinancing decision is a binary choice, hence N years after the initial purchase,
there are 2N possible decision paths that each homeowner might have followed. All 2N paths
for all homeowners must be evaluated to compute the total value of mortgages outstanding
from this single vintage!20
       Also, note that there is no possibility of using re-combining binary trees to simplify the
computations since the outcomes—in terms of magnitude and timing of equity extractions—
are quite distinct across each “slice” of the tree, hence the computations grow exponentially
with the horizon of the simulation. Therefore, in designing our simulation, we must balance
the desire for realism against the tractability of the computations required. To that end, we
make the following assumptions:

(A1) Each house is purchased at a loan-to-value ratio of LTVo which is set to 85% in our
         simulations.

(A2) All homes are purchased with conventional 30-year fixed-rate mortgages that are non-
         recourse loans.

(A3) The market value of all houses that are in “circulation”, i.e., that have outstanding
         mortgages and may be refinanced at some point, grows at the rate given by the Home
         Price Index (HPI), which will be discussed in Section 4.

(A4) We use only national data on home sales, price appreciation, and mortgages outstand-
         ing to calibrate and test our simulation, hence potentially important geographical
         differences are not reflected.
  20
     For concreteness, consider the case where the annual interest rate is 5%, the initial home price is $100,000,
purchased with a 30-year mortgage with initial LTV of 85% and, for further simplicity, assume that payments
are made once a year at year end. Based on these assumption, the initial outstanding loan is $85,000 which,
assuming no refinancing and equity extractions, will decline to $83,720 after 1 year and to $82,377 after
two years due to the payments made by the owner. Let home prices appreciate by 3% per year in each
of the next two years, so the home is worth $103,000 by the second year and $106,090 by the third year.
Consider a homeowner who decides to refinance at the end of first year. In this case, the new mortgage
will be $103, 000 × 85% = $87, 550 and the difference between this amount and $83,720—$3,829—can be
extracted via a cash-out refinancing. By the end of the second year, there are four possibilities to consider in
calculating the total loan value and total equity extractions: homeowners who never refinanced, those who
refinanced after one year but did not refinance in the second year, those who refinanced only in the second
year, and lastly those who refinanced in both year to take advantage of home-price appreciation. Each of
these cases is associated with a different value and timing of equity extractions, and results in a different
value for the outstanding loan amount at the end of the second year. It should be clear that each additional
year multiplies the number of paths that need to considered by a factor of 2, resulting in 2N paths after N
years.


                                                       15
 (A5) We assume that a homeowner’s decision to refinance is made each month, and is only a
       function of the current equity in the home and the potential savings from switching to
       a lower interest-rate mortgage. In particular, we assume that the refinancing decision
       does not depend on factors such as the price and age of the home, or the time elapsed
       since the last refinancing.

 (A6) For rate refinancing, we assume that the owner will refinance when rates have fallen by
       more than the rate-refinancing threshold (RRT) from the rate on an existing mortgage.
       For all of our simulations, we set RRT to be 200 basis points. The new mortgage is
       assumed to have the same maturity as the existing mortgage, and the principal of the
       new mortgage is equal to the remaining value of the existing mortgage. Therefore, the
       homeowner will save in monthly payments due to the lower mortgage rate, but there
       is no equity extracted from the house.

 (A7) For cash-out refinancings, we assume the homeowner will refinance to take out the
       maximum amount of equity possible. Therefore, the loan-to-value ratio will be brought
       back to LTVo after each refinancing, and a new loan with a maturity of 30 years will
       be originated.

 (A8) We assume that the refinancing decisions by homeowners are random and independent
       of each other, apart from the dependence explicitly parameterized in the refinancing
       rule. For example, given a pool of 10MM homes, if the refinancing rule yields a
       probability of 1% for refinancing based on the prevailing inputs (e.g., the current loan-
       to-value ratio, the current interest rate, etc.), we assume that 100,000 homeowners will
       refinance their homes during that period.

 (A9) We assume that once fully owned, a home will not re-enter the market, i.e., the prob-
       ability of a cash-out refinancing is zero after a mortgage is paid off.

(A10) We do not incorporate taxes or transactions costs explicitly into our simulations.

  Given the central role that these assumptions play in our simulations and their interpretation,
  a few words about their motivation are in order.
     Assumptions (A1) and (A2) determine the initial leverage and type of mortgage we
  assume for new homeowners, and we chose a loan-to-value ratio of 85% and 30-year conven-
  tional fixed-rate mortgages partially based on the data reported in Tables 3–14 and 3–15 of

                                                16
the American Housing Survey regarding the behavioral patterns of homeowners.21 Of course,
in the years leading up to the peak of the housing market in June 2006, considerably more
aggressive and exotic loans were made, including the now-infamous NINJA (“no income,
no job or assets”) mortgages and many others with embedded options. Assumptions (A1)
and (A2) are motivated by our desire for simplicity, but also because we wish to err on the
conservative side of default-related loss implications wherever possible. Assuming that all
mortgages are conventional 30-year fixed-rate loans with 15% downpayments instead of a
more realistic mix of conventional and exotic mortgage products is likely to yield under-
estimates of loan-to-value ratios, default correlations, and potential losses from falling home
prices.
       Assuming that mortgages are non-recourse loans greatly simplifies our simulations be-
cause we do not need to model the dynamics of other sources of collateral. However, by
assuming that lenders have no recourse to any other sources of collateral, our simulation
may yield over-estimates of potential losses, and may also oversimplify the behavior of bor-
rowers (see Ghent and Kudlyak, 2009). To take on the more complex challenge of matching
the mix of recourse and non-recourse loans in the mortgage system in our simulations, we
require information about the types of recourse that are permitted and the practicalities
of enforcing deficiency judgments in each of the 50 states, as well as cross-sectional and
time-series properties of homeowner income levels, assets, and liabilities.22 While this is
beyond the scope of our current study, it is not an insurmountable task given sufficient time,
resources, and access to financial data at the household level.
       Assumptions (A3) and (A4) allow us to calibrate the price dynamics of our simulated
housing stock, and our decision to ignore potentially significant individual and regional and
differences in housing prices, mortgage refinancing behavior, and default rates is also likely
to yield conservative loss estimates. To see why, consider the case where the national average
home price shows little growth, masking the fact that certain regions have experienced large
price gains that are offset by comparable declines in other regions. Simulations based on
  21
    See http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/ahs/ahs07/ahs07.html.
  22
    Mian and Sufi (2009) provide some interesting empirical insights into these cross-sectional and time-series
properties using individual-level data on homeowner debt and defaults from 1997 to 2008: “Home equity-
based borrowing is stronger for younger households, households with low credit scores, and households with
high initial credit card utilization rates. Homeowners in high house price appreciation areas experience
a relative decline in default rates from 2002 to 2006 as they borrow heavily against their home equity,
but experience very high default rates from 2006 to 2008. Our estimates suggest that home equity-based
borrowing is equal to 2.8% of GDP every year from 2002 to 2006, and accounts for 34% of new defaults.”


                                                      17
the national average would produce little equity extraction during such periods. In a more
realistic model disaggregated by region, those regions enjoying positive growth will generate
significant equity extractions incrementally as housing prices rise. However, this regional
increase in leverage will not be offset by other regions experiencing comparable price declines
because the indivisibility of housing makes it impossible for over-leveraged homeowners to
reduce their leverage incrementally. Thus, aggregate equity extractions would likely be more
significant in a regionally disaggregated simulation.
   Assumptions (A5)–(A7) are simple behavioral rules meant to encapsulate the economic
deliberations in which homeowners engage to decide whether or not to refinance. Accordingly,
implicit in these rules are many factors that we do not model explicitly such as transactions
costs, opportunity costs, homeowner characteristics such as income and risk preferences,
macroeconomic conditions, and social norms. While it may be possible to derive similar rules
from first principles, the computational challenges may outweigh the benefits, especially from
the perspective of producing estimates of potential losses from the aggregate housing sector.
In particular, Assumption (A5) addresses the usual “curse of dimensionality” that plagues
many computational problems by structuring the simulation so that all homes purchased or
refinanced at a given time can be “combined” into a single simulation path. Adding other
state-dependent factors such as house age or price can increase the dimensionality of the
problem geometrically, quickly rendering the simulation computationally infeasible.
   Assumptions (A6) and (A7) outline the two polar opposites of our simulated refinancing
activities—(A6) describes refinancing behavior that does not extract any equity or increase
the size of the mortgage, and (A7) describes refinancing behavior that extracts the maximum
amount of equity possible and resets the leverage to the initial 85% loan-to-value ratio.
Clearly a number of intermediate cases can be considered, but we focus only on these two
extremes to delineate the boundaries that span them. The choice of 200 basis points for
RRT is arbitrary, and does not affect the loss estimates for cash-out refinancing, but this
behavioral rule does yield a reasonable approximation to the historical rate/term refinancing
origination volumes shown in Figure 1.
   Also, implicit in (A5)–(A7) is the assumption that the supply of credit to households is
infinitely elastic at prevailing market rates, which is motivated by our interest in measuring
the impact of household refinancing behavior by itself. The complexities of consumer credit
markets warrant a separate simulation study focusing on just those issues.


                                              18
   Assumption (A8) requires some clarification because clearly the refinancing rules in (A6)
and (A7) imply that refinancing decisions are not independent across households. Assump-
tion (A8) simply states that there are no other sources of dependence, such as social pressures
arising from neighbors refinancing. Therefore, the only channel by which we allow refinanc-
ing decisions to be correlated across households is through interest rates and home prices
via the behavioral rules in (A6) and (A7). Remarkably, this single source of commonality is
sufficient to generate an enormous amount of synchronized losses when home prices decline.
   Assumption (A9) is motivated primarily by expositional convenience, and can easily be
amended to allow fully paid houses to re-enter the real-estate market, but as shown in Figure
7, our simulations imply that 35% of homes are fully owned as of December 2007, which is
identical to the reported value in American Housing Survey of 2007. Also, ignoring issues
such as relocation or renting vs. owning are not likely to affect our estimates of aggregate
risk and losses. For example, consider the case of an individual who decides to rent after
selling his home for $200,000 which was recently purchased for $100,000 with a downpayment
of $15,000. Assuming a 0% interest rate for simplicity, this fortunate individual has taken
$115,000 of equity out of the housing market. However, the new buyer of this home will
likely borrow all but 10% to 20% of the purchase price, e.g., under our Assumption (A1), the
buyer will borrow $170,000. It is not hard to see that the aggregate effect of this transaction
is virtually identical to a cash-out refinancing by the original homeowner.
   Assumption (A10) is a standard simplification, but is not equivalent to the usual “per-
fect markets” assumption where taxes and transactions costs are assumed to be zero. In
fact, assuming away market frictions may seem particularly incongruous in the context of a
simulation of refinancing activity, which some consider to be driven largely by transactions
costs. In fact, Assumption (A10) does not assert that these frictions do not exist, but merely
that we do not model their impact on behavior explicitly. Instead, our behavioral rules for
the homeowner’s refinancing decision implicitly incorporates these costs into our simulation
in a “reduced-form” manner.
   If, instead of positing simple heuristics, we simulated optimal refinancing behavior of the
kind proposed by Pliska (2006), Fortin et al. (2007), and Agarwal, Driscoll, and Laibson
(2008), then the specific type and degree of transactions costs and taxes could be incorpo-
rated explicitly. The complexities of such stochastic dynamic optimal control policies would
make our simulations considerably less tractable and transparent, but we conjecture that


                                              19
the qualitative properties may not change a great deal. Our intuition is derived from the
vast literature on optimal portfolio policies with transactions costs in which the presence
of fixed and proportional trading costs reduces the frequency of trades and makes trading
volume more “lumpy” (see, for example, Constantinides, 1976, 1986; Davis and Norman,
1990; Grossman and Laroque, 1990; and Lo, Mamaysky, and Wang, 2004). Our behavioral
refinancing rules capture the spirit of these optimal policies, hence our calibration to histor-
ical refinancing levels should implicitly reflect the impact of transactions costs, taxes, and
other factors that enter into a homeowner’s decision to refinance.
   With these assumptions in place, we can now turn to the specific components of the
simulation. In Section 3.3 we describe the simulation of the evolution of a single home over
time, and in Section 3.4, we consider the corresponding simulation for the entire pool of
mortgages in the U.S. housing market.

3.3    Single-Home Simulation
In this component of the simulation, we calculate the monthly payment, mortgage rate,
outstanding loan, market values, and LTV ratios for each vintage of homes using monthly
data from January 1919 to December 2008 (there are 1,080 vintages all together). The initial
purchase price is set to the average price of new homes sold in that month. According to
(A1) and (A2), the starting loan size is set so that the loan-to-value ratio is equal to LTVo
and all homes are purchased with conventional 30-year fixed-rate mortgages.
   At this stage, we assume that homeowners refinance their mortgages if rates have dropped
by more than the RRT parameter. In this part of the simulation, we assume that no cash-
out refinancing takes place. The effect of cash-out refinancing will be captured through our
aggregation scheme described in the next section. Given the assumptions outlined above, the
new mortgage has the exact same maturity and principal amount as the existing mortgage
and no equity is extracted. This step of the simulation produces the following quantities:

   • VALUEi,t is the value of a house from vintage i by time t, i ≤ t. VALUEi,i = NHPi
      where NHPi is the average price for all new homes sold in vintage i. The value for all
      subsequent time periods grows at the rate given by HPI (see Section 4 for the specific
      time series used).

   • LOANi,t is the loan value for a home initially purchased in vintage i by time t, i ≤ t.

                                              20
         Note that LOANi,i = LTVo × VALUEi,i. Also, since there is no change in the amount
         of the loan during the life of the mortgage (however, the rate may change via rate refi-
         nancings), the magnitude of LOANi,t simply follows the standard amortization schedule
         of a conventional 30-year fixed-rate mortgage with a monthly payment frequency.

   • LTVi,t is the loan-to-value ratio at time t for a home initially purchased in vintage i,
         i ≤ t. It is simply given by LTVi,t = LOANi,t /VALUEi,t .

   • GRTi,t is the value of the embedded guarantee a non-recourse mortgage provides to the
         homeowner, essentially giving the owner the right (but not the obligation) to sell the
         property back to the lender if the home price falls below the mortgage’s outstanding
         balance (see Section 5 for further discussion).

3.4       Aggregate Simulation
The aggregation component combines the effect of cash-out refinancing and the time se-
ries obtained from the single-home simulation component to yield aggregate series for the
amounts of loans outstanding and equity extractions, as well as several systemic risk mea-
sures.
   By Assumption (A5), refinancing behavior depends only on the current loan-to-value
ratio and the potential savings due to lower rates, which makes the computation of aggregate
quantities much quicker. This efficiency gain is due to the fact that, starting from the same
initial loan-to-value ratio, LTVo , and with the same price appreciation determined by HPI, all
homes refinanced in period t will have the same refinancing behavior going forward as homes
purchased in period t. Therefore, the time series produced by the single-home simulation
can serve as the starting point for our aggregation simulation, and as long as we keep track
of the number of houses that were refinanced in each period, we can construct our aggregate
measures accordingly.
   As the starting point of our aggregate simulations, we define the variable TOTALVt ,
which is the total value of all homes that were either directly purchased at time t or were
purchased in an earlier period, survived until time t−1, and cash-out refinanced at time t.
This variable can be computed recursively through the relation:


             TOTALVt = NHt × VALUEt,t +


                                                 21
                               t−1
                               X                                            VALUEi,t
                                     TOTALVi × SURVIVi,t−1 × REFIi,t ×                      (1)
                               i=1                                          VALUEi,i

where NHt is the number of new homes entering the system in vintage t, SURVIVi,t−1 is
the probability that a new home from vintage i has not undergone a cash-out refinancing
by time t − 1, and REFIi,t is the probability that a home entering the system in vintage
i undergoes a cash-out refinancing at date t, conditioned on the event that it has not yet
been refinanced by date t. The multiplier VALUEi,t /VALUEi,i is an adjustment factor that
reflects time variation in housing prices. From TOTALVt , we can compute the total value
of loans outstanding, TOTALMt , and the total equity extractions, TOTALXt , using the
following two sums:

                                  t
                                  X                              LOANi,t
                 TOTALMt =              TOTALVi × SURVIVi,t ×                              (2a)
                                  i=1                            VALUEi,i
                                  Xt
                 TOTALXt =              TOTALVi × SURVIVi,t−1 × REFIi,t ×
                                  i=1
                                         VALUEi,t
                                                  × (LTVo − LTVi,t )                       (2b)
                                         VALUEi,i

The logic behind (2) is as follows. The total amount of mortgage debt outstanding is simply
the sum—over all previous vintages of homes—of the product of three terms: (1) the total
value of all homes requiring mortgage financing, i.e., the value of all homes that were either
directly purchased or refinanced in each previous period; (2) the probability that homes in (1)
have survived, i.e., have not undergone cash-out refinancings, until time t (note that the value
of the mortgages associated with homes that have gone through cash-out refinancing will be
reflected through the recursive relation given in (1)); and (3) the ratio LOANi,t /VALUEi,i ,
which accounts for normal mortgage amortization. The total amount of equity extraction
given in (2b) is the sum—also over all previous vintages—of the product of four terms: (1) the
total value of all new and refinanced homes in each previous vintage; (2) the probability that
the homes in (1) did not undergo cash-out refinancings until time t−1 and were refinanced
at date t; (3) the multiplier VALUEi,t /VALUEi,i, to take into account changes in the market
value of homes; and (4) the difference LTVo−LTVi,t , which is the amount of equity that can
be extracted from refinancing.
   The process of calibrating the aggregate simulation consists of specifying a particular


                                               22
behavioral rule for the refinancing decision and selecting parameters for that rule that can
generate realistic histories of the aggregate time series defined in (2). We turn to this task
in Section 4.


4      Calibrating the Simulation
To properly calibrate our simulation, we first describe the data we use as inputs to the
calibration in Section 4.1, and then focus on the two primary time series we intend to match
in our simulation in Section 4.2. We present the results of the calibration in Section 4.3.

4.1     Input Data
The following five time series are used as the main inputs to our simulation:

    1. Home Price Appreciation, HPIt . We use three sources to assemble this series. For
       the most recent history (since January 1987), we use the S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price
       Composite-10 Index.23 From 1975Q1 to 1986Q4, we use the national house price index
       from the FHFA.24 Prior to 1975Q1, we use the nominal home price index collected
       by Robert Shiller.25 These last two series are only available at a quarterly and annual
       frequency, respectively, and to be consistent with the rest of our simulation, we convert
       them into monthly series assuming geometric growth.26 Given the importance of this
       variable for our simulation, we considered two other home-price series using different
       data in the more recent period, but because the results did not differ significantly from
       those based on HPIt , we have omitted them to conserve space.27
  23
     See Standard and Poor’s website.
  24
     See http://www.fhfa.gov/Default.aspx?Page=87. The relevant data may be found in the “All-
Transactions Indexes” section.
  25
     See http://www.econ.yale.edu/∼shiller/data.htm.
  26
     Specifically, for months other than March, June, September, and December, HPIt is computed as:
                                                                           
                                                                       HPIQ+
                             HPIt = exp log(HPIQ− ) + (t − tQ− ) log
                                                                       HPIQ−

where HPIQ− denotes the quarterly index value from the previous quarter, and HPIQ+ denotes the quarterly
index value from the current quarter. The approach for interpolating monthly observations from annual data
is similar.
   27
      Specifically, we define CSNAT-HPIt and NAR-HPIt using the same data as HPIt for the earlier part
of the simulation period, but CSNAT-HPIt uses the Case-Shiller National Home Index price since 1987Q1,
and NAR-HPIt uses the appreciation in the median price of existing homes sold as reported by the National
Association of Realtors, which is available since January 1999. Because the Case-Shiller National Price


                                                   23
   2. New Homes Entering the Mortgage System, NHt . We construct this time
      series from a variety of sources. The time series of “New One-Family Houses Sold”
      available from the U.S. Census Bureau is the starting point.28 This series is available
      monthly since January 1963. However, it only includes homes built for sale and, for
      example, excludes homes built by homeowners and contractors. To take such cases into
      account, we use data collected by the U.S. Census Bureau on the intent of completed
      home constructions.29 This construction data separates the completed units by their
      intent—units in the “Built for Sale” category correspond to homes that will be reported
      in the “New One-Family Houses Sold” upon the completion of a sale transaction. We
      take the sum of construction numbers reported under the “Contractor-Built”, “Owner-
      Built”, and “Multi-Units Built for Sale” categories, and use the ratio of this sum to the
      number of “One-Family Units Built for Sale” to adjust the “New One-Family Houses
      Sold” series.30 For example, in 1974 this ratio is 1.06, therefore we multiply the monthly
      “New One-Family Houses Sold” by a factor of 1+1.06 = 2.06 in each month during
      1974 to estimate the total number of units entering the mortgage system that year.
      For the period from 1963 to 1973, this ratio is not available (see footnote 29), so we will
      use the average of the adjustment factor from 1974 to 1983 to make the adjustments
      prior to 1974. This yields values of NHt back to January 1963.

      However, the useful life of a typical home is often greater than 46 years (1963 to 2008),
      hence we may be omitting a significant fraction of homes with current mortgages if NHt
      only starts in January 1963. Based on data from the American Housing Survey 2007,
      approximately 93% of homes surveyed were built after 1919.31 Therefore, we choose to
Index is only available at a quarterly frequency, we construct monthly observations for this variable via
interpolation assuming geometric growth. Simulation results based on these home-price series are available
from the authors upon request.
  28
     See http://www.census.gov/const/www/newressalesindex.html.
  29
     See http://www.census.gov/const/www/newresconstindex excel.html. The relevant data may be
found in “Quarterly Housing Completions by Purpose of Construction and Design Type”. We use the annual
series since it is available since 1974 (quarterly data only goes back to 1999).
  30
     We have excluded the “Multi-Units Built for Rent” category because our focus is the mortgage liability
of the Personal sector. Mortgages for multi-units built for rent, such as large apartment buildings, are
typically held outside of the Personal sector. However, some of these units may eventually be converted into
condominiums and sold to individual buyers, which will not be captured in our simulations. This exclusion is
yet another reason we consider our simulated mortgage-default losses to be conservative estimates of actual
losses.
  31
     See http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/ahs/nationaldata.html. The relevant data is given
in Table 1A-1.



                                                    24
      extend NHt back to January 1919 to yield a more realistic time series for the stock of
      U.S. residential real estate in more recent years. Appendix A.2 outlines our method for
      extending this series back to January 1919 by using the statistical relationship between
      NHt from 1963 to 2008 and factors such as population and real home prices.

  3. New House Prices, NHPt . We will use the average home price available from the
      U.S. Census Bureau for “New One-Family Houses Sold” in the period from January
      1975 to December 2008. For the period from January 1963 to January 1975, the
      average price is not available. However, the Census reports the median sale price for
      this period, which we will use as our starting point. From January 1975 to December
      2008, when both mean and median home prices are available, we observe that the
      mean price is typically higher than the median by approximately 5%, and the ratio
      has increased in the more recent history. To make our simulations more accurate, we
      multiply the reported median prices in the January-1963-to-December-1974 sample by
      1.05, i.e., we inflate the median by 5%, and use the resulting values to complete the
      NHPt series. From January 1919 to December 1962, we will use the growth rate of
      HPIt to extrapolate sales prices, starting with the sales price in January 1963.

  4. Long-Term Risk-Free Rates, RFt .

      We will use the yield on the 30-year constant maturity U.S. Treasury securities, which
      is available from February 1977 to December 2008, but with a gap from March 2002 to
      January 2006. We fill this gap using yields on 20-year constant maturity Treasury se-
      curities.32 For the period prior to February 1977, we will use the “Long Rate” collected
      by Robert Shiller,33 which is only available annually, so we use linear interpolation to
      obtain monthly observations.

  5. Mortgage Rates, MRt . We will use the series constructed by Freddie Mac for the
      30-year fixed-rate mortgage rate, which starts in April 1971.34 For the earlier period,
      we will simply add 150 basis points to the long-term risk-free rates RFt (see above),
      which is approximately the average spread between 30-year mortgage rates and RFt
      for the period from April 1971 to December 2008.
 32
     See http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/releases/statisticsdata.htm.
 33
     See http://www.econ.yale.edu/∼shiller/data.htm.
  34
     See http://www.freddiemac.com/dlink/html/PMMS/display/PMMSOutputYr.jsp. The section “30-
Year Fixed-Rate Historic Tables” contains the relevant data.

                                             25
4.2    Calibration Reference Series
As described in Section 3.4, for a given model of refinancing behavior, our simulation can
generate the hypothetical time series of total mortgages outstanding and total equity ex-
tractions. Our goal is to calibrate the parameters of that refinancing model so that these
two hypothetical series come as close as possible to the following two historical time series,
which will serve as our calibration reference series:

  1. Outstanding Mortgage Volume. We will use the value of residential mortgage
      liabilities as reported in the Federal Reserve Flow of Funds Accounts. This data is
      available at a quarterly frequency from 1951Q4 to 2008Q4, and annually from 1945 to
      1951.

  2. Equity Extractions. We will use the series produced by Greenspan and Kennedy
      (2005), which is available at a quarterly frequency from 1968Q1 to 2008Q4. While
      their approach decomposes the “Total Gross Equity Extractions” into three compo-
      nents (home sales, home equity loans net of unscheduled payments, and cash-out refi-
      nancings), we will use their “Total Gross Equity Extractions” series in our calibration
      process. This is motivated by the fact that home sales and cash-out refinancings have
      a similar impact on the aggregate risk of the housing market (see Appendix A.1 and
      the discussion of Assumption (A9) in Section 3.2 for further details).

4.3    Calibration Results
The calibration exercise consists of finding a decision rule for the cash-out refinancing deci-
sion that most closely matches the two reference time series of Section 4.2. The simulation
described in Section 3.4 is suitable for simulating situations where the cash-out refinancing
decision depends on any state variable that is not specific to a particular vintage of houses.
For example, the refinancing decision can incorporate changes in interest rates or expecta-
tions about future residential real-estate prices. Therefore, in the interest of simplicity and
feasibility, we propose the most parsimonious rule that can match the gross properties of the
two reference series.
   To establish a baseline for comparison, we first present the results of our simulation if
homes are never cash-out refinanced after their initial purchase. In this scenario, the REFIi,t
probability is 0 and the SURVIVi,t probability is 1 for all i and t, which greatly simplifies (1)

                                               26
and (2). Since no equity is extracted in this case, the main metric for assessing the results
of the simulations is based on the total value of outstanding mortgages. The result of this
exercise is shown in Figure 4 for LTVo set to 85%. Such an approach clearly falls short of
reproducing the total outstanding mortgage volume by a wide margin.


                                       $12,000


                                       $10,000
        Outstanding Mortgages ($Bil)




                                        $8,000


                                        $6,000


                                        $4,000


                                        $2,000


                                           $-
                                                 1/1/1919

                                                             1/1/1924

                                                                        1/1/1929

                                                                                   1/1/1934

                                                                                              1/1/1939

                                                                                                         1/1/1944

                                                                                                                     1/1/1949

                                                                                                                                1/1/1954

                                                                                                                                           1/1/1959

                                                                                                                                                           1/1/1964

                                                                                                                                                                       1/1/1969

                                                                                                                                                                                  1/1/1974

                                                                                                                                                                                             1/1/1979

                                                                                                                                                                                                        1/1/1984

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1/1/1989

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1/1/1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1/1/2009
                                                            Outstanding Mortgages (Simulation, $Bil)                                                  Outstanding Mortgages (Actual Flow of Funds, $Bil)



Figure 4: Volume of outstanding mortgages using our simulation approach versus the actual
values as reported by the Federal Reserve. The simulation is based on an initial loan-to-value
ratio of 85% with no cash-out refinancing. The Federal Reserve mortgage data is available
at a quarterly frequency from 1951Q4 to 2008Q4 and at an annual frequency from 1945 to
1951. The simulation data is at a monthly frequency since January 1919.

   We now turn to the more interesting case where each home has some positive probability
of being cash-out refinanced. In the interest of simplicity, we assume that this probability
depends only on the loan-to-value ratio and is constant across all loan-to-value ratios. Within
this class of refinancing rules, the following rule is able to match the calibration reference
series reasonably well:
                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                    0                                 if              LTVi,t = 0
                                                                        REFIi,t =                                                                                                                                                                                         (3)
                                                                                                                    0.6%                              if              LTVi,t ∈ (0%, 85%]

We shall refer to this refinancing rule as the “Uniform Rule”. Figure 5 shows the simulated
time series of outstanding mortgage volume and cumulative equity extractions, respectively,
based on (3) along with the historical series described in Section 4.2. Clearly this rule is
relatively successful in matching the historical data.
   However, for both time series, it seems that the simulations run ahead of the historical

                                                                                                                                                  27
                                                $14,000

                                                $12,000
        Outstanding Mortgages ($Bil)



                                                $10,000

                                                 $8,000

                                                 $6,000

                                                 $4,000

                                                 $2,000

                                                    $-
                                                               1/1/1919

                                                                               1/1/1924

                                                                                               1/1/1929

                                                                                                               1/1/1934

                                                                                                                             1/1/1939

                                                                                                                                           1/1/1944

                                                                                                                                                         1/1/1949

                                                                                                                                                                       1/1/1954

                                                                                                                                                                                    1/1/1959

                                                                                                                                                                                                  1/1/1964

                                                                                                                                                                                                               1/1/1969

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1/1/1974

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1/1/1979

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1/1/1984

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1/1/1989

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1/1/1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1/1/2009
                                                                          Outstanding Mortgages (Simulation, $Bil)                                                                           Outstanding Mortgages (Actual Flow of Funds, $Bil)




                                                                            (a) Simulated vs. actual time series of outstanding mort-
                                                                            gages.


                                                $10,000
         Cumulative Equity Extractions ($Bil)




                                                 $9,000

                                                 $8,000

                                                 $7,000

                                                 $6,000

                                                 $5,000

                                                 $4,000

                                                 $3,000

                                                 $2,000

                                                 $1,000

                                                     $-
                                                          1/1/1919

                                                                           1/1/1924

                                                                                           1/1/1929

                                                                                                           1/1/1934

                                                                                                                          1/1/1939

                                                                                                                                        1/1/1944

                                                                                                                                                      1/1/1949

                                                                                                                                                                    1/1/1954

                                                                                                                                                                                  1/1/1959

                                                                                                                                                                                                1/1/1964

                                                                                                                                                                                                             1/1/1969

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1/1/1974

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1/1/1979

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1/1/1984

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1/1/1989

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1/1/1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1/1/2009




                                                                                                          Cumulative Equity Extractions (Simulation, $Bil)
                                                                                                          Cumulative Equity Extractions (Estimate by Greenspan and Kennedy, $Bil )




                                                                                          (b) Simulated vs. actual cumulative equity extractions.

Figure 5: Simulated and actual time series of mortgages outstanding and cumulative equity
extractions where homes are purchased at an initial loan-to-value ratio of 85% and cash-out
refinanced based on the Uniform Rule (3). The Federal Reserve mortgage data is available at
a quarterly frequency from 1951Q4 to 2008Q4 and annually from 1945 to 1951. Greenspan
and Kennedy’s (2005) equity extraction data is available at a quarterly frequency from
1968Q1 to 2008Q4. The simulated time series are monthly since January 1919.



                                                                                                                                                                                        28
data. To address this issue, we propose an alternative heuristic motivated by Bennett,
Peach, and Peristiani (2001) in which we assume that the probability of refinancing exhibits
a structural shift (see footnote 12):
                            
                            
                            0             if   LTVi,t = 0
                REFIi,t   = 0.3%           if   t ≤ 1988 and         LTVi,t ∈ (0%, 85%]                   (4)
                           
                           
                             0.9%          if   t ≥ 1989 and         LTVi,t ∈ (0%, 85%]

The parameters 0.3% and 0.9%—the probability of refinancing before and after the structural
break—were selected to be symmetrically spaced around 0.6%, which is the refinancing
probability in the Uniform Rule (3). We will refer to this new refinancing rule as the
“Uniform Rule with Structural Break”. Figure 6 contains the calibration results for this rule.
By adding this simple structural break, the simulated time series matches the historical data
much more closely.35
       The depth of data collected by various organizations on the housing market allows us to
test some other features of our simulation system. In particular, some data on the distribu-
tion of loan-to-value ratios is collected as a part of the American Housing Survey.36 Figure 7
displays this data based on the 2007 survey, and also includes the corresponding simulations
based on no cash-out refinancings as well as the refinancing rules (3) and (4). It is apparent
that the Uniform Rule with Structural Break is reasonably successful in generating similar
loan-to-value ratios to those in this survey. For example, the refinancing rule implies that
35% of the homes in the simulation are owned without any mortgage, which is identical to
the 35% reported in the survey. Also, in the simulation, 58% of the homes had loan-to-value
ratios of 40% or less, which is again identical to 58% based on the 2007 survey results.
       Since the time series used in these calibration are non-stationary, traditional measures
such as correlation and R2 may be misleading indicators of goodness-of-fit. A simpler alter-
native is to compute the mean of the quarterly absolute deviations between the simulated
  35
     However, note the discrepancy between the actual and simulated outstanding mortgages in 2008 (see
Figure 6a). This difference is likely the result of two factors: (1) the wave of foreclosures in 2008 may have
forced lenders to write down significant amounts of principal after foreclosed homes were sold to new buyers
at lower market prices, and this is not captured in our simulations; and (2) the supply of credit declined
dramatically in 2007 and 2008, but this effect is not reflected in the simulations because of our exclusive
focus on the demand side of the mortgage market.
  36
     See http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/ahs/nationaldata.html. The relevant data is given
in Table 3-15.




                                                     29
                                                $14,000


        Outstanding Mortgages ($Bil)            $12,000


                                                $10,000


                                                 $8,000


                                                 $6,000


                                                 $4,000


                                                 $2,000


                                                    $-
                                                            1/1/1919

                                                                         1/1/1924

                                                                                      1/1/1929

                                                                                                   1/1/1934

                                                                                                               1/1/1939

                                                                                                                           1/1/1944

                                                                                                                                       1/1/1949

                                                                                                                                                   1/1/1954

                                                                                                                                                               1/1/1959

                                                                                                                                                                              1/1/1964

                                                                                                                                                                                          1/1/1969

                                                                                                                                                                                                      1/1/1974

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1/1/1979

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1/1/1984

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1/1/1989

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1/1/1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1/1/2009
                                                                       Outstanding Mortgages (Simulation, $Bil)                                                           Outstanding Mortgages (Actual Flow of Funds, $Bil)




                                                                            (a) Simulated vs. actual time series of outstanding mort-
                                                                            gages.


                                                $9,000
         Cumulative Equity Extractions ($Bil)




                                                $8,000

                                                $7,000

                                                $6,000

                                                $5,000

                                                $4,000

                                                $3,000

                                                $2,000

                                                $1,000

                                                    $-
                                                          1/1/1919

                                                                       1/1/1924

                                                                                    1/1/1929

                                                                                                 1/1/1934

                                                                                                              1/1/1939

                                                                                                                          1/1/1944

                                                                                                                                      1/1/1949

                                                                                                                                                  1/1/1954

                                                                                                                                                              1/1/1959

                                                                                                                                                                            1/1/1964

                                                                                                                                                                                         1/1/1969

                                                                                                                                                                                                     1/1/1974

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1/1/1979

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1/1/1984

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1/1/1989

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1/1/1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1/1/2009




                                                                                                 Cumulative Equity Extractions (Simulation, $Bil)
                                                                                                 Cumulative Equity Extractions (Estimate by Greenspan and Kennedy, $Bil )




                                                                            (b) Simulated vs. actual time series of cumulative equity ex-
                                                                            tractions.

Figure 6: Simulated and actual time series of outstanding mortgages and cumulative equity
extractions for the simulation where homes are purchased at an initial loan-to-value ratio
of 85% and cash-out refinanced based on the Uniform Rule with Structural Break (4). The
Federal Reserve mortgage data is available at a quarterly frequency from 1951Q4 to 2008Q4,
and annually from 1945 to 1951. Greenspan and Kennedy’s (2005) equity extraction data
is available at a quarterly frequency from 1968Q1 to 2008Q4. The simulated time series are
monthly since January 1919.


                                                                                                                                                                         30
              65%




           35%      35%

                                                 27%
                 23%
                                                      20%

                                                              13%        13%13%     15%                                                 14%
                             12%          13%13%                                                                                     12%
                          10% 10%                                                              9% 9%
                                                                                                        6%        5% 6%
                                    3%                              4%                                                     5%                 3%
                                                                                          3%                 1%                 3%
                                                                                                                                                   0% 0% 0%

            No Mortgage   Less than 20%       20-39%              40-59%               60-79%                80-89%             90-99%        100 or More

                            American Housing Survey         No Cash-Out           Uniform Rule         Uniform with Structural Break Rule




Figure 7: Distribution of simulated loan-to-value ratios (assuming an initial loan-to-value
ratio of 85%) in December 2007 vs. the results from the 2007 American Housing Survey,
based on the Uniform Rule (3) and the Uniform Rule with Structural Break (4).

and actual series as a percentage of the actual quarterly values:

                                                                                              T
                                                                                           1 X   |Simulatedt − Actualt |
                       Mean Absolute Deviation ≡                                                                         .
                                                                                           T k=1        Actualt

These mean absolute errors are reported for various sample periods in Table 1, and for the
refinancing rule (4), we see that the mean absolute error ranges from 12% for the 1980–2000
sample period to just 5% during the more recent 2000–2008 period.
      The values in Table 1 confirm the patterns in Figures 6 and 7, namely that our simulation
under the refinancing rule (4) is now properly calibrated to assess the impact of refinancing on
the systemic risk of the U.S. residential mortgage market. We shall adopt this specification
in our analysis of such risks in Section 5. While this rule implies a uniform probability of
cash-out refinancing, other refinancing rules where the probability of a cash-out decision
depends on the loan-to-value ratio can also match the calibration reference series relatively
well. We have summarized the results for two such rules—where the refinancing probability is
linearly decreasing in the loan-to-value ratio—in Appendix A.3. The fact that the empirical
implications of these other refinancing rules are similar suggests that our findings are robust
to the particular behavioral hypothesis regarding refinancing.37
 37
      When calibrated against the other two home-price indexes CSNAT-HPIt and NAR-HPIt (see footnote


                                                                                     31
                                                                 Uniform
                                                  Uniform                                  Linear Rule
                     Time Period No Cash-Out                     Rule with   Linear Rule
                                                   Rule                                    with Break
                                                                  Break

                         Mean Absolute Deviation of Total Mortgages Outstanding (% of Actual)

                     1980 to 2008      45%          33%             11%          29%           10%
                     1990 to 2008      51%          21%             10%          17%            8%
                     2000 to 2008      57%           7%              4%           4%            3%

                      Mean Absolute Deviation of Total Cumulative Equity Extractions (% of Actual)

                     1980 to 2008      N/A          59%             12%          54%           13%
                     1990 to 2008      N/A          26%              7%          22%            9%
                     2000 to 2008      N/A           6%              5%           5%            9%




Table 1: Mean absolute deviations of simulated vs. actual time series for total mortgages
outstanding and total cumulative equity extractions under five different refinancing behav-
ioral rules: rate/term refinancing (where no equity is extracted), the Uniform Rule (3), the
Uniform Rule with Structural Break (4), the Linear Rule (A.5), and the Linear Rule with
Structural Break (A.6).

5     Measuring the Refinancing Ratchet Effect
Armed with a properly calibrated simulation of the U.S. residential mortgage market, we can
now turn to the main focus of this paper: an assessment of the systemic risk posed by the
refinancing ratchet effect. We first consider the impact of equity extractions on loan-to-value
ratios in Section 5.1, and then construct a more dynamic measure of risk in Sections 5.2 and
5.3 using a simple derivatives pricing model.

5.1     Aggregate Loan-to-Value Ratios
Figure 8 shows the simulated aggregate value of mortgages outstanding and the market
value of the underlying residential real estate for the no-refinancing case and for the cash-out
refinancing case based on the Uniform Rule with Structural Break (4). For the purposes of
risk assessment, the market value of homes that serve as collateral for outstanding mortgages
is most relevant, hence this is the measure we have displayed in these figures. Note that
27), we do obtain slightly different parameters for the refinancing heuristic but the qualitative properties are
the same.



                                                            32
this series is lower in Figure 8(a) because a larger number of mortgages are eventually fully
paid under the no-cash-out-refinancing simulation, and all those homes are excluded from
this calculation since they are no longer actively used as collateral for any mortgage.
       It can be seen that a much smaller aggregate equity remains in the mortgage system
in the second case. In the case of no refinancing, the total value of mortgages outstanding
in December 2008 is $4,105 billion, which is supported by $10,154 billion of real estate,
representing an aggregate loan-to-value ratio of approximately 40%. In the case where cash-
out refinancings are possible, the amount of loans outstanding is $12,018 billion and this
larger amount of mortgages is supported by $16,570 billion of real estate,38 for a loan-to-
value ratio of 72%. While a 72% aggregate loan-to-value ratio may suggest that even with
refinancing, a relatively large level of homeowners’ equity is left in the mortgage system at
the end of 2008, the cross-sectional distribution of loan-to-value ratios tells a very different
story.
       Figure 9 contains the cross-sectional distribution of the loan-to-value ratios at the end of
our sample (December 2008) and at the peak of the housing market (June 2006), respectively.
The simulation results indicate that with cash-out refinancing, approximately 18% of homes
are in negative-equity territory by December 2008, which is remarkably consistent with the
actual figure of 20% contained in First American CoreLogic’s Negative Equity Report.39
The same figure without cash-out refinancing is 3%. Figure 9(b) shows that cash-out equity
extractions shift the loan-to-value-ratio distribution to the right during the housing boom,
causing a much larger proportion of homeowners to have negative equity as housing prices
declined.

5.2       Option-Implied Losses
Given our assumption that all mortgages in our simulations are non-recourse loans—collateral-
ized only by the value of the underlying real estate—the homeowner has a guarantee or put
option that allows him to put or “sell” the home to the lender at the remaining value of
the loan if the value of the home declines below the outstanding mortgage. Naturally, this
guarantee is worth less for higher amounts of equity that the homeowner has in the prop-
  38
     The collateral value is lower in the first case because in that scenario, a larger fraction of mortgage loans
are fully paid off, in which case the values of the corresponding homes are excluded from the total since they
are no longer used as collateral in the mortgage system.
  39
     See http://www.loanperformance.com/loanperformance hpi.aspx.



                                                       33
                                                     $16,000
        Total Mortgage and Collateral Value ($Bil)


                                                     $14,000

                                                     $12,000

                                                     $10,000

                                                      $8,000

                                                      $6,000

                                                      $4,000

                                                      $2,000

                                                          $-
                                                               1/1/1919

                                                                          1/1/1924

                                                                                     1/1/1929

                                                                                                1/1/1934

                                                                                                           1/1/1939

                                                                                                                      1/1/1944

                                                                                                                                 1/1/1949

                                                                                                                                            1/1/1954

                                                                                                                                                       1/1/1959

                                                                                                                                                                  1/1/1964

                                                                                                                                                                             1/1/1969

                                                                                                                                                                                        1/1/1974

                                                                                                                                                                                                   1/1/1979

                                                                                                                                                                                                              1/1/1984

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1/1/1989

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1/1/1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1/1/2009
                                                                                                 Outstanding Mortgages                                       Value of Houses Used as Collateral




                                                                                                                       (a) No cash-out refinancing.


                                                     $25,000
        Total Mortgage and Collateral Value ($Bil)




                                                     $20,000



                                                     $15,000



                                                     $10,000



                                                      $5,000



                                                          $-
                                                               1/1/1919

                                                                          1/1/1924

                                                                                     1/1/1929

                                                                                                1/1/1934

                                                                                                           1/1/1939

                                                                                                                      1/1/1944

                                                                                                                                 1/1/1949

                                                                                                                                            1/1/1954

                                                                                                                                                       1/1/1959

                                                                                                                                                                  1/1/1964

                                                                                                                                                                             1/1/1969

                                                                                                                                                                                        1/1/1974

                                                                                                                                                                                                   1/1/1979

                                                                                                                                                                                                              1/1/1984

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1/1/1989

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1/1/1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1/1/2009




                                                                                                 Outstanding Mortgages                                       Value of Houses Used as Collateral




                                                                          (b) Cash-out refinancing according to the Uniform Rule with
                                                                          Structural Break.

Figure 8: Simulated value of outstanding mortgages vs. the value of the underlying real-
estate collateral for no-cash-out refinancing vs. cash-out refinancing using the Uniform Rule
with Structural Break (4).




                                                                                                                                                            34
        70%
        60%
        50%
        40%
        30%
        20%
        10%
        0%
                            Less than 10%
              No Mortgage




                                            10-20%


                                                     20-30%


                                                              30-40%


                                                                       40-50%


                                                                                   50-60%


                                                                                                 60-70%


                                                                                                          70-80%


                                                                                                                   80-90%


                                                                                                                            90-100%


                                                                                                                                      100-110%


                                                                                                                                                 110-120%


                                                                                                                                                            More than 120%
                                                     Uniform with Structural Break Rule                      No Cash-Out




                                                                       (a) December 2008.


        70%
        60%
        50%
        40%
        30%
        20%
        10%
        0%
              No Mortgage


                            Less than 10%


                                            10-20%


                                                     20-30%


                                                              30-40%


                                                                       40-50%


                                                                                   50-60%


                                                                                                 60-70%


                                                                                                          70-80%


                                                                                                                   80-90%


                                                                                                                            90-100%




                                                                                                                                                            More than 120%
                                                                                                                                      100-110%


                                                                                                                                                 110-120%




                                                     Uniform with Structural Break Rule                      No Cash-Out




                                                                                (b) June 2006.

Figure 9: Histograms of simulated loan-to-value ratios for the no-cash-out refinancing and
cash-out refinancing (under the Uniform Rule with Structural Break (4)) cases for the end
of our sample period, December 2008, and for the peak of the housing market, June 2006,
where the initial loan-to-value ratio is set to 85%.




                                                                                            35
erty. However, by engaging in a cash-out refinancing, the homeowner effectively increases
his loan-to-value ratio, thereby increasing the value of the guarantee. Such guarantees can
be evaluated using derivatives pricing theory as described in Merton (1977) and Merton
and Bodie (1992), and can be applied to quantifying macro-level risks as described in Gray,
Merton and Bodie (2006, 2007a, 2007b, 2008) and Gray and Malone (2008).
       As mortgages are placed in various structured products like collateralized mortgage obli-
gations and sold and re-sold to banks, asset management firms, or government sponsored
enterprises (see Figure 10), the ultimate entities exposed to these guarantees may be masked.
In fact, some have blamed the Financial Crisis of 2007–2008 on the complexity of these
multi-layered risk-sharing arrangements (see, for example, Gorton, 2008, 2009). However,
it is clear that all mortgage lenders must, in aggregate, be holding the guarantees provided
to all homeowners.40 Therefore, we can circumvent the complexities of these intermediate
transactions—those in the dotted box of Figure 10—by calculating the aggregate value of
the guarantees on the underlying real estate that mortgage lenders have extended to home-
owners.
                                                                                      GSE Balancesheet

                                                                             Assets             Liabilities

                                                                             RMBS               Debt

                                                                             Government         Equity
                                                                             Financial
             Household Real Estate                                           Guarantees
                Balancesheet
                                                                                Asset Owners Balancesheet
        Assets            Liabilities
                                                                             Assets             Liabilities
        Real Estate       Mortgage         RMBS
                                                                             RMBS or            Debt
                          Home Equity                                        RMBS CDO
                                                                                                Equity


                                                     RMBS CDO                         Banks Balancesheet

                                         Assets           Liabilities        Assets             Liabilities

                                         RMBS Pool        Senior Tranche     RMBS or            Debt
                                                          Mezz Tranche       RMBS CDO
                                                          Equity                                Equity




Figure 10: Interlinked balance sheet of entities backed by the underlying real estate, based
on Gray, Merton, and Bodie (2008). Intermediate risk redistributions (through, for example,
CDOs) will be ignored in our simulations.
  40
    Of course, to the extent that some owners may be liable for the deficiency in their collateral value through
recourse, those owners share some of the burden of the loss caused by a decline in home prices. See footnote
1 and Ghent and Kudlyak (2009) for further discussion.




                                                        36
        We measure the value of the guarantee of each mortgage as the value of the put option
 written on the underlying real estate. Since Merton’s (1977) analysis of deposit insurance,
 the use of derivatives pricing models to value guarantees has become standard. Such an
 approach is forward-looking by construction, providing a consistent framework for estimating
 potential losses based on current market conditions—in particular, the price and volatility
 of the guaranteed asset—rather than on historical experience. Of course, derivatives pricing
 models do require additional assumptions, e.g., complete markets and a specific stochastic
 process (one that is consistent with completeness, such as geometric Brownian motion). We
 adopt a discrete-time version of these assumptions in (A11):

(A11) Housing-price dynamics can be approximated by a discrete-time geometric random
          walk represented by a recombining binomial tree, and markets are dynamically com-
          plete so options on property values can be priced by no-arbitrage arguments alone.41

 Whether aggregate home prices follow random walks is debatable, and a number of studies
 have documented departures from geometric Brownian motion in several financial assets
 (see Lo and MacKinlay, 1999, and the many references they provide to this burgeoning
 literature). However, for constructing an initial benchmark for valuing the embedded option
 in non-recourse mortgages, Assumption (A11) is a natural starting point from which more
 sophisticated models can be built.42
        Under (A11), we model the guarantee in non-recourse mortgages as a “Bermuda” put
 option—an option that can be exercised at certain dates in the future, but only on those
 fixed dates—and we set these exercise dates to be once a month, just prior to each mortgage
 payment date.43 The exercise price is the amount of the outstanding loan, which declines
   41
      See Cox and Rubinstein (1985) for further discussion of the binomial option-pricing method.
   42
      One immediate extension is to consider price dynamics that reflect the U.S. real-estate “bubble”. How-
 ever, developing a precise definition of a bubble is not a simple task, and while some studies concluded that
 real estate prices were too high in 2004–2006 (Shiller, 2006), other studies came to the opposite conclusion
 (McCarthy and Peach, 2004, and Himmelberg, Mayer and Sinai, 2005). Even ex post, estimating the appro-
 priate “price correction” is not obvious, as Wheaton and Nechayev (2007) illustrate. This lack of consensus
 underscores the empirical challenges in identifying stable relations between prices and the most obvious
 fundamentals (in particular, see Gallin, 2004, 2006). But to the extent that a “bubble” refers, instead, to an
 impending “black swan” or tail event, this case can easily be accommodated by assuming a jump component
 in the stochastic process of the aggregate home price index, and then using Merton’s (1976) jump-diffusion
 option-pricing model to price the guarantee. Although this is a simple extension, it is likely to lead to larger
 loss estimates than Assumption (A11) because of the additional tail risk component, hence we adopt the
 simpler assumption in the spirit of conservatism.
   43
      We use the Cox-Ross-Rubinstein binomial tree algorithm to price these options, and implement it in
 Matlab (version 7.2) using the Financial Derivatives Toolbox (Version 4.0) and the functions: crrtimespec,


                                                       37
over time due to the monthly mortgage payments.
    Before we can implement this option-pricing model, we must determine the volatility of
the underlying asset on which the option is written, as well as any “dividend yield” that
may affect the value of that asset. In this case, the underlying assets are individual homes,
hence we require the volatility of individual home prices, and the yield from housing service
flows which can be viewed as a “rental yield”. The observed volatility of national home-
price indexes such as the Case-Shiller Index masks much of the volatility of individual home
prices since, by construction, an index averages out the idiosyncratic noise in its constituents.
However, Calhoun (1996) provides volatility estimates for individual home prices as part of
the process of calculating the repeated sales index. Based on these results and the volatility
estimates provided by the FHFA,44 the annualized volatility of individual homes falls between
6.5% and 10% per year. We will use a volatility of 8% per year in our option-pricing model.45
    The estimation of the rental yield for individual homes is challenging. Simply ignoring it
is clearly inappropriate because homes do provide considerable service flows to their owners,
but these flows must be balanced against maintenance costs and property taxes. Also, the
economic value of such service flows is presumably affected by prevailing rental rates, the
tax deductibility of mortgage-interest payments, and property taxes. Himmelberg, Mayer,
and Sinai (2005) provides an excellent discussion of these considerations, and based on their
analysis, we propose a rental yield of 4% for our option-pricing analysis.
    Let GRTi,t be the value of the guarantee calculated using the method and parameters
just described for a single home from vintage i at time t. We can combine these values to
find the aggregate value of the guarantees through the following sum:

                                          t
                                          X                                    GRTi,t
                   TOTALGRTt =                  TOTALVi × SURVIVi,t ×                                     (5)
                                          i=1                                 VALUEi,i

where TOTALVi is given by (1). The logic behind (5) is similar to the calculations of Section
crrsens, crrtree, instoptstock, intenvset, and stockspec. See http://www.mathworks.com for docu-
mentation and additional details.
  44
     See http://www.fhfa.gov/Default.aspx?Page=87. The relevant data is given in the sections “Pur-
chase Only Indexes Volatility” and “All-Transactions Indexes Volatility”.
  45
     Note that negative correlation between volatility and prices has been documented in several asset classes
(see, for example, Bekaert and Wu, 2000, for the equities case). To the extent that this holds in real-estate
markets as well, our volatility parameter—which is an approximate long-term average—is likely to under-
estimate the realized volatility during a market downturn, which, in turn, will under-estimate aggregate
losses.



                                                     38
3.4. TOTALVi is the combined value of all homes that were either directly purchased or
refinanced in period i. To contribute to the value of the aggregate guarantees, a home must
have survived until date t, hence we must multiply TOTALVi by SURVIVi,t . GRTi,t is the
value of the guarantee per house, i.e., per VALUEi,i dollars of initial investment, hence the
multiplicative factor GRTi,t /VALUEi,i in (5) adjusts for this fact.
       Figure 11 shows the simulated time series of TOTALGRTt for the cases of no-cash-out vs.
cash-out refinancing using Uniform Rule with Structural Break, and Table 2 reports these
values for each quarter between 2006Q1 and 2008Q4.
       During normal times, homeowners’ equity absorbs the first losses due to a decline in the
residential real-estate prices (see Figure 10). However, the process of equity extraction causes
the width of this buffer to decrease, resulting in a larger portion of the losses transferred
to the equityholders and debtholders of various lending entities (through the complex risk
redistribution methods shown in the dotted section of Figure 10). Our simulations show that
with the downturn in the value of residential real estate in 2007 and 2008, the value of the
guarantees extended to homeowners by mortgage lenders increased substantially. Clearly a
loss of $1,543 billion is too large to be absorbed by the equity of these entities alone (for
example, based on the data collected by the FDIC, as of December 2007 all U.S. banks had
approximately $1,144 billion in equity), creating the need for government intervention to
address these losses.46
       Moreover, our loss estimates do not include the impact of residential mortgage defaults on
the many related mortgage-backed securities such as collateralized debt obligations (CDOs),
credit default swaps (CDSs), and other derivatives contracts based on associated indexes
such as the ABX.HE. Although these contracts may be viewed as pure side-bets in the sense
that they are in zero net-supply (hence one party’s losses are another party’s profits), the
sheer size of the portion of the derivatives industry affected by the U.S. residential real-estate
market implies that large losses are likely to have major economic repercussions. Such effects
include the distressed unwinding of illiquid assets, defaults and collapses of major financial
institutions, and a general loss of confidence in the financial system.47 Accordingly, our
estimated loss of $1.5 trillion may be a significant under-estimate of actual losses from the
  46
     Simulations calibrated to the other two home-price indexes, CSNAT-HPIt and NAR-HPIt (see footnote
27), generated similar levels of losses: $1,481 billion in the former case, and $1,279 billion in the latter.
  47
     To develop a sense of the scale of the potential repercussions and how quickly these markets can grow,
note that in June 2004 the notional amount of credit derivatives estimated by the Bank for International
Settlements was $4.5 trillion, and by June 2007, this figure increased to $51.1 trillion (BIS, 2007).


                                                     39
                                      $1,800                                                                                                                                                                                                                     270



                                      $1,600                                                                                                                                                                                                                     240



                                      $1,400                                                                                                                                                                                                                     210
       Total Guarantee Value ($Bil)




                                      $1,200                                                                                                                                                                                                                     180




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Case-Shiller Index Level
                                      $1,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                     150



                                       $800                                                                                                                                                                                                                      120



                                       $600                                                                                                                                                                                                                      90



                                       $400                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60



                                       $200                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30



                                          $-                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                               3/1/1919


                                                           3/1/1924


                                                                      3/1/1929


                                                                                     3/1/1934


                                                                                                  3/1/1939


                                                                                                              3/1/1944


                                                                                                                         3/1/1949


                                                                                                                                    3/1/1954


                                                                                                                                               3/1/1959


                                                                                                                                                            3/1/1964


                                                                                                                                                                       3/1/1969


                                                                                                                                                                                  3/1/1974


                                                                                                                                                                                             3/1/1979


                                                                                                                                                                                                          3/1/1984


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3/1/1989


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3/1/1994


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3/1/1999


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3/1/2004
                                                                                 No Cash-Out ($Bil-Left)                              Cash-Out Refinance ($Bil-Left)                                    Home Price Index (Right)




Figure 11: The simulated value of the guarantee in non-recourse residential mortgages, with
and without cash-out refinancing (under the Uniform Rule with Structural Break (4)), and
the home price index levelTotal
                           from Guarantee
                                  January 1919Total Guarantee 2008. Case-Shiller
                                               to December
                                                          Quarter                                Value without                                            Value with Cash-Out                                             Composite-10
                                                                                                Refinancing ($B)                                           Refinancing ($B)                                                Index Level

                                                          2006Q1                                              42.21                                                      228.85                                                  223.75
                                                          2006Q2                                              47.73                                                      258.22                                                  226.29
                                                          2006Q3                                              59.98                                                      328.09                                                  225.09
                                                          2006Q4                                              71.04                                                      397.81                                                  222.39
                                                          2007Q1                                              79.33                                                      451.79                                                  219.67
                                                          2007Q2                                              89.07                                                      501.58                                                  217.37
                                                          2007Q3                                             105.73                                                      595.31                                                  212.72
                                                          2007Q4                                             135.79                                                      766.90                                                  200.67
                                                          2008Q1                                             176.71                                                      991.88                                                  186.12
                                                          2008Q2                                             194.03                                                    1,084.30                                                  180.52
                                                          2008Q3                                             223.53                                                    1,242.20                                                  173.36
                                                          2008Q4                                             279.93                                                    1,543.10                                                  162.17


Table 2: The simulated value of the guarantee in non-recourse residential mortgages, with
and without cash-out refinancing (under the Uniform Rule with Structural Break (4)), and
the Case-Shiller Index, from 2006Q1 to 2008Q4.


                                                                                                                                                          40
refinancing ratchet.

                       Rental Yield = 3%                      Rental Yield = 4%                          Rental Yield = 5%                Rental Yield =
   Quarter                                                                                                                               4%, 8% Vol, No
              6% Vol        8% Vol         10% Vol   6% Vol        8% Vol         10% Vol       6% Vol         8% Vol         10% Vol       Cash-Out
   2003Q1    $    48.76   $    90.03   $ 136.24 $ 105.46 $ 153.11 $ 202.32                  $     195.55   $     239.64   $     285.49   $       29.88
   2003Q2    $    45.02   $    82.01   $ 122.75 $      95.97 $ 137.76 $ 180.55              $     175.48   $     213.31   $     252.68   $       27.54
   2003Q3    $    40.70   $    78.64   $ 121.67 $      89.56 $ 134.38 $ 180.80              $     168.99   $     211.67   $     255.66   $       27.51
   2003Q4    $    42.53   $    82.73   $ 128.84 $      93.64 $ 141.70 $ 191.85              $     177.35   $     223.89   $     271.88   $       28.43
   2004Q1    $    40.40   $    79.07   $ 123.66 $      90.29 $ 136.87 $ 185.60              $     172.72   $     217.96   $     264.68   $       27.23
   2004Q2    $    30.42   $    60.38   $    94.91 $    68.53 $ 104.72 $ 142.47              $     131.86   $     167.01   $     203.19   $       21.63
   2004Q3    $    38.09   $    72.62   $ 112.14 $      83.17 $ 124.18 $ 167.01              $     156.39   $     195.82   $     236.63   $       25.16
   2004Q4    $    45.20   $    83.10   $ 125.58 $      95.60 $ 139.23 $ 184.46              $     175.06   $     215.90   $     258.34   $       27.64
   2005Q1    $    44.81   $    84.08   $ 128.08 $      97.25 $ 142.74 $ 189.71              $     180.99   $     223.40   $     267.38   $       27.83
   2005Q2    $    48.37   $    92.17   $ 141.62 $ 106.15 $ 157.52 $ 210.64                  $     199.43   $     247.84   $     297.86   $       31.51
   2005Q3    $    51.39   $    98.83   $ 152.97 $ 112.68 $ 169.00 $ 227.62                  $     212.46   $     266.49   $     322.29   $       33.66
   2005Q4    $    60.52   $ 113.11     $ 172.78 $ 129.34 $ 190.90 $ 255.08                  $     239.35   $     298.04   $     358.92   $       36.53
   2006Q1    $    76.02   $ 136.82     $ 204.96 $ 159.21 $ 228.85 $ 301.28                  $     289.42   $     354.36   $     422.18   $       42.21
   2006Q2    $    88.60   $ 156.34     $ 231.40 $ 182.08 $ 258.22 $ 337.10                  $     325.69   $     395.59   $     468.80   $       47.73
   2006Q3    $ 118.73     $ 202.00     $ 293.39 $ 236.59 $ 328.09 $ 422.98                  $     413.05   $     495.79   $     583.07   $       59.98
   2006Q4    $ 150.66     $ 248.95     $ 355.81 $ 291.99 $ 397.81 $ 507.52                  $     499.07   $     593.43   $     693.55   $       71.04
   2007Q1    $ 175.77     $ 284.43     $ 401.48 $ 336.82 $ 451.79 $ 570.79                  $     569.79   $     670.35   $     777.73   $       79.33
   2007Q2    $ 197.16     $ 318.26     $ 448.59 $ 373.59 $ 501.58 $ 634.11                  $     628.18   $     740.68   $     860.74   $       89.07
   2007Q3    $ 247.59     $ 385.25     $ 532.11 $ 453.38 $ 595.31 $ 742.63                  $     742.61   $     865.30   $     997.43   $      105.73
   2007Q4    $ 365.99     $ 521.45     $ 684.19 $ 616.38 $ 766.90 $ 924.27                  $     947.77   $   1,071.60   $   1,208.50   $      135.79
   2008Q1    $ 546.75     $ 709.99     $ 881.43 $ 842.84 $ 991.88 $ 1,152.20                $   1,214.00   $   1,331.60   $   1,467.20   $      176.71
   2008Q2    $ 621.75     $ 790.81     $ 969.39 $ 930.48 $ 1,084.30 $ 1,251.10              $   1,315.10   $   1,436.90   $   1,578.20   $      194.03
   2008Q3    $ 757.26     $ 929.73     $ 1,114.10 $ 1,087.60 $ 1,242.20 $ 1,412.70          $   1,491.90   $   1,613.50   $   1,757.20   $      223.53
   2008Q4    $ 1,039.40   $ 1,204.50   $ 1,386.90 $ 1,399.50 $ 1,543.10 $ 1,708.20          $   1,825.60   $   1,936.50   $   2,073.20   $      279.93




Table 3: The simulated value of the guarantee in non-recourse residential mortgages for vari-
ous values of rental yields and home-price volatilities, with and without cash-out refinancing
(under the Uniform Rule with Structural Break (4)), from 2006Q1 to 2008Q4.

   To develop some sense of the robustness of the loss estimates in Table 2, we perform
additional simulations for rental yields of 3% and 5%, and home-price volatilities of 6% and
10%. The various combinations are reported in Table 3. These results show that in the
fourth quarter of 2008, the loss estimates range from a low of $1,039 billion (3% rental yield,
6% volatility) to a high of $2,073 billion (5% rental yield, 10% volatility). As volatility
increases, or as the rental yield increases, ceteris paribus, the embedded guarantee is more
valuable, hence the potential losses are greater. While rental yields may be relatively stable
over time, it can be argued that home-price volatility is more variable. In particular, as the
national home-price index reached its peak in June 2006 and began its decline, home-price
volatility is likely to have increased significantly beyond its previous historical levels, another
reason that the estimated losses in Table 2 may under-estimate actual losses.




                                                                      41
5.3       Option-Implied Sensitivities
If TOTALGRTt is used to measure the potential losses realized after the housing market
downturn, then its sensitivity to changes in home prices can serve as a measure of systemic
risk. This sensitivity can be easily derived from the embedded option’s “delta” or partial
derivative with respect to the price of the underlying asset (see Gray, Merton, and Bodie,
2006). Let DLTi,t be the sensitivity of the value of the guarantee, GRTi,t , to changes in
the price of real estate for a single home from vintage i at time t. This measure can be
easily calculated as a part of the Single-Home Simulation step of our analysis discussed in
Section 3.3. We can combine these single-home sensitivities using an approach similar to (5)
to obtain the aggregate sensitivity, TOTALDLTt , as follows:

                                          t
                                          X                                   DLTi,t
                    TOTALDLTt =                 TOTALVi × SURVIVi,t ×                             (6)
                                          i=1                                VALUEi,i

TOTALDLTt measures the dollar change in the aggregate value of the guarantees of non-
recourse mortgages given an incremental change in the value of the underlying real estate.
Higher sensitivities imply greater losses for mortgage lenders for the same incremental decline
in real-estate values.
      To measure the impact of cash-out refinancing on the aggregate sensitivity TOTALDLTt ,
in Figure 12 we plot the ratio of this sensitivity in the cash-out refinancing case (under
the Uniform Rule with Structural Break (4)) to the sensitivity in the case of no-cash-out
refinancing. This ratio may be used as a forward-looking measure of systemic risk in the
housing market. Figure 12 shows that this ratio increased steadily over the course of the
housing boom from the late 1980’s until the peak in mid-2006.48 According to this measure,
just prior to that peak in June 2006, cash-out equity extractions increased the magnitude
of losses in the event of a decline in real-estate prices by a factor of 5.5. This is consistent
with the ratio of the simulated $1,543 billion loss in the case of cash-out refinancings to the
simulated $280 billion for no-cash-out refinancing (see Table 2), and well within the range
that should have been expected if the magnitude of systemic risk was measured correctly.
      Moreover, while the magnitude of this delta-based measure of systemic risk exposure
to the housing market reached its highest level in early 2006, its lowest level since 1990
was only slightly below 4. In other words, cash-out equity extractions will greatly multiply
 48
      Note that the jump from 2 to 4 occurs in 1989 due to the structural break modeled in (4).


                                                     42
the potential losses from any real-estate market downturn, so that even a small decline
in housing prices is magnified into much larger losses for mortgage lenders. And after an
extended period of rising home prices, falling interest rates, and refinancings, the ratchet
effect can create so much irreversible leverage in the housing market that the question is
no longer whether large-scale defaults will occur, but rather when they will occur (which
amounts to the question of when housing prices will begin to fall). The Financial Crisis of
2007–2008 was an accident waiting to happen.
      Ratio of Sensitivity of Guarantees to Real Estate Prices with Cash-Out




                                                                               6




                                                                               5
                  Refinancing to without Cash-Out Refinancing




                                                                               4




                                                                               3




                                                                               2




                                                                               1




                                                                               0
                                                                                   3/1/1919

                                                                                              3/1/1924

                                                                                                         3/1/1929

                                                                                                                    3/1/1934

                                                                                                                               3/1/1939

                                                                                                                                          3/1/1944

                                                                                                                                                     3/1/1949

                                                                                                                                                                3/1/1954

                                                                                                                                                                           3/1/1959

                                                                                                                                                                                      3/1/1964

                                                                                                                                                                                                 3/1/1969

                                                                                                                                                                                                            3/1/1974

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3/1/1979

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3/1/1984

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3/1/1989

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3/1/1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3/1/2004




Figure 12: The ratio of cash-out-refinancing to no-cashout-refinancing aggregate sensitivities
of the value of guarantees to changes in the price of real estate, based on quarterly data from
1990Q1 to 2008Q4. The cash-out refinancing simulation is based on the Uniform Rule with
Structural Break (4) versus the case of no-cash-out refinancing

   The embedded options in non-recourse mortgages also imply that the magnitude of po-
tential losses to lenders may not be linearly related to housing prices. Because a put options
value is a nonlinear, convex, and decreasing function of its underlying assets price, its risk
sensitivity (delta) increases as the underlying assets price decreases. The options “gamma”
measures this change in sensitivity, also known as “convexity”. The put option’s convexity

                                                                                                                                                                               43
implies that the losses on mortgages experienced by lenders from an initial housing price
decline will be substantially smaller than subsequent losses if prices were to decline again by
the same dollar amount.
    Now add to this feature the additional complexities introduced by securitization, banking
regulation, credit ratings, and default insurance, and the implications of nonlinearity for
systemic risk become apparent. Convexity can surprise even sophisticated and experienced
managers, investors, and regulators who may have developed their market intuition over the
past several decades, because they would not have experienced a significant national-level
housing market decline during that period, and because the popularity and efficiency of
refinancing is a relatively new phenomenon. Surprise—particularly negative surprise—can
quickly lead to panic, massive coordinated unwindings, illiquidity and market dislocation,
and, ultimately, financial crisis.


6     Discussion
In this section, we present a number of qualifications, extensions, and implications of our
simulation of the U.S. residential housing market. In Section 6.1, we contrast the heuristic
nature of our simulations to traditional general equilibrium analysis, and acknowledge in
Section 6.2 that we have not modeled the behavior of lenders in our simulations. We distin-
guish between market risk and systemic risk in Section 6.3, and in Section 6.4 we observe
that the welfare implications of the recent financial crisis, and the events leading up to it,
are not yet fully understood.

6.1    Heuristic vs. General Equilibrium Analysis
Our simulations are based on a number of simplifying assumptions. While we have at-
tempted to err on the side of lower implied losses whenever possible, some assumptions may
have the opposite effect, e.g., assuming that all mortgages are non-recourse loans. By incor-
porating more realistic features of the housing market such as adjustable-rate and negative
amortization mortgages with teaser rates, NINJA loans, and regional differences in the U.S.
residential real-estate market, bankruptcy laws, homeowner asset and income dynamics, the
accuracy of the simulation may be increased.
    However, our analysis is not designed to capture feedback effects among all endogenous


                                              44
variables such as home prices, interest rates, household income, and borrowing and lending
behavior. Therefore, standard comparative-statics questions such as “how much would home
prices have risen if the Fed did not cut interest rates from 2000 to 2003” are not addressed in
our simulations. Instead, our narrower “reduced-form” focus has been to gauge the magni-
tude of the refinancing ratchet effect on mortgage lenders. A more formal general-equilibrium
analysis of these markets would begin with optimizing households from which the demand
for housing and mortgages are derived, aggregated, and equilibrated with optimizing builders
and lenders that supply the homes and mortgages, respectively, to households. While com-
putable general equilibrium models have become considerably more sophisticated in recent
years (see, for example, Dixon and Rimmer, 2002), the dynamic and stochastic nature of the
demand and supply decisions are sufficiently complex even for a single agent that construct-
ing a true stochastic dynamic general equilibrium model of the entire U.S. housing market
seems computationally impractical. Nevertheless, some useful insights may be gleaned from
considering special cases of such optimizing behavior and equilibrium, e.g., Pliska (2006),
Fortin et al. (2007), and Agarwal, Driscoll, and Laibson (2008), and may be worth pursuing.

6.2    Lending Behavior
Any analysis of the Financial Crisis of 2007–2008 would be incomplete without some discus-
sion of the behavior of mortgage lenders and associated businesses. Our simulations assume
that all household demand for mortgages and refinancing is satisfied at prevailing histori-
cal rates, i.e., the supply of funds to borrowers is infinitely elastic at all times. While this
may have been a reasonable approximation to reality during the decade prior to the peak
of the housing market in 2006, we were motivated by the objective to isolate and measure
the impact of the refinancing ratchet effect by itself. However, supply shocks certainly must
have had an impact on systemic risk in recent years as well. Therefore, an important open
question is how lenders behaved during the course of our simulations, and what economic or
behavioral forces led them to engage in such behavior?
   A tractable and empirically plausible model of lending behavior is beyond the scope of
our current simulation, and deserves a separation set of simulation studies in its own right
(one possible starting point is Thurner, Farmer, and Geanakoplos, 2009). However, it is
not difficult to speculate about the factors those simulations might include. In addition
to modeling the behavior of banks, which are the traditional sources of home loans, such


                                              45
a simulation must also account for a host of financial innovations that have emerged only
recently, including securitized debt (e.g., CDOs and CDO-squareds), credit default swaps
and related insurance products, Internet-based marketing of consumer-finance products, the
growth of the “shadow banking industry” and illiquidity, and the globalization of financial
markets. Chan et al. (2006), Rajan (2006), Khandani and Lo (2007, 2008), Gorton (2008,
2009), Brunnermeier (2009), and Gorton and Metrick (2009) provide overviews of some of
these developments. In addition, these simulations must incorporate the impact of rating
agencies, government sponsored enterprises, and broader government policies in promoting
cheap financing for would-be homeowners, as well as the increasing competition for yield
among asset-managers and asset-owners. Collectively, these developments contributed to
the enormous supply of funds available to homeowners during the past decade, but further
analysis is needed before we can determine the relative importance of each.
   However, the challenge in constructing a simulation with all of these features is the fact
that there is precious little history on which to calibrate many of the parameters. In contrast
to typical simulations that assume a statistically stationary environment, simulating the
supply of funds for residential real-estate purchases involves the historically unique financial
innovations described above. This may provide a clue as to the magnitude of the current
crisis, as well as its apparent uniqueness in recent history.
   More importantly, the main thrust of our analysis is that the refinancing ratchet effect
is a wholly separate mechanism that operates irrespective of the supply of credit, and must
be considered a potential source of systemic risk in its own right.

6.3    Market Risk vs. Systemic Risk
While the $1.5 trillion figure seems imposing, large financial losses do not necessarily imply
significant systemic risk. For example, on April 14, 2000, the CRSP value-weighted stock
market index (excluding dividends) declined by 6.63%, implying an aggregate one-day loss
of approximately $1.04 trillion to corporate America. While certainly unfortunate, this
event was not particularly memorable, nor was it a cause for national alarm or emergency
government intervention. Market risk is distinct from systemic risk; the latter arises when
large financial losses affect important economic entities that are unprepared for and unable to
withstand such losses, causing a cascade of failures and widespread loss of confidence. This
element of surprise lies at the heart of the current financial crisis. The three conditions for


                                               46
the refinancing ratchet effect—rising house prices, falling interest rates, and easy access to
refinancing opportunities—are individually innocuous, and often viewed positively as signs
of economic growth and prosperity. But when all three occur at the same time, aggregate
homeowner leverage can increase rapidly, and may even contribute to upward pressure on
home prices. Without any “safety valve” to release this pressure gradually, the result when
home prices inevitably decline can be explosive, as we witnessed in 2007–2008.

6.4    Welfare Implications
Although much has already been written about the Financial Crisis of 2007–2008, its welfare
implications for homeowners, lenders, and intermediaries are not yet fully understood. While
many homeowners have been adversely affected by higher interest rates, foreclosures, and
falling property values, there are other satisfied and solvent homeowners who are homeown-
ers only because of the business practices, government policies, and economic circumstances
that contributed to the refinancing ratchet. Eliminating or otherwise restricting these busi-
ness practices and policies may benefit some groups, but will no doubt disadvantage others.
Moreover, as discussed above, we have not attempted to model the supply side of the refi-
nancing industry, which no doubt contributed to the growth of home prices, leverage ratios,
and systemic risk. Many have criticized the role of securitization, insurance, and financial
innovation in creating the crisis, but during the decade leading up to the peak of the housing
market in 2006, these developments were responsible for the low-interest-rate and easy-credit
environment that was so conducive to global economic growth and the “ownership society”.
Any policy recommendations with respect to the crisis must balance these myriad trade-offs
between individual and institutional stakeholders.


7     Conclusions
During periods of rising house prices, falling interest rates, and increasingly competitive and
efficient refinancing markets, cash-out refinancing is like a ratchet, incrementally increasing
homeowner leverage as real-estate values appreciate without the ability to symmetrically
decrease leverage by increments as real-estate values decline. Using a numerical simulation
calibrated to the basic time-series properties of U.S. residential housing market, we show
that this ratchet effect is capable of generating the magnitude of losses suffered by mortgage


                                              47
lenders during the Financial Crisis of 2007–2008. During normal times, and in the absence
of cash-out refinancings, the cross-sectional distribution of leverage among homeowners is
relatively heterogeneous, with newer homeowners more highly leveraged than those who have
had the opportunity to build up more equity. Heterogeneity of leverage in the cross section
implies less correlated defaults among borrowers, and lower systemic risk.
   However, during periods of falling interest rates and rising house prices, most homeowners
will have an incentive to refinance. If the refinancing market is so competitive and efficient
that homeowners refinance frequently, this pattern of behavior has a similar effect on systemic
risk as if these homeowners all purchased their homes at the same time, at peak prices, with
newly issued mortgages at the highest allowable loan-to-value ratios. A coordinated increase
in leverage among homeowners during good times will lead to sharply higher correlations in
defaults among those same homeowners in bad times. Our simulations show that this effect
alone is enough to generate $1.5 trillion in losses for mortgage-lending institutions since June
2006.
   These observations have important implications for risk management practices and reg-
ulatory reform. The fact that the refinancing ratchet effect arises only when three market
conditions are simultaneously satisfied demonstrates that the current financial crisis is sub-
tle, and may not be attributable to a single cause. Moreover, a number of the activities that
gave rise to these three conditions are likely to be ones that we would not want to sharply
curtail or outright ban because they are individually beneficial. While excessive risk-taking,
overly aggressive lending practices, pro-cyclical regulations, and political pressures surely
contributed to the recent problems in the U.S. housing market, our simulations show that
even if all homeowners, lenders, investors, insurers, rating agencies, regulators, and policy-
makers behaved rationally, ethically, and with the purest of motives, financial crises can still
occur. Therefore, we must acknowledge the possibility that no easy legislative or regulatory
solutions exist such as prohibiting the Fed from cutting interest rates below a certain thresh-
old, or placing a ceiling on housing prices, or putting “sand in the gears” of the refinancing
system and limiting consumer credit. Successfully managing systemic will require flexible,
creative, and well-trained professionals that understand the fundamental drivers of such risk,
not static rules meant to prevent history from repeating.
   The complexities illustrated by our simulation underscores the need for an independent
organization devoted solely to the study, measurement, and public notification of systemic


                                              48
risk, not unlike the role that the National Transportation Safety Board plays with respect to
airplane crashes, train wrecks, and highway accidents (see Getmansky, Lo, and Mei, 2004).
Currently, no single regulatory body is responsible for monitoring the three refinancing-
ratchet conditions; in fact, on occasion, each of these conditions has been associated with
the policy objectives of one part of government or another. Therefore, it is difficult to imagine
any existing regulatory agency raising red flags over any of these conditions. For example,
in response to the bursting of the Tech Bubble in 2000 and the threat of recession, the U.S.
Federal Reserve systematically lowered its Federal Funds target rate from 6.50% in May
2000 to 1.00% in June 2003. During this period, the Fed could hardly have been expected
to sound the alarm regarding the refinancing ratchet, despite the fact that quarterly cash-
out refinancing activity more than tripled over this period (see Figure 1). Similarly, lower
interest rates and new mortgage products allowed more households to purchase homes that
were previously unaffordable; rising home prices generated handsome wealth gains for those
households; and greater refinancing opportunities allowed those households to liquify their
gains, fueling consumer demand and general economic growth. Which politician or regulator
would seek to interrupt such a “virtuous” cycle, and how could such a maverick accomplish
this task without broad-based support from colleagues and constituents?
   The subtle and multi-faceted nature of the refinancing ratchet effect is just one example
of the much broader challenge of defining, measuring, and managing systemic risk in the
financial system. As Reinhart and Rogoff (2008a,b) have documented, financial crises occur
on a regular basis throughout the world, and is often tied to economic growth, capital inflows,
and financial liberalization and innovation. In the current crisis, systemic risk has taken
the form of three factors affecting the housing market; in the next crisis, it may be other
combinations of factors that create vulnerabilities to the global financial system. The very
nature of crisis is that the underlying drivers are difficult to spot in advance. Establishing
an independent institution dedicated to systemic risk analysis—with the capabilities and
mandate to construct a variety of simulations and risk measures across instruments, markets,
institutions, industries, and economic activities to produce early warning signals of over-
leverage, illiquidity, and potential market dislocations—can provide invaluable support to
all regulatory bodies that are collectively responsible for managing systemic risk. We believe
that systemic risk can and should be managed (see, for example, Lo, 2008), but it can only
be managed if it is first properly measured and anticipated. Institutionalizing the ongoing


                                               49
effort to construct simulations such as those in this paper can contribute to that effort.




                                             50
A     Appendix
In this Appendix, we describe the components of Greenspan and Kennedy’s (2005) gross
equity extraction time series used in our analysis (Section A.1), our statistical approach to
estimating home sales from 1919 to 1962 (Section A.2), and provide calibration results for
additional refinancing rules (Section A.3).

A.1     Components of Gross Equity Extractions Series
Greenspan and Kennedy (2005) propose a method for disaggregating the net change in
outstanding home mortgage debt into its constituent gross flows. For our purposes, the
most important series produced by their approach is the Gross Equity Extractions series,
and for completeness, we provide a brief overview of this series in this section. Please see
Greenspan and Kennedy (2005) for further details.
   Greenspan and Kennedy (2005) define Gross Equity Extractions as “extraction of equity
on existing homes as the discretionary initiatives of home owners to convert equity in their
homes into cash by borrowing in the home mortgage market”. To calculate Gross Equity
Extractions, they hypothesize that the change in home mortgage debt outstanding in the
absence of discretionary initiative would have been equal to the mortgage origination to
purchase new homes minus the scheduled amortization. Accordingly, they define Gross
Equity Extractions as the difference between the actual change in total home mortgage
outstanding and this quantity. More precisely, they use the following relationship:

          Gross Equity Extractions ≡ Change in home mortgage outstanding
                                        excluding construction loans
                                             − Origination for new homes
                                             + Scheduled amortization .

Using a variety of sources, they are able to estimate this quantity at a quarterly frequency
since 1968Q1. This series is one of the two primary reference time series that we use to
calibrate our simulations.
    With a more detailed set of data sources that are only available since 1991, Greenspan
and Kennedy (2005) further decompose Gross Equity Extractions into the following three
components from 1991Q1 to 2008Q4:

                Turnover Extractions ≡ Origination to purchase existing homes
                                         − Cancellation of home sellers mortgage
                      Gross Cash-Out ≡ Origination for refinancing
                                         − Cancellation of refinanced loans
  Net Change in Home Equity Loans ≡ Change in home equity loans outstanding
                                      − Unscheduled repayments .


                                             51
                                        Figure A.1 plots these three components at a quarterly frequency from 1991Q1 to 2008Q4.



                                        $180

                                        $160
Components of Gross Equity Extraction




                                        $140

                                        $120
        ($Bil per Quarter)




                                        $100

                                         $80

                                         $60

                                         $40

                                         $20

                                         $-
                                                3/1/1991

                                                           3/1/1992

                                                                      3/1/1993

                                                                                 3/1/1994

                                                                                            3/1/1995

                                                                                                       3/1/1996

                                                                                                                    3/1/1997

                                                                                                                               3/1/1998

                                                                                                                                          3/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                          3/1/2000

                                                                                                                                                                     3/1/2001

                                                                                                                                                                                3/1/2002

                                                                                                                                                                                            3/1/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                       3/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3/1/2005

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3/1/2006

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3/1/2007

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3/1/2008
                                        $(20)

                                        $(40)


                                                                      Gross Cash-out                              Net Change in Home Equity Loans                                          Turnover Extractions




                                        Figure A.1: Three component of the Gross Equity Extractions series of Greenspan and
                                        Kennedy (2005) from 1991Q1 to 2008Q4. The three components are: “Turnover Extractions”
                                        (origination to purchase existing homes minus cancellation of home sellers mortgage), “Gross
                                        Cash-Out” (defined as origination for refinancing minus cancellation of refinanced loans), and
                                        “Net Change in Home Equity Loans” (defined as change in home equity loans outstanding
                                        minus unscheduled repayments). See Greenspan and Kennedy (2005) for further details.

                                            Our choice to calibrate our simulations to the Gross Equity Extractions series rather than
                                        to one of the three subcomponents is motivated by our focus on systemic risk. In particular,
                                        our refinancing behavioral rules (3) and (4) are meant to capture the aggregate effects of
                                        all three components of the Gross Equity Extractions series. As we discussed in Section
                                        3.2 in reference to Assumption (A9), this broader focus is more relevant for aggregate risk
                                        measurement because all three components contribute to the total leverage of the residential
                                        housing market. In particular, in the example of Section 3.2 in which a homeowner decides
                                        to sell his home and rent thereafter, he would fall into the “Turnover Extraction” case
                                        but the buyer of his home presumably finances the purchase with a similarly leveraged
                                        loan, yielding virtually the same impact on aggregate leverage as if the original homeowner
                                        continued owning after engaging in a cash-out refinancing (place him in the “Gross Cash-
                                        Out” category). Therefore, for our purposes, combining the three disaggregated series of
                                        Greenspan and Kennedy (2005) seems more appropriate.



                                                                                                                                                     52
A.2     Estimating Home Sales from 1919 to 1962
New home sales data is only available from January 1963 to December 2008. Since out-
standing loans and equity extractions depend on the value of the underlying stock of real
estate, we would like to extend our analysis farther back to better approximate the current
stock of real estate. We select 1919 as a starting point based on data from the American
Housing Survey 2007, which shows that approximately 93% of all homes surveyed were built
after 1919. We now describe the statistical model used to “back-fill”the new home sales time
series from January 1919 to December 1962.
    We begin by hypothesizing that the growth rate in NHt is related to the growth in
population (see Section 4.1 for a definition of this variable). Higher values of NHt also seem
to be correlated with periods of high real home-price appreciation, such as the earlier part
of this decade. Accordingly, we first collect data for annual new home sales, population, and
real home prices. The population data are obtained from two sources: data from 1900 to
1999 are obtained from

           http : //www.census.gov/popest/archives/1990s/popclockest.txt

and data from 2000 to 2008 are obtained from

    http : //www.census.gov/popest/national/files/NST − EST2008 − alldata.csv.

The Real Home Price Index is obtained from Robert Shiller at

                     http : //www.econ.yale.edu/ ∼ shiller/data.htm.

We then transform each of these series into growth rates by taking the first difference of the
natural logarithms of the original time series, i.e.,

               ∆NHt = log(NHt+1 ) − log(NHt ) for t ∈ {1963, . . . , 2008}
              ∆POPt = log(POPt+1 ) − log(POPt ) for t ∈ {1919, . . . , 2008}
              ∆HPIt = log(HPIt+1 ) − log(HPIt ) for t ∈ {1919, . . . , 2008}

We then estimate the following linear model:

                           ∆NHt = α + β∆POPt + γ∆HPIt .                                 (A.1)

The estimated parameters, α̂, β̂ and γ̂ and the data for ∆POPt and ∆HPIt from 1919 to
                                                   ˆ
1962 are used to construct left-hand-side variable ∆NH  t for this period. Finally, we use




                                             53
           ˆ
NH1963 and ∆NHt to backfill NHt from 1919 to 1962 through the following calculation:


                                                 1962
                                                 X
                  d
              log(NH  t)    = log(NH1963 ) −            ˆ
                                                        ∆NHi for t ∈ {1919, . . . , 1962} .   (A.2)
                                                  i=t


In the final step, we use the empirical distribution of monthly new home sales estimated
using monthly data from 1963 to 2008 to construct monthly estimates based on the annual
              d constructed using the method above. Given NH , i.e., the sales in month i
estimates of NH  t                                               i,t
of year t for years 1963 to 2008, we estimate the proportion of houses constructed in month
i using the following estimator:

                                                        2008
                                                        X NHi,t
                                              1
                                Pi   =                                                        (A.3)
                                       2008 − 1963 + 1 t=1963 NHt

Combining (A.2) and (A.3), we set the number of new houses entering the mortgage system
in month i of year t over the period from 1919 to 1962 to be:

                           d
                           NH      d
                             i,t = NHt × Pi for t ∈ {1919, . . . , 1962} .                    (A.4)

   Figure A.2 shows the actual and estimated time series of the number of new units entering
the mortgage system from January 1919 to December 2008. This approach implies that
101.5MM units enter our simulation. Of this total, 52.6MM is based on actual data from
January 1963 to December 2008, and 48.9MM is based on the estimation approach outlined
above for the period from January 1919 to December 1962. The total of 101.5MM seems
reasonable given our objective of capturing more than 90% of the homes in the U.S.

A.3     Calibrating Other Refinancing Rules
In this section, we provide the calibration results for two alternative refinancing rules. Recall
that in Section 4.3, the refinancing probability was assumed to be uniform for all loan-to-
value ratios. Here we change this assumption so that the refinancing probability is linear in
the loan-to-value ratio. We also consider the case of a structural shift after 1989. Specifically,
we propose:

Linear Rule:
                                
                                
                                    0                      if LTVi,t = 0
                   REFIi,t =                                                                  (A.5)
                                
                                             85%−LTVi,t
                                     0.9% ×      85%
                                                            if LTVi,t ∈ (0%, 85%]




                                                    54
                                             180,000

                                             160,000

         Number of Housing Units per Month
                                             140,000

                                             120,000

                                             100,000

                                              80,000

                                              60,000

                                              40,000

                                              20,000

                                                  0
                                                       1/1/1919

                                                                  1/1/1924

                                                                             1/1/1929

                                                                                        1/1/1934

                                                                                                   1/1/1939

                                                                                                                1/1/1944

                                                                                                                           1/1/1949

                                                                                                                                      1/1/1954

                                                                                                                                                 1/1/1959

                                                                                                                                                              1/1/1964

                                                                                                                                                                         1/1/1969

                                                                                                                                                                                    1/1/1974

                                                                                                                                                                                               1/1/1979

                                                                                                                                                                                                          1/1/1984

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1/1/1989

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1/1/1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1/1/2004
                                                                                                              Units (1919-1962)                             Units (1963-2008)




Figure A.2: Time series of the number of units of new homes entering the mortgage system
since January 1919. This series is used as an input to our simulations. The data since
January 1963 is available from the U.S. Census Bureau, and we have extrapolated the data
back to 1919 based on a linear-regression model using population growth and a real-estate
price index as regressors.

Linear Rule with Structural Break:
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                                   0                                                                    if LTVi,t = 0
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                                                                   85%−LTVi,t
       REFIi,t =                                                   0.45% ×                            85%
                                                                                                                                        if t ≤ 1988 and LTVi,t ∈ (0%, 85%]                                                                                       (A.6)
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                                                                  85%−LTVi,t
                                                                   1.35% ×                            85%
                                                                                                                                        if t ≥ 1989 and LTVi,t ∈ (0%, 85%]

   Figures A.3 and A.4 show the calibration results for these two rules. In both cases,
the simulations can reproduce the outstanding mortgage volume and the cumulative equity
extractions with reasonable accuracy. The Linear Rule with Structural Break given in (A.6)
seem to match the earlier parts of the calibration reference series more closely.
   Figure A.5 compares the simulation results based on the refinancing rules (A.5) and (A.6)
with the results of the 2007 American Housing Survey. The refinancing levels generated by
(A.6) comes relatively close to the survey data. This is similar to the data in Figure 7 based
on the Uniform Rule (3) and the Uniform Rule with Structural Break (4).
   Table A.1 reports the estimated values of losses according to the approach described in
Section 5.2 and equation (5) at a quarterly frequency each quarter between 2006Q1 and
2008Q4 for the case of no cash-out refinancing as well as the Linear Rule with Structural
Break (A.6). This is the counterpart to the results in Table 2 for the Uniform Rule with
Structural Break (4). While these estimates are somewhat smaller than the values given in
Table 2, the qualitative patterns, and the increase in the magnitude of losses due to equity

                                                                                                                                                      55
                          Total Guarantee      Total Guarantee      Case-Shiller
                Quarter    Value without     Value with Cash-Out   Composite-10
                          Refinancing ($B)     Refinancing ($B)     Index Level

                2006Q1          42.21                 203.96           223.75
                2006Q2          47.73                 230.53           226.29
                2006Q3          59.98                 293.36           225.09
                2006Q4          71.04                 356.34           222.39
                2007Q1          79.33                 404.47           219.67
                2007Q2          89.07                 449.70           217.37
                2007Q3         105.73                 535.20           212.72
                2007Q4         135.79                 691.85           200.67
                2008Q1         176.71                 898.16           186.12
                2008Q2         194.03                 982.19           180.52
                2008Q3         223.53               1,126.90           173.36
                2008Q4         279.93               1,404.50           162.17




Table A.1: The simulated value of the guarantee in non-recourse residential mortgages, with
and without cash-out refinancing (under the Linear Rule with Structural Break (A.6)), and
the Case-Shiller Index, from 2006Q1 to 2008Q4.

extractions, are comparable.




                                               56
                                                $14,000


                                                $12,000
        Outstanding Mortgages ($Bil)


                                                $10,000


                                                 $8,000


                                                 $6,000


                                                 $4,000


                                                 $2,000


                                                    $-
                                                            1/1/1919

                                                                         1/1/1924

                                                                                      1/1/1929

                                                                                                   1/1/1934

                                                                                                               1/1/1939

                                                                                                                           1/1/1944

                                                                                                                                       1/1/1949

                                                                                                                                                   1/1/1954

                                                                                                                                                               1/1/1959

                                                                                                                                                                              1/1/1964

                                                                                                                                                                                          1/1/1969

                                                                                                                                                                                                      1/1/1974

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1/1/1979

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1/1/1984

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1/1/1989

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1/1/1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1/1/2009
                                                                       Outstanding Mortgages (Simulation, $Bil)                                                           Outstanding Mortgages (Actual Flow of Funds, $Bil)




                                                                            (a) Simulated vs. actual time series of outstanding mort-
                                                                            gages.


                                                $9,000
         Cumulative Equity Extractions ($Bil)




                                                $8,000

                                                $7,000

                                                $6,000

                                                $5,000

                                                $4,000

                                                $3,000

                                                $2,000

                                                $1,000

                                                    $-
                                                          1/1/1919

                                                                       1/1/1924

                                                                                    1/1/1929

                                                                                                 1/1/1934

                                                                                                              1/1/1939

                                                                                                                          1/1/1944

                                                                                                                                      1/1/1949

                                                                                                                                                  1/1/1954

                                                                                                                                                              1/1/1959

                                                                                                                                                                            1/1/1964

                                                                                                                                                                                         1/1/1969

                                                                                                                                                                                                     1/1/1974

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1/1/1979

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1/1/1984

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1/1/1989

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1/1/1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1/1/2009




                                                                                                 Cumulative Equity Extractions (Simulation, $Bil)
                                                                                                 Cumulative Equity Extractions (Estimate by Greenspan and Kennedy, $Bil )




                                                                            (b) Simulated vs. actual time series of cumulative equity ex-
                                                                            tractions.

Figure A.3: Simulated vs. actual outstanding mortgages and cumulative equity extractions,
where homes are purchased at an initial loan-to-value ratio of 85% and cash-out refinanced
based on the Linear Rule (A.5). The Federal Reserve mortgage data is available at a quar-
terly frequency from 1951Q4 to 2008Q4, and annually from 1945 to 1951. Greenspan and
Kennedy’s (2005) cumulative equity extraction data is available at a quarterly frequency
from 1968Q1 to 2008Q4. The simulated time series is monthly, from January 1919.


                                                                                                                                                                         57
                                               $14,000


                Outstanding Mortgages ($Bil)   $12,000


                                               $10,000


                                                $8,000


                                                $6,000


                                                $4,000


                                                $2,000


                                                   $-
                                                              1/1/1919

                                                                             1/1/1924

                                                                                            1/1/1929

                                                                                                           1/1/1934

                                                                                                                          1/1/1939

                                                                                                                                         1/1/1944

                                                                                                                                                        1/1/1949

                                                                                                                                                                       1/1/1954

                                                                                                                                                                                      1/1/1959

                                                                                                                                                                                                       1/1/1964

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1/1/1969

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1/1/1974

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1/1/1979

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1/1/1984

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1/1/1989

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1/1/1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1/1/2009
                                                                         Outstanding Mortgages (Simulation, $Bil)                                                                                Outstanding Mortgages (Actual Flow of Funds, $Bil)




                                                                                    (a) Simulated vs. actual time series of outstanding mort-
                                                                                    gages.


                                               $9,000
        Cumulative Equity Extractions ($Bil)




                                               $8,000

                                               $7,000

                                               $6,000

                                               $5,000

                                               $4,000

                                               $3,000

                                               $2,000

                                               $1,000

                                                   $-
                                                         1/1/1919

                                                                         1/1/1924

                                                                                        1/1/1929

                                                                                                       1/1/1934

                                                                                                                      1/1/1939

                                                                                                                                     1/1/1944

                                                                                                                                                    1/1/1949

                                                                                                                                                                   1/1/1954

                                                                                                                                                                                  1/1/1959

                                                                                                                                                                                                   1/1/1964

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1/1/1969

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1/1/1974

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1/1/1979

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1/1/1984

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1/1/1989

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1/1/1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1/1/2009




                                                                                                       Cumulative Equity Extractions (Simulation, $Bil)
                                                                                                       Cumulative Equity Extractions (Estimate by Greenspan and Kennedy, $Bil )




                                                                              (b) Simulated vs. actual time series of cumulative equity ex-
                                                                              tractions.

Figure A.4: Simulated vs. actual outstanding mortgages and cumulative equity extractions,
where homes are purchased at an initial loan-to-value ratio of 85% and cash-out refinanced
based on the Linear Rule with Structural Break (A.6). The Federal Reserve mortgage data
is available at a quarterly frequency from 1951Q4 to 2008Q4, and annually from 1945 to
1951. Greenspan and Kennedy’s (2005) cumulative equity extraction data is available at a
quarterly frequency from 1968Q1 to 2008Q4. The simulated time series is monthly, from
January 1919.


                                                                                                                                                                                             58
        35%
                    32%



                                                   27%


                                                         22%
              21%



                                                                                  15%
                                                               13% 13%
                                13%          13%                       13%                                                          13%
                                                                                                                              11%
                          10%
                                                                                         9% 10%

                                                                                                      6%        6%
                                                                                                           5%
                                      5%                                                                                 5%
                                                                                                                                          3%

                                                                                                                                               0%   0%


        No Mortgage       Less than 20%        20-39%            40-59%                 60-79%          80-89%             90-99%         100 or More


                                           American Housing Survey        Linear Rule        Linear with Structural Break Rule




Figure A.5: Distribution of simulated loan-to-value ratios (assuming an initial loan-to-value
ratio of 85%) in December 2007 vs. the results from the 2007 American Housing Survey,
based on the Linear Rule for refinancing behavior (A.6) and the Linear Rule with Structural
Break (A.6).




                                                                                        59
                                    References


Agarwal, S., Driscoll, J., and Laibson, D., 2008, “Optimal Mortgage Refinancing: A Closed
    Form Solution”, NBER Working Paper No. W13487.
Archer, W., Ling, D., and McGill, G., 1997, “The Effect of Income and Collateral Con-
    straints On Residential Mortgage Terminations”, Regional Science and Urban Eco-
    nomics 29, 314–25.
Bajari, P., Chu, C., and Park, M. 2008, “An Empirical Model of Subprime Mortgage Default
    From 2000 to 2007”, NBER Working Paper No. 14625.

Bank for International Settlements, 2007, Triennial Central Bank Survey: Foreign Exchange
   and Derivatives Market Activity in 2007. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International
   Settlements.
Bekaert, G. and Wu, G., 2000, “Asymmetric Volatility and Risk in Equity Markets”, Review
    of Financial Studies 13, 1–42.
Bennett, P., Peach, R., and Peristiani, S., 2001 “Structural Change in the Mortgage Market
    and the Propensity to Refinance”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 33, 955–75.
Bhardwaj, G. and Sengupta, R., 2008a, “Did Prepayments Sustain the Subprime Market?”,
    Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper No. 2008–039A.
Bhardwaj, G. and Sengupta, R., 2008b, “Where’s the Smoking Gun? A Study of Under-
    writing Standards for U.S. Subprime Mortgages”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
    Working Paper No. 2008–036A.
Brunnermeier, M., 2009, “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007–2008”, Jour-
    nal of Economic Perspectives 23, 77–100
Calem, P. and LaCour-Little, M., 2004, “Risk-Based Capital Requirements for Mortgage
    Loans”, Journal of Banking and Finance 28, 647–672.
Calhoun, C., 1996, “OFHEO House Price Indexes: HPI Technical Description”, Office of
    Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, available at
    http://www.fhfa.gov/webfiles/896/hpi tech.pdf
Chan, N., Getmansky, M., Haas, S. and A. Lo, 2006, “Do Hedge Funds Increase Systemic
   Risk?”, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Economic Review Q4, 49–80.

Chang, Y. and Nothaft, F. 2007, “Demystifying the Refi-Share Mystery”, Journal of Real
   Estate Research 29, 511–46.
Chomsisengphet, S., Murphy, T., and Pennington-Cross, A., 2008, “Product Innovation
   and Mortgage Selection in the Subprime Era”, Working Paper Available on SSRN.



                                           60
Coleman, M., LaCour-Little, M., and Vandell, K., 2008, “Subprime Lending and the Hous-
    ing Bubble: Tail Wags Dog?”, available at SSRN:
    http://ssrn.com/abstract=1262365.
Constantinides, G., 1976, “Stochastic Cash Management with Fixed and Proportional
    Transaction Costs,” Management Science 22, 1320–1331.
Constantinides, G., 1986, “Capital Market Equilibrium with Transaction Costs,” Journal
    of Political Economy 94, 842–862.
Cox, J. and Rubinstein, M., 1985, Options Markets. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-
    Hall.
Danis, M. and Pennington-Cross, A., 2005, “A Dynamic Look at Subprime Loan Perfor-
    mance”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper No. 2005–029A.
Davis, M. and Norman, A., 1990, “Portfolio Selection with Transactions Costs”, Mathe-
    matics of Operations Research 15, 676–713.
Dell’Ariccia, D., Igan, D. and Laeven, L., 2008, “Credit Booms and Lending Standards:
     Evidence from the Subprime Mortgage Market”, International Monetary Fund Working
     Paper.
Demyanyk, Y. and Van Hemert, O., 2008, “Understanding the Subprime Mortgage Crisis”,
   to appear in Review of Financial Studies.
Deng, Y. and Quigley, J., 2002, “Woodhead Behavior and the Pricing of Residential Mort-
   gages”, USC Lusk Center for Real Estate Working Paper No. 2003–1005.
Deng, Y., Quigley, J., and Van Order, R., 2000, “Mortgage Terminations, Heterogeneity
   and the Exercise of Mortgage Options”, Econometrica 68, 275–307.
Dixon, P. and M. Rimmer, 2002, Dynamic General Equilibrium Modelling for Forecasting
    and Policy: a Practical Guide and Documentation of MONASH. New York: North
    Holland.

Doms, M., Furlong, F., and Krainer, J., 2007, “Subprime Mortgage Delinquency Rates”,
   Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper No. 2007–33.
Downing, C., Stanton, R., and Wallace, N., 2005, “An Empirical Test of a Two-Factor Mort-
   gage Valuation Model: How Much Do House Prices Matter?”, Real Estate Economics
   33, 681–710.
Foote, C., Gerardi, K., and Willen, P., 2008, “Negative Equity and Foreclosure: Theory
    and Evidence”, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Public Policy Discussion No. 08–3.
Fortin, R., Michelson, S., Smith, S., and Weaver, W., 2007, “Mortgage Refinancing: The
     Interaction of Break-Even Period, Taxes, NPV, and IRR”, Financial Services Review
     16, 197–209.


                                           61
Gallin, J., 2004, “The Long-Run Relationship between House Prices and Rent”, Federal
     Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series No. 2004–50.
Gallin, J. 2006, “The Long-Run Relationship between House Prices and Income: Evidence
     from Local Housing Markets”, Real Estate Economics 34, 417–438.

Gerardi, K., Lehnert, A., Sherlund, S. M., and Willen, P., 2008, “Making Sense of the
    Subprime Crisis”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Fall 2008.
Gerardi, K., Shapiro, A. H., and Willen, P., 2007, “Subprime Outcomes: Risky Mortgages,
    Homeownership Experiences, and Foreclosures”, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Dis-
    cussion Paper No. 07–15.
Getmansky, M., Lo, A. and S. Mei, 2004, “Sifting Through the Wreckage: Lessons from
   Recent Hedge-Fund Liquidations”, Journal of Investment Management 2, 6–38.
Ghent, A. C. and Kudlyak, M., 2009, “Recourse and Residential Mortgage Default: Theory
   and Evidence from U.S. State”, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper No.
   09–10.
Gorton, G., 2008, “The Panic of 2007”, Presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
    City Jackson Hole Conference, August 2008.
Gorton, G., 2009, “The Subprime Panic”, European Financial Management 15, 10–46.

Gorton, G. and A. Metrick,, 2009, “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo”, Yale ICF
    Working Paper No. 09–14.
Gray, D., Merton, R., and Bodie, Z., 2006, “A New Framework for Analyzing and Managing
    Macrofinancial Risks of an Economy”, NBER Working Paper No. 12637.

Gray, D., Merton, R., and Bodie, Z., 2007a, “New Framework for Measuring and Managing
    Macrofinancial Risk and Financial Stability”, NBER Working Paper No. 13607.
Gray, D., Merton, R., and Bodie, Z., 2007b, “Contingent Claims Approach to Measuring
    and Managing Sovereign Risk”, Journal of Investment Management 5, 5–28.

Gray, D., Merton, R., and Bodie, Z., 2008, “A Contingent Claims Analysis of the Subprime
    Credit Crisis of 2007-2008”, CREDIT 2008 Conference on Liquidity and Credit Risk,
    Venice, 22–23 September 2008.
Gray, D. and Malone, S., 2008, Macrofinancial Risk Analysis. New York: John Wiley &
    Sons.
Greenspan, A. and Kennedy, J., 2005, “Estimates of Home Mortgage Originations, Re-
    payments, and Debt on One-to-Four-Family Residences”, Board of Governors of the
    Federal Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 2005–41.

Greenspan, A. and Kennedy, J., 2008, “Sources and Uses of Equity Extracted from Homes”,
    Oxford Review of Economic Policy 24, 120–144.

                                          62
Grossman, S. and Laroque, G., 1990, “Asset Pricing and Optimal Portfolio Choice in the
    Presence of Illiquid Durable Consumption Goods”, Econometrica 58, 25–51.
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., and Zingales, L., 2009, “Moral and Social Constraints to Strategic
    Default on Mortgages”, European University Institute Economics Working Papers No.
    ECO2009/27.
Haugh, M. and Lo, A., 2001, “Asset Allocation and Derivatives”, Quantitative Finance 1,
   45–72.
Himmelberg, C., Mayer, C., and Sinai, T., 2005, “Assessing High House Prices: Bubbles,
   Fundamentals and Misperceptions”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 19, 67–92.
Hurst, E., and Stafford, F., 2004, “Home is Where the Equity Is: Mortgage Refinancing
    and Household Consumption”, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 36, 985–1014.
Kau, J., and Keenan, D., 1995, “An Overview of the Option-Theoretic Pricing of Mort-
    gages”, Journal of Housing Research 6, 217–244.
Kau, J., Keenan, D., and Kim, T., 1994, “Default Probabilities for Mortgages”, Journal of
    Urban Economics 35, 278–296.
Kau, J., Keenan, D., Muller, W., and Epperson, J., 1992, “A Generalized Valuation Model
    for Fixed-Rate Residential Mortgages”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 24,
    279–99.
Kau, J., Keenan, D., Muller, W., and Epperson, J., 1995, “The Valuation at Origination of
    Fixed-Rate Mortgages with Default and Prepayment”, Journal of Real Estate Finance
    & Economics 11, 5–36.

Keys, B., Mukherjee, T., Seru, A. and Vig, V., 2008, “Did Securitization Lead to Lax
    Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans”, EFA 2008 Athens Meetings Paper, avail-
    able at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1093137.
Khandani, A. and A. Lo, 2007, “What Happened To The Quants In August 2007?”, Journal
   of Investment Management 5, 29–78.
Khandani, A. and A. Lo, 2008, “What Happened To The Quants In August 2007?: Evidence
   from Factors and Transactions Data”, available at SSRN:
   http://ssrn.com/abstract=1288988.

LaCour-Little, M., 2008, “Mortgage Termination Risk: A Review of the Recent Literature”,
   Journal of Real Estate Literature 16, 297–326.
Lo, A., 2008, “Hedge Funds, Systemic Risk, and the Financial Crisis of 2007–2008: Written
    Testimony of Andrew W. Lo”, prepared for the U.S. House of Representatives Com-
    mittee on Oversight and Government Reform, November 13, 2008 Hearing on Hedge
    Funds.



                                           63
Lo, A. and MacKinlay, C., 1999, A Non-Random Walk Down Wall Street. Princeton, NJ:
    Princeton University Press.
Lo, A., Mamaysky, H. and Wang, J., 2004, “Asset Prices and Trading Volume Under Fixed
    Transaction Costs”, Journal of Political Economy 112, 1054–1090.
Mayer, C. and Pence, K., 2008, “Subprime Mortgages: What, Where, and to Whom?”,
   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion
   Series, 2008–29.
McCarthy, J. and Peach, R., 2004, “Are Home Prices the Next ‘Bubble’ ?”, Economic
   Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December, 1–17.
Merton, R., 1976, “Option Pricing When the Underlying Stock Returns are Discontinuous”,
    Journal of Financial Economics 3, 125–144.
Merton, R., 1977, “An Analytic Derivation of the Cost of Deposit Insurance and Loan
    Guarantees: An Application of Modern Option Pricing Theory”, Journal of Banking
    and Finance 1, 3–11.
Merton, R. and Bodie, Z., 1992, “On the Management of Financial Guarantees”, Financial
    Management 21, 87–109.
Mian, A. and Sufi, A., 2008, “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence
    from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis”, to appear in Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Mian, A., and Sufi, A., 2009, “House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the U.S.
    Household Leverage Crisis”, available at SSRN:
    http://ssrn.com/abstract=1397607.
Pennington-Cross, A. and Chomsisengphet, S., 2007, “Subprime Refinancing: Equity Ex-
    traction and Mortgage Termination”, Real Estate Economics 35, 233–263.
Peristiani, S., Bennett, P., Peach, R., and Raiff, J., 1997, “Credit, Equity, and Mortgage
     Refinancings”, Economic Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, July, 83–99.
Piskorski, T. and Tchistyi, A., 2006, “Optimal Mortgage Design”, available at SSRN:
    http://ssrn.com/abstract=971223.
Pliska, S., 2006, “Mortgage Valuation and Optimal Refinancing”, in A. Shiryaev, M. Gross-
     inho, P. Oliveira, and M. Esquvel (eds.), Stochastic Finance, 183–196. New York:
     Springer.
Rajan, R. G., 2006, “Has Finance Made the World Riskier?”, European Financial Manage-
    ment 12, 499–533.
Quercia, R. and Stegman, M., 1992, “Residential Mortgage Default: A Review of the
    Literature”, Journal of Housing Research 3, 341–379.
Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff, 2008a, “This Time Is Different: A Panoramic View of Eight
    Centuries of Financial Crises”, NBER Working Paper No. 13882.

                                           64
Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff, 2008b, “Is the 2007 U.S. Subprime Crisis So Different? An
    International Historical Comparison”, American Economic Review 98, 339–344.
Schwartz, E. and Torous, W., 1989, “Prepayment and the Valuation of Mortgage-Backed
    Securities”, The Journal of Finance 44, 375–392.

Shiller, R., 2006, “Long-Term Perspective on the Current Boom in Home Prices”, Economists’
     Voice, Berkeley Electronic Press, March.
Stanton, R., 1995, “Rational Prepayment and Valuation of Mortgage-Backed Securities”,
    Review of Financial Studies 8, 677–708.

Thurner, S., Farmer, D. and J. Geanakoplos, 2009, “Leverage Causes Fat Tails and Clus-
    tered Volatility”, Working Paper No. 2009–08–031, Santa Fe Institute.
Vandell, K., 1993, “Handing Over the Keys: A Perspective on Mortgage Default Research”,
   Journal of American Real Estate and Urban Economics 21, 211–46.

Wheaton, W. and Nechayev, G., 2007, “The 1998–2005 Housing ‘Bubble’ and the Current
   ‘Correction’: What’s Different this Time?”, Journal of Real Estate Research 30, 1–26.




                                          65
