                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            PARTY AFFILIATION, PARTISANSHIP, AND POLITICAL BELIEFS:
                             A FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                          Alan S. Gerber
                                         Gregory A. Huber
                                        Ebonya Washington

                                        Working Paper 15365
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15365


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2009




¸˛Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the Conference on Homogeneity and Heterogeneity
  in Public Opinion, Cornell University, October 3-5, 2008 and at the Institution for Social and Policy
  Studies @ 40 Conference, Yale University, November 14-15, 2008. We thank participants at those
  conferences for their helpful comments. Thanks also to Don Green and the Institution for Social and
  Policy Studies at Yale University for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the
  author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Alan S. Gerber, Gregory A. Huber, and Ebonya Washington. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Party Affiliation, Partisanship, and Political Beliefs: A Field Experiment
Alan S. Gerber, Gregory A. Huber, and Ebonya Washington
NBER Working Paper No. 15365
September 2009
JEL No. D72,H0

                                               ABSTRACT

Political partisanship is strongly correlated with attitudes and behavior, but it is unclear from this pattern
whether partisan identity has a causal effect on political behavior and attitudes. We report the results
of a field experiment designed to investigate the causal effect of party identification. Prior to the February
2008 Connecticut presidential primary, researchers sent a mailing to a random sample of unaffiliated
registered voters informing them of the need to register in order to participate in the upcoming primary.
Comparing post-treatment survey responses to subjects’ baseline survey responses, we find that those
informed of the need to register with a party were more likely to affiliate with a party and subsequently
showed stronger partisanship. Further, we find that the treatment group also demonstrated greater concordance
than the control group between their pre-treatment latent partisanship and their post-treatment reported
voting behavior and intentions and evaluations of partisan figures. Thus our treatment, which caused
a strengthening of partisan identity, also caused a shift in subjects’ candidate preferences and evaluations
of salient political figures. This finding is consistent with the claim that partisanship is an active force
changing how citizens behave in and perceive the political world.


Alan S. Gerber                                        Ebonya Washington
Yale University                                       Yale University
Institution for Social and Policy Studies             Box 8264
77 Prospect Street                                    37 Hillhouse, Room 2
New Haven, CT 06520                                   New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER                                              and NBER
alan.gerber@yale.edu                                  ebonya.washington@yale.edu

Gregory A. Huber
Yale University
Institution for Social and Policy Studies
77 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520
gregory.huber@yale.edu
        Scholars from a variety of disciplines contend that allegiances and group affiliations, from

nationalism and religious identities to ethnic and kinship ties, have a powerful effect on attitudes and

behavior. One such identity is partisanship, which political scientists have hypothesized is an active force

shaping how individuals evaluate and interact with the political world ([in the U.S.] Campbell et al. 1960;

more recently, Bartels 2002; [abroad] Brader and Tucker 2001; Dancygier and Saunders 2006; Whitefield

and Evans 1999). Evidence presented to support the importance of partisanship includes the strong

correlation between partisanship and salient political opinions ([vote choice] Campbell et al. 1960;

Fiorina 1981; Miller 1991; Bartels 2000; [assessments of the economy] Bartels 2002; Erikson 2004;

Wlezien, Franklin, and Twiggs 1997), the divergence among conflicting partisans in interpretations of

common events (Bartels 2002; Lupia 2002; Rahn 1993; Zaller 1992) and preferences for biased political

information (Lau and Redlawsk 2002; Redlawsk 2002), and the persistence over time of partisan

affiliations (Alwin and Krosnick 1991; Green, Palmquist, and Schickler 2002; Jennings and Niemi 1974;

Niemi and Jennings 1991). Across accounts, both political and beyond, a common thread is the claim that

affiliations and identities cause those outcomes associated with holding a particular allegiance.

        While there exists a large body of research that tests whether identity shapes political

views, a persistent concern with this research is that the observed correlation between partisanship and

politically-relevant outcomes may originate in unobserved factors that both encourage particular partisan

identities and the political outcomes associated with those beliefs (Bartels 2000; Fiorina 2002). Further,

causality may flow in both directions, with partisanship reflecting political attitudes and events as well as

causing them (Allsop and Weisberg 1988; Beasley and Joslyn 2001; Brody and Rothenberg 1988;

Converse 1976; Kessel 1968; Fiorina 1981; Franklin and Jackson 1983; MacKuen, Erikson, and Stimson

1989; Norrander and Wilcox 1993; Weisberg and Smith 1991). While scholars have implemented a

variety of research approaches in an attempt to disentangle correlation from causation ([including using

lagged partisanship as an independent variable] Miller and Shanks 1996; Bartels 2000; Bartels 2002;

Goren 2005, Carsey and Layman 2006; [using state registration laws as an exogenous factor] Burden and



                                                      1
Greene 2000), we identify in existing research several persistent threats to causal inference. Overall,

previous research has shown that measures of partisanship have great predictive power in statistical

models of a variety of political outcomes, but has not demonstrated that those relationships reflect the

casual influence of those affiliations.

        We address the limitations of previous research by means of an experiment fielded in the state of

Connecticut during the 2008 presidential primary election season. Connecticut has a closed primary

system in which only voters affiliated with a party can vote in that party’s primary. We surveyed a

random sample of registered Independents (those who were both not formally affiliated with either the

Democratic or Republican party and who also indicated they did not already consider themselves a

Democrat or Republican) and based on their response to an item that asked which party the respondent

felt closer to we classified some respondents as latent Democrats or Republicans. We classified as latent

Independents those who declined to choose either party. We then randomly assigned equal proportions of

latent Democrats and latent Republicans to treatment or control status. Treated individuals received a

mailing informing them of the need to register with a party in order to participate in that party’s upcoming

presidential preference primary. Our intervention increased party registration with the party of one’s

latent partisanship by 7.2 percentage points in our target population. Treatment group members were also

3.3 percentage points more likely to vote in the primary election, placing our intervention on par with the

most effective get out the vote efforts.

        Four months after our intervention, we returned to the field to survey subjects and found that

treated individuals, who by definition identified with neither party just months prior, were now more than

seven percentage points more likely to identify with their latent party. Treatment group responses to the

standard seven point party identification scale were similarly polarized. Our intervention is the first that

we are aware of to manipulate partisan feelings over long periods of time and outside of the laboratory

setting. In so doing, we have provided evidence of the political relevance of the psychological theory of

cognitive dissonance, which states that people align their attitudes and behaviors in part to avoid a feeling




                                                      2
of discomfort that arises from their discordance.1 Applying cognitive dissonance to the present context,

months after declaring (or deciding to declare) oneself a member of a particular party, a citizen may hold

favorable views of that party in part to avoid the internal discomfort of having registered (or decided to

register) with a party for which the individual has a poor opinion. Because of the nature of our

experiment, our evidence is robust to the criticism made of the first contributions to this literature

(Beasley and Joslyn 2001 and Mullainathan and Washington 2009) that the attitudinal changes associated

with voting (picking a candidate) may be due to altered information flows, rather than to the need for

consistency between behavior and attitudes.

        We then employ this randomly induced partisanship to test key theoretical arguments about the

role of partisanship in shaping political opinions and behaviors. We find that in addition to heightened

partisan identities, treatment group members were increasingly partisan in their voting choices and

evaluations of partisan figures and institutions. Thus we demonstrate that randomly-induced variation in

partisan identities yields changes in attitudes and planned voting decisions consistent with claims that

partisanship is an active force shaping how citizens behave in the political world.

        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section I presents the methodological

concerns motivating our experimental design, while Section II describes the experiment. In Section III we

present results demonstrating that our treatment altered party affiliation, voter turnout, partisan identity,

and, ultimately, partisan views. Given the variety of behavioral and attitudinal effects arising from our

intervention, Section IV provides a discussion of potential mediators that may have led treated individuals

to become more polarized in their partisan views. In Section V we conclude.



I. Research Design and Casual Inference

        In this section, we discuss the barriers to causal inference in existing research and describe an


1
  Self-perception theory (Bem 1967), which stipulates that we look to our own behaviors to discover our
attitudes, is another possible explanation. In this work we refer to the mechanism as cognitive dissonance
because of its greater use in the psychological community and not to signify a stance on which of these internal
mechanisms is at play.


                                                       3
alternative technique for measuring partisanship’s effects. A conventional approach to demonstrating the

effects of partisanship on political attitudes or behavior relies on cross-sectional data (or a pooled series of

cross-sections). Those data are then used to estimate a regression of the following form:

(1)     Yi = α + βXi + γMi + ε,

where Y is the outcome of interest for individual i, X is partisanship, M is a vector of measured control

variables (M for measured variables), and ε is the error term. Analysis employing this specification will

generate a biased estimate of β, the effect of partisanship on outcome Y, in a variety of circumstances.

The most important threats to inference originate in (a) omitted variable bias due to unobserved

differences across individuals (unobserved heterogeneity) and (b) endogenous partisanship.2

        Unobserved heterogeneity will bias β if there are any factors not included in M that are correlated

with X and also affect Y (we label these unmeasured factors U, for unmeasured variables). In most

survey settings, factors in U include variables such as wealth, heredity, personality, educational and

employment experience, and parental socialization, variables that are both hard to measure accurately

(even when attempts are made) and likely to have consequential effects on Y. Without an exhaustive

measurement of all those factors that might plausibly affect partisanship and Y, and therefore belong in M

but are instead left in U, analysis exploiting observed variation in partisanship cannot rule out the

alternative that partisanship (and therefore β) merely proxies correlated but unmeasured factors.

Consistent with this concern, analysts regularly find that including additional variables in M reduces the

estimated effect of partisanship (β) on political opinions and behaviors (e.g., Fiorina 2002).

        Endogenous partisanship poses a threat to estimates of β because regression analysis cannot

distinguish the effect of changes in X on Y from the effect of changes in Y on X. If Y is a measure of

political preferences, it is reasonable to anticipate that changes in Y (or the effects of any unmeasured

factors that cause changes in those preferences) might affect another choice, partisan affiliations. Thus,

2
 Additional threats include measurement error in M. The effects of measurement error are complex and
depend on the covariances among the variables and the pattern of measurement error. Measurement error may
generate the same bias in β as unobserved heterogeneity if that measurement error is correlated with X.
Correlated measurement error in X and Y may also generate bias in β.


                                                       4
even an exhaustive construction of M (reducing the share of variation left to the variables included in U)

would not allow the analyst to demonstrate that partisanship changes opinions because one cannot rule

out the possibility that it is instead opinions which cause partisanship.

        Returning to omitted variable bias, one approach designed to address concerns about unmeasured

factors (U) that shape both partisanship (X) and the outcome of interest (Y) is to employ panel data in

which the same respondent is interviewed multiple times (e.g., Bartels 2000; Miller and Shanks 1996).

The relationship between changes in partisanship and changes in Y can then be used to estimate β without

bias originating in U, but this requires the restrictive assumption that those unmeasured factors and their

effects on X are constant over time. If U changes, or if the effect of U on X or Y varies, however, then β

may still be biased.3 In practice, panel estimates of β are considered candidates for causal interpretation

when it is reasonable to assume that the change in partisanship (X) is due to changes in some factor that

does not directly affect Y. However, it is quite plausible that observed changes in partisanship are due to

changes in unmeasured factors (U) such as life experiences (e.g., parenthood), wealth changes, changes in

the views of close friends and relatives, or changes in religious beliefs, and any of these might cause

changes in both partisanship (X) and Y. Alternatively, U may remain constant, but the nature of political

conflict might vary. For example, wealthier individuals might hold different policy views or feel closer to

one party or the other.4 Even if these methodological issues were resolved, however, the panel approach

still cannot resolve the uncertainty about the direction in which causality flows—it may still be the case

that changes in opinions cause differences in partisanship rather than the other way around.

        In light of these difficulties, what is needed to estimate the effect of partisan identity (X) on a

political outcome of interest (Y) is a means to create variation in partisanship (X) that is independent of

changes in opinions or those unmeasured factors (U). Setting aside for the moment the question of how

one might create such variation, suppose that a sample of “latent” partisans exists, with some leaning

3
 As in the cross-sectional approach, measurement error may also cause estimates of β to be biased.
4
 Note also that in the absence of an explanation for observed changes in X, there is little reason to believe that
changes in X cause variation in Y. Far more likely is that changes in X reflect common shocks to X and Y
originating in U or measurement error in X, Y, or M.


                                                        5
toward the Democratic Party (D=1, 0 otherwise) and others leaning toward the Republican Party (R=1, 0

otherwise). We define latent partisans as individuals who, when initially asked if they identify with a

party, say they are Independent, but respond to a follow up question by responding that they are closer to

one of the parties. For purposes of exposition, we first consider the case where the sample consists only of

latent Democratic partisans. Additionally, for notational convenience, we scale partisanship by setting

initial partisanship (partisanship at time t, Xit), to 0 for the latent partisans.

         Next, suppose there exists some treatment (T=1 if treated, 0 otherwise) which can be randomly

applied to these latent Democratic partisans to induce some to more fully express those partisan leanings.

Given that Xit is normalized to 0, if individuals in both the treatment and control groups are surveyed pre-

treatment (at time t) and post-treatment (at time t+1), the change in partisanship for subject i is Xit+1 - Xit =

Xit+1. An unbiased estimate of the effect of the treatment on partisanship (the intent to treat effect of T on

Y), can then be obtained from

(3)      Xit+1 = α + β1T + γMit + ε,

where β1 is the intent to treat effect on partisanship for latent Democrats and M are pre-treatment

covariates included to increase efficiency. Note that in this specification we also measure other covariates

M prior to the random assignment.5 (The term controlling for the initial value of X is omitted due to the

normalization of Xit to 0.) Using the same notation as in (3), we can estimate the intent to treat effect of T

on Y using the equation:

(4)      Yit+1 = α + β1T + β2Yit + γMit + ε.

         The ITT (intent to treat) estimates provide unbiased measures of the effect of being assigned to

the treatment on partisanship (T on X) and outcome measures of attitudes and behavior (T on Y). We are

also interested in the effect of partisanship on outcome measures of attitudes and behavior (X on Y). The

experimental treatment can be used to estimate the effect of X on Y if some additional assumptions are

made. The critical assumption is that the treatment, T, has no direct effect on Y, and also does not cause

5
 Alternatively, one could measure M post-treatment if one was confident that T had no effect on M or its
measurement.


                                                          6
any other changes that might indirectly affect Y, except through changes in X. In this case, and if T

affects X, then T may be used as an instrumental variable for X. The assumption regarding how T affects

Y is labeled the exclusion restriction and it implies that T can be omitted from an equation that explains Y

as a function of X. The ITT estimates the effect of T on Y and X and does not rely on the exclusion

restriction, however, the interpretation of the experimental results as the effect of X on Y does. We

discuss this assumption in greater detail in section 4, where we consider the mechanisms by which T

might affect Y.

        We assume the exclusion restriction holds and we estimate the effect of X on Y using the

following pair of equations:

(5)     Xit+1 = α + βT + γMit + ε,

and

(6)     Yit+1 = α + β1Xit+1 + β2Yit + γMit + ε.

        To ease exposition, we have so far restricted our presentation to the case where the latent

partisans are all of one party. Our empirical sample, however, includes both Democratic and Republican

latent partisans. The notation presented above can be adjusted to permit the statistical model to include

the entire sample. First, let partisanship at time t+1 take on the value 1 if a respondent’s post-treatment

partisanship is equal to her pre-treatment latent partisanship and 0 otherwise. Assuming that the treatment

effect is the same for latent partisans of both parties, the ITT estimate of T on X can be estimated by:

(3)'    Xit+1 = α + β1T + β2Dit + γMit + ε,

where pre-treatment measures of latent partisan identity (Dit=1 if latent Democrat, 0 otherwise) and

observables (Mit) are included for efficiency. Turning next to the ITT effect of T on Y for the pooled

sample, define Y so that it measures the degree of correspondence between latent partisanship and the

outcome measure. Thus, individuals score more highly when their expressed opinions match their partisan

leanings. For example, Y is maximized when a Democrat has a positive view of the Democratic candidate

and when the Republican subject has a negative view of the Democratic candidate. If we assume that the




                                                      7
effect of the treatment on opinions is the same (in terms of increasing the concordance between latent

partisanship and opinions) for latent Democrats and latent Republicans, (4) can be rewritten as

(4)'    Yit+1 = α + β1T + β2Yit + β3Dit + γMit + ε.

        Finally, under the exclusion restriction, we estimate the effect of X on Y using the system of

equations:

(5)'    Yit+1 = α + β1Xit+1 + β2Dit + γMit + ε,

where we instrument for X using the random assignment of T:

(6)'    Xit+1 = α + β1T + β2Dit + γMi t + ε.

        As previously discussed, under the assumption that T affects Y only through its effect on X, the

two-stage least squares estimate of β1 will then provide a consistent estimate of the effect of changes in

partisanship on changes in opinions. Of course, this leaves unresolved the question of how one might

induce random variation in partisanship, the topic to which we now turn.



II. Experimental Protocol

        The basic requirements of the experiment are to, first, randomly produce subjects with

strengthened partisan identities and, second, to measure the effect of the randomly induced changes in

partisanship on salient political attitudes and opinions.

        There are several important hurdles to surmount in creating random variation in partisan

affiliations. First, we must identify a pool of respondents amenable to conversion. Second, and perhaps

most critically, we must develop a means to induce changes in partisanship that can be randomly applied

to some individuals but not others. Third, we must be able to measure changes in outcomes associated

with changes in partisanship before other actors (e.g., candidates in political races) who might also

condition their behavior on a respondent’s newly-activated party affiliation can impose additional

treatments on those individuals.

        Fortunately, we are able to address these concerns by exploiting a unique opportunity afforded to




                                                       8
us during the 2008 presidential primary season in Connecticut. For ease of exposition, it is useful to

divide our experiment into three stages, outlined in Table 1.

        Phase 1 of our experiment involved identifying a pool of latent partisans. In early 2008 (January

11-16) we fielded a survey to measure the latent partisanship and pre-treatment opinions of a large set of

registered, but formally unaffiliated, Connecticut voters.6

Table 1: Experiment Outline
Phase 1: Identification of Latent          Survey registered but unaffiliated CT voters to measure
Partisans and Measurement of Baseline      partisan leanings and baseline opinions.
Opinions (Survey, January 11-16,
2008)
Phase 2: Mail Information about            Send randomly selected subset of surveyed voters a letter
Primary Election Voting Rules(Mailed       informing voter of need to register with a party if they wished
January 22, 2008)                          to vote in the upcoming Democratic or Republican
                                           presidential primary.
Phase 3: Measure Post Primary              Analyze voter file to measure changes in party registration
Opinions and Behaviors (Updated CT         status and turnout in 2008 presidential primary. Gather survey
Voter File and Survey, June 2008)          data on post-primary opinions and behaviors.

        Partisanship was measured using the standard branching NES instrument in which respondents

were initially asked “Generally speaking, do you think of yourself as a Republican, a Democrat, an

Independent, or what?” Respondents who chose either the Democratic or Republican Party were then

asked “Would you call yourself a strong [Democrat/Republican] or a not very strong

[Democrat/Republican]?” All other respondents were then asked “Do you think of yourself as closer to

the Republican Party or to the Democratic Party?” We classify as latent partisans those respondents who

declined to identify with the Democratic or Republican Party when asked the first question, but stated that

they felt closer to either party in response to the follow up question.7 In our random sample of unaffiliated

registered Connecticut voters there were 975 latent Democrats and 565 latent Republicans. Additionally,

we identified 808 Independents (those who refused to express a preference for either major party or


6
  Further details about sample restrictions, experimental protocol, and coding of variables appear in the
Appendix.
7
  Of the 3,787 individuals who completed our survey, 8.3% identified as strong Democrats, 11.3% as weak
Democrats, 25.7% as closer to the Democrats, 21.3% as true Independents (responded to the second question
as closer to neither), 14.9% as closer to the Republicans, 7.3% as weak Republicans, and 4.6% as strong
Republicans. An additional 6.5% of respondents answered “don’t know” or refused to answer the second
question after refusing to choose either major party in the first question.


                                                      9
specified “other” in response to the second question).8

        Phase 2 of our experiment had the effect of randomly inducing a small subset of these unaffiliated

voters to alter their registration to affiliate with a party. In Connecticut, unaffiliated voters cannot vote in

either the Democratic or Republican presidential preference primary without first formally registering

with the respective party. All of the respondents in our sample were thus initially ineligible to participate

in the February 5, 2008 primary.9 We sent a treatment letter to a 50% random subset of the experimental

participants.10 Mailed on January 22, 2008, these letters, which were prepared in cooperation with the

Connecticut election officials, reminded the recipient of the upcoming election, explained the need to

affiliate with a party in order to participate in the party’s presidential primary, and were accompanied by a

blank party affiliation form.11 Each letter included the following text:

        In 2008, the Democratic and Republican Presidential preference primaries will be held on
        February 5th and the general election will be held on November 4th. Polls will be open from 6 AM
        to 8 PM on both primary and election days.

        Based on the most recent voter registration records, you are not currently affiliated with a
        political party. I wish to remind you that in Connecticut, unaffiliated voters cannot vote in
        primary elections. If you wish to vote in a party’s primary, your registration records must show
        that you are affiliated with that party. If you have recently amended your registration status to
        affiliate with a party, please disregard this notice.

        To affiliate with a party, please fill out and return the enclosed voter registration form to your
        town’s registrar of voters.

        Note that the letter provides voters with information about their registration status, the upcoming

primary, and the need to register with a party to participate in the primary. Our treatment, therefore,


8
  In the remainder of our exposition here, we focus on the latent partisans, although we also randomly treated
some individuals with all different levels of partisanship as well as individuals we never surveyed in order to
allow us to examine treatment effects for larger populations. Results for those additional groups are available
upon request from the authors and are discussed below.
9
  The results of Connecticut’s presidential preference primary, as reported by Connecticut’s Secretary of State
(http://www.ct.gov/sots/cwp/view.asp?a=3179&Q=392194&SOTSNav_GID=1846), were as follows. In the
Republican primary: McCain (52%), Romney (32.9%), Huckabee (7.0%), and All Others (8.1%). In the
Democratic primary: Obama (50.6%), Clinton (46.5%), Edwards (1.0%), and All Others (1.9%).
10
   A test of random assignment appears in Table A1 in the Appendix, in which we demonstrate that observable
features of respondents in the treatment and control groups cannot explain treatment assignment.
11
   Citizens may be unaware of legal requirements for primary participation in closed primary states and this
may present a barrier to participation. These mailings were part of a larger project investigating the turnout
effects of providing pre-election information about primary voting rules.


                                                       10
lowered the cost to changing one’s registration, made individuals aware of the impending primary, and

provided information about a potential benefit of party affiliation. While the letter is non-partisan, as a

result of receiving the letter, a portion of treated respondents decided to affiliate with a party.12 We detail

the size of this effect in Section III.

         Phase 3 of our experiment involved measuring the effects of the treatment on various outcomes of

interest, including partisan registration status, party affiliations, and opinions. Data come from two

sources. The first is a survey we conducted in June 2008 of all respondents for whom we initially

measured pre-treatment partisanship in our January 2008 survey (we label this second survey the post-

survey). Of the 1,540 latent partisans we initially surveyed, we were able to complete a second survey for

approximately 497, or about 32%.13 The survey took place soon after 2008 primary turnout and changes

in party registration were added to the CT voter file, minimizing our concern about effects originating in

targeted communications in response to turnout or changes in party registration. Measures included on the

survey are detailed in the Appendix and include all of the questions asked on the baseline survey as well

as planned vote intention for the November 2008 election, evaluations of important historical partisan

figures, measures of various forms of political behavior, and reports of campaign contact.

         The second data source is the Connecticut voter file, an updated version of which was provided to

us by state election officials on June 25, 2008. The voter file allows us to track all respondents in our

original sample and to obtain an accurate measure of their registration and turnout behavior. Because

Connecticut towns are not required to report turnout to the Secretary of State’s office by a particular

deadline, however, accurate turnout records may not be available for all towns in the voter file. (No such

concern applies to changes in registration.) We identified seven Connecticut towns where no voters were

12
   In Connecticut, voters who chose to register with a party could do so in person up to the day before the
election, or by January 31 if doing so by mail.
13
   Out of concern that non-random variation in survey response might generate bias, we tested whether
treatment status affected the probability a latent partisan completed a second interview and found no evidence
that it does. Those results appear in Table A2. In a model in which a simple treatment indictor is used to
predict response to the second survey, the coefficient on treatment is .005 with a p-value of 0.842. In a model
in which we also interact treatment status with all of the other control variables available from the voter file
and our pre-survey, an F-test for the joint significance of treatment status and those interactions has p-value of
.301.


                                                        11
shown to have voted in the 2008 primary. These seven towns include 24 of the 1540 latent partisans in

our sample (1.6%).14

        Finally, because of concerns that bad addresses in the voter file would have interfered with our

efforts to treat respondents, we also employed an outside vendor to verify the addresses listed in the voter

file for all individuals in our survey sampling frame (both treatment and control groups). This validation

took place in June 2008, and led us to identify 32 latent partisans who completed both surveys but had

questionable contact information in the voter file (or 6.7% of the 479 latent partisans who completed both

surveys).15



III. Results

In this section, our analysis proceeds in two phases. First, we examine the effect of our treatment on party

affiliation, voter turnout, and party identification. Having verified that our treatment did in fact induce

changes in partisanship, our second step is to test whether those induced changes in partisanship were

accompanied by corresponding changes in political opinions and attitudes.

        We examine separately two sets of attitudinal outcomes: Voting decisions and evaluations of

political figures and opinions on salient political issues. (Sample means and standard deviations for

dependent variable measures among latent partisans who completed both surveys appear in Table A3.) To

foreshadow our findings, the results show that our treatment induced individuals to alter their reports of

future and past voting behavior as well as their evaluations of the parties in a manner consistent with their

change in partisanship. However, we find little evidence that changes in partisanship result in changes in

opinions on salient political issues. (We consider below whether this last result reflects issues of timing

and issue selection.)

Treatment Effect on Party Registration and Party Identification

14
   Accurate town turnout records are missing for 1.3% of respondents who provided a measure of party
identification in the first survey, and 1.1% of all records in our original first-survey sampling frame.
15
   6.6% of all respondents who provide a first-interview measure of partisanship were similarly classified. In
the entire sampling frame, 16.6% of respondents were classified in this way (for individuals never surveyed,
we also eliminated individuals who are reported as having died).


                                                       12
Table 2 demonstrates the effect of the pre-election mailing on party affiliation rates as presented in the

June 2008 Connecticut voter file. Overall, treated individuals were more likely to affiliate than those in

the control condition. The table divides the results by initial political leaning. Recall that latent Democrats

are those who answered “no” to the initial question of whether they identified with either of the major

parties, but stated that they felt closer to the Democratic Party in response to the follow-up question.

Latent Republicans are defined in a parallel fashion while Independents are those who stated they did not

feel closer to either of the parties. The first three columns of Table 2 focus on the latent Democrats.

15.5% of treated individuals affiliated with the Democratic Party while an additional 0.7% affiliated with

the Republicans, for a net increase of 14.9% in Democratic registration. Of the non-treated latent

Democrats, 6.4% affiliated with the Democrats and only 0.2% with the Republicans, for a net increase of

6.2% in Democratic registration. The difference between these figures implies the treatment caused an

increase in net Democratic Party registration of 8.7 percentage points among latent Democrats.

        Not surprisingly, latent Republicans (shown in the final three columns of the table) break in the

opposite direction, with an increase of 1.6 percentage points in net Republican registration. One

explanation for the relatively greater effect on Democratic Party registration is that contrary to initial

expectations that Hilary Clinton would be the easy winner while the Republicans would be fighting into

the spring, the Democratic race for the nomination was much closer than the Republican race. Thus,

participation in the closely contested race for the Democratic nomination may have been more

compelling.16 This intuition is supported by two facts: First the Democratic primary saw turnout rates of

51 percent compared to 37 percent for the Republican contest. Second, among Independents, the

treatment letter increased net Democratic registration by 2.3 percentage points.17

                                           <Table 2 about here>

        In our experimental setting in which letters were randomly sent to some survey participants but

16
   See Kaplan 2008 and Layton 2008 on the greater effort put into the Connecticut race by the Democratic
candidates.
17
   Standardizing the relative figures for the latent Democrats and latent Republicans by this amount, on the
theory that the adjusted figure would be what one would expect in a primary with equally compelling drama
and candidates for both parties, yields comparable figures of 6.4 and 3.9 percentage points, respectively.


                                                      13
not others, the numbers presented in Table 2 are unbiased estimates of the effect of the letter on party

affiliation. In Table 3 we present regression adjusted estimates of the treatment effect of the mailings (the

regression follows equation (4)’). We include as covariates information gleaned from the pre-treatment

survey and voter file. In our experimental setting, the inclusion of covariates serves to increase the

precision of our coefficients. We find that the letter increases the propensity to affiliate with the

Democratic Party by 8.2 percentage points (p<.01) for latent Democrats (column 2), while it increases the

probability of registering with the Republican Party by 3.8 percentage points (p<.10) for latent

Republicans (column 5). The estimated treatment effect for Independents is also quite similar to that

shown in Table 2.

           In the remaining two columns of the table we present the effect of the treatment on party

affiliation for what will be our focal sample: latent party leaners who completed a follow-up survey. We

focus on this population in the remainder of the paper for three reasons: First, and most obviously, we

cannot measure the impact of the treatment on political opinions without the responses to the second

survey measuring post-treatment opinions. Secondly, we restrict attention to the party leaners because for

this population (as opposed to Independents) we can measure whether changes in opinions are in fact

increases or decreases in partisan-aligned views. Finally, we focus on party leaners, as opposed to strong

partisans, because there is room for partisan leaners to increase their (measured) level of partisanship.

           Column 7 of the table shows that our treatment increased registration with the party a respondent

leaned toward by 7.2 percentage points in the focal population. Our treatment also increased primary

turnout by about 3.3 percentage points.18 This increase in turnout, coming after such a simple

intervention, is large relative to the effects of most impersonal communications (By contrast, door-to-door

canvassing increases turnout by 5-10 percentage points. See Gerber and Green 2000. ).

                                               <Table 3 about here>

           Our simple mailing treatment resulted in increased turnout and party registration. As we show

next, it also increased partisan identity in a manner consistent with the changes in registration. This

18
     The p-value (one-sided) of the effect of treatment on turnout is .103.


                                                          14
portion of the analysis is based on the post-treatment survey. Table 4 presents two measures of changes in

partisan identification: (1) the proportion of those respondents who post-identify with their latent pre-

survey partisanship (coded 1 if a respondent now stated that “generally speaking” s/he thought of

her/himself as of that party and 0 otherwise) and (2) the standard party-ID measure scaled so that it is

directional relative to a respondent’s pre-survey latent partisanship (coded so that 7=the respondent now

strongly identified with his or her pre-survey latent partisanship and 1=the respondent now strongly

identified with the opposing party). We present these measures separately for latent Democrats and latent

Republicans as well as for a pooled sample of all latent partisans.

                                           <Table 4 about here>

        The results presented in Table 4 indicate that the treatment strengthened the latent partisanship of

our survey respondents. Among latent Democrats, we see a net increase in the treatment group relative to

the control group of 5.1 points in the percentage of respondents calling themselves Democrats. Treated

latent Democrats also increase their relative partisanship on the seven point ID scale by about .19. Among

latent Republicans, we see a net increase of 5.6 points in the percentage identifying as Republicans, and

the average relative movement on the seven point party ID scale is .16. Pooling all partisan leaners we see

a relative increase in dichotomous identification of about 5.2 percentage points and of .18 points on the

seven point identification scale.

        To give a greater sense of the effect of the treatment on reported partisanship throughout the

entire distribution of partisan leanings, we also present our data graphically. Figure 1 displays the post-

survey party-ID scale by treatment status and by pre-survey partisan leaning. Panel (A) focuses on latent

Democrats. The distribution of post-treatment partisan leanings for control group members appears on the

left and that for treated individuals appears on the right. The partisan identification scale goes from a low

of strong Democrat to a high of strong Republican. Note that among latent Democrats, the treatment

group has a distribution of partisan identity that is to the left (or to the more Democratic end) of the

control group. Among latent Republicans, shown in Panel (C), the pattern is reversed with the treatment

distribution to the right of that of the control. Interestingly, we see in Panel (B) that Independent


                                                      15
respondents also seem to have strengthened their commitment to their partisan view as a result of the

treatment. The treated distribution has more mass in the center of the scale, indicating that treated

Independents became more independent. This fact suggests that the treatment acted to cause respondents

to reaffirm and strengthen their initial partisanship for all groups, which in the case of “true”

Independents is an identity that is divorced from either party.19

                                           <Figure 1 about here>

        In Table 5, we present regression results that confirm these tabular and graphical presentations

(these regressions follow equation (3)’). In columns (1) through (3), the dependent variable is the

aforementioned post-survey identification with the pre-survey latent partisanship (coded 0 to 1), while in

(4) through (6) it is the directional measure of party affiliation with pre-survey latent partisanship (coded

1 to 7). In column (1), we find that the letter increased partisan identification by 8.1 percentage points

(p<.05 in a two-tailed test), an effect which is reduced only slightly (to 7.5, p<.10) with the inclusion of

measures from the voter file.

                                           <Table 5 about here>

        In column (3), we add measures of opinions from the pre-survey to the list of covariates. Because

our outcome of interest is the correspondence between the respondent’s latent partisanship and his or her

post-survey expressed partisanship, we recoded the survey responses (other than primary interest) to

reflect the degree of agreement between the respondent’s latent partisanship and those opinions. Higher

values indicate a respondent’s pre-survey opinions coincided more with his or her latent partisanship. So,

for example, the variable “Pre-survey 2000 vote aligned with pre-survey latent partisanship” is coded 1

for latent Democrats (Republicans) who reported voting for Gore (Bush) in 2000, and 0 for all others.

Similarly, responses to the Bush Approval measure are multiplied by -1 for respondents who were latent

Democrats, so that latent Democrats who evaluated Bush negatively were scored highly on this measure


19
  This graphical result is supported by statistical analysis. Focusing on these pre-survey Independents, in a
regression framework in which we code post-identity as an Independent=1, the coefficient on treatment is .12
(p-value=.05, one-tailed, N=210) in a model without controls. With all controls from the voter file the
coefficient is .09 (p-value=.09).


                                                      16
along with latent Republicans who evaluated Bush positively. In this specification, we find the effect of

receiving mail to be 7.3 percentage points (p<.10).

        Columns (4) through (6) mirror the specifications from (1) through (3), substituting as the

dependent variable the 7-point scale measured relative to pre-survey latent partisanship. In the OLS

specifications, the coefficients range from .225 to .233 with a maximum p-value less than .05.

Substantively, these estimates suggest that being sent the letter moved a respondent about a quarter of unit

between any two of the 7 point scale measures of partisanship.

        Overall, these results show that the treatment caused important changes in both political behavior

and identification. On the behavior side, we find evidence that latent partisans reacted to the letter by

formally registering with the party they felt closer to. Additionally, treated individuals were more likely

than controls to vote in the presidential primary. With respect to identity, we see that the letter induced

recipients to increasingly identify themselves as partisans and to more fully express their previously latent

partisanship.

Treatment Effect on Opinions

Table 6 presents estimates from a series of models examining the effect of the treatment letter on voting

decisions and evaluations of political figures (columns [1] through [9]) and salient policy opinions

(columns [10] through [12]). The results suggest that the manipulation of partisanship induces

corresponding partisan-tinged differences in reported voting decisions and evaluations of political figures,

but is not accompanied by similar movements in policy opinions. We examine these results in greater

detail here.

                                           <Table 6 about here>

        Table 6 contains 12 columns. The models explain 4 different outcome variables and there are

three regression models for each of the outcomes. The first regression in each of the triples (columns 1, 4,

7, and 10) is the intent to treat effect of treatment on the particular political outcome variable (equation

3’). The remaining columns report the results of two-stage least squares estimation of the effect of

partisanship on political attitudes and behavior (based on the system of equations 5’ and 6’).


                                                      17
         In columns (1) through (3), the dependent variable is a scale of the alignment between a

respondent’s latent partisanship and post-survey responses to four questions (Candidate choice in 2000,

planned vote in November 2008, and evaluation of the Democratic and Republican parties). Results by

individual items for this and other indexes appear in the appendix. The .293 in column 1 indicates that the

treatment letter increased the degree of alignment between partisanship and these opinions. To put the

magnitude of this increase in perspective, note that it is 1/6th of the observed standard deviation in the

index for all latent partisans (1.73). This impact is significant at standard levels with a p-value of .02.

(Given that we expect effects, if any, to manifest in the direction of a greater agreement between a

respondent’s latent partisanship and subsequent opinions, we report in the text here and at the bottom of

the table one-tailed/directional hypotheses tests.) Thus, receiving the pre-election letter led individuals to

increase the degree of alignment in their expressed opinions and planned and past voting decisions.

         This result is displayed graphically in Figure 2. The figure plots the cumulative distribution of the

alignment scale for the pooled sample of latent partisans by treatment status. The fact that those in the

treatment group have greater alignment between their latent partisanship and their voting and evaluations

alignment scale score is apparent from the fact that the cumulative distribution of responses for the treated

respondents (the dotted line) is consistently below the untreated respondents (the solid line) by about 5 to

7% for the entire distribution. The entire distribution of alignment scale scores is shifted to the right for

those sent the letter.

                                           <Figure 2 about here>

         Assuming that the effect of the treatment letter on the alignment scale is mediated through the

increased partisanship we documented in Table 5, we measure the impact of partisanship on party

alignment in opinions in the second and third columns of Table 6. In column 2 we use the dichotomous

measure of partisanship and in column 3 we rely on the seven point variable to scale our average

treatment-on-the-treated effects. The 3.9 in column 2 (p=.06) implies that identifying with one’s latent

party increases a respondent’s scale score by about 4 points on the 10 point scale, more than twice the

observed standard deviation in the scale score. The 1.3 in column (3) (p=.02) means that a 2-point move


                                                      18
in the party ID scale (from feeling closer to one’s latent party to feeling strongly that one is of that party)

increases a respondent’s index score by about 2.7, or about 70% of the effect estimated in the column (2)

specification.

        In columns (4) through (9) we test the robustness of these results to the inclusion of additional

items in our voting and party alignment scale. In columns (4) through (6) we add measures of the degree

of agreement between a respondent’s latent partisanship and evaluations of Congress and President Bush,

while in columns (7) through (9) we also add the degree of alignment in evaluations of two iconic partisan

figures: Former presidents Carter (a Democrat) and Reagan (a Republican).20 In general, the results with

these changes can be characterized as follows: The size of the estimated effect increases (which is not

surprising given that the range of the scales being used also increases), but the standard errors increase by

slightly larger proportions than the coefficients. P-values in columns (4) through (6) range from .05 to

.08, while in (7) through (9) they range from .06 to .12.

        Overall, these results provide the first evidence that exogenously induced changes in partisanship

are accompanied by movements in political opinions. This pattern is consistent with the claim that

partisanship affects voting decisions and perceptions of political figures.

        The effects of our mailing treatment do not appear to extend to personal policy opinions on

important issues of the day. In columns (10) through (12) of Table 6 we presents results where the

dependent variable is an index of the alignment between a respondent’s expressed personal policy

opinions and his or her latent pre-survey partisanship. (The four policy items deal with policy in Iraq,

taxing the rich, and evaluations of retrospective economic performance and unemployment rates.) These

results show little evidence that the letter induced personal opinion polarization. The estimated

20
  One concern we had about the evaluation of Bush and Congress measures was that Bush was unpopular for
reasons, apart from his partisanship. (Even many Republicans in Connecticut reported strong displeasure with
his performance in our pre-survey.) Additionally, evaluations of Congress were already relatively polarized in
our pre-survey, raising concerns about ceiling effects. We were also concerned that evaluations of Carter and
Reagan might be relatively uninformative because those figures do not remain as salient partisans in many
individuals’ memories (indeed, the oldest person in our sample was only 21 in 1980 when Carter left office).
Evidence consistent with this fear is that in our data, both former presidents appear to be viewed relatively
positively by the vast majority of respondents (less than 14% of all respondents viewed Carter or Reagan
negatively).


                                                      19
coefficients are small in size, negative, and have large standard errors (the smallest p-value, with a one-

tailed test, despite being negative, is only .38). One concern we have in interpreting this result is that the

component measures of this scale are of salient issues where respondents likely had developed relatively

strong opinions even prior to our intervention. The claim that individuals adjust their personal policy

preferences in response to their party identification often describes a long-run process of adjustment

(perhaps driven by elite queuing or selective exposure to different forms of media or campaign

communications) or the role of partisanship in guiding opinion formation on newly-emergent issues. We

measure only relatively short-term responses on persistent issues, and so we remain agnostic about

whether a similar pattern would emerge with alternative issues or over longer periods of time.

        What we have demonstrated is that the receipt of the letter informing the recipients about the need

to be affiliated with a party to vote in that party’s primary increased partisan affiliation, voter turnout,

partisan identity, and, ultimately, partisan perceptions of political figures. Thus we provide the first

evidence that we are aware of that researchers can manipulate partisanship in the field. That the

manipulation arose from a treatment that induced most proximately a behavior change (deciding on or

declaring a party affiliation) provides support for the importance of a need for cognitive consistency

(aligning subsequent attitudes with prior decisions and behaviors). That we find that increased

partisanship is accompanied by increased partisan views provides support for the hypothesis that

partisanship is an active mediator of political views. However, because our intervention affected a variety

of behaviors and attitudes, our experiment can not definitively sort out the mechanism that led from letter

receipt to increased partisan views. Was it the increased partisan allegiance, voting in a partisan primary,

or the new party affiliation that increased partisan attitudes? In the next section we discuss the feasibility

of each of these various mechanisms.



IV. Discussion of Mechanisms

        Our random intervention caused both a shift in partisan allegiance and changes in opinions. We

can be certain, subject to sampling error, that the treatment caused these two types of effects. However,


                                                       20
the conclusion that the opinion changes are due to changes in partisanship rests on an exclusion restriction

that we cannot test directly. In particular, two alternative interpretations must be considered. First, we

must consider whether the treatment (the information letter) itself caused the change in outcome

measures. Second, we must consider whether a treatment induced change, other than increased

partisanship, led to the increase in partisan views.

        We dismiss the former account, that the informational letter directly caused changes in partisan

identities and opinions, as implausible. There is no reason to believe that obtaining information about the

upcoming election and Connecticut election laws could alter subjects’ voting intentions or recollections of

their views about the merits of each party in a way that would generate the observed greater polarization

between competing latent partisans.21

        The latter account suggests that other treatment induced changes, in particular increased political

affiliation (party registration) or voting, generated the observed changed in opinions. We discuss these

alternative explanations in turn.

        Our treatment increased the rate of party registration. Changes in party registration may induce

partisan views by altering information flows. The parties may send their members information

specifically designed to strengthen their partisan views in regards to vote choice and opinions of

prominent partisans. While this is a theoretical possibility, it is unlikely to be applicable to our

experiment. The presidential primary election campaigns in Connecticut were unlikely to have known

about or reacted to changes in registration, particularly those induced by our treatment in the very last

days before the election. (In particular, Connecticut’s highly decentralized town based system of election

administration ensured that any information trickling in to town election offices would be impractical to

incorporate into mass communications efforts.) Alternatively, perhaps those who registered with a party

or voted subsequently received a different flow of general election mailings? In this case, this seems

unlikely because the Connecticut voter file was updated to include registration and turnout in the primary

21
  For the same reason, we believe that an account which posits that the letter caused changes in opinions that
preceded the changes in partisan identity is not feasible. We are unaware of any means by which this letter
could induce greater partisan-colored opinions without first inducing a change in partisan identities.


                                                       21
election only near the end of April, and we surveyed the subjects in late June. We are aware of no active

campaign efforts during that brief window, a fact that is unsurprising given the season (late spring) and

Connecticut’s solid Democratic status for the upcoming general election.

        Additionally, we sought to confirm that our treatment group members were not contaminated by

partisan information transmission by asking them about this topic in our post treatment survey. We find

no evidence that those sent letters were more likely to seek out information or receive information from

campaigns, as we demonstrate in Table 7.

                                           <Table 7 about here>

We examine three outcomes: campaign interest, political behavior, and reported campaign contact. We

measure interest using a single question. Our index of political behavior is comprised of three items:

seeking out political information, trying to persuade others, and donating to a campaign. Finally, our

index of campaign treatment is comprised of five items measuring whether a respondent viewed a

political advertisement, received a request for money, or was contacted by a campaign via telephone,

mail, or face-to-face campaigning. We find that the mailing slightly depressed interest in the general

election22 (column 1), and had no statistically discernable effect on political participation (column 2) or

reported receipt of campaign contact (columns 3). Thus we rule out information as the source of our

increased partisan views based both on our experimental design and on the empirical evidence concerning

political behavior and campaign treatment.

        A second way in which party registration might affect opinions is if the act of registering with a

party leads the subject to change his or her opinions about the parties. As cognitive dissonance theory

suggests, if a subject perceives the act of registering as affirming a partisan identity (rather than a mere

technical act necessary to participate in an upcoming election), the act of formally affiliating would create

a wish to reconcile actions (affiliating with the party) and views (attitudes toward the party and its

22
   We have two hypotheses of how the mailing may have depressed interest in the general election campaign.
First, political affiliation or partisan views may render the question of how to vote in the general election
decided and thus decrease any need or interest to think further about the campaign. Second, the decrease in
interest may be coming from those who supported a losing primary candidate. Unfortunately, we did not
collect the data on primary vote choice to evaluate this second explanation.


                                                      22
positions). Classic accounts of the formation of partisan identity emphasize both the external influences

that lead to partisan orientation, such as parental socialization and key political experiences during

formative years, and the persistent effects of early political acts such as initial voting decisions. If the act

of registering with a party has a direct psychological effect on a subject’s partisan identity and subsequent

evaluations of political objects, this is consistent with the standard view of how partisan identity drives

attitudes. Interestingly, the active consideration and rejection of party registration appears to have

strengthened the independent views of our Independent non-latent partisans (Independents who refused to

express feeling closer to either party).23 This suggests that reflecting upon one’s partisanship and actively

refusing to register with a party (a non-action) can also strengthen partisan allegiances.

                                            <Table 8 about here>

        The second additional mechanism we consider relates to the effect of casting a vote. Our

treatment increased turnout in the presidential primary. Both Beasley and Joslyn (2001) and Mullainathan

and Washington (2009) provide evidence that the act of voting for a candidate causes an increase in

support for that candidate. However, these studies do not provide evidence on whether voting for a

candidate increases partisan views of partisans who were not standing for office in that particular election.

While it would be an interesting new channel for reinforcing partisan identity, it seems unlikely in the

present experiment that voting increased the partisan views we observe. Unlike a general election, the

primary election did not force voters to select a particular partisan view (or any opinion we subsequently

measured). On the Democratic side, for example, the leading candidates, Barack Obama and Hillary

Clinton, were quite similar in their political ideology. Thus voting in the primary was not a commitment

to any particular partisan view. In contrast, registration—for the Democratic or the Republican side—

forced a commitment to the partisan choice. Thus, if an act of commitment is driving our findings, it is


23
  Columns (1) and (2) of Table 8 present results from a pair of models in which we examine the probability
that non-leaning Independents in the pre-treatment survey identified as non-leaning Independents in the post-
survey as a function of whether they received our treatment letter. As these results show, Independent non-
leaners in the treatment group are 11.6 (column 1, one-sided p-value=.05) to 9.4 (column 2, p-value =.09)
percentage points more likely to identify as non-leaning Independents, despite the fact that they could not
express that independence through a formal change in registration.


                                                       23
likely the act of affiliating as discussed above. (We note also that the above finding concerning

Independent non-leaners, that they become more independent in response to the treatment, suggests

voting is not the only mechanism by which partisan divergence is generated, as these Independents could

only express their independence in action by not voting in either of the major parties’ primaries.)



V. Conclusion

        This paper presents the first evidence we are aware of that researchers can induce changes in

partisanship in the field. We drafted a letter that informs unaffiliated but registered voters that their

eligibility to participate in a party’s presidential primary hinges on their willingness to register with that

party. This letter was sent to a randomly selected subset of registered Connecticut voters who were

unaffiliated with either party but who also describe themselves as Independents who felt “closer” to either

the Democratic or Republican parties. Receiving this letter causes a substantial increase in partisan

registration as well as increasing self-reported partisan identification in the direction of this latent

partisanship.

        This mechanism for inducing changes in partisanship has important consequences for

understanding the causal role of partisanship in explaining behaviors and opinions. In particular, we

provide the first evidence that induced changes in partisanship are accompanied by partisan-tinged

divergence in planned and reported voting behavior as well as in evaluations of partisan figures. This

effect does not appear to carry over into personal policy opinions, although this may be because we

survey on already salient policy issues or because the period between our treatment and post-survey

measure of policy opinions is four months, which may be insufficient for longer-term effects of

partisanship on information acquisition and elite cue-taking to manifest. Nor does partisanship appear to

be immediately related to increased personal political involvement, a finding that again may suggest the

persistent effects of partisanship may be confined to turnout or may be similarly delayed in developing

(e.g., if caused by subsequent targeted campaigning).

        Turning to other questions, we argue that the basic design we propose can be used to study a


                                                       24
variety of important questions about partisanship. For example, do partisans seek out different sorts of

political information (selective exposure), evaluate the information transmitted by political elites

differently (cue-taking and source attribution), or receive differential campaign treatments (strategic

targeting of campaigns)? We are currently exploring the last question, but future experiments with larger

sample sizes and different and more widely-spaced survey instruments could provide panel studies of

media consumption and over-time opinion changes associated with changes in partisanship. Indeed, it

may be the case that the effects we find understate the long-term changes associated with changes in

formal affiliation because of other factors that reinforce this initial change in registration and

identification.

        More generally, our research is a single and relatively small study of induced changes in

partisanship in Connecticut during a particularly compelling presidential primary season. While our

experimental design provides us with no reason to believe our findings are spurious or overly large, a

larger sample and treatments on different populations would provide insights into the robustness of this

finding for different populations and across different electoral contexts. Indeed, the latent partisans we are

able to convert to active partisans may be more or less amenable to attitude change then other groups with

different levels of attachments to one party or another.24

        Among the questions we are interested in examining in future work is whether similar changes in

partisan identity can be created in the absence of party registration rules. We see several promising

avenues in this regard, one of which would be to identify a similar cohort of latent partisans in states with

open or semi-open primaries and to randomly induce some to participate in the party primary most closely

associated with their latent partisanship. If participation led to the quick development of persistent

24
   For example, it might be the case that Independents who refused to feel closer to either party but who had
issue beliefs that made them seem closer to one party would experience more attitude change if they were
induced to register with that party because their views were initially less structured by any partisan leanings,
even though they might be less likely to affiliate in the first place. It might also be the case that those who have
a strong partisan identity but who were not registered with that party might be less receptive to our treatment
and therefore demonstrate less movement in their opinions. (Given that strong partisanship would ordinarily
also be associated with formal registration.) Support for this conjecture is found by including in our analysis
data for all unaffiliated partisans, latent and otherwise. When we do so, the effects on opinions reported here
are reduced.


                                                        25
changes in partisanship and opinions, again prior to targeted campaign communication, this would

provide additional information about the mechanism by which partisanship can emerge. In particular, it

would demonstrate the effects do not originate solely because of the relatively formal decision to legally

affiliate with one party rather than another.

        Returning to the larger questions that motivate our inquiry, we believe this research provides

compelling evidence for interpreting the consistent relationship in survey data between partisanship and

voting decisions and evaluations of partisan figures as causal. In an experimental setting outside of the

laboratory, we have demonstrated an ability to randomly strengthen partisan affiliations and shown that

those induced changes in partisanship are accompanied by corresponding changes in political opinions

and planned behaviors. Our results imply that partisanship is an active force causing changes in important

political outcomes even prior to the imposition of partisan-targeting by political campaigns and other

actors. Our findings thus suggest that partisanship deserves a place as an independent source of political

decisions and opinions and our work implies more broadly that group allegiance influences like-minded

attitudes.




                                                     26
                                               References

Allsop, Dee, and Herbert Weisberg. 1988. "Measuring Change in Party Identification in an Election
        Campaign." American Journal of Political Science 32: 996-1017.

Alwin, Duane F., and Jon A. Krosnick. 1991. “Aging, Cohorts, and the Stability of Sociopolitical
       Orientations Over the Life Span.” American Journal of Sociology 97: 169-95.

Bartels, Larry. 2000. “Partisanship and Voting Behavior, 1952-1996,” American Journal of Political
         Science 44: 35-50.

Bartels, Larry. 2002. “Beyond the Running Tally: Partisan Bias in Political Perceptions,” Political
         Behavior 24: 117-150.

Beasley, Ryan K., and Mark R. Joslyn. 2001. “Cognitive Dissonance and Post-decision Attitude Change
       in Six Presidential Elections.” Political Psychology 22: 521-40.

Bem, Daryl J. 1967. “Self-Perception: An Alternative Interpretation of Cognitive Dissonance
      Phenomena.” Psychological Review 74: 183-200.

Brader, Ted, and Joshua A. Tucker. 2001. “The Emergence of Mass Partisanship in Russia, 1993-1996,”
        American Journal of Political Science, Vol. 45, No. 1. (Jan., 2001), pp. 69-83.

Brewer, Marilyn B. 1979. “Ingroup Bias in the Minimal Intergroup Situation: A Cognitive Motivational
       Analysis.” Psychological Bulletin 86: 307-24.

Brody, Richard, and Lawrence Rothenberg. 1988. "The Instability of Partisanship: An Analysis of the
       1980 Presidential Election." British Journal of Political Science 18: 445-66.

Brown, Rupert J., Henri Tajfel, and John C. Turner. 1980. “Minimal Group Situations and Inter-group
       Discrimination: Comments on the Paper by Aschenbrenner and Schaefer.” European Journal of
       Social Psychology 10: 399-414.

Burden, Barry C., and Steven Greene. 2000. “Party Attachments and State Election Laws.” Political
       Research Quarterly 53: 63-76.

Campbell, Angus, Philip Converse, Warren Miller, and Donald Stokes. 1960. The American Voter. New
      York: John Wiley and Sons.

Carsey, Thomas M., and Geoffrey C. Layman. 2006. “Changing Sides or Changing Minds? Party
        Identification and Policy Preferences in the American Electorate.” American Journal of Political
        Science 50: 464-77.

Converse, Philip. 1976. The Dynamics of Party Support: Cohort-Analyzing Party Identification. Beverly
       Hills, CA: Sage.

Dancygier, Rafaela, and Elizabeth N. Saunders. 2006. “A New Electorate? Comparing Preferences and
       Partisanship between Immigrants and Natives,” American Journal of Political Science 50: 962–
       981.




                                                    27
Erikson, Robert S. 2004. “Economic Voting: Micro and Macro Perspectives,” Presented at the Annual
        Meeting of the Political Methodology Society, Stanford University.

Fiorina, Morris P. 1981. Retrospective Voting in American National Elections. New Haven, CT: Yale
         University Press.

Fiorina, Morris P. 2002. “Parties and Partisanship: A 40-Year Retrospective.” Political Behavior 24: 93-
         115.

Franklin, Charles H., and John E. Jackson. 1983. "The Dynamics of Party Identification." American
        Political Science Review 77: 957-73.

Gerber, Alan S., and Donald P. Green. 2000. “The Effects of Canvassing, Telephone Calls, and Direct
        Mail on Voter Turnout: A Field Experiment.” American Political Science Review 94:653-63.

Goren, Paul. 2005. “Party Identification and Core Political Values.” American Journal of Political
       Science 49: 881-96.

Green, Donald, Bradley Palmquist and Eric Schickler. 2002. Partisan Hearts and Minds: Political Parties
       and the Social Identities of Voters. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Hewstone, Miles, Frank Fincham, and Jos Jaspars. 1981. “Social Categorization and Similarity in
      Intergroup Behavior: A Replication with Penalties.” European Journal of Social Psychology 11:
      101-7.

Horwitz, Murray, and Jacob M Rabbie. 1982. “Individuality and Membership in the Intergroup System.”
       In Social Identity and Intergroup Relations, ed. Henri Tajfel. Cambridge: Cambridge University
       Press, 241-74.

Jennings, M. Kent, and Richard G. Niemi. 1974. The Political Character of Adolescence: The Influence
       of Families and Schools. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Kaplan, Thomas, “As Candidates Scramble for Delegates, Connecticut Primary Gains Spotlight,” New
        York Times, <http://www.nytimes.com/2008/02/04/nyregion/04connecticut.html> September 30,
        2008.

Kessel, John. 1968. The Goldwater Coalition. Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill.

Lau, Richard R., and David P. Redlawsk. 2001. “Advantages and Disadvantages of Cognitive Heuristics
        in Political Decision Making,” American Journal of Political Science, 45: 951-971.

Layton, Lindsay. 2008. “CT: Small Prize, But Big-Name Visits.” February 4. WahsingtonPost.com, The
        Trail: A Daily Diary of Campaign 2008, http://blog.washingtonpost.com/the-
        trail/2008/02/04/ct_small_prize_but_big_name_vi.html (September 30, 2008).

Lupia, Arthur. 1992. “Busy Voters, Agenda Control, and the Power of Information,” The American
        Political Science Review 86: 390-403.

MacKuen, Michael, Robert Erikson, and James Stimson. 1989. "Macropartisanship." American Political
      Science Review 83: 1125-42.




                                                   28
Miller, Warren E. 1991. “Party Identification, Realignment, and Party Voting: Back to Basics.” American
        Political Science Review 85: 557-68.

Miller, Warren E., and J. Merrill Shanks. 1996. The New American Voter. Cambridge: Harvard University
        Press.

Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Ebonya Washington. 2009. “Sticking with Your Vote: Cognitive Dissonance
       and Political Attitudes.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. Forthcoming.

Mummendey, Amelie, Bernd Simon, Carsten Dietze, Melanie Grünert, Gabi Haeger, Sabine Kessler,
     Stephan Lettgen, and Stefanie Schäferhoff. 1992. “Categorization is Not Enough: Intergroup
     Discrimination in Negative Outcome Allocations.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology
     28: 125-44.

Niemi, Richard G., and M. Kent Jennings. 1991. “Issues and Inheritance in the Formation of Party
       Identification.” American Journal of Political Science 35: 970-988.

Norrander, Barbara, and Clyde Wilcox. 1993. “Rallying around the Flag and Partisan Change: The Case
       of the Persian Gulf War.” Political Research Quarterly 46: 759-70.

Otten, Sabine, Amelie Mummendey, and Mathias Blanz. 1996. “Intergroup Discrimination in Positive
        and Negative Outcome Allocations: Impact of Stimulus Valence, Relative Group Status and
        Relative Group Size.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 22: 568-81.

Rabbie, Jacob M., and Murray Horwitz. 1969. “Arousal of Ingroup-outgroup Bias by a Chance Win or
        Loss.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 13: 269-77.

Rahn, Wendy M. 1993. “The Role of Partisan Stereotypes in Information Processing about Political
       Candidates,” American Journal of Political Science, 37: 472-496.

Redlawsk, David P. 2002. “Hot Cognition or Cool Consideration? Testing the Effects of Motivated
       Reasoning on Political Decision Making,” The Journal of Politics, 64: 1021-1044.

Sherif, Muzafer, O. J. Harvey, B. Jack White, William R. Hood, and Carolyn W. Sherif. 1961. Intergroup
        Conflict and Cooperation: The Robber’s Cave Experiment. Norman, OK: University of
        Oklahoma Press.

Sherif, Muzafer, and Carolyn W. Sherif. 1953. Groups in Harmony and Tension: An Integration of
        Studies on Intergroup Relations. New York: Octagon.

Sherif, Muzafer, B. Jack White, and O. J. Harvey. 1955. “Status in Experimentally Produced Groups.”
        American Journal of Sociology 60: 370-9.

Tajfel, Henri. 1970. “Experiments in Intergroup Discrimination.” Scientific American 223: 96-102.

Tajfel, Henri. 1982. “Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations.” Annual Review of Psychology 33: 1-30.

Tajfel, Henri, Claude Flament, M. G. Billig, and R. P. Bundy. 1971. “Social Categorization and
         Intergroup Behaviour.” European Journal of Social Pscyhology 1: 149-78.

Weisberg, Herbert F., and Charles E. Smith, Jr. 1991. "The Influence of the Economy on Party
       Identification in the Reagan Years." Journal of Politics 53: 1077-92.


                                                   29
Whitefield, Stephen, and Geoffrey Evans. 1999. “Class, markets and partisanship in post-Soviet Russia:
       1993-96,” Electoral Studies 18: 155-178.

Wlezien, Christopher, Mark Franklin, and Daniel Twiggs. 1997. “Economic Perceptions and Vote
       Choice: Disentangling the Endogeneity,” Political Behavior 19: 7-17.

Zaller, John R. 1992. The Nature and Origins of Mass Opinion, New York: Cambridge University Press.




                                                  30
                         Appendix 1: Experiment Protocol and variable coding

Phase 1: Identification of Latent Partisans and Measurement of Baseline Opinions

Latent partisans were indentified from a random survey of registered but unaffiliated voters listed in the
Connecticut voter file provided to us by the Secretary of State’s office in January 2008.

We processed the voter file to identify households (common telephone numbers or addresses) with valid
CT telephone numbers and containing two or fewer registered voters, at least one of whom was
unaffiliated. In households with two unaffiliated voters, we randomly selected which voter to interview.
To ensure we could reach individuals for surveying and for our subsequent treatment, we further
restricted the sample to eliminate records for registered voters with out of state mailing addresses, invalid
mailing addresses, or discrepancies among the multiple addresses listed in the voter file. Finally, to
maximize the returns to our survey efforts by avoiding calling individuals who had likely moved or had
little likelihood of responding to any treatment, we restricted the sample to younger voters (18-49,
inclusive) and to those that met a minimal engagement standard (Having voted in any election in 2006,
2004, or 2002 or being less than 21 or having registered after 2000). This list of 118,076 names and
numbers was then randomly ordered for survey sampling reasons.

We were able to gather data for 3,787 complete surveys, of which we obtained a valid measure of
partisanship for 3,539. Question wording and statistics on the distribution of measured partisan
identification appear in the text.

Additional questions included on this survey included the following:

Primary Interest: There will be a presidential primary election in Connecticut this February. This election
will help determine the Democratic and Republican party presidential candidates. How interested are you
in this election? Would you say that you are very much interested, somewhat interested, or not much
interested in this election? (2=Very, 1=Somewhat, 0=Not Much. All other responses coded missing)

2000 Turnout: Putting aside how you currently feel about President George Bush and former vice
president Al Gore, do you remember whether or not you voted in the 2000 presidential election between
Republican George Bush, Democrat Al Gore, and Green candidate Ralph Nader? (1=Yes, 0=No/Don’t
Know/Refused/Etc.)

2000 Vote Choice (Asked only if 2000 Turnout=1): Which one did you vote for? Vote for Bush/Gore:
(1=Yes, 0=Other candidate/Didn’t vote/Don’t Know/Refused/Etc.)

Economy Retrospective Judgment: Thinking about the economy in the country as a whole, would you say
that OVER THE PAST YEAR the nation’s economy has gotten better, stayed about the same, or gotten
worse? If Better/Worse: Much [Better/Worse] or somewhat [Better/Worse]? (2=Much Better, 1=Better,
Somewhat or Don’t Know response to second question, 0=Same/Don’t Know, -1=Worse, Somewhat or
Don’t Know response to second question, -2=Much Worse).

Unemployment Performance: George Bush was elected president in November 2000 and took office in
January 2001. He will soon be leaving office next year after eight years as president. Would you say that
compared to 2000, the level of unemployment in the country has gotten better, stayed about the same, or
gotten worse? If Better/Worse: Much [Better/Worse] or somewhat [Better/Worse]? (2=Much Better,
1=Better, Somewhat or Don’t Know response to second question, 0=Same/Don’t Know, -1=Worse,
Somewhat or Don’t Know response to second question, -2=Much Worse).



                                                     31
Bush/Congress Approval: Do you approve or disapprove of the way George Bush is handling his job as
president? The Democratic party currently controls the Congress. Do you approve or disapprove of the
performance of Congress? If Approve/Disapprove: Strongly or not strongly? (2=Strongly Approve,
1=Approve, not strongly, 0=Don’t Know, -1=Disapprove, not strongly, -2=Strongly Disapprove).

Phase 2: Mail Information about Voting Rules

Balance statistics for treatment and control groups, by pre-survey status and partisanship (if surveyed)
appear in Table A1.

Phase 3: Measure Post Primary Opinions and Behaviors

The Voting and Party Alignment Scale is coded as the sum of these four measures:

1. Post-survey 2000 vote aligned with pre-survey latent partisanship (1 if respondent reports voting for
   Bush in 2000 and felt closer to Republicans in pre-survey or if respondent reports voting for Gore in
   2000 and felt closer to Democrats in pre-survey, 0 otherwise). 2000 Vote is measured and coded in
   the same was as on the pre-survey.

2. Post-survey Nov. 2008 vote aligned with pre-survey latent partisanship (1 if respondent reports will
   vote for Republican in 2008 and felt closer to Republicans in pre-survey or if respondent reports will
   vote for Democrat in 2008 and felt closer to Democrats in pre-survey, 0 otherwise). Question: Who
   do you think you will likely vote for in the election for President this coming November, the
   Democratic candidate, the Republican candidate, or the candidate of some other party? If Don’t
   Know, this probe is used: Needless to say, the election for president of the United States is a long
   time away in November, but I’d like to ask you for your best guess about who you will vote for in the
   election for president in November.

3. Post-survey evaluation of Reps. aligned with pre-survey latent partisanship (If latent Republican,
   2=very positive, 1=somewhat positive, 0=DK/Neutral, -1=somewhat negative, -2=very negative,
   scale reversed if latent Democrat.). Question wording was from battery that asked respondents to
   evaluate several actors using: Now I’m going to read you the names of several public figures and
   organizations, and I’d like you to rate your feelings toward each one as either very positive,
   somewhat positive, neutral, somewhat negative, or very negative. If you don’t know the name, please
   just say so. Actor in this case was Republican Party.

4. Post-survey evaluation of Dems. aligned with pre-survey latent partisanship (If latent Democrat,
   2=very positive, 1=somewhat positive, 0=DK/Neutral, -1=somewhat negative, -2=very negative,
   scale reversed if latent Republican.). Question wording same as above. Actor in this case was
   Democratic Party.

Post-survey evaluation of Bush aligned with pre-survey latent partisanship & Post-survey evaluation of
Congress aligned with pre-survey latent partisanship. Question word same as in pre-survey, responses
flipped for individuals aligned with opposing party (e.g., Democrats evaluating Bush, Republicans
evaluating Congress).

Post-survey evaluation of Reagan aligned with pre-survey latent partisanship (Coded same as for
Republican Party alignment). Actor in this case was Former President Ronald Reagan.

Post-survey evaluation of Carter aligned with pre-survey latent partisanship (Coded same as for
Democratic Party). Actor in this case was Former President Jimmy Carter.


                                                    32
The Policy evaluations alignment scale is coded as the sum of these four measures:

    1. Post-survey Iraq Policy aligned with pre-survey latent partisanship (If latent Republican, 2=
       strongly agree, 1=partially agree, 0=DK/feel neutral, -1=partially disagree, -2=strongly disagree,
       scale reversed if latent Democrat). I’m going to read you a number of positions that a candidate
       might take. For each one, please tell me whether you strongly agree with this position, partially
       agree, feel neutral, partially disagree, or strongly disagree. Favors keeping American troops in
       Iraq until the mission there is complete, no matter how long this takes

    2. Post-survey Taxing Rich aligned with pre-survey latent partisanship (If latent Democrat, 2=
       strongly agree, 1=partially agree, 0=DK/feel neutral, -1=partially disagree, -2=strongly disagree,
       scale reversed if latent Republican). I’m going to read you a number of positions that a candidate
       might take. For each one, please tell me whether you strongly agree with this position, partially
       agree, feel neutral, partially disagree, or strongly disagree. Favors increasing taxes for upper-
       income taxpayers to fund health care for the uninsured.

    3. Post-survey Retrospective Economy aligned with pre-survey latent partisanship. Same question
       wording as in pre-survey. Responses reversed coded for latent Democrats.

    4. Post-survey Unemployment Performance aligned with pre-survey latent partisanship. Same
       question wording as in pre-survey. Responses reverse coded for latent Democrats.

General Election Interest (2=Very, 1=Somewhat, 0=Not Much): There will be a presidential election in
November. How interested are you in this election? Would you say that you are very much interested,
somewhat interested, or not much interested in this election?

Participation, Individual Behavior Index is coded as the sum of these three measures:

       Here is a list of things some people do during election year. Which if any did you do in the last
       six months? (1 point for each yes, 0 for No/DK.)
    1. Talked to other people to persuade them to vote for a particular candidate?
    2. Looked for information about one or more of the candidates running for the nomination, for
       example by reading the newspaper, watching TV, or searching on the Internet.
    3. In the last 6 months, did you contribute MONEY to an individual candidate, party group, a
       political action committee, or any other organization that supported a candidate or a ballot
       proposition? (1=Yes, 0=No/DK)

Participation, Campaign Treatment Index is coded as the sum of these five measures:

    We have a series of questions about any contact you may have had since January 1 on behalf of any
    candidate. Please tell us whether you have been contacted in this way during the last 6 months. Have
    you… (1 point for each yes, 0 for No/DK.)
    1. Received a letter or piece of mail from a campaign?
    2. Received a phone call from a campaign?
    3. Had a face-to-face conversation or contact with someone from a campaign?
    4. Received a request to donate money to a campaign?
    5. Heard or saw a radio or television ad from a campaign?

Additionally, to supplement the voter file measure of gender (which was missing for many individuals),
the interviewer coded gender.



                                                    33
       Figure 1: Post−Survey Party Identification
By Pre−Survey Party Identification and Whether Sent Mail
                                    (A) Among Pre−Survey Latent Democrats
                                  Not Sent Mail                                                             Sent Mail
             .6
Proportion
             .4
             .2
             0




                   1       2        3        4        5        6       7                1        2        3        4        5        6       7

                                        (B) Among Pre−Survey Independents
                                  Not Sent Mail                                                             Sent Mail
             .6
Proportion
             .4
             .2
             0




                   1       2        3        4        5        6       7                1        2        3        4        5        6       7

                                   (C) Among Pre−Survey Latent Republicans
                                  Not Sent Mail                                                             Sent Mail
             .6
Proportion
             .4
             .2
             0




                   1       2        3        4        5        6       7                1        2        3        4        5        6       7
                  Post−survey Party ID (1=SD, 2=WD, 3=CD, 4=I, 5=CR, 6=WR, 7=SR)
  Note: Sample is respondents with measure of partisanship in both surveys, valid addresses, and who had not moved before treatment was applied.
                  Figure 2: Cumulative Distribution of Voting and Evaluations Alignment Scale
                          Among Pre−Survey Latent Partisans by Whether Sent Mail
          1
Cumulative Distribution
.2   .4   0  .6      .8




                          −4                −3                 −2     −1     0       1      2      3       4                                                                      5   6
                                                                Voting and evaluations post−alignment scale

                                                                                         Not Sent Mail                                                      Sent Mail
                          Note: Sample is all respondents with valid measure of Party ID in both surveys who had valid addresses and had not moved before treatment was applied
                          Larger scores on underlying scale indicate post−survey voting and evaluations are more aligned with pre−survey latent partisanship.
                                                                          Table 2: Effect of Being Sent Mail on Registration Status

                                                                        Latent Democrats                                 Independents                                 Latent Republicans
                                                                  Sent Mail?          Difference (Sent -          Sent Mail?          Difference (Sent -         Sent Mail?           Difference (Sent -
                                                              Yes            No         Not Sent Mail)       Yes             No        Not Sent Mail)        Yes            No         Not Sent Mail)
% Registered with Democratic Party                          15.52%         6.43%            9.09%           5.77%          2.45%            3.33%          3.88%          1.51%             2.37%
% Registered with Republican Party                          0.67%          0.22%            0.44%           1.57%          0.54%            1.03%          6.98%          3.02%             3.96%
Increase in Net % Registered with Democratic Party          14.86%         6.21%            8.65%           4.20%          1.90%            2.30%          -3.10%         -1.51%            -1.59%
N                                                             451            451             902              381            368             749             258            265               523
Sample is respondents interviewed in pre-survey who had valid addresses and had not moved before treatment was applied.
                                          Table 3: OLS Analysis of Effect of Treatment on Probability Registered With Party and Primary Turnout

                                                            (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)
                                                                                                                                                     Focal Sample (Pooled Latent
                                                                                                                                                    Partisans Who Completed Both
                                                           Latent Democrats                  Independents                  Latent Republicans                   Surveys)
                                                    Registered with Registered with Registered with Registered with Registered with Registered with Registered with
                                                     Republican      Democratic      Republican      Democratic      Republican       Democratic     Party Leaned       Voted in
                                                         Party           Party           Party           Party           Party            Party        Toward            Primary
Sent Mail                                               0.003          0.082***         0.007          0.037**          0.038*            0.020        0.072**             0.033
                                                       [0.005]          [0.021]        [0.007]          [0.016]         [0.020]          [0.015]        [0.031]          [0.026]
Age, years (voter file)                                 0.001           -0.013         -0.007*           0.006           0.006           -0.001         -0.021            -0.009
                                                       [0.003]          [0.011]        [0.004]          [0.008]         [0.011]          [0.009]        [0.017]          [0.014]
Age squared                                              0.000           0.000          0.000*           0.000           0.000            0.000          0.000             0.000
                                                       [0.000]          [0.000]        [0.000]          [0.000]         [0.000]          [0.000]        [0.000]          [0.000]
Year registered, missing=2007 (voter file)               0.000           0.002           0.000           0.002           0.003           0.004**         0.004             0.002
                                                       [0.001]          [0.003]        [0.001]          [0.002]         [0.002]          [0.002]        [0.004]          [0.003]
Year registered missing                                 -0.006          -0.075           0.010           0.014           0.046          -0.073**        -0.007             0.017
                                                       [0.011]          [0.050]        [0.017]          [0.035]         [0.045]          [0.034]        [0.076]          [0.063]
Female (voter file)                                     -0.008          -0.039          -0.013          -0.021          -0.003           -0.028          0.021             0.012
                                                       [0.006]          [0.026]        [0.009]          [0.019]         [0.023]          [0.018]        [0.042]          [0.035]
Gender missing in voter file                             0.001         0.071***         -0.002           0.015           0.007            0.015          0.029             0.025
                                                       [0.005]          [0.023]        [0.008]          [0.017]         [0.022]          [0.017]        [0.034]          [0.028]
Two registered people in household (voter file)         -0.004           0.031          -0.016          -0.003           0.034            0.044          0.037            -0.013
                                                       [0.010]          [0.046]        [0.015]          [0.032]         [0.038]          [0.029]        [0.067]          [0.055]
Voted in 2006                                            0.002           0.029           0.007           0.011           0.007            0.026         -0.008             0.000
                                                       [0.005]          [0.024]        [0.009]          [0.018]         [0.023]          [0.018]        [0.037]          [0.030]
Voted in 2004                                            0.002           0.034           0.009           0.022         -0.043*           -0.005         -0.010             0.019
                                                       [0.006]          [0.027]        [0.009]          [0.019]         [0.026]          [0.020]        [0.041]          [0.034]
Voted in 2002                                            0.006          -0.015           0.004           0.013           0.018           0.037*          0.006            -0.027
                                                       [0.007]          [0.032]        [0.012]          [0.024]         [0.027]          [0.021]        [0.045]          [0.037]
Voted in 2000                                            0.006           0.023           0.005          -0.020          -0.008            0.014         -0.022             0.035
                                                       [0.007]          [0.031]        [0.012]          [0.025]         [0.028]          [0.021]        [0.046]          [0.038]
Voted in 1998                                           -0.012          -0.009          -0.015          -0.026          0.080*            0.021          0.007             0.013
                                                       [0.011]          [0.049]        [0.019]          [0.039]         [0.042]          [0.032]        [0.060]          [0.050]
Voted in 1996                                           -0.006          -0.059          -0.016          -0.002          -0.009           -0.045         -0.020            -0.032
                                                       [0.012]          [0.054]        [0.017]          [0.035]         [0.042]          [0.032]        [0.069]          [0.057]
Pre-survey Interest in Primary (2=Very,                  0.004         0.060***          0.004         0.034***        0.042***           0.012        0.079***          0.045**
1=Somewhat, 0=Not Much)                                [0.004]          [0.016]        [0.005]          [0.010]         [0.015]          [0.011]        [0.025]          [0.020]
Pre-survey Report Voting in 2000 (1=yes)                -0.004          -0.035           0.005          -0.011           0.014           -0.021          0.015             0.015
                                                       [0.009]          [0.042]        [0.012]          [0.026]         [0.044]          [0.034]        [0.061]          [0.051]
Pre-survey Report Voting for Bush in 2000 (1=yes)        0.000         0.094**           0.003          -0.018          -0.011            0.003
                                                       [0.010]          [0.044]        [0.011]          [0.022]         [0.035]          [0.027]
Pre-survey Report Voting for Gore in 2000 (1=yes)       -0.009          -0.006          -0.018          -0.038          -0.071           0.070*
                                                       [0.008]          [0.034]        [0.012]          [0.024]         [0.048]          [0.036]
Pre-survey Economy Retrospective Judgement               0.000          -0.010          -0.001           0.000           0.021           -0.004
(2=MB, 1=B, 0=Same/DK, -1=W, -2=MW)                    [0.003]          [0.015]        [0.005]          [0.011]         [0.013]          [0.010]
Pre-survey Unemployment Performance (2=MB,              -0.001          -0.009           0.003         -0.020**         -0.004           -0.016
1=B, 0=Same/DK, -1=W, -2=MW)                           [0.003]          [0.013]        [0.005]          [0.010]         [0.013]          [0.010]
Pre-survey Bush Approval (2=SA, 1=WA, 0=DK, -           -0.001          -0.016          -0.002         -0.015**         -0.007           -0.008
1=WD, -2=SD)                                           [0.003]          [0.012]        [0.003]          [0.007]         [0.008]          [0.006]
Pre-survey Congress Approval (2=SA, 1=WA,               -0.001           0.002          -0.003           0.000           0.002           -0.007
0=DK, -1=WD, -2=SD)                                    [0.002]          [0.008]        [0.003]          [0.007]         [0.008]          [0.006]
Pre-survey 2000 vote aligned with pre-survey latent                                                                                                     -0.008            -0.037
partisanship                                                                                                                                            [0.040]          [0.033]
Pre-survey Unemployment performance rel. pre-                                                                                                            0.020            -0.005
survey latent partisanship (-2 to 2)                                                                                                                    [0.016]          [0.013]
Pre-survey Economy Retrospective Judgment rel.                                                                                                           0.017            -0.013
pre-survey latent partisanship (-2 to 2)                                                                                                                [0.020]          [0.016]
Pre-survey Bush Approval rel. pre-survey latent                                                                                                         -0.002             0.018
partisanship (-2 to 2)                                                                                                                                  [0.015]          [0.012]
Pre-survey Congress Approval rel. pre-survey latent                                                                                                     -0.017           -0.019*
partisanship (-2 to 2)                                                                                                                                  [0.012]          [0.010]
Constant                                                -0.081          -4.318          -0.476          -4.407          -6.443          -7.606**        -7.487            -4.917
                                                       [1.314]          [5.806]        [1.779]          [3.709]         [4.529]          [3.445]        [7.819]          [6.519]
Observations                                              852             852             666             666             473              473            418               414
R-squared                                                0.018           0.095           0.029           0.065           0.070            0.098          0.104             0.067
P-value of treatment effect (one-sided)                  0.272           0.000          0.158            0.009           0.032            0.099          0.011             0.103
Note: OLS coefficients with robust (Huber/White) standard errors in brackets. *** denotes p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.10, two-tailed tests. Sample is respondents interviewed in pre-survey who had
valid addresses and had not moved before treatment was applied. This includes respondents who did not complete June 2008 follow-up survey. All respondents were listed as unaffiliated in
January 2008 voter file. Party registration measured using June 2008 voter file.
                                                                Table 4: Effect of Being Sent Mail on Party Identification

                                                            Latent Democrats                                  Latent Republicans                       Pooled Latent Partisans
                                                      Sent Mail?          Difference (Sent -             Sent Mail?          Difference (Sent -       Sent Mail?           (Sent - Not
                                                  Yes            No         Not Sent Mail)           Yes            No         Not Sent Mail)      Yes           No         Sent Mail)

Post-Identify With Pre-Survey Latent Party
                                                26.67%         21.57%            5.10%             20.88%          15.29%          5.59%          24.48%       19.33%        5.15%
(1=yes)

Post-Survey Directional Party ID Relative to
Pre-Survey Latent Party (1=Strongly against       5.22           5.03            0.19             4.93          4.78             0.16            5.11            4.94          0.18
to 7=Strongly with)
N                                                 150            153             303               91            85              176             241             238           479
Sample is respondents interviewed in pre-survey who had valid addresses and had not moved before treatment was applied and who also completed party identification measure in post-
survey.
                                      Table 5: Regression Analysis of Effect of Being Sent Mail on Party Identification

                                                               (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)
                                                                                                           Post-Survey Directional Party ID Relative to Pre-
                                                           Post-Identify With Pre-Survey Latent Party                    Survey Latent Party
                                                                             (1=yes)                            (1=Strongly against to 7=Strongly with)
Sent Mail                                                   0.081**           0.075*          0.073*          0.233**           0.225**        0.230***
                                                            [0.040]          [0.041]         [0.040]           [0.092]          [0.093]         [0.088]
Leaned to Dems in pre-survey                                0.082**           0.067           0.099           0.300***         0.273***           0.093
                                                            [0.040]          [0.042]         [0.076]           [0.098]          [0.102]         [0.158]
Age, years (voter file)                                                       0.005           0.004                              0.086            0.068
                                                                             [0.022]         [0.023]                            [0.065]         [0.061]
Age squared                                                                   0.000           0.000                             -0.001           -0.001
                                                                             [0.000]         [0.000]                            [0.001]         [0.001]
Year registered, missing=2007 (voter file)                                   0.010**         0.009**                            0.018**           0.015
                                                                             [0.004]         [0.004]                            [0.009]         [0.009]
Year registered missing                                                       -0.130          -0.140                            -0.266           -0.329
                                                                             [0.086]         [0.090]                            [0.204]         [0.211]
Two registered people in household (voter file)                               0.041           0.041                             -0.060           -0.088
                                                                             [0.059]         [0.061]                            [0.132]          [0.131]
Female (1=yes) VF/Survey                                                      0.036           0.032                             0.177*           0.163*
                                                                             [0.041]         [0.041]                            [0.097]          [0.092]
Voted in 2006                                                                 -0.074         -0.086*                            -0.009           -0.025
                                                                             [0.051]         [0.049]                            [0.102]          [0.098]
Voted in 2004                                                                0.105**          0.096*                             0.118            0.064
                                                                             [0.052]         [0.052]                            [0.111]          [0.109]
Voted in 2002                                                                 -0.042          -0.034                             0.015            0.034
                                                                             [0.051]         [0.052]                            [0.096]          [0.094]
Voted in 2000                                                                 -0.043          -0.046                            -0.045           -0.031
                                                                             [0.051]         [0.052]                            [0.103]          [0.100]
Voted in 1998                                                                  0.033           0.019                             0.019           -0.052
                                                                             [0.066]         [0.069]                            [0.151]          [0.152]
Voted in 1996                                                                 0.064           0.083                              0.140            0.159
                                                                             [0.079]         [0.079]                            [0.165]         [0.153]
Pre-survey Interest in Primary (2=Very, 1=Somewhat,                                           0.049                                               0.101
0=Not Much)                                                                                  [0.033]                                            [0.070]
Pre-survey 2000 vote aligned with pre-survey latent                                           -0.010                                              0.090
partisanship                                                                                 [0.048]                                             [0.096]
Pre-survey Unemployment performance rel. pre-                                                 0.005                                              0.095*
survey latent partisanship (-2 to 2)                                                         [0.025]                                             [0.053]
Pre-survey Economy Retrospective Judgment rel. pre-                                           -0.037                                             -0.028
survey latent partisanship (-2 to 2)                                                         [0.029]                                             [0.063]
Pre-survey Bush Approval rel. pre-survey latent                                              0.039**                                           0.194***
partisanship (-2 to 2)                                                                       [0.019]                                             [0.048]
Pre-survey Congress Approval rel. pre-survey latent                                            0.022                                           0.096***
partisanship (-2 to 2)                                                                       [0.016]                                             [0.034]
Constant                                                   0.126***         -20.507**       -17.348**         4.732***         -33.620*         -26.705
                                                            [0.036]          [8.180]         [8.454]           [0.090]         [18.393]        [18.703]
Observations                                                  418               418             418              418              418              418
R-squared                                                    0.018             0.051           0.073            0.037            0.064            0.155
P-value of treatment effect (one-sided)                      0.023             0.033           0.034            0.006            0.008            0.005
Note: OLS coefficients with robust (Huber/White) standard errors in brackets. *** denotes p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.10, two-tailed tests. Sample is respondents
interviewed in pre-survey who had valid addresses and had not moved before treatment was applied and who also completed party identification measure
in post-survey.
                                                                                      Table 6: Regression Analysis of Effect of Being Sent Mail on Political Opinions

                                                                (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)                  (7)            (8)            (9)          (10)            (11)           (12)
                                                                                                             Voting and Party Alignment Scale adding         Voting and Party Alignment Scale also adding
                                                            Voting and Party Alignment Scale (-4 to 6)               Congress/Bush (-8 to 10)                          Reagan/Carter (-12 to 14)          Policy evaluations alignment scale (-8 to 8)


                                                                                           ATT (Post-                                       ATT (Post-                                       ATT (Post-                                   ATT (Post-
                                                                                             Survey                                           Survey                                           Survey                                       Survey
                                                                                           Directional                                      Directional                                      Directional                                  Directional
                                                                          ATT (Identified    Party ID                      ATT (Identified    Party ID                      ATT (Identified    Party ID                  ATT (Identified    Party ID
                                                                             with pre-    Relative to Pre                     with pre-    Relative to Pre                     with pre-    Relative to Pre                 with pre-    Relative to Pre
                                                                           survey latent Survey Latent                      survey latent Survey Latent                      survey latent Survey Latent                  survey latent Survey Latent
                                                               OLS            party)          Party)            OLS            party)          Party)            OLS            party)          Party)         OLS           party)          Party)
Sent Mail                                                     0.293**                                           0.339                                            0.417                                        -0.052
                                                              [0.143]                                          [0.210]                                          [0.267]                                       [0.226]
Post-survey identified with pre-survey latent party                            3.924                                            4.369                                            4.554                                       -0.971
                                                                              [2.517]                                          [3.146]                                          [3.839]                                      [3.179]
Post-Survey Directional Party ID Relative to Pre-Survey                                         1.336**                                         1.487                                            1.550                                       -0.325
Latent Party                                                                                    [0.676]                                        [0.911]                                          [1.158]                                      [1.072]
Leaned to Dems in pre-survey                                   0.071          -0.248            -0.041         0.328           -0.060           0.171       -1.316***       -1.739***         -1.498***     3.972***        4.028***        3.973***
                                                              [0.241]         [0.408]           [0.281]       [0.379]          [0.537]         [0.408]        [0.453]         [0.610]           [0.472]       [0.413]        [0.455]         [0.404]
Age, years (voter file)                                       -0.032          -0.038            -0.101         0.036            0.027          -0.043          0.045           0.063            -0.010         0.149          0.161           0.176
                                                              [0.071]         [0.098]           [0.087]       [0.112]          [0.122]         [0.111]        [0.132]         [0.138]           [0.132]       [0.109]        [0.114]         [0.132]
Age squared                                                    0.001           0.001             0.001         0.000            0.000           0.001          0.000           0.000             0.001        -0.002         -0.002          -0.002
                                                              [0.001]         [0.001]           [0.001]       [0.002]          [0.002]         [0.002]        [0.002]         [0.002]           [0.002]       [0.002]        [0.002]         [0.002]
Year registered, missing=2007 (voter file)                     0.012          -0.022            -0.008        0.046*            0.004           0.019         0.050*           0.004             0.020         0.019          0.023           0.019
                                                              [0.016]         [0.029]           [0.020]       [0.024]          [0.040]         [0.029]        [0.028]         [0.045]           [0.032]       [0.028]        [0.039]         [0.032]
Year registered missing                                       -0.174           0.489             0.368        -0.339            0.411           0.277         -0.792           0.080            -0.060         0.485          0.281           0.314
                                                              [0.346]         [0.588]           [0.422]       [0.549]          [0.754]         [0.573]        [0.646]         [0.857]           [0.670]       [0.551]        [0.706]         [0.655]
Two registered people in household (voter file)             -0.573***        -0.701**          -0.437**     -0.906***        -1.053***       -0.760***      -1.258***       -1.365***         -1.060***       -0.427         -0.359          -0.428
                                                              [0.190]         [0.297]           [0.198]       [0.280]          [0.380]         [0.265]        [0.356]         [0.440]           [0.332]       [0.326]        [0.404]         [0.333]
Female (1=yes) VF/Survey                                      0.371**          0.253             0.150        0.558**           0.406           0.292         0.627**          0.450             0.331         0.072          0.034           0.057
                                                              [0.148]         [0.218]           [0.198]       [0.221]          [0.279]         [0.279]        [0.285]         [0.345]           [0.352]       [0.237]        [0.268]         [0.310]
Voted in 2006                                                  0.015           0.452             0.132        -0.228            0.220          -0.137         -0.003           0.475             0.103         0.017         -0.058           0.021
                                                              [0.169]         [0.338]           [0.178]       [0.242]          [0.409]         [0.237]        [0.297]         [0.515]           [0.294]       [0.262]        [0.409]         [0.275]
Voted in 2004                                                  0.242          -0.253             0.070        0.474*           -0.105           0.254          0.212          -0.401            -0.027      -0.640**         -0.657         -0.739**
                                                              [0.191]         [0.385]           [0.218]       [0.271]          [0.463]         [0.273]        [0.338]         [0.583]           [0.350]       [0.280]        [0.482]         [0.310]
Voted in 2002                                                 -0.274          -0.230           -0.407**       -0.228           -0.168          -0.366          0.029           0.072            -0.133         0.100          0.133           0.178
                                                              [0.189]         [0.293]           [0.205]       [0.281]          [0.364]         [0.283]        [0.347]         [0.436]           [0.351]       [0.286]        [0.309]         [0.293]
Voted in 2000                                                 -0.149           0.053            -0.051        -0.043            0.173           0.058          0.106           0.354             0.234         0.187          0.108           0.135
                                                              [0.193]         [0.301]           [0.217]       [0.286]          [0.383]         [0.295]        [0.367]         [0.474]           [0.381]       [0.311]        [0.350]         [0.317]
Voted in 1998                                                 -0.200          -0.318            -0.168        -0.220           -0.385          -0.218         -0.448          -0.609            -0.435        -0.377         -0.335          -0.372
                                                              [0.248]         [0.371]           [0.291]       [0.357]          [0.464]         [0.390]        [0.478]         [0.550]           [0.495]       [0.435]        [0.444]         [0.447]
Voted in 1996                                                  0.468           0.342             0.454         0.233            0.092           0.217          0.378           0.340             0.470         0.550          0.853           0.824
                                                              [0.298]         [0.457]           [0.329]       [0.361]          [0.507]         [0.408]        [0.490]         [0.631]           [0.543]       [0.470]        [0.607]         [0.552]
Pre-survey Interest in Primary (2=Very, 1=Somewhat,           0.193*           0.043             0.088         0.205            0.030           0.079          0.338           0.168             0.219         0.192          0.250           0.239
0=Not Much)                                                   [0.112]         [0.196]           [0.153]       [0.163]          [0.248]         [0.206]        [0.218]         [0.323]           [0.278]       [0.191]        [0.262]         [0.242]
Pre-survey 2000 vote aligned with pre-survey latent          0.838***        0.917***          0.748***      1.072***         1.132***        0.943***       1.264***        1.307***          1.111***        0.059          0.126           0.166
partisanship                                                  [0.166]         [0.252]           [0.184]       [0.241]          [0.306]         [0.250]        [0.309]         [0.364]           [0.308]       [0.273]        [0.300]         [0.279]
Pre-survey Unemployment performance rel. pre-survey            0.141           0.112             0.012        0.232*            0.221           0.110        0.436***        0.441**            0.325*      0.820***        0.820***        0.845***
latent partisanship (-2 to 2)                                 [0.092]         [0.119]           [0.105]       [0.139]          [0.152]         [0.142]        [0.168]         [0.177]           [0.171]       [0.144]        [0.149]         [0.175]
Pre-survey Economy Retrospective Judgment rel. pre-           0.189**         0.337**           0.223**        0.236           0.417**         0.291*         0.396**         0.554**           0.422**     0.686***        0.654***        0.683***
survey latent partisanship (-2 to 2)                          [0.093]         [0.162]           [0.106]       [0.146]          [0.213]         [0.151]        [0.173]         [0.240]           [0.169]       [0.158]        [0.187]         [0.157]
Pre-survey Bush Approval rel. pre-survey latent              0.453***         0.310**            0.207       1.159***         0.995***        0.881***       1.338***        1.180***          1.060***     0.305***         0.357**          0.381
partisanship (-2 to 2)                                        [0.062]         [0.144]           [0.154]       [0.099]          [0.183]         [0.212]        [0.124]         [0.219]           [0.266]       [0.111]        [0.177]         [0.248]
Pre-survey Congress Approval rel. pre-survey latent          0.207***          0.103             0.055       0.725***         0.607***        0.554***       0.935***        0.796***          0.741***     0.291***        0.300***         0.311**
partisanship (-2 to 2)                                        [0.060]         [0.102]           [0.093]       [0.085]          [0.123]         [0.119]        [0.114]         [0.149]           [0.149]       [0.092]        [0.108]         [0.132]
Constant                                                     -22.951          44.127            13.111      -92.837**          -8.176         -42.709       -100.799*         -8.909           -44.907       -41.198        -49.401         -41.435
                                                             [32.455]        [58.957]          [39.118]      [47.049]         [80.250]        [56.927]       [55.546]        [89.373]          [61.926]     [55.430]        [77.956]        [63.170]
Observations                                                    413             399               399           413              399             399            413             399               399           412            398             398
R-squared                                                      0.360                                           0.514                                           0.468                                           0.684
P-value of treatment effect (one-sided)                        0.020           0.060          0.024            0.054            0.083          0.051           0.060           0.118          0.091            0.410          0.380            0.381
Note: OLS and 2SLS (Instrumenting for aligning party identification with latent partisanship using treatment status) coefficients with robust (Huber/White) standard errors in brackets. *** denotes p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.10, two-tailed tests. Sample i
respondents interviewed in pre-survey who had valid addresses and had not moved before treatment was applied and who also completed post-survey.
              Table 7: Regression Analysis of Effect of Treatment on Political Interest, Participation, and Reported Campaign Treatment

                                                                 (1)                           (2)                                   (3)
                                                      General Election Interest
                                                    (2=Very, 1=Somewhat, 0=Not Participation Behavior Index (0-           Participation, Campaign
                                                                Much)                          3)                          Treatment Index (0-5)
Sent Mail                                                     -0.091**                       -0.070                                 -0.059
                                                               [0.044]                      [0.057]                                [0.103]
Leaned to Dems in pre-survey                                    0.052                        0.027                                 -0.328*
                                                               [0.077]                      [0.101]                                [0.180]
Age, years (voter file)                                         0.011                        -0.003                                  0.030
                                                               [0.025]                      [0.035]                                [0.051]
Age squared                                                     0.000                        0.000                                   0.000
                                                               [0.000]                      [0.000]                                [0.001]
Year registered, missing=2007 (voter file)                     -0.008                        0.000                                0.033***
                                                               [0.005]                      [0.007]                                [0.010]
Year registered missing                                        0.161*                        -0.003                                 -0.191
                                                               [0.095]                      [0.107]                                [0.251]
Two registered people in household (voter file)                -0.010                       -0.133*                                  0.040
                                                               [0.054]                      [0.070]                                [0.131]
Female (1=yes) VF/Survey                                       -0.049                      -0.119**                                 -0.039
                                                               [0.046]                      [0.059]                                [0.107]
Voted in 2006                                                  0.099*                        0.029                                   0.083
                                                               [0.053]                      [0.065]                                [0.121]
Voted in 2004                                                  -0.033                        -0.005                                  0.028
                                                               [0.061]                      [0.069]                                [0.133]
Voted in 2002                                                   0.044                        -0.051                                  0.177
                                                               [0.062]                      [0.079]                                [0.143]
Voted in 2000                                                   0.016                        0.055                                 0.301*
                                                               [0.062]                      [0.076]                                [0.154]
Voted in 1998                                                 -0.169**                       -0.099                                 -0.049
                                                               [0.079]                      [0.115]                                [0.186]
Voted in 1996                                                   0.059                        0.001                                 -0.387*
                                                               [0.089]                      [0.139]                                [0.207]
Pre-survey Interest in Primary (2=Very, 1=Somewhat,           0.275***                     0.207***                                 -0.028
0=Not Much)                                                    [0.038]                      [0.047]                                [0.073]
Pre-survey 2000 vote aligned with pre-survey latent             0.075                        0.018                                  -0.055
partisanship                                                   [0.054]                      [0.065]                                [0.116]
Pre-survey Unemployment performance rel. pre-                   0.038                        0.025                                  0.064
survey latent partisanship (-2 to 2)                           [0.029]                      [0.036]                                [0.063]
Pre-survey Economy Retrospective Judgment rel. pre-            -0.042                        -0.040                                0.117*
survey latent partisanship (-2 to 2)                           [0.032]                      [0.040]                                [0.067]
Pre-survey Bush Approval rel. pre-survey latent                 0.019                        0.029                                   0.052
partisanship (-2 to 2)                                         [0.023]                      [0.028]                                [0.046]
Pre-survey Congress Approval rel. pre-survey latent             0.000                        -0.004                                  0.015
partisanship (-2 to 2)                                         [0.020]                      [0.023]                                [0.042]
Constant                                                      17.608*                        1.924                               -64.828***
                                                              [10.073]                     [13.258]                               [20.499]
Observations                                                     433                          423                                     436
R-squared                                                       0.194                        0.093                                   0.071
Note: OLS coefficients with robust (Huber/White) standard errors in brackets. *** denotes p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.10, two-tailed tests. Sample is
respondents interviewed in pre-survey who had valid addresses and had not moved before treatment was applied and who also completed post-
survey.
                    Table 8:Treatment Effect on Partisan Identity Among Non-Leaning Independents

                                                                      (1)                              (2)

                                                         Among Non-Leaning Independents, Post-ID As (non-leaning)
                                                                          Independent (1=yes)
Sent Mail                                                         0.116*                         0.094
                                                                  [0.069]                       [0.071]
Age, years (voter file)                                                                          0.016
                                                                                                [0.037]
Age squared                                                                                      0.000
                                                                                                [0.001]
Year registered, missing=2007 (voter file)                                                      -0.008
                                                                                                [0.007]
Year registered missing                                                                          0.065
                                                                                                [0.148]
Two registered people in household (voter file)                                                  0.039
                                                                                                [0.087]
Female (1=yes) VF/Survey                                                                         0.003
                                                                                                [0.070]
Voted in 2006                                                                                   -0.103
                                                                                                [0.079]
Voted in 2004                                                                                    0.029
                                                                                                [0.088]
Voted in 2002                                                                                   0.202**
                                                                                                [0.100]
Voted in 2000                                                                                   -0.098
                                                                                                [0.108]
Voted in 1998                                                                                    0.081
                                                                                                [0.134]
Voted in 1996                                                                                    0.108
                                                                                                [0.140]
Constant                                                         0.490***                       15.733
                                                                  [0.051]                      [13.925]
Observations                                                        210                           210
R-squared                                                          0.013                         0.088
Note: OLS coefficients with robust (Huber/White) standard errors in brackets. *** denotes p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.10, two-
tailed tests. Sample is respondents interviewed in pre-survey who had valid addresses and had not moved before
treatment was applied and who also completed post-survey.
                                         Table A1: Sample Statistics for Sent Mail and Not Sent Mail Groups

                                                         LATENT DEMOCRATS                                                LATENT REPUBLICANS
                                                                         Lean D,                             Indpt,                        Lean R,
Variable                                            Lean D, Control    Treatment       Indpt, Control    Treatment    Lean R, Control    Treatment
Age, years (voter file)                                  38.200           37.741           38.409           39.253         39.787           39.981
                                                        [8.3544]         [8.4974]         [8.5502]         [8.1387]       [7.5695]         [7.0676]
Year registered, missing=2007 (voter file)             2001.501         2001.548         2001.318         2001.435       2000.264         2000.600
                                                        [5.1257]         [5.7615]         [5.7917]         [5.7073]       [5.7942]          [6.237]
Year registered missing                                   0.062            0.084            0.068            0.079          0.062            0.098
                                                         [.2416]          [.2781]          [.2525]          [.2698]        [.2417]           [.298]
Female (voter file)                                       0.574            0.559            0.538            0.497          0.500            0.517
                                                          [.495]          [.4971]          [.4992]          [.5007]         [.501]          [.5007]
Gender missing in voter file                              0.073            0.087            0.068            0.092          0.105            0.106
                                                         [.2607]          [.2814]          [.2525]            [.29]        [.3067]           [.308]
Two registered people in household (voter file)           0.248            0.211            0.260            0.209          0.267            0.291
                                                         [.4325]          [.4082]          [.4391]          [.4073]        [.4435]          [.4549]
Voted in 2006                                             0.532            0.546            0.459            0.508          0.597            0.543
                                                         [.4995]          [.4985]           [.499]          [.5006]        [.4915]          [.4991]
Voted in 2004                                             0.621            0.632            0.612            0.620          0.690            0.657
                                                         [.4857]          [.4828]           [.488]          [.4862]        [.4634]          [.4757]
Voted in 2002                                             0.215            0.224            0.213            0.226          0.322            0.268
                                                         [.4113]          [.4173]          [.4097]          [.4185]         [.468]          [.4437]
Voted in 2000                                             0.264            0.275            0.236            0.245          0.314            0.325
                                                         [.4412]           [.447]          [.4253]          [.4304]         [.465]          [.4691]
Voted in 1998                                             0.064            0.098            0.068            0.057          0.085            0.064
                                                         [.2456]           [.297]          [.2525]          [.2323]        [.2798]          [.2455]
Voted in 1996                                             0.047            0.078            0.081            0.060          0.070            0.060
                                                         [.2109]          [.2678]          [.2738]          [.2374]        [.2552]          [.2386]
Pre-survey Interest in Primary (2=Very, 1=Somewhat,       1.453            1.382            1.126            1.117          1.395            1.313
0=Not Much)                                              [.6936]            [.72]          [.8106]          [.7741]        [.6893]          [.7227]
Pre-survey Report Voting in 2000 (1=yes)                  0.767            0.783            0.738            0.712          0.841            0.845
                                                         [.4231]          [.4129]          [.4406]          [.4535]        [.3663]          [.3623]
Pre-survey Report Voting for Bush in 2000 (1=yes)         0.129            0.131            0.291            0.285          0.647            0.645
                                                         [.3351]          [.3376]           [.455]          [.4522]        [.4787]          [.4793]
Pre-survey Report Voting for Gore in 2000 (1=yes)         0.497            0.550            0.202            0.193          0.093            0.091
                                                         [.5005]          [.4981]          [.4021]          [.3951]         [.291]          [.2875]
Pre-survey Economy Retrospective Judgement (2=MB,        -1.258           -1.240           -1.136           -1.177         -0.787           -0.741
1=B, 0=Same/DK, -1=W, -2=MW)                             [.7756]          [.7777]          [.8264]          [.7987]        [.8399]          [.9313]
Pre-survey Unemployment Performance (2=MB, 1=B,          -0.665           -0.629           -0.529           -0.515         -0.125           -0.087
0=Same/DK, -1=W, -2=MW)                                   [.885]          [.8689]          [.8512]          [.9126]        [.8971]          [.9331]
Pre-survey Bush Approval (2=SA, 1=WA, 0=DK, -            -1.503           -1.429           -0.799           -0.807          0.081            0.230
1=WD, -2=SD)                                             [.9529]          [1.014]         [1.3261]        [1.3647]       [1.4572]         [1.5196]
Pre-survey Congress Approval (2=SA, 1=WA, 0=DK, -        -0.101            0.068           -0.356           -0.384         -0.466           -0.562
1=WD, -2=SD)                                           [1.3057]         [1.2892]           [1.213]        [1.1945]       [1.3013]         [1.2685]
Chi-squared statistic for test of random assignment              22.844                            15.728                          13.790
P-value of Chi-squared statistic                                  0.297                            0.733                           0.841
Observations                                               451             451              381               368          258              265
Standard deviations in brackets
                                                 Table A2: Test for Non-Random Panel Attrition

                                                                                                                  (1)              (2)
                                                                                                              Completed Post-Treatment
                                                                                                                    Survey (1=yes)
Pre-treatment, Latent Democrat                                                                                  0.003              0.059
                                                                                                               [0.042]           [0.056]
Age, years (voter file)                                                                                         0.005             -0.007
                                                                                                               [0.013]           [0.019]
Age squared                                                                                                     0.000              0.000
                                                                                                               [0.000]           [0.000]
Year registered, missing=2007 (voter file)                                                                      0.002              0.005
                                                                                                               [0.003]           [0.004]
Year registered missing                                                                                        -0.089            -0.135*
                                                                                                               [0.055]           [0.072]
Two registered people in household (voter file)                                                               -0.131***        -0.140***
                                                                                                               [0.029]           [0.040]
Female (voter file)                                                                                             0.028              0.012
                                                                                                               [0.027]           [0.038]
Gender missing in voter file                                                                                   -0.010             -0.049
                                                                                                               [0.050]           [0.066]
Voted in 2006                                                                                                   0.037             0.069*
                                                                                                               [0.028]           [0.039]
Voted in 2004                                                                                                   0.011             -0.052
                                                                                                               [0.032]           [0.044]
Voted in 2002                                                                                                  0.079**            0.099*
                                                                                                               [0.037]           [0.053]
Voted in 2000                                                                                                   0.011              0.027
                                                                                                               [0.036]           [0.048]
Voted in 1998                                                                                                  0.145**           0.157**
                                                                                                               [0.057]           [0.078]
Voted in 1996                                                                                                  -0.078           -0.171**
                                                                                                               [0.058]           [0.079]
Pre-survey Interest in Primary (2=Very, 1=Somewhat, 0=Not Much)                                                 0.020              0.003
                                                                                                               [0.018]           [0.025]
Pre 2000 vote aligned with pre PID                                                                             0.049*             0.070*
                                                                                                               [0.028]           [0.039]
Pre Econ Retrospective rel. pre PID (-2 to 2)                                                                  -0.015           -0.045**
                                                                                                               [0.017]           [0.023]
Pre Econ Unemployment performance rel. pre PID (-2 to 2)                                                        0.005              0.017
                                                                                                               [0.015]           [0.021]
Pre Bush Approval rel. pre PID (-2 to 2)                                                                       0.021*              0.021
                                                                                                               [0.012]           [0.016]
Pre Cong Approval rel. pre PID (-2 to 2)                                                                        0.009              0.014
                                                                                                               [0.010]           [0.014]
Sent Mail                                                                                                       0.008            16.069
                                                                                                               [0.026]          [12.867]
Sent Mail * Pre-treatment, Latent Democrat                                                                                        -0.129
                                                                                                                                 [0.084]
Sent Mail * Age, years (voter file)                                                                                                0.023
                                                                                                                                 [0.026]
Sent Mail * Age squared                                                                                                            0.000
                                                                                                                                 [0.000]
Sent Mail * Year registered, missing=2007 (voter file)                                                                            -0.008
                                                                                                                                 [0.006]
Sent Mail * Year registered missing                                                                                                0.089
                                                                                                                                 [0.112]
Sent Mail * Two registered people in household (voter file)                                                                        0.024
                                                                                                                                 [0.058]
Sent Mail * Female (voter file)                                                                                                    0.038
                                                                                                                                 [0.055]
Sent Mail * Gender missing in voter file                                                                                           0.064
                                                                                                                                 [0.100]
Sent Mail * Voted in 2006                                                                                                         -0.058
                                                                                                                                 [0.057]
Sent Mail * Voted in 2004                                                                                                        0.140**
                                                                                                                                 [0.064]
Sent Mail * Voted in 2002                                                                                                         -0.045
                                                                                                                                 [0.076]
Sent Mail * Voted in 2000                                                                                                         -0.046
                                                                                                                                 [0.073]
Sent Mail * Voted in 1998                                                                                                          0.000
                                                                                                                                 [0.116]
Sent Mail * Voted in 1996                                                                                                         0.214*
                                                                                                                                 [0.119]
Sent Mail * Pre-survey Interest in Primary (2=Very, 1=Somewhat, 0=Not Much)                                                        0.041
                                                                                                                                 [0.036]
Sent Mail * Pre 2000 vote aligned with pre PID                                                                                    -0.053
                                                                                                                                 [0.057]
Sent Mail * Pre Econ Retrospective rel. pre PID (-2 to 2)                                                                        0.069**
                                                                                                                                 [0.034]
Sent Mail * Pre Econ Unemployment performance rel. pre PID (-2 to 2)                                                              -0.029
                                                                                                                                 [0.030]
Sent Mail * Pre Bush Approval rel. pre PID (-2 to 2)                                                                               0.000
                                                                                                                                 [0.024]
Sent Mail * Pre Cong Approval rel. pre PID (-2 to 2)                                                                              -0.013
                                                                                                                                 [0.020]
Constant                                                                                                       -2.941            -10.600
                                                                                                               [6.323]           [8.792]
Observations                                                                                                    1325               1325
R-squared                                                                                                       0.046              0.063
F-statistic for test of joint significance of Sent Mail and all Sent Mail interactions.                                            1.137
P-value of F-statistic statistic                                                                                                   0.301
Note: OLS coefficients with robust (Huber/White) standard errors in brackets. *** denotes p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.10, two-tailed tests.
Sample is latent partisans interviewed in pre-survey who had valid addresses and had not moved before treatment was applied.
                              Table A3: Summary statistics for outcome measures among latent partisans

Variable                                                                                                                     (1)
Registered with party closest to pre-survey PID                                                                            0.114
                                                                                                                          [.3183]
Voted in 2008 primary                                                                                                      0.072
                                                                                                                          [.2592]
Post-Identify With Pre-Survey Latent Party (1=yes)                                                                         0.224
                                                                                                                          [.4172]
Post-Survey Directional Party ID Relative to Pre-Survey Latent Party (1=Strongly against to 7=Strongly with)               5.040
                                                                                                                          [.9533]
Voting and Party Alignment Scale (-4 to 6)                                                                                 2.465
                                                                                                                         [1.7289]
Voting and Party Alignment Scale adding Congress/Bush (-8 to 10)                                                           3.714
                                                                                                                         [2.9566]
Voting and Party Alignment Scale also adding Reagan/Carter (-12 to 14)                                                     4.376
                                                                                                                         [3.5187]
Policy evaluations alignment scale (-8 to 8)                                                                               2.481
                                                                                                                         [3.8415]
General Election Interest (2=Very, 1=Somewhat, 0=Not Much)                                                                 1.727
                                                                                                                          [.5031]
Participation Behavior Index (0-3)                                                                                         2.037
                                                                                                                          [.5939]
Campaign Treatment Index (0-5)                                                                                             1.671
                                                                                                                         [1.0742]
Observations                                                                                                                447
Standard deviations in brackets. Sample is respondents interviewed in pre-survey who had valid addresses and had not moved before
treatment was applied and who also completed post-survey.
                                                                                   Table A4: Regression Analysis of Effect of Being Sent Mail on Political Opinions by item

                                                              (1)               (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)               (7)             (8)           (9)             (10)            (11)             (12)
                                                         Post-survey       Post-survey     Post-survey   Post-survey     Post-survey      Post-survey      Post-survey     Post-survey    Post-survey      Post-survey     Post-survey      Post-survey
                                                          2000 vote      Nov. 2008 vote evaluation of    evaluation of   evaluation of   evaluation of     evaluation of   evaluation of   Iraq Policy     Taxing Rich    Retrospective Unemployment
                                                       aligned with pre- aligned with pre- Reps aligned Dems aligned     Bush aligned       Congress     Reagan aligned Carter aligned aligned with pre- aligned with pre- Economy         Performance
                                                        survey latent     survey latent with pre-survey with pre-survey with pre-survey aligned with pre- with pre-survey with pre-survey survey latent   survey latent aligned with pre- aligned with pre-
                                                         partisanship      partisanship       latent         latent          latent      survey latent         latent          latent     partisanship     partisanship   survey latent    survey latent
                                                                                           partisanship  partisanship    partisanship     partisanship     partisanship    partisanship                                    partisanship     partisanship



Sent Mail                                                  0.080**              0.034            0.071            0.109            -0.001            0.047            0.132          -0.054           0.104          0.009         -0.043          -0.121
                                                            [0.036]           [0.046]          [0.084]           [0.081]           [0.077]          [0.108]          [0.096]        [0.097]         [0.124]         [0.131]        [0.058]         [0.077]
Leaned to Deems in pre-survey                                0.028              0.097         -0.329**           0.275**          0.792***        -0.535***        -2.247***       0.604***           0.241        0.639***       2.425***        0.663***
                                                            [0.056]           [0.083]          [0.137]           [0.139]           [0.142]          [0.194]          [0.153]        [0.164]         [0.212]         [0.221]        [0.121]         [0.138]
Age, years (voter file)                                    0.032**             -0.001           -0.021           -0.042            -0.025            0.093           -0.039           0.047           0.049         0.145**        -0.028          -0.018
                                                            [0.016]           [0.025]          [0.042]           [0.039]           [0.040]          [0.058]          [0.052]        [0.044]         [0.064]         [0.064]        [0.032]         [0.037]
Age squared                                                -0.000*              0.000            0.000            0.001             0.000           -0.001            0.001          -0.001           0.000        -0.002**         0.000           0.000
                                                            [0.000]           [0.000]          [0.001]           [0.001]           [0.001]          [0.001]          [0.001]        [0.001]         [0.001]         [0.001]        [0.000]         [0.001]
Year registered, missing=2007 (voter file)                   0.001             -0.001           0.017*           -0.005            0.017**           0.017            0.008          -0.003           0.000          0.007          0.008           0.002
                                                            [0.004]           [0.005]          [0.010]           [0.009]           [0.008]          [0.012]          [0.011]        [0.010]         [0.016]         [0.016]        [0.007]         [0.009]
Year registered missing                                      0.006             -0.067           -0.210            0.097            -0.176            0.011           -0.272          -0.181         0.479*           0.052         -0.152           0.107
                                                            [0.071]           [0.113]          [0.212]           [0.185]           [0.207]          [0.239]          [0.208]        [0.201]         [0.278]         [0.293]        [0.127]         [0.192]
Two registered people in household (voter file)            -0.091*            -0.109*          -0.212*           -0.161            -0.112           -0.221           -0.122         -0.230*           0.114       -0.488***        -0.068           0.011
                                                            [0.053]           [0.061]          [0.117]           [0.109]           [0.097]          [0.148]          [0.118]        [0.126]         [0.167]         [0.172]        [0.084]         [0.106]
Female (1=yes) VF/Survey                                   0.089**              0.067            0.025           0.190**            0.094            0.092           -0.053           0.122           0.013         -0.063          0.069           0.052
                                                            [0.038]           [0.048]          [0.087]           [0.084]           [0.081]          [0.113]          [0.101]        [0.103]         [0.133]         [0.133]        [0.065]         [0.081]
Voted in 2006                                                0.015             -0.001            0.092           -0.091             0.055          -0.298**          0.248**         -0.024           0.017          0.032         -0.059           0.025
                                                            [0.042]           [0.054]          [0.094]           [0.097]           [0.082]          [0.120]          [0.113]        [0.114]         [0.152]         [0.150]        [0.072]         [0.093]
Voted in 2004                                               0.090*             -0.023            0.169            0.007             0.050            0.182           -0.168          -0.094         -0.311*         -0.190          0.010          -0.150
                                                            [0.050]           [0.059]          [0.103]           [0.112]           [0.089]          [0.141]          [0.126]        [0.128]         [0.158]         [0.156]        [0.083]         [0.099]
Voted in 2002                                              -0.080*              0.023           -0.129           -0.088             0.058           -0.012            0.064           0.192          -0.004          0.167         -0.008          -0.053
                                                            [0.048]           [0.061]          [0.127]           [0.113]           [0.120]          [0.143]          [0.136]        [0.134]         [0.180]         [0.180]        [0.073]         [0.102]
Voted in 2000                                                0.064             -0.055           -0.043           -0.116            -0.078            0.184            0.010           0.139          -0.057          0.170          0.032           0.045
                                                            [0.054]           [0.064]          [0.130]           [0.117]           [0.116]          [0.151]          [0.141]        [0.148]         [0.192]         [0.186]        [0.073]         [0.105]
Voted in 1998                                               -0.025             -0.018           -0.079           -0.078             0.056           -0.076           -0.222          -0.005          -0.116         -0.198          0.021          -0.083
                                                            [0.063]           [0.089]          [0.197]           [0.154]           [0.145]          [0.224]          [0.167]        [0.171]         [0.231]         [0.248]        [0.104]         [0.146]
Voted in 1996                                               -0.072              0.018            0.043         0.479***            -0.116           -0.119            0.196          -0.051           0.008          0.326         -0.044           0.260
                                                            [0.087]           [0.096]          [0.229]           [0.151]           [0.168]          [0.245]          [0.202]        [0.164]         [0.254]         [0.236]        [0.116]         [0.183]
Pre-survey Interest in Primary (2=Very, 1=Somewhat,         -0.004            0.089**            0.103            0.004            -0.019            0.032            0.105           0.027          -0.026          0.086         0.095*           0.038
0=Not Much)                                                 [0.028]           [0.036]          [0.065]           [0.064]           [0.066]          [0.081]          [0.073]        [0.079]         [0.101]         [0.102]        [0.050]         [0.058]
Pre-survey 2000 vote aligned with pre-survey latent        0.592***             0.017            0.103            0.127             0.132            0.102            0.122           0.070           0.079          0.015          0.044          -0.081
partisanship                                                [0.047]           [0.053]          [0.098]           [0.097]           [0.094]          [0.126]          [0.110]        [0.116]         [0.154]         [0.147]        [0.071]         [0.089]
Pre-survey Unemployment performance rel. pre-survey        0.056**              0.002           0.089*           -0.006            0.129**          -0.037           0.156**          0.048           0.113        0.256***        0.077**        0.375***
latent partisanship (-2 to 2)                               [0.024]           [0.029]          [0.051]           [0.053]           [0.052]          [0.074]          [0.065]        [0.065]         [0.076]         [0.085]        [0.035]         [0.049]
Pre-survey Economy Retrospective Judgment rel. pre-        -0.043*              0.036          0.124**            0.071             0.056           -0.008            0.037          0.122*        0.240***         -0.056        0.288***        0.217***
survey latent partisanship (-2 to 2)                        [0.025]           [0.032]          [0.054]           [0.054]           [0.056]          [0.081]          [0.066]        [0.064]         [0.081]         [0.091]        [0.044]         [0.055]
Pre-survey Bush Approval rel. pre-survey latent              0.027           0.077***         0.223***         0.126***           0.600***          0.106**         0.155***          0.023        0.195***          0.024          0.003          0.082**
partisanship (-2 to 2)                                      [0.018]           [0.023]          [0.041]           [0.039]           [0.048]          [0.053]          [0.044]        [0.048]         [0.061]         [0.067]        [0.031]         [0.036]
Pre-survey Congress Approval rel. pre-survey latent          0.023            0.045**          -0.063*         0.203***             0.038          0.480***          -0.018        0.229***           0.077         0.093*          0.031         0.090***
partisanship (-2 to 2)                                      [0.015]           [0.018]          [0.034]           [0.033]           [0.032]          [0.043]          [0.041]        [0.039]         [0.050]         [0.053]        [0.022]         [0.030]
Constant                                                    -2.413              3.179        -34.078*            10.362          -33.329**         -36.558          -13.736           5.774          -1.213        -17.374        -17.823          -4.657
                                                            [8.356]          [10.714]         [20.185]          [17.867]          [16.880]         [24.476]         [22.274]       [20.411]        [32.061]        [32.719]       [14.594]        [17.597]
Observations                                                  413                413              413              413               413              413              413             413             413            413            413             412
R-squared                                                    0.486              0.151            0.219            0.214             0.687            0.344            0.495           0.229           0.210          0.134          0.869           0.552
Note: OLS coefficients with robust (Huber/White) standard errors in brackets. *** denotes p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.10, two-tailed tests. Sample is respondents interviewed in pre-survey who had valid addresses and had not moved before treatment was applied and
who also completed post-survey.
                                     Table A5: Regression Analysis of Effect of Treatment on Participation and Reported Campaign Treatment by item

                                                              (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)             (7)              (8)
                                                                    Items in Behavior Index                                            Items in Treatment Index
                                                                                                                                              Campaign face
                                                                             Tried to    Gave campaign                                        to face contact    Received         Received
                                                       Tried to get info    persuade       donation in      Saw or heard Asked for cash or conversation          campaign      campaign mail
                                                           (1=yes)       others (1=yes) prev. 6 mos.          ad (1=yes)          (1=yes)          (1=yes)     phone (1=yes)       (1=yes)
Sent Mail                                                   -0.044             -0.008          -0.024           -0.015             0.003            0.013          -0.026           -0.034
                                                            [0.031]           [0.040]         [0.025]          [0.030]            [0.036]          [0.021]         [0.041]         [0.045]
Leaned to Deems in pre-survey                               -0.023             0.060           0.000            -0.029          -0.177***           -0.042          0.057          -0.137*
                                                            [0.059]           [0.069]         [0.045]          [0.051]            [0.058]          [0.044]         [0.073]         [0.078]
Age, years (voter file)                                      0.023             -0.037          0.015             0.006             -0.008           0.005           0.004           0.023
                                                            [0.020]           [0.022]         [0.011]          [0.016]            [0.019]          [0.009]         [0.020]         [0.021]
Age squared                                                  0.000              0.001         -0.000*            0.000             0.000             0.000          0.000            0.000
                                                            [0.000]           [0.000]         [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.000]          [0.000]         [0.000]         [0.000]
Year registered, missing=2007 (voter file)                   0.000              0.007        -0.006**            0.002             0.007*            0.004         0.007*         0.013***
                                                            [0.004]           [0.004]         [0.003]           [0.004]           [0.004]          [0.003]         [0.004]         [0.004]
Year registered missing                                      0.045            -0.147*          0.090*            0.062              0.036           -0.031         -0.055          -0.202*
                                                            [0.062]           [0.078]         [0.052]           [0.061]           [0.093]          [0.057]         [0.110]         [0.104]
Two registered people in household (voter file)              0.002             -0.064          -0.065            0.023           -0.095**           -0.016          0.095            0.033
                                                            [0.039]           [0.050]         [0.040]           [0.042]           [0.044]          [0.027]         [0.059]         [0.062]
Female (1=yes) VF/Survey                                   -0.062*           -0.112**         0.063**           -0.042             -0.029            0.012          0.028           -0.009
                                                            [0.032]           [0.044]         [0.029]          [0.032]            [0.039]          [0.022]         [0.043]         [0.046]
Voted in 2006                                               -0.014             0.041           -0.007          0.071**             0.048            -0.002         -0.055           0.021
                                                            [0.035]           [0.048]         [0.029]          [0.035]            [0.043]          [0.028]         [0.049]         [0.054]
Voted in 2004                                               -0.005             -0.005           0.002            0.025             0.008             0.011          0.018           -0.033
                                                            [0.038]           [0.054]         [0.032]           [0.037]           [0.046]          [0.029]         [0.056]         [0.060]
Voted in 2002                                                0.039             -0.051          -0.034           -0.013              0.056            0.023          0.022            0.089
                                                            [0.045]           [0.059]         [0.032]           [0.037]           [0.050]          [0.037]         [0.059]         [0.063]
Voted in 2000                                               -0.002              0.062          -0.010           -0.042              0.044            0.062          0.062         0.175***
                                                            [0.047]           [0.058]         [0.033]           [0.041]           [0.051]          [0.041]         [0.061]         [0.066]
Voted in 1998                                               -0.015             -0.013          -0.060            0.005             -0.012           -0.007         -0.049            0.014
                                                            [0.059]           [0.069]         [0.063]           [0.063]           [0.066]          [0.051]         [0.077]         [0.088]
Voted in 1996                                               -0.019              0.036          -0.036           -0.032             -0.062         -0.101***        -0.113           -0.079
                                                            [0.069]           [0.082]         [0.078]           [0.075]           [0.071]          [0.034]         [0.082]         [0.100]
Pre-survey Interest in Primary (2=Very, 1=Somewhat,        0.108***         0.098***            0.003           -0.021             0.043*           -0.001         -0.019           -0.029
0=Not Much)                                                 [0.029]           [0.029]         [0.017]           [0.025]           [0.024]          [0.015]         [0.033]         [0.034]
Pre-survey 2000 vote aligned with pre-survey latent          0.036             -0.017          -0.012            0.013              0.021           -0.038         -0.019           -0.033
partisanship                                                [0.037]           [0.048]         [0.028]          [0.034]            [0.040]          [0.026]         [0.050]         [0.053]
Pre-survey Unemployment performance rel. pre-               -0.009            0.043*           -0.012           -0.019             0.024           0.029**         -0.004           0.033
survey latent partisanship (-2 to 2)                        [0.018]           [0.025]         [0.017]          [0.019]            [0.021]          [0.013]         [0.026]         [0.028]
Pre-survey Economy Retrospective Judgment rel. pre-          0.028            -0.054*          -0.009            0.028           0.063***           0.014          -0.029           0.040
survey latent partisanship (-2 to 2)                        [0.022]           [0.029]         [0.020]          [0.022]            [0.023]          [0.013]         [0.029]         [0.031]
Pre-survey Bush Approval rel. pre-survey latent             -0.012            0.036*           0.001             0.007             0.007             0.010          0.006            0.022
partisanship (-2 to 2)                                      [0.015]           [0.019]         [0.011]           [0.014]           [0.018]          [0.010]         [0.020]         [0.020]
Pre-survey Congress Approval rel. pre-survey latent         -0.004             -0.011           0.011            0.015             -0.019            0.004          0.002            0.013
partisanship (-2 to 2)                                      [0.013]           [0.016]         [0.010]           [0.013]           [0.015]          [0.009]         [0.017]         [0.018]
Constant                                                     0.229           -12.568         13.520**           -2.262           -13.647*           -8.495        -14.522*       -25.903***
                                                            [8.198]           [8.911]         [5.282]           [7.685]           [7.503]          [5.372]         [8.680]         [8.765]
Observations                                                  434                436             423              436                436              436            436              436
R-squared                                                    0.071              0.094           0.073            0.038              0.075            0.054          0.046            0.079
Note: OLS coefficients with robust (Huber/White) standard errors in brackets. *** denotes p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.10, two-tailed tests. Sample is respondents interviewed in pre-survey who
had valid addresses and had not moved before treatment was applied and who also completed post-survey.
