                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              MEASURING HOW RISK TRADEOFFS ADJUST WITH INCOME

                                             Mary F. Evans
                                             V. Kerry Smith

                                         Working Paper 15372
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15372


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2009




The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) provided funding for this research under STAR
grant RD-83159502-0. The research has not been subjected to EPA review and therefore does not
necessarily reflect the views of the Agency, and no official endorsement should be inferred.Thanks
are due Jon Valentine for his assistance in the preparation of this manuscript. Josh Abbott, Kelly Maguire,
J.R. DeShazo, and participants at the 2008 Southern Economic Association Meetings and the Vanderilt
University Law School Conference on the Heterogeneity in the Value of Statistical Life provided
helpful comments on earlier drafts of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Mary F. Evans and V. Kerry Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Measuring How Risk Tradeoffs Adjust With Income
Mary F. Evans and V. Kerry Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 15372
September 2009
JEL No. J31,Q51

                                            ABSTRACT

Efforts to reconcile inconsistencies between theory and estimates of the income elasticity of the value
of a statistical life (IEVSL) overlook important restrictions implied by a more complete description
of the individual choice problem. We develop a more general model of the IEVSL that reconciles some
of the observed discrepancies. Our framework describes how exogenous income shocks, such as unexpected
medical expenditures, may affect labor supply decisions which in turn influence both the coefficient
of relative risk aversion and the IEVSL. The presence of a consumption commitment, such as a home
mortgage, also alters this labor supply adjustment. We use data from the Health and Retirement Study
to explore the responsiveness of labor force exit decisions to spousal health shocks and the role of
a home mortgage as a constraint on this response.


Mary F. Evans
The Robert Day School
 of Economics and Finance
Claremont McKenna College
500 E. Ninth Street
Claremont, CA 91711
Mary.Evans@ClaremontMcKenna.edu

V. Kerry Smith
Department of Economics
W.P. Carey School of Business
P.O. Box 873806
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287-3806
and NBER
kerry.smith@asu.edu
I.       Introduction

         A poll of the analysts tasked with preparing the economic assessments of policies that

improve air quality would likely identify the estimates of the value of a statistical life (VSL)

as the single most influential economic parameter in their evaluations. Adapting estimates of

the VSL to account for differences between the labor market context on which they are based

and the policy context where they are applied has been an important and controversial area of

research.1 Economic theory identifies several factors that we expect to influence an

individual’s marginal willingness to pay for a mortality risk reduction. With regards to

variation in income, theory predicts a positive income elasticity of the value of a statistical life

(IEVSL). Numerous empirical studies, adopting various strategies, confirm the theoretical

sign prediction.2 However, in spite of the agreement across studies on the sign of the IEVSL,

the empirical literature finds little consistency in its size.

         As the IEVSL is often a central component in estimating the benefits of large-scale

policy changes, its magnitude is of considerable importance. Several examples illustrate why.

First, major changes in existing rules or proposals for new regulations require estimating the

benefits of the proposed changes over time (due to Executive Order 12866). Environmental

regulations in particular often yield reductions in mortality risks today and into the future and

these risk reductions are a major component of the associated benefits. With insufficient

information to estimate the marginal willingness to pay for risk reductions for the time period

of interest, an alternative indirect method of obtaining benefit estimates involves

1
  For example, see Lisa Heinzerling’s indictment of all of benefit cost analysis based on her dissatisfaction with
the important role VSL estimates play for policy (Ackerman and Heizerling [2004]). Heinzerling is the current
Associate Administrator of EPA’s Office of Policy, Economics and Innovation.
2
  We are aware of four methodologies used to estimate the IEVSL: 1) meta-analyses of hedonic wage studies
(see Mrozek and Taylor [2003], Viscusi and Aldy [2003], Bowland and Beghin [2001]); 2) stated preference
studies (see Hammitt and Graham [2000], Hammitt and Zhou [2000], Mitchell and Carson [1986]); 3)
comparisons of VSL estimates at different points in time for a single country (see Hammitt, Liu, and Liu [2006],
Costa and Kahn [2004]); 4) cross-country comparisons of VSL estimates (see Hammitt, Liu, and Liu [2006]).


                                                        2
approximating the future value of a statistical life (VSL) based on current VSL, the IEVSL,

and projected future incomes. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Science Advisory

Board (SAB) recently concluded that the empirical literature supports adjusting willingness-

to-pay estimates to account for higher future income levels. The prospective report on the

costs and benefits of the Clean Air Act Amendments for 1990 to 2010 conducted sensitivity

analyses using three IEVSL estimates of 0.08, 0.4, and 1.0. The potential policy implications

of different values are striking; the difference between the estimated 2010 VSL based on the

upper and lower IEVSL estimates is more than $1 million dollars. The $1 million difference

in the VSL estimates translates into a $1 million difference in estimated benefits for each

avoided fatality. With mortality risk reductions serving as the lion’s share of benefits, this

type of variation in estimates for future VSL measures is a major influence on projected future

aggregate benefits.

       Efforts to estimate the benefits of historical improvements in health and safety, as

Murphy and Topel [2006] and Jena et al. [2008] have recently done for 1970 to 2000, offer a

second application where the IEVSL plays an important role. Weitzman [2009] recently used

VSL estimates as a gauge in calibrating the importance of a disastrously low level of

consumption for his assessments of how to deal with climate uncertainty. Once again this

measure of a people’s willingness to tradeoff resources for risk plays a key role in his

conclusions. An extension to his work would explore the dependence of this linkage on

income. The IEVSL would be an important component of such an analysis. A final context in

which the IEVSL has important policy implications is in benefit transfer. Methods for

transferring measures of the marginal willingness to pay for risk reductions from one context

to another are often the only available basis on which to estimate the benefits of some




                                                3
policies. A common application of benefit transfer involves applying VSL estimates based on

revealed or stated choices of individuals in developed countries for policies intended to reduce

premature mortality in developing countries. An assessment of the benefits of policies that

reduce mortality risks for populations in developing countries would ideally use VSL

estimates derived from choices, revealed or stated, of residents of these countries. Of course,

obtaining these estimates is costly therefore they are often unavailable for many countries and

applications. In these cases, benefit transfer, which relies on the IEVSL and the associated

income differences across countries, provides an option for benefit estimation.

       Given the observed empirical inconsistencies and the policy implications of different

values of the IEVSL, we might ask what insight on the IEVSL theory has to offer. Theory has

provided some guidance on factors that influence the IEVSL and, in doing so, on its expected

magnitude. For example, Eeckhoudt and Hammitt [2001] and Kaplow [2005] highlight the

relationship between the IEVSL and the coefficient of relative risk aversion (CRR). Both

models suggest the IEVSL should be at least as large as the CRR, a theoretical prediction that

is not supported by a comparison of empirical estimates of the IEVSL and the CRR. Thus, in

addition to the conflicting IEVSL estimates among empirical studies, there is little consistency

between theoretical predictions and empirical evidence on the IEVSL.

       We propose a more general theoretical model that helps to reconcile some of the

observed inconsistencies related to the IEVSL. Our model of the labor supply decision

demonstrates how relaxing key simplifying assumptions results in an alternative explanation

for the bounds of the IEVSL. While relaxing these assumptions complicates the relationship

between the IEVSL and the CRR, doing so allows us to isolate other factors that influence the

IEVSL. Our analysis identifies behavioral (e.g., labor supply) adjustments to an exogenous




                                               4
income shock, for example unanticipated medical expenditures, as a key component of the

IEVSL. A final innovation of our theoretical model involves considering the role of

constraints to these behavioral adjustments, in the form of consumption commitments. Home

mortgages, automobile purchases, and the acquisition of other consumer durables often

involve fixed payment schedules that consumers find costly to adjust. As a result, short run

adjustments to exogenous shocks will differ from responses when the consumption

commitments can be modified. Our model confirms that the presence of consumption

commitments affects risk preferences (Chetty and Szeidl [2007]) and the responsiveness of

labor supply to income changes. Both effects have implications for the IEVSL.

       While full estimates of a structural model are beyond the scope of this paper, it is

nonetheless important to consider whether features of our theoretical model are empirically

relevant. To address this question we consider, in section IV, the empirical relevance of two

key features of our theoretical model, the responsiveness of labor supply decisions to spousal

health shocks and the role of a home mortgage as a constraint on this response. Data from the

Health and Retirement Study (HRS) permits an empirical investigation of these issues. Our

results suggest that the presence of consumption commitments alters individuals’ abilities to

respond to shocks, especially for the male workers in our HRS sample.

       We begin in the next section by describing how the recent work of Eeckhoudt and

Hammitt [2001], Kaplow [2005], Chetty [2006] and Chetty and Szeidl [2007] relate to the

structure of our conceptual model. In section III we describe the results from our generalized

model which yields some of the previous models as special cases.



II.    Background




                                               5
        Several studies contain descriptions of how we should expect VSL estimates to vary

with individual circumstances. We focus our attention on four such papers (Eeckhoudt and

Hammitt [2001], Kaplow [2005], Chetty [2006] and Chetty and Szeidl [2007]). The primary

objectives of the papers vary but each offers a key insight that motivates the structure of our

analytical model discussed in section III.

        Eeckhoudt and Hammitt [2001] propose a state dependent expected utility

specification to explore how different types of background risk influence the properties of

VSL estimates. They assume a simple preference specification where utility derives from

wealth (m), u j = u j (m ) , where j = A, D denote the two possible states, alive and dead,

respectively. Utility in the dead state, associated with bequest motives, is assumed to be a

linear function of utility in the living state as in equation (2.1).

        u D (m ) = αu A (m) − δ                                                         (2.1)

where 0 ≤ α ≤ 1 and δ ≥ 0 .

        Assuming p denotes the probability of death, expected utility is given by

V ≡ (1 − p )u A (m ) + pu D (m ) . Expressions (2.2) and (2.3) provide the implied VSL and IEVSL

(denoted η EH ), respectively (with m treated as being synonymous with income).

                (1 − α )u ′A (m ) + δ
        VSL =                                                                           (2.2)
                (1 − p + pα )u ′A (m )

        nEH =
                dVSL m
                       =
                            (1 − α ) ⎛ m ⎞ − m u ′A′ (m )
                                      ⎜     ⎟                                           (2.3)
                 dm VSL (1 − p + pα ) ⎝ VSL ⎠  u ′A (m )

where the subscript EH indentifies the Eeckhoudt and Hammitt measure. The second term in

                                                                   ⎛    u ′′ (m ) ⎞
equation (2.3) is the coefficient of relative risk aversion (CRR) ⎜⎜ − m A         ⎟.
                                                                   ⎝    u ′A (m ) ⎟⎠




                                                   6
         Expressed in these terms, the Eeckhoudt and Hammitt analysis is consistent with the

model Kaplow [2005] develops in his paper a few years later. By assuming a utility function

that exhibits constant relative risk aversion, Kaplow shows that an approximation for the

income elasticity of the VSL is expected to be slightly greater than the CRR. While in practice

the difference may be small, his result has been interpreted as implying the CRR provides a

lower bound for the income elasticity of VSL. A brief inspection of (2.3) confirms why we

might expect the difference to be small. Suppose m is small relative to the VSL, which we

might expect. In this case, the first term of expression (2.3) is small (but positive) and the

income elasticity of the VSL, η EH , just exceeds the CRR. As noted by Kaplow, this result

creates a puzzle since most estimates of the income elasticity for the VSL are significantly

less that one (see Viscusi and Aldy [2003]) whereas estimates of the coefficient of relative

risk aversion are approximately two (see Chetty [2006]).

         Closer examination of Kaplow’s model, which differs from that of Eeckhoudt and

Hammitt along a few key dimensions, provides additional insight into this relationship.

Kaplow allows an individual to reduce his risk of death, p ( x ) with p′( x ) < 0 , through

precautionary activities (expenditures), x. As in Eeckhoudt and Hammitt, individuals derive

utility from a single source, in this case net consumption.3 The simplest formulation of

Kaplow’s model, which we review here, ignores bequest motives (thus we drop the D

subscript for notational simplicity). Modifying notation for consistency with Eeckhoudt and

Hammitt, expected utility in Kaplow’s model is given in (2.4).

         V ≡ (1 − p ( x ))u A (m − x )                                                               (2.4)



3
 Since prices are normalized to unity and x is a perfect substitute for c, the Kaplow formulation is equivalent to
assuming an indirect utility function in describing preferences.


                                                         7
Utility depends only on net consumption (c) with c = m − x where m now represents

exogenous income rather than wealth as in Eeckhoudt and Hammitt.4 That is, the model

assumes individuals derive no utility (or disutility) directly from engaging in pre-cautionary

activities. While this formulation has been applied in some settings, such as sunscreen (see for

example Dickie and Gerking [2007]), it is also plausible to assume individuals derive utility or

disutility from the activities measured by x (e.g., physical exercise). The most important

implication of this assumption for our discussion is that it removes the possibility of

considering complementarity or substitution relationships between c and x. Indeed, Kaplow’s

model has the feature that x simply absorbs resources that could go to consumption. The

marginal utility of consumption is independent of x, and vice versa, in his formulation. We

return to this point later in our discussion.

         Kaplow derives the following expression for the consumption elasticity of the VSL

implied by his model, denoted η Kc :

                  dVSL c    u′   u ′′ u ′ dx
         η Kc =           =c A −c A −c A                                                           (2.5)
                   dc VSL   uA   u ′A u A dc

where the second term is the curvature of utility over net consumption, not over wealth or

                                   dx
income as in (2.3). The term          in (2.5) measures how (optimal) expenditures on pre-
                                   dc

cautionary activities vary as consumption changes.

         In general, the consumption elasticity of the VSL does not equal the income elasticity

of the VSL. The income elasticity of the VSL indicates the responsiveness of the VSL to

changes in an exogenous factor (m). On the other hand, the consumption elasticity of the VSL,



4 The distinction for static models is largely one of terminology. The models we discuss do not have an inter-
temporal dimension so there is no saving and asset accumulation.


                                                        8
η Kc , measures the responsiveness of the VSL to changes in an endogenous variable (c). Of

course, the VSL responds to changes in m through changes in consumption. However, this

adjustment occurs via two channels, one direct and one indirect. The income elasticity of the

VSL separates these two channels. Additionally, in contrast to η Kc , the formation of and

intuition associated with the IEVSL parallel those for income elasticity measures found in

other contexts.

           The IEVSL (i.e., the responsiveness of the VSL to changes in m) for Kaplow’s model,

denoted η Km , is given in equations (2.6a) and (2.6b). The underlying model used to derive this

measure is unchanged.5

                    dVSL m    mu ′A ⎛      dx ⎞ mu ′A′ ⎛    dx ⎞
           η Km =           =       ⎜1 − 2    ⎟−       ⎜1 −    ⎟                                     (2.6a)
                     dm VSL   uA ⎝         dm ⎠ u ′A ⎝ dm ⎠

                         ⎛     dx ⎞            ⎛        ⎞
                 mu ′A   ⎜1−      ⎟            ⎜ 1 ⎟
               =         ⎜     dc ⎟ − mu ′A′   ⎜        ⎟                                            (2.6b)
                 uA      ⎜ 1 + dx ⎟ u ′A       ⎜ 1 + dx ⎟
                         ⎜        ⎟            ⎜        ⎟
                         ⎝     dc ⎠            ⎝     dc ⎠

                                                                dx   dx dc
where expression (2.6b) results from substituting                  =         into (2.6a).
                                                                dm 1 + dx dc

                                                                              u′A′
           Two observations are important to highlight. First, − m                 measures the curvature of
                                                                              u′A

the utility function over exogenous income, rather than over net consumption as in (2.5).

                                                      dx dx
Second, note that even when we assume                   ,   ≈ 0 as argued by Kaplow ([2005], [2003]), a
                                                      dc dm

comparison of (2.5) and (2.6a) confirms that η Kc ≠ η Km .




5
    In fact, in a working paper version of his 2005 paper, Kaplow [2003] reports the measure given here as (2.6a).


                                                            9
         Chetty’s [2006] analysis, while not intended to consider the underlying determinants

of the VSL, takes a significant step in this direction. His framework was directed at

reconciling estimates of the CRR implied by choices in financial markets with estimates

implied by the elasticity of labor supply.6 His partial explanation for divergences in these

estimates identifies the failure of past models to account for consumption-labor supply

complementarities—“…increased consumption makes work less painful” (p.1821).

Connecting Chetty’s insights to the earlier work by Eeckhoudt and Hammitt and Kaplow

requires extending our characterization of the individual decision problem, as we do in the

beginning of the next section.

         Chetty and Szeidl [2007] add another component, the presence (or absence) of

constraints on other behavioral adjustments to exogenous shocks, that may cause additional

differences in the relationship between the coefficient of relative risk aversion and the income

elasticity of the VSL. Chetty and Szeidl [2007] conclude that:

         “…the wealth elasticity of labor supply is larger in magnitude when households have

         commitments. Insofar as commitments are retained when households face small or

         temporary wealth fluctuations but are adjusted in the long run, this result implies that

         the wealth (unearned income) elasticity of the labor supply is larger in the short run

         that the long run.” (p. 862)

To explain the intuition for this result, they note that if a primary earner is temporarily

unemployed, then there are incentives for the spouse to enter the labor force to help pay the

mortgage and other household commitments, which are effectively fixed in the short run. The

basic questions we consider in the next section of the paper are how to treat: (1) behavioral


6
 Smith et. al. [2003] in an independent analysis use labor supply elasticity measures for specific preference
functions to measure VSL.


                                                       10
adjustments in response to exogenous income shocks (section III.A.); and (2) other

consumption components’ responses that may well be costly to adjust (section III.B.).



III.     Model of Labor Supply, Mortality Risk, and Commitments

A.       Implications of behavioral adjustments for risk preferences and the IEVSL

         In this subsection, we develop a model (denoted Model I) of labor supply that

combines the consumption-labor supply complementarities Chetty highlights with a feature of

Kaplow’s model which recognizes behavioral influences on survival probabilities. We ignore

the bequest motive and re-define c as the sum of non-wage, exogenous income (m) and wage

income ( wl ) where w and l denote the wage and labor supply respectively. We assume the

risk of death, p, is a function of the time spent working so that p = p(l ) with p′(l ), p′′(l ) > 0 .7

Individuals gain utility from consumption and disutility from working so expected utility is

given in (3.1).

         V = (1 − p (l ))u (c, l ) = (1 − p(l ))u (m + wl , l )                                      (3.1)

         We assume uc (c, l ) > 0, ul (c, l ) < 0 and ucc (c, l ), ull (c, l ) < 0 where subscripts are used to

denote partial effects. The first order condition for an interior solution in selecting l is then

given in (3.2) and the expression for the VSL in (3.3).

         − p ' u (c I *, l I *) + (1 − p )[wu c (c I *, l I *) + ul (c I *, l I *)] = 0              (3.2)

where l I * and c I * = m + wl I * denote optimal labor supplied and consumption in Model I

respectively (the subscript I identifies the Model I results).

                       w                      wu (c I *, l I *)
         VSL =               =                                                                       (3.3)
                   p' (l I *) (1 − p(l I *))[wu c (c I *, l I *) + ul (c I *, l I *)]

7
 Our assumption of p′(l ) > 0 implies that an individual faces a relatively lower probability of death in non-
work related activities so that substituting an hour of leisure with an hour of work increases the risk of death.


                                                               11
         As the IEVSL measures the responsiveness of the VSL, which is a function of the

optimal labor supply, to changes in m, constructing an expression for the IEVSL requires an

assumption regarding the ability of labor supply to adjust to income shocks. For now, assume

l is fixed at the optimal level implied by (3.2). That is, (optimal) labor supply cannot adjust to

                           dl I *
changes in m (i.e.,               = 0 ). This assumption is comparable to Kaplow’s assumption that
                            dm

expenditures on risk reducing goods will not respond to changes in consumption. In both

cases, the behavioral response to an exogenous shock is assumed to be negligible.

         For l fixed at l I * , the income elasticity of the VSL is given by equation (3.4) with

u ' ≡ wuc + ul

                           muc wmucc mucl
         η I , l fixed =      −     −                                                              (3.4)
                            u   u'    u'

where the arguments of the preference function are suppressed. Expression (3.4) implies that

even when we assume no behavioral adjustments to exogenous income shocks,

complementarity between consumption and labor supplied (ucl > 0) reduces the income

elasticity of the VSL relative to the value that would obtain under independence (i.e.,

ucl = 0 ).8 Consider the channel through which this result occurs. With fixed labor supply, an

increase in m results in a one-for-one increase in consumption (i.e., dc I * = dm ); consumption

entirely absorbs the effect of the income shock. When consumption and labor supply are

complements consumption makes work less painful and the increased consumption decreases

the marginal disutility of labor (i.e., u l moves towards zero). The compensation required for




8
 A comparable result holds in Kaplow’s model if we allow x to affect utility and the marginal utility of
consumption (c) to vary with x.


                                                       12
accepting the increase in risk associated with working an additional hour (VSL) is lower as a

result.

           An examination of the relationship between the IEVSL and the coefficient of relative

risk aversion (CRR) facilitate comparisons with the previous literature. Equation (3.5) defines

the elasticity of utility to non-wage income and equation (3.6) the CRR (for l fixed at l I * ).9

                            muc
           γ I ,l fixed =                                                                                        (3.5)
                             u

                              mucc
            RI ,l fixed = −        .                                                                             (3.6)
                               uc

Substitution using (3.5) and (3.6) allows us to rewrite (3.4) as follows:

                                           wu c               mucl
           η I ,l fixed = γ I ,l fixed +        RI ,l fixed −                                                    (3.7)
                                            u′                 u′

                      wu c
Since ul < 0 ,             > 1 . Therefore, assuming independence between c and l (i.e., ucl = 0 ),
                       u′

RI ,l fixed bounds η I ,l fixed from below as in Eeckhoudt and Hammitt and Kaplow. However, we

find that sufficient complementarity alters the role of the CRR as a lower bound for the

income elasticity of the VSL. Thus, when we expand the description of consumption to

individual earnings and non-wage income, the model suggests that even when labor supply is

held fixed, risk preferences alone (as measured by the coefficient of relative risk aversion) do

not provide a lower bound for the income elasticity for the VSL; with sufficient labor-

consumption complementarity, the income elasticity is less than the coefficient of relative risk




9
    Note our definitions of     γ I ,l fixed   and RI ,l fixed are consistent with Kaplow [2003] in that these measures are
defined with respect to expected utility, V. With no labor supply adjustment, comparable measures defined with
respect to utility, u, are identical. Thus, the distinction is irrelevant for Model I with l fixed.


                                                                     13
aversion.10 This result stands in contrast with the conclusions drawn from both Eeckhoudt and

Hammitt [2001] and Kaplow [2005] whose preference specifications do not allow for the

consumption/labor supply link.

         Now consider how the ability to adjust labor supply in response to an exogenous

change in non-wage income affects the link between the income elasticity of the VSL and the

CRR. Intuitively, when l can adjust to income shocks, a change in m affects the VSL through

two channels. First, the change in m affects c directly, as in the case with fixed l. Second, the

change in m affects the optimal choice of l, which influences both the level of consumption

(through changes in wage income) as well as the marginal utility of consumption when

u cl > 0 . As a result, allowing for variable labor supply complicates the expression for the

IEVSL as illustrated in equation (3.8).

                dVSL m
         η I ,l var iable =
                 dm VSL
                                                                                                       (3.8)
           muc wmu cc mucl   dl * ⎡ 2u ' w 2ucc + 2wu cl + ull ⎤
         =    −      −     +m I ⎢       −                      ⎥
            u   u'     u'     dm ⎣ u              u'           ⎦

where

          dl I *                p ' uc − (1 − p)( wu cc + ucl )
                 =                                                       .                             (3.9)
                               2u ( p′)
                                                  [                       ]
                                       2
           dm
                      − p′′u −           + (1 − p ) w ucc + 2wu cl + ull
                                                     2

                               (1 − p )
Two important questions arise with respect to expression (3.8). First, how does allowing for

variable labor supply affect the magnitude of the IEVSL? Second, how does variable labor

supply affect the relationship between the IEVSL and the CRR? To address the first question,


10
   One potential explanation for this complementarity could be health related. Indeed, following research by Hall
and Jones [2007], we recently argued [Evans and Smith, 2008] that improved health increases complementarity
between consumption and leisure (implying substitution between consumption and labor). Thus, for a given
degree of risk aversion, those individuals in good health are likely to have higher income elasticities for their risk
tradeoffs then those in poor health.


                                                         14
consider the case of independence between consumption and labor supply. With u cl = 0 , the

expressions for the income elasticity of the VSL with fixed and variable labor supply can be

written as in (3.10) and (3.11) respectively:

                          muc wmu cc
         η I ,l fixed =      −                                                                   (3.10)
                           u   u'

                              muc wmu cc    dl * ⎡ 2u ' w 2u cc + ull ⎤
         η I ,l var iable =      −       +m      ⎢     −              ⎥                          (3.11)
                               u   u'       dm ⎣ u            u'      ⎦

The first two terms of (3.10) and (3.11) are identical when they are evaluated at the same level

                                                                          dl I *
of labor supply (and therefore consumption). With u cl = 0 ,                     < 0 since the denominator
                                                                           dm

of (3.9) is negative by the second order condition. The bracketed term in (3.11) is positive.

Thus, for this case the final term in (3.11) is negative and η I ,l var iable < η I ,l fixed .

         Variable labor supply provides the individual with an additional margin along which

he can adjust to income shocks. This ability to adjust dilutes the effect of an income shock on

the marginal willingness to pay for a risk reduction. Note also that the larger is the reduction

in labor supply in response to an increase in m, the larger is the deviation between η I ,l var iable

and η I ,l fixed . While our discussion here focuses on independence between consumption and

labor supply, the result also holds with sufficiently modest levels of complementarity.

         To explore the second question posed above, we rearrange expression (3.8) to express

η I ,l var iable as a function of the elasticity of utility to consumption and the CRR. However, with

labor supply adjusting to changes in exogenous income, the CRR is no longer expressed as in




                                                        15
(3.6); the CRR must also account for the labor supply adjustment (Chetty [2006]). We obtain

the following expression for the CRR with variable labor supply.11

                                mucc   dl * ⎡ p′        wu cc + ucl ⎤
         RI ,l var iable = −         +m I ⎢           −             ⎥                                 (3.12)
                                 uc     dm ⎣ (1 − p )       uc      ⎦

         Note that the first term in (3.12) is the coefficient of relative risk aversion with l fixed

at l I * (which we denoted RI ,l fixed above). As in Chetty (2006), with l variable, the agent has

increased flexibility to adjust to exogenous income shocks and thus is less risk averse when

adjustment is possible. Therefore, RI ,l var iable < RI ,l fixed .12

         When we rewrite the expression for the IEVSL with variable labor supply ((3.8))

substituting for the CRR given in (3.12), the conditions under which the CRR serves as a

lower bound for the IEVSL become even less transparent as illustrated in expression (3.13).

                              muc                   wuc mucl dl I * ⎡ mu ′ mul m(wucl + ull ) ⎤
         η I ,l var iable =       + RI ,l var iable     −    +            +   −               ⎥ (3.13)
                               u                     u'   u'   dm ⎢⎣ u      u      u′         ⎦

Expression (3.13) confirms that the degree of complementarity between c and l again plays a

key role in determining the relationship between the CRR and the IEVSL. To highlight the

potential role of complementarity, rewrite η I ,l var iable as a function of RI ,l fixed (the CRR with l

fixed) as follows:

                                                wuc mucl dl I * ⎡ 2mu ′ m 2
                                                                       − (w ucc + 2wucl + ull )⎥ (3.14)
                              muc                                                              ⎤
         η I ,l var iable =       + RI ,l fixed     −    +      ⎢
                               u                 u'   u'   dm ⎣ u       u                      ⎦

11
   Our derivation of the CRR with variable labor supply parallels a related measure developed by Chetty (2006).
However, our expression for the CRR is different from Chetty’s because his model does not consider risk as a
function of labor supply. Thus in his model, the CRR defined in terms of utility is identical to the measure we
define with respect to expected utility (as in Kaplow).
12
   See the appendix for a proof of this result. It is important to recognize that this conclusion depends on defining
the CRR in terms of expected utility as Kaplow has proposed. Arrow’s [1971] overview of the theory underlying
the definition of the coefficient of risk aversion describes it as a feature of the utility function not the expected
utility function. We have adopted the Kaplow convention in order to facilitate direct comparisons between our
results and those of Kaplow and others. Chetty and Szeidl [2007] also define a CRR in terms of expected utility
(p. 844).


                                                         16
                                                         dl I *
Now suppose ucl = 0 . Under independence,                       < 0 and the bracketed term in equation
                                                          dm

(3.14) is positive so that the final term, their product, is negative. Thus, even with ucl = 0 ,

RI ,l fixed need not provide a lower bound for the IEVSL when we allow for labor market

adjustments to income shocks (η I ,l var iable ). What about RI ,l var iable ? Since RI ,l var iable < RI ,l fixed ,

under certain conditions (i.e., ull sufficiently close to zero or ul sufficiently negative)

RI ,l var iable provides a lower bound for η I ,l var iable when ucl = 0 . However, the result does not

hold generally even under independence. Not surprisingly, the presence of consumption-labor

supply complementarity ( ucl > 0 ) further confounds the relationship between RI ,l var iable and

η I ,l var iable . Although the relationship between the income elasticity of the VSL and the

coefficient of relative risk aversion is less transparent with variable labor supply, our

analytical derivations again suggest key roles for both the behavioral responses to exogenous

income shocks as well as consumption-labor supply complementarities.



B.       Implications of consumption commitments for risk preferences and the IEVSL

The final model extension we explore (reported as Model II) involves considering the

possibility that the presence of other constraints, such as those related to consumption, may

limit the ability of some individuals to adjust their labor supply in response to income shocks.

Our objective is to examine how the presence of consumption commitments impacts the

IEVSL. To do so, we add a third argument, denoted z, to the utility function specified above.

That is, we assume expected utility is given by:

         V = (1 − p (l ))u (m + wl − z , z , l )                                                         (3.15)




                                                          17
with the price of z assumed to be unity. With this specification, we can use assumptions about

whether z can adjust to exogenous income shocks to further explore the relationship between

the IEVSL and the CRR in the presence (or absence) of additional behavioral constraints. It is

straightforward to see the parallel structure of the problem by differentiating the relevant

expression for the VSL with respect to exogenous income (m) while allowing both l and z to

adjust as in equation (3.16).

           dVSL      wuc        w2uucc       wuucl       dl *     dz *
                =           −              −            + II ⋅ A + II ⋅ B                            (3.16)
            dm    (1 − p )u′ (1 − p )(u′) (1 − p )(u′) dm
                                         2            2
                                                                   dm

where

              − w3uucc − 2w 2uucl − wuull + w(u ′)
                                                          2
           A≡
                          (1 − p )(u ′)2
           and

                 w 2uucc − w 2uucz + wuulc − wuulz − wu ′(uc − u z )
           B≡
                                    (1 − p )(u ′)2
l II * and z II * denote the optimal choices of labor supply and consumption of z for Model II

respectively.

           An argument similar to what we developed for Model I above would yield a

generalization to the CRR and the implication that restrictions on adjustments to z lead to

measures for the CRR that imply magnified risk aversion with commitments. When z is fixed

(i.e., the individual faces a consumption commitment), adjustment is precluded on this margin

and with complementarities the effect of this constraint can be magnified.13 What is important

for our situation is the fact that this added restriction further compromises seemingly clear-cut

judgments about the relationship between the IEVSL and measures of risk aversion.

13
     See Chetty and Szeidl [2007] pp 845-846 for the derivation in a closely related model and further discussion.


                                                         18
       The basic logic of our model implies that we should be able to detect the effects of

these commitments by considering other margins of adjustment. For example if z corresponds

to a commitment to a home and associated mortgage payments, then a shock to household

income should be reflected in hours worked or the labor force participation decisions of

household members. We should expect to observe different behavioral responses among

individuals in households with significant mortgage or other commitments relative to those in

households with smaller or no pronounced commitments.

       Table 1 combines the results from all the cases we have considered for Models I and

II, with fixed and variable labor supply as well as accounting for the role of prior consumption

commitments. Specifically, the table reports the implied coefficient of relative risk aversion

(CRR), the income elasticity of the VSL (IEVSL), and labor supply responses to exogenous

income shocks for each model specification. The first row of the table includes the three

measures of interest derived from Kaplow’s model for comparison.

       Consistent estimates of the VSL that capture the effects of differences in exogenous

non-wage income or in other factors influencing individuals’ labor supply and consumption

decisions must be based on a structural model. Fortunately this does not mean we must have a

comprehensive dataset that would support estimation of a fully structural model of labor

supply and commodity choices under uncertainty. Policy can be based on consistently

calibrated models. Indeed, none of the four studies that we discuss in section II report new

estimates of structural models based on the arguments these authors develop. Instead, they

present numerical exercises based on calibrated models. However, there is an important

distinction between these numerical exercises and most extrapolations currently used in

benefit transfers for environmental policy. These numerical analyses maintain a consistent




                                               19
framework to describe how optimal choices respond to exogenous shocks in the presence of

constraints. This type of analysis imposes the structural linkages derived from utility-theoretic

models of decision making.14 The same would be possible for the case of adjustments to VSL

for income differences or other factors important to a consistent economic model for risk

tradeoffs. Of course, imposing this structure is warranted when the estimates of the necessary

model parameters are available and when there is empirical support for the importance of the

role of commitments and labor supply adjustments. The next section presents some empirical

evidence that begins to make a case for the relevance of such a structural framework.



IV.      Empirical Relevance of Consumption Commitments

         This section reports the results of a simple exercise that explores the empirical

relevance of labor supply responses to shocks and the role of consumption commitments as a

constraint on these responses. Recall our conceptual analysis suggested that measures of both

risk preferences and labor supply responses would be influenced by the ability to adjust

commitments in response to exogenous shocks. Our empirical analysis uses data from the

Health and Retirement Study (HRS).15 Because of the demographic group represented in these

data, the sample has some special features, such as detailed information on health conditions,

which work to our advantage. In addition, income constraints may also be more pronounced

among these respondents. We divide our empirical findings into two parts. The first

subsection reports some simple cross tabulations investigating the link between estimates of

the extent of risk aversion based on stated choices and a set of economic and demographic

14
  This is the point of arguments for using preference calibration in other types of benefits transfer.
15
  The HRS is a national panel study intended to be representative of individuals who fell in the age cohort of 51
to 61 years old in 1992 (wave 1) and their spouses. The HRS (Health and Retirement Study) is sponsored by the
National Institute of Aging (grant number NIA U01AG09740) and conducted by the University of Michigan.
We rely on the RAND Corporation’s cleaned version of the HRS.


                                                       20
attributes. In the second subsection, we explore the responsiveness of labor force participation

to exogenous shocks in the presence and absence of consumption commitments.

A.         The effect of consumption commitments for risk preferences

           The measurement of risk aversion relies primarily on indirect methods. For example,

Holt and Laury [2003] propose a paired lottery-choice experiment that provides estimates of

risk aversion coefficients under various preference specifications. Alternatively, the auction

literature has proposed structural models to estimate risk coefficients, for particular preference

functions, using bidding data.16 Many of these indirect methods involve inferring risk

preferences from models of decision making in various settings but as a result rely on the

maintained assumptions of these models. The method proposed by Barsky et al. [1997] is a

notable exception. Their risk tolerance question is based responses to questions about choices

between a secure job for life and another job with a 50-50 chance of two different income

levels. With locally constant relative risk aversion the answers classify respondents into one

of four risk tolerance categories from least risk averse to most averse. Barsky et al.’s analysis

of wave one (1992) of the HRS (the same dataset used in our analysis in the next section)

found higher levels of risk aversion among women (relative to men) and among homeowners

(relative to renters). The latter finding is consistent with the results of Chetty and Szeidl.

           We confirm similar results for the effects of commitments among the subset of HRS

respondents who were asked the Barksky risk tolerance questions in 2000. That is, we find

higher levels of risk aversion (based on the Barksy classification) among respondents in our

sample with mortgage payments (p = 0.109, N = 1,375). Thus, we find additional support for

the Chetty-Szeidl hypothesis that we expect to observe higher levels of risk aversion among

those with commitments.
16
     See Chetty [2006] for citations of additional studies that use indirect methods to estimate risk coefficients.


                                                           21
       More recently the second author and Carol Mansfield (see Smith and Mansfield

[2008]) consider a representative sample of adults 18 years or older from Knowledge

Networks Internet panel in 2006. The survey asked a series of questions to investigate risk

preferences. Respondents were first asked the Barsky et al. risk classification questions.

Following this question, respondents were informed, using a series of descriptive phrases, the

risk classification implied by their answers. Respondents were asked to indicate whether they

agreed with the assessment. If a respondent did not agree with the description of their

attitudes, then he was given the opportunity to reclassify himself into another risk tolerance

category. About one third of respondents expressed disagreement with the Barsky

classification of their risk preferences and chose a revised classification that differed from the

Barsky measure. Smith and Mansfield report a strong link between the CRR based on revised

responses and the economic characteristics and behaviors of the respondents. Table 2

reproduces their results from three models as well as summary statistics for the sample. The

third column reports regression results using the full sample where the dependent variable is

either the implied CRR (for respondents who agreed with the original assessment) or the

revised CRR (for those who disagreed and chose an alternative category). The fourth column

reports the same model using the original responses and the last restricts the sample to those

individuals who agreed with the original assignment. Two features of these findings are

relevant for our arguments. Commitments in the form of home ownership increase measured

risk aversion as Chetty and Szeidl’s analysis suggests. Income level appears to reduce risk

aversion as theory would suggest and age increases measured risk aversion. Offering the

opportunity to revise affects the ability of the model to uncover the effects of education.

B.     The effect of consumption commitments for labor market responses to shocks




                                                22
       Our second empirical exercise involves exploring the relevance of consumption

commitments as constraints to individual labor market responses to exogenous shocks. Coile

(2008) proposes a model to examine the impact of own and spouse health shocks on labor

market behavior. We adapt her specification to consider how older individuals’ decisions to

exit the labor force in response to a change in the health status of a spouse vary with the

presence of consumption commitments. We focus on the decision of HRS respondents to exit

the full-time labor force between 1998 (wave 4) and 2000 (wave 5). We estimate the

following model:

        yi = α + xi β + γ 0 zi + γ 1mi + γ 2 z i mi + ε i                            (4.1)

where yi = 1 if respondent i exited from full-time work between 1998 and 2000. That is,

yi = 1 if i worked full time in 1998 but worked part-time, was fully or partly retired,

unemployed, disabled, or not in the labor force in 2000. yi = 0 if respondent i continued to

work full-time in 2000. xi denotes a vector in individual characteristics. mi indicates the

presence of an exogenous (negative) income shock. zi is a binary variable which takes a value

of one if the individual faces a consumption commitment.

       We indicate the presence of a consumption commitment if the value of all mortgages

on the respondent’s first home exceeds $50,000. A reported increase in (own) functional

limitations by the respondent’s spouse between 1998 and 2000 serves as a proxy for an

exogenous shock that may influence the labor market behavior of the respondent. During each

interview wave, survey participants (target respondents and their spouses) indicate whether or

not they experience difficulty with various activities of daily living (ADLs) including bathing,

dressing, eating, getting in and out of bed, and walking across a room. Using summary

measures available in the RAND version of the HRS data, we construct a binary variable that


                                                            23
equals one if the number of ADLs with which the respondent’s spouse reported having some

difficulty increased between waves 4 and 5.

         We focus on increased difficulties with activities of daily living rather than other

changes in health such as a new diagnosis of a serious health condition for two reasons. First,

as noted by Coile, indicators of specific health conditions may mask important heterogeneity.

That is, the severity of and therefore the behavioral response to a spousal health shock are

likely vary across individuals and across diagnoses. For example, a respondent whose spouse

suffers a stroke that results in significantly reduced capacity may face increased care-giving

responsibilities relative to one whose spouse also suffers a stroke but whose capacities are not

severely diminished as a result. A binary variable indicating the occurrence of the stroke

would treat these two scenarios identically. Second, relative to spouses in our sample with

new health diagnoses between 1998 and 2000, spouses who had an increase in ADLs are more

likely to report limitations in the type or amount of paid work in which they engage in 2000.17

Of those spouses in our sample with an increase in ADLs, 74% reported work limitations

while only 26% and 47% of spouses with new diagnoses of chronic and acute health

conditions indicated limitations respectively.18 To explore the suitability of our measure of

increased ADL difficulties as a proxy for an income shock, we examine the mean difference

in average medical expenditures in 2000 among spouses with increased difficulties and those




17
   The text of the survey question is: “Now I want to ask how your health affects paid work activities. Do you
have any impairment or health problem that limits the kind or amount of paid work you can do?”
18
   Chronic health conditions include diabetes or high blood sugar, lung disease such as chronic bronchitis or
emphysema, arthritis or rheumatism, and high blood pressure or hypertension. We define an acute health
condition as a stroke or transient ischemic attack, cancer or a malignant tumor of any kind except skin cancer,
heart attack, coronary heart disease, angina, congestive heart failure, or other heart problem. These definitions
are broadly consistent with Coile [2004].


                                                        24
without. Mean medical expenditures are more than $20,000 higher (p = 0.00) among those

with increased ADLs.19

           Table 3 reports summary statistics for our primary sample, which is restricted to 3,920

married respondents who reported working full time, at least 35 hours per week for at least 36

weeks, in wave 4 (1998). About 25% of respondents exited the full time labor force between

1998 and 2000. The average respondent in our sample is about 59 years old with 13 years of

education. About 58% of individuals in our sample are male. Almost a third of respondents

live in household with mortgages that exceed $50,000. Mean household income and non-

housing assets in 1998 were both approximately $90,000.

           Table 4 contains the results of our full time labor market exit probit models. The table

reports marginal effects and z statistics. Following Coile, we estimate separate models for

male and female respondents in our sample. The final two columns of the table add additional

controls for own ADL shock and own ADL shock interacted with the mortgage commitment

variable. The results suggest that the labor exit decisions of women in our sample are not

significantly affected by spousal ADL shocks independent of the presence of a mortgage

commitment. Specifications (1) and (3) indicate significance differences in the impact of a

spousal ADL shock on the labor exit decision for those men in our sample who have mortgage

commitments relative to those who do not. Specification (1) suggests that for men without

significant mortgage commitments, an increase in spousal ADLs increases the probability of

exiting the full time labor force by about 7%. For men in our sample with mortgage

commitments, a spousal ADL shock decreases the exit probability by about 10% (p-value =

0.06). Once we control for own ADL shocks (specification 3), we continue to find differences



19   All reported dollar figures are nominal.


                                                  25
in the responsiveness of the labor exit outcome to spousal ADL shocks between men in our

sample with commitments and those without. The results with respect to the other controls are

generally consistent with expectations.

       To summarize our empirical analysis, we find clear evidence consistent with the

notion that significant consumption commitments alter individuals’ abilities to respond to

exogenous income shocks. The constraints to behavioral adjustments implied by these

commitments are more pronounced among men in our sample. Among women in our sample,

the decision to exit the full time labor force in response to increased spousal functional

limitations is insensitive to the presence of commitments. While our empirical model focuses

on the extensive margin of adjustment, these findings are nonetheless broadly consistent with

our analytical model which suggests that the presence of consumption commitments can alter

labor market responses (at the intensive margin) to exogenous income effects.



V.     Conclusion

       Our analysis was motivated by the policy importance of how estimates of the marginal

willingness to pay for risk reductions are adapted to fit the conditions required by the policies

they help to evaluate. Most of the available estimates of these tradeoffs are derived from

reduced form models that consider the marginal changes in compensation different individuals

are willing to accept for different working conditions. These working conditions include

variations in serious risks of injury or death on the job. Using these reduced form estimates

outside the domain of the conditions underlying the measurement of the tradeoffs requires an

understanding of how people adapt to a wide range of influences to their behaviors involving

labor-leisure choices, financial and nonfinancial commitments, and health status. Recent




                                               26
theoretical advances by Chetty and Chetty and Szeidl have identified ways in which the

models proposed by Eeckhoudt and Hammitt and Kaplow require revision in order to

accommodate the multiple margins available to people to adjust to shocks. We have

demonstrated that integrating these diverse conceptual treatments of individual behavior and

risk preferences leads to substantial changes in the widely accepted conclusions of Eeckhoudt

and Hammitt and Kaplow on how we should think about the role of exogenous income

changes as influences to risk tradeoffs. Moreover our preliminary empirical findings support

the empirical relevance of two key components of our theoretical analysis, the responsiveness

of labor market behavior to health shocks and the influence of consumption commitments for

this responsiveness.




                                             27
Table 1. Theoretical findingsa

            Coefficient of relative risk aversion                  Income elasticity of the VSL (IEVSL)           Labor supply response to exogenous income
            (CRR)                                                                                                 shock
 Kaplow model: V = (1 − p ( x ))u (c ), p ′ < 0 , choice variable is x

 x fixed at                − mu cc                                               mu c mu cc                       0
 initial       RK =                                                   ηK =           −
                              uc                                                  u    uc
 optimum
 Model I: V = (1 − p (l ))u (c, l ), p ′ > 0 , choice variable is l
 l fixed at                     − mu cc                                                  mu c wmu cc mu cl        0
 initial       R I ,l fixed =                                         η I ,l fixed =         −      −
                                  uc                                                      u    u'     u'
 optimum
 l variable                       − mu cc                                       muc        wu mu                  dl I *                       p ' u c − (1 − p )( wu cc + u cl )
               R I ,l var iable =                                     ηI ,l variable =
                                                                                     + R c − cl                          =
                                                                                                                                             2u ( p ′)
                                                                                                                                                                    [                         ]
                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                   dm
                                    uc                                           u          u'   u'                           − p ′′u −                + (1 − p ) w 2 u cc + 2 wu cl + u ll
                                                                       dl * ⎡ m(wucl + ull ) mu′ mul ⎤                                        (1 − p )
                        dl * ⎡ wu cc + u cl      p' ⎤                 − I ⎢                 −    −
                 −m
                        dm ⎣
                             ⎢
                                   uc
                                            −          ⎥
                                              (1 − p ) ⎦                dm ⎣      u′           u    u ⎥⎦

 Model II: V = (1 − p(l ))u (c, z , l ), p ′ > 0 , choice variables are l and z
 l, z fixed at                         − mu cc                                              mu c wmu cc           0
 initial         R II ,l & z fixed =                                  η II ,l & z fixed =       −
                                         uc                                                  u    u'
 optima                                                                   mu cl
                                                                      −
                                                                           u'
 l variable, z                                   − mu cc                                mu c        wu c mu cl    dl II , z fixed *                     p ' u c − (1 − p )( wu cc + u cl )
                 R II ,l fixed , z var iable =                        η II ,l fixed , z var iable =
                                                                                               + Rz      −                            =
 fixed at                                                                                                                                             2u ( p ′)
                                                                                                                                                                           [                           ]
                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                       dm
                                                                                                                                                                + (1 − p ) w 2 u cc + 2 wu cl + u ll
                                                   uc                                      u         u'      u'                           − p ′′u −
 initial
                                                                        dlˆ ⎡ m(wu cl + u ll ) mu ′ mu l ⎤                                             (1 − p )
 optimum            dlˆ ⎡ wu cc + u cl      p′ ⎤                      −                       −     −
                 −m     ⎢              −                                    ⎢                              ⎥
                    dm ⎣      uc         (1 − p )⎥⎦                     dm ⎣      u′             u      u ⎦




                                                                                                  28
l, z variable
                R II ,l & z var iable =
                                          − mu cc                                     mu c
                                                                      η II ,l & z var iable =+ Rz
                                                                                                  wu c mu cl
                                                                                                         −                              ⎧ p' u c [u cc + u zz − 2u cz ]          ⎫
                                                                                                                         d II * (1 − p) ⎪                                        ⎪
                                            uc                                          u           u'      u'                 =        ⎨− (1 − p )( wu cc + u cl )(u zz − u cz )⎬
                                                                        dlˆ ⎡ m(wu cl + u ll ) mu ′ mu l ⎤
                                                                                                                          dm       H ⎪                                           ⎪
                       dlˆ ⎡ wu cc + u cl      p′ ⎤                                                                                     ⎩− (1 − p)( wu cz + u zl )(u cc − u cz )⎭
                −m         ⎢              −                           −     ⎢                  −       −     ⎥
                       dm ⎣      uc         (1 − p )⎥⎦                  dm ⎣         u′           u        u ⎦
                       dzˆ ⎛ u cz − u cc      ⎞                         dzˆ ⎡ m(u lz − u cl ) u z − u c ⎤
                −m         ⎜                  ⎟⎟                      −                      −
                       dm ⎜⎝ u c               ⎠                        dm ⎢⎣      u′             u ⎥⎦
          a
           Note that the table using u to denote the three utility functions presented in the Kaplow model and in Models I and II. However, these utility functions are not
          equivalent. Thus the arguments of the marginal utility terms (and second derivative terms), which are suppressed in the table, differ across the three models.
          Therefore the values of these terms differ across models so that, for example, u cc for Model I is not equal to u cc for Model II.




                                                                                                29
30
Table 2: Smith Mansfield Results for Risk Aversion Index with KN Sample -2006∗


Independent                Summary              Imputed CRR            Imputed CRR            Imputed CRR
Variables                  Statisticsa          with Revision         without revision       without revision
                                                                                              and restricted
                                                                                                 sample
Own home (=1)                 0.70                    0.33                   0.37                  0.43
                             (0.46)                  (1.75)                 (1.94)                (2.07)
Female(=1)                    0.52                    0.53                   0.43                  0.56
                             (0.50)                  (3.42)                 (2.78)                (3.31)
Household                    52,759                -.51x10-5              -.34x10-5             -.45x10-5
income                      (41,160)                (-2.45)                (-1.61)               (-1.94)
Age                           48.1                    0.03                   0.03                  0.03
                             (16.9)                  (6.18)                 (5.34)                (6.29)
White(=1)                     0.74                    0.32                   0.61                  0.54
                             (0.44)                  (1.52)                 (2.84)                (2.30)
African                       0.09                    0.32                   0.17                  0.32
American(=1)                 (0.30)                  (1.01)                 (0.53)                (0.94)
Not high school               0.13                    0.45                   0.12                  0.27
grad (=1)                    (0.34)                  (1.91)                 (0.49)                (1.06)
College                       0.17                   -0.52                  -0.19                 -0.51
grad(=1)                     (0.38)                 (-2.39)                (-0.91)               (-2.12)
Greater then                  0.10                   -0.95                  -0.38                 -0.95
college(=1)                  (0.30)                 (-3.43)                (-1.35)               (12.98)
Intercept                                             3.23                   3.98                  3.34
                                                    (10.22)                (12.49)                (9.54)
Sample size                   2,244                  2,244                  2,244                  1858
R2                                                    0.05                   0.04                  0.06




∗
  CRR designates the inverse of the risk tolerance measure derived using the mean values Barsky et al. assign to
responses to their stated choice questions. See Smith and Mansfield [2008].
a
  The numbers in parentheses for the first column are standard errors. In the remaining columns they are t-ratios
for the null hypothesis of no association.


                                                       31
Table 3. Summary statistics for primary sample—married HRS respondents who worked full
time in 1998a

Variable name              Variable description                                      Sample mean
                                                                                     (standard
                                                                                     deviation) or
                                                                                     sample percentage
Exit                       = 1 if individual reported a labor force status other     24.16
                           than full time in 2000, = 0 if individual reported
                           continuing to work full time in 2000
Own ADL                    = 1 if individual reported an increase in activities of   4.36
increase                   daily living between 1998 and 2000, = 0 otherwise
Spouse ADL                 = 1 if individual’s spouse reported an increase in        6.30
increase                   activities of daily living between 1998 and 2000, = 0
                           otherwise
Mortgage                   = 1 if individual belongs to household with mortgage      31.76
commitment                 exceeding $50,000, = 0 otherwise
Age                        Individual’s age in 2000                                  58.51
                                                                                     (6.62)
Male                       = 1 for male, = 0 for female                              57.73
Education                  Years of education                                        13.05
                                                                                     (2.94)
HH income                  Total household income reported in 1998 (in               8.72
                           $10,000)                                                  (17.11)
HH non-housing             Net value of non-housing household financial wealth       9.20
wealth                     reported in 1998 (in $10,000)                             (54.97)
a
    Sample size is 3920.




                                                     32
Table 4. Empirical results—Decision to exit full time labor force (in 2000) probit modelsa,b

                         (1)                          (2)                   (3)                      (4)
                  Male sample                  Female sample         Male sample              Female sample
Spouse ADL        0.067*                       -0.031                0.044                    -0.039
increase          (1.65)                       (-0.61)               (1.10)                   (-0.78)
Mortgage          -0.025                       -0.064**              -0.018                   -0.059**
commitment        (-1.19)                      (-2.65)               (-0.84)                  (-2.40)
Spouse ADL        -0.166**                     0.125                 -0.159**                 0.122
increase*mortgage (-2.30)                      (1.04)                (-2.12)                  (1.00)
commitment
Own ADL                                                              0.233**                  0.262**
increase                                                             (4.43)                   (3.97)
Own ADL                                                              -0.079                   -0.046
increase*mortgage                                                    (-0.88)                  (-0.42)
commitment
Age2              -0.135                       0.140                 -0.133                   0.140
                  (-1.30)                      (1.61)                (-1.29)                  (1.59)
Age3              -0.101                       0.172**               -0.102                   0.173**
                  (-1.10)                      (2.19)                (-1.12)                  (2.18)
Age4              0.125                        0.219**               0.013                    0.223**
                  (0.12)                       (2.78)                (0.13)                   (2.81)
Age5              0.196*                       0.421**               0.196*                   0.431**
                  (1.79)                       (4.85)                (1.80)                   (4.92)
Age 6             0.316**                      0.548**               0.319**                  0.549**
                  (2.61)                       (5.76)                (2.65)                   (5.73)
Education         -0.0009                      -0.006                -0.0006                  -0.005
                  (-0.26)                      (-1.16)               (-0.19)                  (-1.03)
HH income (1998) -0.003**                      0.001                 -0.003**                 0.001
                  (-1.98)                      (1.44)                (-2.05)                  (1.48)
HH non-housing    0.0006**                     -0.00004              0.0006**                 -0.00003
wealth (1998)     (2.18)                       (-0.24)               (2.23)                   (-0.23)
N                 2263                         1655                  2263                     1655
Pseudo R2         0.114                        0.105                 0.122                    0.114
a
    Table reports marginal effects and z statistics.
b
    All models include a set of dummy variables indicating occupation and industry in 1998.




                                                        33
Appendix:

                                                                                                  mvmm
To show RI ,l var iable < RI ,l fixed , define RI ,l var iable generally as RI ,l var iable = −        where
                                                                                                   vm

          v = v(m ) = (1 − p(l (m )))u (m + wl (m ), l (m ))                                              (A.1)

denotes indirect (expected) utility over income and l (m ) = l I * . By the envelope condition,

          vm = (1 − p(l (m )))uc (m + wl (m ), l (m )) .                                                  (A.2)

Therefore,

                                       ∂l
          vmm = (1 − p(l ))ucc +          [(1 − p(l ))(wucc + ucl ) − p′uc ].                             (A.3)
                                       ∂m

                       ∂l I *
Substituting for              using (3.9) yields
                        ∂m

          vmm = (1 − p(l ))ucc −
                                        1
                                          [(1 − p(l ))(wucc + ucl ) − p′uc ]2                             (A.4)
                                        K

                 2u ( p′)
                                         [                      ]
                           2
K = − p′′u −              + (1 − p ) w 2ucc + 2wu cl + ull < 0 by the second order condition so the
                 (1 − p )
second term in (A.4) is positive and vmm > (1 − p(l ))ucc . Combining this result with (3.6), it

follows that

          RI ,l var iable = −
                                mvmm
                                     <−
                                        (1 − p(l ))mucc = − (1 − p(l ))mucc = R
                                                                                I ,l fixed .
                                 vm           vm              (1 − p(l ))uc




                                                            34
References

Ackerman, Frank and Lisa Heinzerling, 2004, Priceless: On Knowing the Price of Everything
      and the Value of Nothing, New York: the New Press.

Arrow, Kenneth J., 1971, Essays in the Theory of Risk Bearing, Chicago: Markham
       Publishing Co.

Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro, 1997,
       “Preference and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health
       and Retirement Study,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 112 (May): 537-580.

Bowland, B.J. and J.C. Beghin, 2001, “Robust Estimates ofValue of a Statistical Life for
      Developing Economies,” Journal of Policy Modeling, Vol. 23: 385–396.

Chetty, Raj, 2006, “A New Method of Estimating Risk Aversion” American Economic
       Review, Vol. 96 (December): 1821-1834.

Chetty, Raj and Adam Szeidl, 2007, “Consumption Commitments and Risk Preferences,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 122 (May): 831-877.

Coile, Courtney C., 2004, “Health Shocks and Couples’ Labor Supply Decisions,” NBER
       Working Paper #10810, September.

Costa, Dora L. and Matthew E. Kahn, 2004, “Changes in the Value of Life, 1940-1980,”
       Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, Vol. 29(2): 159-180.

Dickie, Mark and Shelby Gerking, 2007, “Altruism and Environmental Risks to Health of
       Parents and their Children,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
       Vol. 53: 323-341.

Eeckhoudt, Louis R. and James K. Hammitt, 2001, “Background Risk and the Value of a
      Statistical Life,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, Vol. 23 (3): 261-279.

Eeckhoudt, Louis R. and James K. Hammitt, 2004, “Does Risk Aversion Increase the Value
      of Mortality Risk?” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, Vol. 47
      (January): 13-29.

Evans, Mary F. and V. Kerry Smith, 2008, “Complementarity and the Measurement of
       Individual Risk Tradeoffs: Accounting for Quantity and Quality of Life Effects,”
       Environmental and Resource Economics, Vol. 41 (November): 381-400.

Hall, Robert E. and Charles J. Jones, 2007, “The Value of Life and the Risk in Health
       Spending,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 122 (February): 39-72.




                                             35
Hammitt, J.K., and J.D. Graham, 1999, “Willingness to Pay for Health Protection: Inadequate
     Sensitivity to Probability?” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty Vol. 18: 33-62.

Hammitt, James K., Jin-Tan Liu, and Jin-Long Liu, “Is Survival a Luxury Good? The
     Increasing Value of a Statistical Life, 2003, Working paper originally prepared for the
     2000 NBER Summer Institute Workshop on Public Policy.

Hammitt, J.K., and Y. Zhou, 2000, “Economic Value of Reducing Health Risks by Improving
     Air Quality in China,” Sino-US Research Workshop on Economy, Energy, and
     Environment, Tsinghua University, Beijing.

Holt, Charles A. and Susan K. Laury, 2002, “Risk Aversion and Incentive Effects.” American
       Economic Review, Vol. 92(5): 1644-1655.

Jena, Anupam, Casey Mulligan, Tomas J. Philipson, and Eric Sun, 2008, “The Value of Life
       in General Equilibrium,” NBER Working Paper #14157, July.

Kaplow, Lous, 2005, “The Value of a Statistical Life and the Coefficient of Relative Risk
      Aversion,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, Vol. 31 (July): 23-34.

Morgan, Granger and Maureen Cropper, 2007, Letter to Stephen L. Johnson, Administrator of
      U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Subject: SAB Advisory on EPA’s Issues in
      Valuing Mortality Risk Reductions, October 12.

Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel, 2006, “The Value of Life and Longevity,” Journal of
      Political Economy, Vol. 114 (October): 811-904.

Mitchell, R.C., and R.T. Carson, 1986, “Valuing Drinking Water Risk Reductions Using the
       Contingent Valuation Method: A Methodological Study of Risks from THM and
       Giardia,” Resources for the Future, Washington, DC.

Mrozek, Janusz R. and Laura O. Taylor, 2002, “What Determines the Value of Life? A
      Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 21: 253–270.

Smith, V. Kerry, Subhrendu Pattanayak and George Van Houtven, 2003, “VSL Reconsidered:
       What do Labor Supply Estimates Reveal about Risk Preferences?” Economics Letters,
       Vol. 80 (1): 147-153.

Smith, V. Kerry and Carol Mansfield, 2008, “Puzzles with Measures of Risk Aversion: Do
       People Agree with Our Measures?” unpublished paper, November.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 1998, The Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act,
       1990-2010.

Viscusi, W. Kip and Joseph E. Aldy, 2003, “The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review
       of Market Estimates Throughout the World,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, Vol. 28
       (1): 5-76.

                                             36
Weitzman, Martin L.,2009, “On Modeling and Interpreting the Economics of Catastrophic
      Climate Change”, Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.91 (February):1-19.




                                           37
