NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RIDING THE WAVE OF TRADE:
EXPLAINING THE RISE OF LABOR REGULATION IN THE GOLDEN AGE OF GLOBALIZATION
Michael Huberman
Christopher M. Meissner
Working Paper 15374
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15374

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2009

Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the meetings of the Economic History Association
(Tuscon), Cliometrics Society (Tuscon), European Historical Economics Society (Lund), and seminars
at Harvard University, London School of Economics, UCLA, Universidade de Lisboa, and the University
of Toronto. We would like to acknowledge the comments of discussants and participants, and three
anonymous referees and the editor of the Journal of Economic History, Philip Hoffman. We are indebted
to Toke Aidt, Gerald Friedman, David Jacks, Peter Lindert, Dennis Novy, and Robert Pahre for contributions
to the data sections of this paper. Huberman’s research was funded by SSHRCC. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Michael Huberman and Christopher M. Meissner. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Riding the Wave of Trade: Explaining the Rise of Labor Regulation in the Golden Age of
Globalization
Michael Huberman and Christopher M. Meissner
NBER Working Paper No. 15374
September 2009, Revised May 2010
JEL No. J8,N3,N40,N70
ABSTRACT
The received view pins the adoption of labor regulation before 1914 on domestic forces. Using directed
dyad-year event history analysis, we find that trade was also a pathway of diffusion. Market access
served as an important instrument to encourage a level playing field. The type of trade mattered as
much as the volume. In the European core, states emulated the labor regulation of partners because
intraindustry trade was important. The New World exported less differentiated products and pressures
to imitate were weak.
Michael Huberman
Département d'Histoire
Université de Montréal
Pavillon Lionel-Groulx, local C-6105
C.P. 6128, succursale Centre-ville
Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7
Michael.Huberman@umontreal.ca
Christopher M. Meissner
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
cmmeissner@ucdavis.edu

3
This paper brings a fresh coat to shopworn questions in political economy: what explains the
adoption of labor legislation across a large and disparate group of countries in a brief time span
before 1914, and why did the Old World see more intervention than the New, a phenomenon that
has persisted into the early twenty-first century? The standard explanation situates the origins of the
regulatory state in a confluence of domestic factors that included the rise of per capita incomes, the
extension of the vote, and demands for social reform of labor organizations and pressure groups,
even those led by employers. But rich and poor countries, and the most and least democratic states,
adopted similar laws before 1914. Our explanation is that domestic and international factors jointly
mattered in the diffusion of social policy. 1 While others have given priority to learning from
neighbors and emulation of social norms, in this paper we identify trade flows between countries—
the nuts and bolts of globalization—as pathways in the cross-border movement of social policy.2
The crux of our argument is that international integration prompted states to emulate the
stricter laws of major trading partners. The type of trade mattered as much as the volume. In the
European core, intraindustry trade was important. If states failed to imitate the legislation of
trading partners they would have exposed themselves to embargos on exports and terms of trade
shocks. In the New World, states were not compelled to adopt laws of major partners because
world demand and supply determined prices of their less differentiated exports and, consequently,
threats of market loss were not credible.
The complementary relation between trade and social protection stands in opposition to
frequent claims, espoused in the first wave of globalization and echoed in the second, that
competitive forces drive labor standards down in a race to the bottom. Our findings suggest that,
even in the absence of international authorities like the World Trade Organization coordinating
1

For a primer on the interdependence of domestic and external forces, see Simmons, Dobbin, and Garret, Global
Diffusion.
2
On learning and emulation of norms, see Rodgers, Atlantic Crossings; Van Daele, “Engineering Social Peace.”

4
strategies and responses, decentralized forces promoted convergence in worker protection.
Market access served as an important instrument to encourage the diffusion of labor regulations,
and farsighted policymakers recognized that emulating partners’ laws would serve to bolster
trade. This is not to imply that there was a race to the top in which one country leapfrogged
another in the adoption of restrictive laws. Nor was it the case that states mimicked exactly the
regulations of others. And states could delay emulating laws that imposed significant costs.
Nonetheless, over the period, a rising tide in legislation swept countries upward and together. 3
Our methodology is based on models of policy diffusion applied, most recently, to the
spread of environmental protection and health care provision across jurisdictions. 4 In contrast to
standard country-year event history analysis, we focus on convergence in policy between pairs
(or dyads) during particular years. This setup naturally allows for a clear demarcation of the
relative weights of internal factors, like the extension of the vote, and external pressures, such as
trade, for each pair of countries. To be clear, the issue of adaptation—the effect of regulation on
labor market outcomes—requires a different methodology and is beyond the scope of this paper.
Our research strategy responds to our conception of social policy formation in an
interdependent world. The standard approach begins with the local interests of key protagonists,
firms, sectors, or factors of production, whose preferences toward policy are defined by their
location relative to others in the international economy; in the next phase, domestic institutions
and politicians, whose objective may be to maximize support, broker competing interests and
determine policy; in the final stage, the state, as if it were a unitary actor, brings these outcomes
to the international level. Our view, which is in the spirit of studies in “open economy politics,”

3

On trade as a pathway of diffusion since the 1980s, see Greenhill, Mosley and Prakash, “Trade-based Diffusion.”
Vogel, Trading Up, defines the California effect as the capacity of importing jurisdictions to determine the
environmental laws of exporters.
4
For an example, see Volden, “States.”

5
captures the likelihood that causality also runs in the other direction, from international
institutions and pressures to domestic interests. 5 In this case, states do not take domestic and
foreign interests as given, because the international context structures bargaining and affects
outcomes relevant to constituents. Since states must contend with a complex and shifting
amalgam of interests, they are anything but unitary actors. Robert Putnam put the problem
simply: “Domestic politics and international relations are somehow often entangled. It is fruitless
to debate whether domestic politics really determine international relations or the reverse. The
answer to that question is clearly both sometimes.” 6
LABOR REGULATION: RECEIVED VIEWS AND BASIC DATA
At the most basic level, the widely accepted view is that labor laws were the stepchild of
development, “the consequences,” Stanley Engerman wrote, “of higher national income, with
accompanying changing preferences regarding work time and work arrangements as income
rose.” 7 In the popular power resources model, the leading protagonists are the spread of the
franchise and the rise of organized labor. Comparative approaches have built on national
histories, juxtaposing domestic factors of one country against another. 8 The common
denominator in this body of research is that regulation was a closed economy affair.
Curiously, the basic data reveal only a weak correspondence between income and voice
and the adoption of labor laws. Table 1 gives dates of introduction of five major pieces of
legislation for a broad sample of Old and New World countries. Putting aside issues of data
availability, we have selected these regulations as representative of contemporary demands to

5

Summarizing the “emerging paradigm” of open economy politics, Lake (“Open Economy,” p. 238) wrote:
“[I]nternational institutions may actually create an important endogenous dynamic with important effects on [domestic]
politics.” For an example, Davis, Food Fights.
6
Putnam, “Diplomacy,” p. 427.
7
Engerman, “History and Political Economy,” p. 60.
8
For examples of studies of social spending, see Lindert, Growing Public; Aidt, Dutta, and Loukoianova,
“Democracy.”

6
protect children and women, improve factory conditions, and provide some form of compensation
in case of workplace accidents. 9 The last two columns give GDP per capita in 1900 and average
voter turnout in 1890-1900. Among Old World countries, the dispersion of income was large, as
was voter turnout, but even the poorest and least democratic countries, Bulgaria, Italy, Portugal,
Russia, and Spain, had several laws on the books. In the New World, Canada was relatively
wealthy and had a large male electorate, but it was a laggard compared to Europe; Mexico after
the revolution had pretty much the same level of regulation. 10 The calendar of adoption was also
inconsistent with the income and voice model. Germany, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom
were early movers, but beginning in the 1880s any systematic ordering is difficult to detect. 11
Figure 1 presents a competing perspective on the spread of labor laws showcasing their
diffusion over a narrow time frame. The adoption of minimum age legislation of 12 years traces a
classic S-shaped logistic curve, a pattern representative of other laws in Table 1, and similar to that
which has been documented for the diffusion of democracy and economic and social policies, from
Keynesianism to neo-liberalism, across a range of countries in the late twentieth century.12 The first
movers behind age limits, Germany and Switzerland, were decidedly early. For this precocious
club, regulation may have had different origins than for countries in the middle years. This phase,
which had no obvious leader, saw the bulk of adoptions in small and large, and poor and rich
countries alike— even the U.K. in 1901. In the last period, adoptions leveled off and were restricted
chiefly to latecomers in the periphery. The pattern of diffusion gives us pause to reconsider the
widely held view that situates the rise of labor regulation as a chapter of national history only.

9

These were core demands of the international movement to harmonize labor standards. Fallows, Antecedents; Lowe,
International Protection; Shotwell, Origins. An appendix to the longer version of this paper gives full details of the
sources and methods used in constructing the table.
10
Bortz, “Revolution,” pp. 674-83.
11
For the five pieces of legislation in Table 1, the null hypothesis of zero rank correlation cannot be rejected.
12
For case studies, see Simmons, Dobbin, and Garret, Global Diffusion.

7
To be sure, historians have not ruled out the interdependence of domestic and international
factors. Learning from neighbors—and rivals—and emulation of norms regarding women’s and
children’s employment precipitated a “transfer in social technology.” 13 In the classic example of the
demonstration effect, Lloyd George was full of praise for Germany’s social programs after his visit
to the continent in 1908, the year before he introduced unemployment insurance legislation in
London. 14 Apart from these exchanges, transnational epistemic communities emerged late in the
century. Founded in 1900, the International Association of Labour Legislation (IALL) coordinated
research on working conditions and evolved into a well-organized pressure group for the
harmonization of labor standards. 15 According to its historian, Daniel Rodgers, blueprints flowed
across the Atlantic, and in both directions, the reform ideals of Henry George outpopularized those
of the Webbs, let alone Marx. 16 The trouble with this line of argument is that the establishment of
information channels does not explain how beliefs were translated into policy, the presumption
being that regulation was adopted because of ideas in the ‘air’.17 It remains unclear which ideas
were persuasive and under what circumstances the new body of legislation was adopted, especially
in countries where membership in communities in support of legislation was small. 18
A Closer Look at the Data
It may well be that the data in Table 1 cannot bear the weight of our argument. Any
international comparison is flawed because the laws by their very nature were not identical across
jurisdictions, owing to differences in coverage, application, and compliance. To minimize
differences, we chose standards established at the international conference on labor legislation
13

The term is from Hennock, British Social Reform, pp. 1-36. In the diffusion literature, learning refers to the adoption
of successful policies elsewhere; emulation describes the adoption of policy whether it has proven to be effective or not.
14
Ibid., pp. 149-51.
15
Follows, Antecedents, pp. 120-43. We evaluate the role of the IALL below.
16
Rodgers, Atlantic Crossings, p. 70.
17
See Hall, “Role of Interests”, for interest and idea based approaches to political economy.
18
Denmark, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain were underrepresented in the IALL. For membership statistics,
see Métin, Traités ouvriers, p. 43.

8
held in Berlin in 1890, the midpoint in our period of study. 19 The federal structures of the New
World and Germany and Switzerland complicate issues of comparability because sub-national
authorities held responsibility for labor legislation. While Canadian provinces and Australian
colonies and states passed legislation within short delays of neighbors, there were substantial
differences in dates of adoption and in the heterogeneity of laws across U.S. jurisdictions. 20 To
adjust for this, the table gives two dates for the introduction of each piece of legislation in the
U.S. The first when ten states achieved the level set at Berlin, and a second, in parentheses, when
the ten most populated states achieved this norm.
Notwithstanding these drawbacks, Table 1 is a meaningful point of departure to study
adoption across countries. At the most practical level, when the U.S., the most troublesome country
in our sample, is omitted in the analysis that follows all our results go through. 21 Across national
and sub-national units, many dimensions of the laws tended to converge after their passage. The
same pressures promoting international diffusion of the basic laws would have also affected the
various dimensions of these laws. Table 2 reports the number of factory inspectors per
establishment, some specifics of restrictions on women’s night work, age limits for children, and
the actual contributions employers paid out for accident compensation (measured as a percentage of
the wage bill). Even before pressures to harmonize labor regulations that can be traced to the
establishment of the International Labor Organization in 1919, dispersion across these dimensions
was remarkably small—a testament to the forces of convergence in policy that we will describe
below. There is only one obvious outlier in the table: the factory inspectorate in Italy was poorly

19

Sources on the Berlin standards are: Fallows, Antecedents; Shotwell, Origins. In the case of child labor, the
minimum was fixed at 12 years of age. See appendix for details.
20
On centralization of Swiss and German labor law, see Hennock, Origin of the Welfare State; on the dispersion of U.S.
laws, see Fishback, Holmes, and Allen, “Lifting the Curse.”
21
In the remainder of the text and in the regression analysis, we refer to dates of adoption of the first ten U.S.
jurisdictions.

9
staffed, a finding entirely consistent with contemporary observation and gives credence to the other
values in the Table 2.
Finally, we restrict our use of Table 1 to study international diffusion. How workers and
firms responded to labor regulation is a different question that requires another methodology and
other types of information. 22 Consider the interdependent world of 1914 facing supportmaximizing politicians. Their objective was to supply benefits to concentrated constituencies
while diffusing costs as much as possible. To reduce the burden on their own constituents,
policymakers would have prevailed upon partners to level the playing field. Under certain
circumstances—and we consider this possibility below—countries may have had legislation
imposed on them, regardless of local labor market conditions and how domestic forces lined up in
support of or in opposition to regulation. The upshot is that domestic and foreign reform agendas
were entangled. At some level, adoption and adaptation were related, but Table 1 serves as a
starting point because it provides the timetable we need to study policy diffusion in an
interconnected world.
INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND THE RISE OF LABOR REGULATION
In today’s global economy, the claim is, national authorities care what social and economic
policies get adopted elsewhere because they want to keep their exports competitive, contain
imports, and keep their home markets open to foreign investment. Of course, in the long term,
certain regulations may increase the capabilities of local workforces, but policymakers are driven
by short-run considerations, and assume rivals vie for a fixed quantity of trade or investment.
Polices adopted to harmonize markets across jurisdictions have tended to weaken local controls.
Everywhere, the argument goes, global competition has unleashed a race to the bottom in all
types and dimensions of regulation.
22

For the U.S., see Fishback, “Progressive Era.”

10
The late nineteenth century, the heyday of globalization, saw comparable competitive
pressures. Bismarck, for one, asserted that “[a] normal workday could be established for
Germany alone, if Germany were surrounded by a Chinese wall and were economically selfsufficient.” 23 The Chancellor rejected demands to incorporate labor legislation in Germany’s
advanced program of social entitlements. Exploiting similar reasoning, the Swiss National
Council, despite the early leadership of several cantons in policy adoption, delayed passage of the
first set of federal labor laws in the early 1870s. The association of cotton textile employers had
lobbied against proposals for limits on hours in order to preserve foreign and domestic markets. 24
Bending to employers, the Swiss government did not move ahead with protective legislation.
Others have found direct evidence of a downward spiral in labor regulation. In 1891, Finland
extended the length of the work day of minors (aged 12-14 years) to 8.5 hours from the level of
6.5 fixed in 1889, after its export firms found they had lost their competitive edge to rivals.
Following the decision of its neighbor to loosen standards, Sweden reciprocated and lengthened
the working day of 13 year olds from 6 to 10 hours 25 For the U.S., Jacob Hacker and Paul
Pierson claimed that capital’s threat to divest locally and move their enterprises across state
borders stunted, if not delayed, the development of the welfare state. 26 Canada, in turn, postponed
legislation to limit women’ s work to meet the competitive North American environment. 27
There is an opposing way to conceptualize the role of competition. Countries imported and
exported labor standards as they did goods. Globalization, in this view, was an effective deterrent
and not the cause of a race to the bottom. Kyle Bagwell and Robert Staiger developed a model in
which countries are motivated to preserve market access, the combined shares of exports they
23

Cited in Fallows, Antecedents, p. 91.
Humair, Développement économique, pp. 364-69.
25
Rahikainen, “Child Labour,” pp. 55-57.
26
Hacker and Pierson, “Business Power.”
27
Drummond, Progress Without Planning, pp. 234-37.
24

11
have acquired in foreign markets and of imports they have come to accept. 28 A country that
unilaterally raises its labor standards will find its domestic market more vulnerable to imports and
its exports less competitive, since adopting stricter laws is the equivalent of reducing trade
barriers. Bagwell and Staiger empower any country in the WTO, as set in GATT Article XXIII,
to impose sanctions on trading partners that fail to reciprocate because they have reneged on
raising labor standards or lowering tariffs. There is no presumption labor standards will be
harmonized internationally, only that the newly established level of regulation will preserve
market access, thus giving politicians’ discretion to raise standards as they see fit.
In the absence of international oversight before 1914, states had other options to level the
playing field. They could threaten import restrictions on selected products of trading partners; fail
to renew or abrogate commercial treaties and most-favored-nation clauses; or, in extreme cases,
initiate trade wars to cut off competitors’ entry into their markets. 29 The threat of market loss was
credible in established and thick trading networks, like the bulk of countries grouped in the
middle period of Figure 1. Conversely, low degrees of integration reduced the ability to enforce
labor standards, and there were also latecomers at the tail of the logistic curve, the handful of
countries that did not play by the rules or did not know them, and which were more likely to
defect. International associations used soft coercion or moral suasion on these countries, but in
the absence of sanctions the incentive to cooperate was weak.
The distinction between intersectoral and intraindustry trade is relevant to the history of
labor regulation because countries that sold differentiated goods were more susceptible to
retaliation if they did not adopt the standards of their chief markets. While the hallmark trade in
the period was exchange between the resource-abundant New World and labor-abundant Old,

28
29

Bagwell and Staiger, “WTO.”
Conybeare, Trade Wars; Lazer, “Free Trade Epidemic”; Pahre, Politics and Trade.

12
trade in manufacturing was sizeable within the European core. 30 In the iconic world industry,
cotton textiles, Europe was the foremost producer and largest consumer. Differentiation was
based on type of machinery used, ring or mule spindles, quality and treatment of cotton fibers,
and the final dressing and preparation of goods. 31 Many producers were dependent on restricted
outlets, for instance Belgium on France, and Italy on France and Germany, and found themselves
exposed to threats of market loss. Certainly, manufacturers could have modified or upgraded
products to find new customers, but, in the short run, if states did not acquiesce to demands for a
level playing field, they would have had to dump their goods at steep discounts. 32
Table 3 presents a snapshot of trading networks in cotton and woolen textiles, and silk and
lace manufacture, for several European countries in 1913. 33 Column 12 gives the share of each
country’s exports of manufactured items sold in Europe; 65 percent of the total value of
production had European outlets. The last column gives country shares of all items exported to
other European destinations, while the bottom row gives the share of imports. The U.K.,
Germany, the Netherlands, and, by this date, Switzerland had developed commercial networks to
sell goods abroad, but for all exporters destinations in Europe retained importance. Many
producers were dependent on restricted outlets, for instance Belgium on France, and Italy on
France and Germany, and found themselves exposed to threats of market loss.
Again the Swiss experience is illustrative. Recall it was reluctant to adopt limits on hours,
fearing the loss of export markets if it introduced legislation ahead of major partners. Germany

30

The shares of inter- and intraindustry exchanges in world trade remained roughly stable between 1870 and 1914.
Primary product trade comprised 60-65 percent of world trade. See Findlay and O’Rourke, Power, pp. 411-14. For
Germany, see Brown, “Imperfect Competition”; for France, Messerlin and Becuwe, “Intra-industry Trade.”
31
Saxonhouse and Wright, “Technological Evolution.”
32
Big countries had the advantage of discriminating between home and foreign markets. Providing a textbook study of
unfair trade practices, Belgian woolen manufacturers accused German firms of pricing exports lower than identical
goods sold in their home market—a practice contemporaries called ‘le dumping’. Since their domestic market was
small, the Belgians were unable to reciprocate (Mahaim, “La conference de Berne”).
33
We thank John Brown for suggesting Kertesz’s (Textilindustrie) study of intra-industry trade in 1913.

13
and France did introduce limits on women’s work in 1891 and 1892. As it happens, the French
National Assembly had initiated an inquiry into compulsory accident compensation in 1893, and
opponents claimed that exporters and import-competing industries would not be able to pass on
the increased costs. 34 The timing of the reform debate was propitious. Rejecting France’s offer of
the minimum rates in the Méline tariff schedule, in exchange for import concessions, Switzerland
initiated a trade war. 35 French exports fell, but the conflict was relatively more costly for
Switzerland. 36 It could not find alternative outlets for its major exports to France, high-end cotton
textiles and silks, clocks, and specialty cheeses. The French had an incentive to prolong the
conflict since it provided the import-competing sector a respite to adjust to the new reforms. It
was the Swiss who backed down first. Even before the end of the trade war in 1894, Switzerland
agreed to restrictions on night work and an 11-hour working day for women.
Trade wars were costly for all parties. By the early 1900s, states put aside the stick of
retaliation for the carrot of conciliation. Policymakers realized that attempts to level the playing
field did not have to come at the expense of trade between partners. The vehicle was bilateral
labor accords, early versions of labor and environmental clauses in late twentieth-century trade
agreements. Table 4 gives some examples of labor treaties negotiated from 1880 until 1914.
Initially, states discriminated in the delivery of social protection; for instance, foreign or guestworkers, were not eligible to receive accident compensation, which inevitably gave rise to an
incentive to reduce benefits for nationals. The early bilateral accords, which assured the
reciprocal treatment of native and foreign workers, were conceived as backstops against a
potential unraveling in labor standards. These accords served to standardize the coverage and
34

Fuchs, “Institutions, Values,” p. 321; Jay, Protéction légale, pp. 315-18.
Conybeare, Trade Wars, pp. 179-203; Humair, Développement économique, pp. 595-618.
36
In 1891, France took 18.6 percent of all Swiss exports, and Switzerland 6.0 percent of French exports. Between 1892
and 1894, Switzerland’s shipments to France fell by about 30 percent; French exports fell by 6.9 percent. Trade data
from Mitchell, Statistics, pp. 545, 595; Conybeare, Trade Wars, p. 191.
35

14
application of labor laws as reported in Table 2, and although they often revolved around single
items, the expectation was, as stated clearly in the Germany and Austria-Hungary accord of 1905,
that a “broader” harmonization of legislation would follow. 37
There was also a commercial dimension. Belgian authorities were persuaded that its 1897
accord with France dealing with workers’ savings would strengthen commercial relations and
preempt retaliatory trade practices. 38 Beginning with the Franco-Italian labor accord of 1904,
which we examine in a later section, agreements were explicitly designed to strengthen bilateral
trade. Many of the signatories had previously negotiated most favored nation treaties as indicated
in the last column of the table. 39 The spike in labor accords in the years after 1904 coincided with
the clustering of MFN treaties and the decline in tariffs in the subsequent decade. Germany
initiated accords with its partners, exploiting strategically its high tariffs to negotiate increased
access to its markets in exchange for better foreign labor protection. 40 The link between labor and
commercial treaties reinforced the stepwise movement in adoption traced in Figure 1. Countries
would raise levels of regulation because their trading partners had done so. But the added
incentive was that as it raised its labor regulation to the level of its partner, it gained market
access in countries that had MFN arrangements with the latter.
Both episodes of retaliation and negotiation were infrequent in the New World since
domestic concerns trumped external pressures. Regions of recent settlement mainly exported
foods and raw materials whose prices were fixed in world markets. The pressure to comply with
37

Lowe, International Protection, pp, 143-44.
Métin, Traités ouvriers, pp. 25-36.
39
We are grateful to Robert Pahre for providing us access to his commercial treaty data set. Many of the accords were
unconditional MFNs. See Pahre, Politics and Trade, pp. 157-76. Irwin, (“Multilateral and Bilateral Trade,” p. 454),
referred to MFN agreements as “progressive bilateralism” because they promoted multi-party accords and did not divert
trade. The clustering of bilateral labor accords fits this model.
40
France and Germany, high-tariff countries, actively negotiated bilateral agreements. Lampe, (“Nineteenth Century
Bilateralism”), found that high-tariff states were more prone than low-tariff countries to cooperate in the CobdenChevalier era. Later in the century, Pahre, (Politics and Trade, pp. 204-46), reported that smaller countries were less
likely to cooperate, and tariff treaties more likely to be stable if foreign tariffs were initially high.
38

15
standards of major trading partners was less keen, because exporters could shift outlets without
severe loss. Canada’s wheat exports did not contract when Germany launched a trade war
between 1903 and 1910 to protest Ottawa’s preferential agreement with London; in fact, it was
the U.K. that feared collateral damage. 41 Exceptionally, by 1914 the U.S. exported manufactured
goods, although these were mainly standardized items. 42 Anyway, international trade played a
small role in total production in the U.S. Overall, the New World was insulated from external
pressures to emulate the European model. Trade patterns reinforced the primacy of domestic
factors in areas of recent settlement. There was a structural disconnect in the New World between
commercial access negotiated at the national level and labor laws passed by sub-national
jurisdictions. In some regions, like Australia, labor power in key states was strong enough to use
the ballot box to see through legislation, but it was difficult to mount the same force in North
America. The aphorism that all politics is local was appropriate to the New World.
THE DECISION TO ADOPT: TESTING FOR DOMESTIC AND EXTERNAL FORCES
To study policy convergence we implement a directed dyad-year event history analysis.
The unit of analysis is the country-pair-year (or dyad-year). We seek to explain why country “A”
converges to the labor standards already adopted by another country “B”. Convergence does not
imply that policymakers emulate exactly the other country in the dyad. The dichotomous
dependent variable takes on the value one if country A adopts at least one out the five labor
standards (Table 1), given that B had already adopted that (those) particular standard(s) prior to

41

On the Canadian-German trade war, see Trentmann, Free Trade Nation, pp. 137-40; Conybeare, Trade Wars, p. 182.
There was no deviation in the trend of Canadian wheat exports. The U.K. feared losing access to countries having MFN
agreements with Germany.
42
Sabel and Zeitlin, “Historical Alternatives.”

16
the current year, and zero otherwise..43 When A converges to all standards in B, this particular
dyad is dropped from the sample, since no further convergence is possible.
A pair of countries can be present up to two times in each year since the order of adoption
for each country adopted may not have been the same across labor laws. We found that just over
50 percent of the ‘emulations’ in the data are associated with convergence to a standard
previously adopted by five or fewer countries. The number of leaders in our sample period is
restricted by definition, and as a result most countries were followers in the diffusion process. To
be clear, our procedure is inappropriate to explain fully why country B was in fact the first mover.
Our primary interest is the transmission of policy between trade partners.
The directed dyad approach improves on the standard country-year event history model
because it includes information on interaction effects between neighbors or trading partners and
common features of the country pairs. In event history models, external factors are usually
weighted-averages of arbitrarily defined ‘neighbors’, or other countries comprising the reference
group. Our approach also permits countries to be leaders and followers over different policies and
in different country pairs. To be sure, some degree of sample selection is unavoidable because B
only appears when it has adopted at least one of the five pieces of legislation. For sample
selection to force a change in the sign of a marginal effect, A’s “error term” would have to be
strongly correlated with B’s. The selection problem increases in severity as the correlation
between the included explanatory variables and B’s error term becomes greater. We return to
these issues below.
Our control variables consist of external and internal determinants of labor standards. For
trade integration, we use the measure of trade costs developed by David Jacks, Christopher
43

This procedure avoids jointly estimating the probability that country A imitates B and the probability of B adopting a
labor standard. Boehmke, “Policy Evaluation.” There are no cases where a country adopts and then gives up a particular
standard.

17
Meissner, and David Novy. The measure is related to the (geometric average of) bilateral trade
shares of GDP, but it is derived explicitly from trade theory and is more precisely evaluated. 44
We invert the trade shares to obtain the tariff equivalent. In effect, the term measures the wedge
between observed bilateral trade and that predicted by size alone, which would be the key driver
in a world without barriers to trade. The variable is strongly related to observable proxies for
barriers to trade including tariffs, transportation networks, exchange rate variability, and language
differences. The measure for year t is calculated as
1
2(σ−1)

 xAAtxBBt

x
x
 ABt BAt

τABt =

−1
.

The variables xAA and xBB are proxies for intra-national trade, or domestic absorption, and xAB and
xBA represent total exports from country A to country B and exports from B to A. The parameter σ
is the elasticity of substitution between all goods, domestic and foreign (and foreign vs foreign),
and is assumed to be equal to 11. 45 The term can be interpreted as the extent to which foreign
trade is more costly than domestic trade; it falls as countries trade more together. The estimated
coefficient will have a negative sign if increased trade encourages A to adopt B’s policy.
The baseline model includes the share of the labor force in agriculture of country A to
control for the level of development, and also wealth and size (the logarithms of GDP and
population) of each country in a pair. Central to Engerman’s claim, A’s demand for labor

44

Jacks, Meissner, and Novy, “Trade Costs, 1870–2000.” Between 1870 and 1913, the average decline in international
trade costs was 23 percent. See also Jacks, Meissner, and Novy, “Trade Costs in the First Wave.”
45
The level of trade costs depends on the elasticity of substitution. There is no evidence to that the elasticity varied
across countries in the aggregate and evidence for more recent periods suggests preference parameters are constant over
time. The parameter is a scaling factor, with a consensus estimate of eight. Arguably, during the nineteenth century
goods were less differentiated and, hence, more substitutable. Our assumption is equivalent to a factory gate markup of
10 percent over the marginal cost of production.

18
regulation would have risen with income per capita (a positive marginal effect of GDP for a fixed
level of population). But larger countries faced weaker external pressures. They may have been
less prone to imitate neighbors because they naturally traded less internationally and were more
shielded from foreign competition. A proportional increase in GDP and population (an increase in
size) would have lowered the likelihood of adoption. We include real GDP and population of
country B to identify the roles of wealth and size in policy diffusion and emulation: was A more
willing to adopt if B was big or rich?
The other determinants follow from previous discussion. Union density and voter turnout,
the ratio of persons actually voting to the adult population (of the relevant enfranchised gender),
stand in for the key determinants of the power resources model. Since convergence may have
differed across regions, a dummy variable indicates whether country A is in the New World or
not. We have also included an interaction variable between the presence of a New World country
and voter turnout. This variable disentangles the roles of resources and political economy factors
behind regulation. The decision to adopt might have also been dependent on the number of
standards already in place, measured by the total number of laws (out of the five considered) A
and B shared in the prior year.
The sample in the baseline regression consists of information on the adoption of five
standards in 17 countries, across a maximum of 16 partners, and for the 33 years from 1881 to
1913. The exact number of observations per country depends on the length of time required to
converge on a partner’s law, and the number of standards and dates of adoption of each partner.
Countries in the baseline sample (and occasions they initially appear as a follower/leader) are:
Argentina (14/0), Australia (5/6), Austria (5/12), Belgium (14/13), Canada (12/10), Denmark
(11/9), France (6/15), Germany (2/15), Italy (10/8), the Netherlands (10/14), Norway (13/14),
Portugal (15/2), Spain (15/7), Sweden (11/11), Switzerland (10/10), United Kingdom (11/16),

19
and the United States (14/14). All countries behaved as followers and leaders which underscores
the basic problem we explore: what drove pairs of countries to converge on labor laws? 46
Table 5 gives results of a series of logit regressions for the policy convergence model. We
report average marginal effects. Standard errors are clustered at the country pair level (regardless
of whether a country is located in position A or B) to correct for potential bias in the errors
arising from arbitrary forms of serial correlation over time. 47 In the baseline specification of
column 1, which includes all relevant independent variables, the trade cost marginal effect is
negative and significant. Trade was a conduit of convergence. Contrary to claims, international
competition did not lead to a downward cascade in social and labor policy. Wealthier, larger, or
more democratic countries were not more likely to play leadership roles. It would appear that the
impact of Germany’s advanced legislation on British policy had as much to do with Lloyd’s
George storied visit to a large country as with the fact that the two were major trading partners.
In the baseline regression, domestic factors in A, with the exception of union density, have
the expected signs, though their impact was not significant. The positive marginal effects of A’s
GDP (p-value 0.40) and population (p-value 0.94) are insignificant. The natural logarithm of
GDP per capita (entered as a single variable in a separate unreported specification) has a positive
but statistically insignificant marginal effect (p-value 0.32). The overall size of A was
unimportant. Proportionally increasing GDP and population did not lead to a change in the
probability of convergence. If we cannot detect that large and democratic countries were leaders,
neither were small countries followers.

46

Excluding Germany from our sample does not affect the estimated results.
In unreported regressions, we clustered standard errors over all country A observations in a particular year to account
for correlation within years across a country’s decision to adopt its partners standards. Results do not differ from those
of the baselines in columns 1 and 2.

47

20
The salience of domestic and international factors varied across regions. In the Old World,
voter turnout, while positive, is not significant. Our interpretation is that domestic voice was not
sufficient to achieve the goals of social activists, although it may have interacted with other
internal or external forces to advance the reform agenda. In one scenario, capital in B would have
sought to form cross-border and cross-class coalitions with labor and reformers in A to level the
playing field. These types of pressures may be captured in the trade costs term itself. Putting
aside this explanation, the dynamic was different in the New World. Countries were less prone to
converge, but sufficiently high levels of voter turnout offset the obstacles to regulation posed by
the region’s specialization in primary products and other idiosyncrasies.
The sign of union density may appear to be counterintuitive, but worker organization was
strongly correlated with the presence of a New World country. 48 Other studies have reported a
positive relation between the share of population above 65 and social spending, a finding repeated
in column 1, although the marginal effect is statistically insignificant. Older workers were less
mobile than younger ones and more dependent on social entitlements. Populations were younger
in the New World thus deepening the divergence between regions.
Countries with relatively weaker sets of labor laws were more prone to adopt. The negative
sign on the lagged number of shared standards has, at least, two interpretations. Stragglers may
have wanted to signal to residents and foreigners their willingness to move toward the new
international norm of greater regulation, albeit at a slower pace; alternatively, they may have
adopted legislation later than others because the cost of doing so was less. 49

48

The New World indicator actually rises in absolute value in the short baseline in column 2 which omits unionization
rates.
49
According to Von Laue (“Factory Inspection,” p. 348), Russia “stood ahead of public opinion of employers and
workers,” upgrading labor standards to attract more foreign investment and in the anticipation of securing new export
markets. By the late 1890s, Von Laue added, Russia “had a set of laws more enlightened than those of France or the
United States.”

21
Did countries with common features have the same regulatory outcomes? Neither
differences in GDP nor turnout had a perceptible effect. We cannot conclude, as did Markus
Lampe and Robert Pahre in separate studies of MFNs, that democracies were any more prone to
emulate each other than autocracies. 50 We also consider in the baseline whether close neighbors
were more likely to copy each other. The answer is mixed. A common border actually exerted
pressure to diverge, but a smaller distance between capitals implied a greater chance in adopting a
similar labor standard. Emulation effects, derived from culture—common language and legal
origins, and shared histories—cannot be excluded even after controlling for trade relations.
In the remaining columns, we explore the robustness of these findings. We exclude
unionization, agricultural share of the labor force, age distribution, differences in turnout and
income per capita, and geographical variables. These variables did not prove to be robust
determinants, and, in the short baseline of column 2, the trade cost coefficient actually increases
in significance. The geographical variables are highly collinear with trade costs as the literature
on trade and gravity models shows. The income and turnout differences are essentially controlled
for already since A and B’s respective levels are entered separately. The other structural variables
are poorly measured across the sample and we are hesitant to rely on them further.
Columns 3 and 4 compare estimates of an Old World only sample and another which
restricts country A to being in the New World. For European pairs, the results are in line with
column 1. The dynamic was different in the New World: the trade cost term is positive but not
significant, and the marginal effect of voter turnout is statistically significant. Recall Rodgers’
claim that reform blueprints flowed between continents; trade, however. does not appear to have
been the conduit of transmission to the Americas and Australia. Voice was the main channel of

50

Lampe, “Nineteenth Century Bilateralism,” p. 31; Pahre, Politics and Trade, pp. 247-79.

22
policy diffusion in the region. In line with our previous discussion, local forces trumped global
pressures in regions of new settlement.
Column 5 controls for (time-invariant) unobservable heterogeneity at the level of country A
with a conditional logit model. GDP and population of B are now significant. GDP of A, which is
strongly persistent and presumably highly correlated with country fixed effects, is estimated to
have no statistically significant impact on convergence. The high correlation between fixed
factors and GDP shows up in the sign on the coefficient which is opposite to that in column 1.
Regardless of specification, the effect of trade costs is robust, confirming the rising tide in labor
standards as nations sought to keep up with levels of regulation provided by trading partners.
Figure 2 summarizes the baseline result. For each year we give the total number of labor laws
adopted. The maximum for the 18 countries in the sample is 90. We also track the decline in trade
costs. The decline in trade costs was steep beginning in the 1880s, as was the rise in the number
of adoptions rapid. Greater trade integration went hand in hand with convergence in social
protection.
Alternative Models of Labor Standards
Our model and empirical evidence have several potential problems. The procedure we have
exploited may be restricted to policy adjustments, for instance the tweaking of current minimum
age law in A to meet levels in B, as opposed to converging on new policies having no history
between the pair. But states in our sample had previous interactions on immigration, commercial,
and foreign policies, and in other ways like legal systems they were not far apart. In light of
broader historical and political interconnections, countries can be seen to be fine-tuning along an
existing dimension of contact. We may have omitted some key determinants of convergence or
measured incorrectly other variables. In the appendix, we report results using an alternate

23
measure of political competition that substantiates the baseline results But the inclusion of other
indicators, like a new measure of political competition, substantiates the baseline results.
Our procedure may be flawed if we have not properly controlled for the sample selection
problem because only pairs where B has already adopted one or more standards are included,
thereby leaving out information for a number of dyads. The loss of information is attenuated
since a country not appearing as B will likely show up as A; that said, a fraction of observations
remains ineligible to converge and, hence, excluded from the estimation sample. 51 Bias in the
marginal effects of the convergence equation depends on whether or not unobservables in country
A that may have helped determine its decision to follow B were correlated with the latter’s
unobservables, and the extent to which included covariates in the convergence equation
determine the probability of B adopting. The impact of the selection bias depends on the degree
of correlation that is, arguably, not too great in our large sample. Concretely, the wave of
adoptions in the short-time frame beginning in the 1880s created a large number of countries with
the potential of being emulated. Finally, to address the problem of correlation in error terms, we
control for as many observables as possible for A and B.
In the appendix, we report results for two tests of the effects of missing pairs and of
correlation in error terms. First, we estimate a country-year event history analysis which performs
poorly both in terms of domestic and international forces. Second, a Heckman selection
correction for a probit model of convergence cannot reject the null that there is no correlation
between the error terms of the convergence equation and the determinants of B adopting one or
more standards, and hence eligible to be included in the sample or not. Overall, it appears there is

51

In the entire sample of 11,286 dyads, 21 percent of the cases are eliminated because country B has no standard to be
emulated.

24
little evidence that missing information and sample selection issues are driving the baseline
findings on convergence.
BRINGING UP THE LATECOMERS
The pressure to emulate at the tail of the logistic curve in Figure 1 was weak because
countries were not well integrated in trade networks, or, because as latecomers in development,
domestic forces in support of reform had not yet coalesced. The IALL spearheaded the
transnational movement to level the playing field. The Belgians and Swiss were key players in
founding the IALL in Paris in 1900, since, by themselves, small states had less leverage to coerce
trading rivals than larger ones. The powers of the IALL were limited, however, to soft coercion
and no procedure was put in place to ensure ratification. Still, attendance at the occasional
conferences grew in the decade before the outbreak of war. 52 Most European governments in our
sample sent delegates—the U.S. sent an observer to the first meeting—and although they were
not completely persuaded by reformers, states became attuned to new social norms of worker
protection that were being circulated. In the decade after the creation of the IALL, Italy, Portugal,
Spain, and Sweden, all latecomers to the reform movement, prohibited night work of women.
There is modest statistical support for the role of the IALL as a purveyor of ideas. The
quinqeunnial controls in the baseline estimations suggest a higher propensity of emulation later in
the period, a change in trend coinciding with the emergence of a vocal and organized movement
for international harmonization. Column 6 in Table 3 tests for the role of international coercion
more directly. We include dummy variables if both countries A and B attended IALL conferences
in 1901 (Basel), 1905 (Berne), and 1913 (Zurich and Berne). 53 We find attendance at all three

52

Number of countries: Basle 1901, 8; Berne 1905, 14; Zurich and Berne 1913, 16. Follows, Antecedents; Chatelain,
Protection internationale; Métin, Traités ouvriers.
53
French was the predominant language at IALL meetings. The IALL indicator in column 6 can be considered a proxy
for shared cultural values.

25
meetings is related to a higher likelihood of adoption, although only for 1901 was it significant.
The effects of the 1905 and 1913 conferences may be poorly estimated because the primary
objective of the later meetings was to harmonize the dimensions of existing labor regulation, as
most counties had some laws on the books by this period.
There were substantial costs involved in negotiating multiparty agreements and all states,
even those which could easily meet the criteria set out, were wary of the diktats of a transnational
body. States had little reason to ratify IALL conventions because the penalty or reward for doing
so was small. After 1900, states negotiated bilateral labor accords which, as we previously
described, ensured reciprocal commitments to level the playing field. The accords gave
policymakers greater control over the reform agenda. Moreover, because accords were linked to
market access, states had a motive to promote and abide by them. The intuition was clearly laid
out by the German Minister of the Interior in parliamentary discussion on Imperial commercial
social and policy in 1902. Since import tariffs had reduced the purchasing power of workers, the
degree of further commercial protection available to manufacturers was limited. Better to
persuade commercial rivals to raise levels of social protection. “If we and our neighbors agree to
common charges for worker protection, we will be able to lower our commercial duties. We
should consider rivals which raise their levels of protection favorably.” 54 Exploiting strategically
its higher tariffs, Germany exchanged increased access in its own market for greater labor
protection abroad. 55 Germany had come to reject Bismarck’s formulation of a “Chinese wall” in
defense of social policy; instead, labor regulations and economic integration were now perceived

54

Our translation. Cited in Métin, Traités ouvriers, pp. 152-53.
In the Cobden-Chevalier era, Lampe (“Nineteenth Century Bilateralism”) found that high-tariff states were more
likely to cooperate than low-tariff jurisdictions. Pahre (Politics and Trade, pp. 204-46) reported that smaller countries in
the decades before 1914 were less cooperative and MFN treaties more stable if foreign tariffs were initially high.
55

26
as complements. In terms of the baseline model, the reduction in tariffs would lead to lower trade
costs and higher likelihood of convergence.
The French-Italian labor treaty of 1904 represented an attempt by one trading partner to
persuade a laggard to level the playing field in exchange for greater market access. 56 France and
Italy had engaged in a trade war that began in 1886 and effectively lasted into the early 1900s.
The war was especially hard on Italy because of its dependence on France for its exports of
specialty goods. 57 While Italian silk was a relatively standardized item and producers readily
found markets in Switzerland, its specialty wine producers were less fortunate and they had to
dump their stock. 58 As part of the agreement ending the trade war, France demanded that Italy
raise its labor standards to international norms, thus guaranteeing its producers greater market
access. In exchange, France agreed to give Italian migrant workers the same level of benefits
French workers received. It also enticed its trading partner by removing some commercial duties
on Italian imports. Italy was not opposed to the French initiative. Its history of labor legislation
was recent and, because the percentage of the population eligible to vote was low, the liberal
government could exploit the French initiative to go around vested interests opposing reform. 59
The net result was that labor costs increased relatively more in Italy. After the accord, French
exports to Italy rose by 61 percent; Italian exports to France by about 20 percent. 60
The strategy of linking regulation and market access was generalized across Europe. The
French-Italian arrangement, which even dispassionate observers like the U.S. Department of
56

On the French-Italian labor accord, see Fontaine, “Review”; Lowe, International Protection, pp. 180-84; Métin,
Traités ouvriers, pp. 49-59. The agreement is reprinted in Chatelain, Protection internationale, pp. 176-92.
57
In 1887, Italian exports to France were 40 percent of its total exports; French exports to Italy were less than 6 percent
of its total. In the ten-year period after 1887, Italian exports to France fell by 57 percent, and those of France to Italy by
21 percent. Connybeare, Trade Wars, p. 185.
58
Lazer, “Free Trade,” p. 453.
59
Earlier in the decade, the Italian (liberal) Prime Minister Giovanni Giolitti had invited socialists into his cabinet. In the
years before the accord, the minimum working age was raised to 12 years, and the employment of women on night
shifts was restricted to 12 hours, but Giolitti hesitated against making further improvements. Workers were
underrepresented in Parliament, universal suffrage being granted only in 1911 (Coppa, Planning in Italy, pp. 162-65).
60
Trade statistics from Annuaire statistique, various years.

27
Labor viewed as groundbreaking, served as a model for the French-Belgian (1906) accord, and
Germany’s treaties with Italy (1904) and Austria-Hungary (1905). 61 For the time period 19021913 we estimate the short and long run effects of the bilateral treaties (from Table 4) on trade
between pairs of European countries (a and b) with the regression:
Trade costsab = 0.0008 + 0.9248trade costsab (t-1) - 0.0066labor treatyab
(0.0138) (0.0182)**
(0. 0029)*
+ controls (tariffs, common border, distance between capitals, year dummies),

N = 1868

F(18, 179) = = 2265.4

R-squared

= 0.96. 62

The short run effect is the coefficient on labor treaty, -0.0066, significant at the 2 percent level.
The long run effect is calculated as -0.0066/(1-0.9248) = -0.089, or a 9 percent decline in trade
costs (p-value 0.02). With an elasticity of substitution between foreign and home goods of 11, the
point estimate amounts to a rise of bilateral exports of 35 percent for each partner. 63 Lampe’s
observation that the interaction of “trade-creation considerations and strategically oriented
political economy forces” lay behind the diffusion of MFN agreements appears applicable to the
spread of labor accords. Countries had an incentive to consent to converge on labor standards,
because they did not wish to forsake the gains from trade.
In unreported regressions, we estimate that the negotiation of a labor treaty after 1900
reduced trade costs by nine percent. Countries had an incentive to converge on labor standards
because they did not wish to forsake the gains from trade.

61

U.S. Commissioner of Labor, Twenty-fourth Report, pp. 24-27; Lowe, International Protection, pp. 195, 200;
Chatelain, Protection internationale, pp. 194-200, 213-15.
62
OLS regression; robust standard errors clustered at the country pair level are in parentheses; * indicates significance at
the 5 percent level; ** significance at the 1 percent level. Tariffs and distance between capitals are positive and
significant; common border and year dummies are negative and significant.
63
Calculated as (1-ρ){ln(1+0.91τo)2-ln(1+τo)2}, where τo , the average trade cost in the sample in the year before a trade
treaty was signed, equals 0.52 , and ρ , the elasticity of substitution, equals 11. The expression is derived from a gravity
model of trade. See Jacks, Meissner, and Novy “Trade Booms, Trade Busts and Trade Costs.”

28
WERE ALL LABOR STANDARDS EQUAL?
In this section, we extend our analysis and examine the type of legislation countries adopted
in response to the entanglement of domestic and foreign pressures. Consider the likelihood that
country A had the choice between high and low-cost standards, defined by the relative incidence
of legislation on firms’ bottom line. On the domestic front, high-cost standards may have gained
politicians a large and loyal constituency, but could have been perceived to do damage to the
competitiveness of the economy. An alternative was to adopt policies having more symbolic than
real effects. Now consider the ‘open political economy’ aspects of the decision. Country B might
demand that A adopt a high-cost standard like its own. Could A have gotten away with regulation
imposing lower costs? It might have if it could have convinced its partner that adoption of lowcost standards, appropriate to its own level of development and size and wealth, was a prelude of
tougher regulation. Country B may have not been entirely satisfied, but it at least had something
to show its own constituents who may have been behind targeting A in the first place. In this way,
even piecemeal regulation could have acted as gateway standards. 64
The Berne meeting of the IALL in 1905 distinguished between types of labor standards. 65
Delegates considered limits on the working hours of women and children as high cost. According
to one observer, 1.4 million women in Europe would be affected by a curb on night work,
benefiting, on average, from a shorter workday of 2.5 hours. 66 Factory inspection laws were
deemed low cost, as determined by the number of inspectors states had actually hired, and so was
accident compensation whose burden was shared by workers, firms, and governments (Table 2).

64

Rodrik (One Economics, p. 228) claimed a similar process was behind the rise in labor regulation after 1945.
For a summary, see Mahaim, “La conference de Berne,” pp. 14-15.
66
Assuming women comprised 60 percent of the labor force in textiles, the reduction of labor input in the industry
would have been in the order of about 10 percent. This is a lower bound estimate. Men may have reduced their hours
alongside women since their work was complementary. The 60 percent figure is for the U.K. from Boot and
MainDonald, “New Estimates”; hours from Huberman, “Working Hours.”
65

29
We employ a multinomial logit approach to study the possibility that the determinants of
convergence varied with the type of labor standard adopted (Table 6). We create three categories
to capture country A’s potential responses. Category 0 represents the outcome where there was no
convergence between countries A and B. Category 1 designates that country A adopted limits on
women and children’s work (restrictions on women’s maximum hours and prohibition of night
work, and minimum age laws for children) to emulate B’s corresponding legislation. The third
category (effectively category 2) indicates that country A adopted factory inspection or accident
compensation when B had these policies in place. For this purpose, our sample of 2,884 countrypair years, contains 90 instances of emulation in category 1, and 151 in category 2. The list of
explanatory variables is identical to the short baseline in Table 5, but we now include two
indicators for lagged values of convergence. The first indicates the number of category 1
standards shared in the previous year; the other indicates the number of category 2 standards
shared.
For category 1, the key determinants of policy convergence in Table 6, column 1, are
similar, but not identical, to previous results. Domestic forces trumped external pressures in the
adoption of costly regulation. As per capita GDP of country A rose, it was more likely to
implement limits on women’s and children’s work and converge to country B. Size did not matter
in the adoption of category 1 standards. Adoption was less likely the greater the degree of
convergence already achieved. The lagged values of convergence in each category reveal
evidence consistent with the dynamic proposed above. Countries may have acted sequentially,
adopting one category of legislation before moving on to the other set as conditions became more

30
opportune. Emulation was more likely the higher the level of convergence in the opposite group
of standards. 67
Strikingly, and in contrast to Table 5, the partial effect of trade integration for category 1
standards is not statistically significant. Trade pressures were less important for these types of
standards. And there was no difference between Old and New Worlds. In a separate, but
unreported multinomial estimation that included bilateral distance and a border dummy, these
variables were also not statistically significant. Again, domestic forces overwhelmed external
pressures in the adoption of costly regulation.
All standards were not alike. We find opposite results for policies that we perceive to have
imposed a smaller shock on an economy’s cost structure. There are significant differences in the
determinants of convergence between high and low cost standards. Country A’s GDP per capita
(an increase in GDP for a fixed population) has the opposite sign from that for high cost standards
in column 1. Richer countries were less likely to emulate less costly standards. Alternatively,
poorer countries were more prone to emulate less costly standards. Proportional rises in GDP and
population (or size) had no relation to convergence. Turnout in country A is no longer statistically
significant. Similar to previous findings, the process of emulation was slower in the New World,
although a higher voter turnout ratio accelerated the process. Regarding the time path in the
diffusion of standards, the (unreported) period dummies for category 2 variables grow larger over
time and are statistically significant, while none of the period dummies for category 1 are
statistically important, though the point estimates of the average partial effects on the time
dummies appear to fall over time.
Conspicuously, trade was a pathway of diffusion for less costly labor standards only. States
did not mimic holis bolis the policy agenda of neighbors or trading partners, but were selective in
67

In other (unreported) regressions, emulation was more likely if the country pair had similar per capita incomes.

31
their choice of policy based on internal and external constraints. Domestic and external forces
were entangled. Countries more exposed to trade were predisposed to emulate, but only on low
cost standards. The adoption of factory inspection and accident compensation satisfied the
demands of the domestic reform movement, and of trading partners and their constituents,
because they were the first step to more stringent and comprehensive legislation. Still, while
states appeared to have been more cautious in adopting costly standards in the face of
international competition, there is no evidence of a race to the bottom. If undercutting
international competition mattered, then the partial effect on the trade cost variable should have
been positive and statistically significant. Countries facing the stiffest international competition—
where trade costs were low—would have been the least likely to emulate. However, greater
integration did not lead to a lower likelihood of adopting labor standards present elsewhere, and
European countries, in particular, raised levels of labor regulation in line with key trading
partners while preserving some domestic independence in the sequence of policies adopted.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS
Everywhere labor regulation was on the rise in the decades before 1914. The prevailing
narrative views this episode as a chapter in national history. Since countries developed
economically and politically on parallel trajectories, they consequently adopted comparable
policies. But globalization mattered too. Countries were under strong pressure to emulate the
labor standards of major trading partners, although this did not mean adopting identical laws. And
since the process was uncoordinated, trade flows actually strengthened nationally regulatory
standards.
Our findings lead to a neglected but straightforward explanation of the origins of social
Europe and liberal America—and possibly why the divergence between the two has persisted
over the last century. Intraindustry trade was greater in the Old World. The threat of market loss

32
was credible and enforceable against countries that failed to emulate the standards of partners. To
avoid costly trade wars, policymakers negotiated bilateral labor treaties that exchanged market
access for a level playing field. The New World exported undifferentiated products and countries
were under no compulsion to adopt regulation of trading partners, the rise of labor legislation
being predominately a local affair.
We have made a point of separating the determinants of adoption from the effects of
regulation, studies of which have tended to find that new legal norms codified existing practice. 68
Why then did states feel compelled to adopt legislation? Politicians may have wished to
demonstrate a concern for working people; social reformers may have wanted to curtail
backsliding; employers may have thought otherwise. This paper points to an alternative
explanation of the persistent and loud demands for legislation, despite its null effects. Foreign
intervention, in conjunction with or in opposition to domestic interests, had a voice in the
timetable of reform. But since the adoption of new laws was conditional on guarantees of market
access, trade and labor regulation rose together. As incomes and employment expanded along
with trade, a self-adjusting mechanism ensured that the effects of legislation were neutralized.

68

See Fishback, “Progressive Era”; Moehling, “State Child.”

33

APPENDIX
Labor Legislation
Table 1 gives the years countries adopted legislation, as opposed to when it came into
effect. Wherever possible, we selected dates of introduction of laws or amendments to laws that
came close to meeting standards of the Final Protocol of the International Conference on Labour
in Factories and Mines held in Berlin in 1890. The Berlin meeting outlined a model labor code
that was intended to be the basis of a late nineteenth century European social charter. The final
Protocol recommended that children under 12 years of age be prohibited from factory work; the
elimination of night work for young women; and a working day for women of 11 hours. In an
attempt to be consistent, we relied on dates given in the proceedings of the International
Association of Labour Legislation that gave detailed information for many of the countries in our
sample. The IALL distinguished between dates of adoption and dates when the legislation came
into effect. 69 Where the IALL did not provide information, we relied on official publications;
when official reports gave conflicting years, we assumed that change occurred mid-way between
the last two dates identified. In the case of accident compensation, we took dates from the
comprehensive international Report prepared by the U.S. Commissioner of Labor. We have
followed the Report and record that Russia adopted accident compensation in 1903. 70
For the Old World, we assume that legislation was standardized within national borders,
although after the Franco-Prussian War, German manufacturers maintained that Alsatian firms
had a competitive advantage because they were exempted from the stricter German labor code. 71
For Switzerland, we take federal legislation. For Australia, we use the date the first state passed
legislation meetring the Berlin standard; for Canada, when Quebec and Ontario achieved this
level; for the U.S., we give two values: the first, when ten states passed comparable legislation,
and the second in parenthesis, when the ten most populated states adopted comparable laws. In
the case of Mexico, new labor law was passed in the wake of the revloution; we have followed
labor historians and record adoption in 1913. 72
To be sure, other laws governing women’s and children’s work, and factory conditions
could be included in Table 1. For other measures for which we have information there was
correlation in the years of adoption with those in the table. 73 But some of the details of these
measures (for instance, night work of children) varied greatly across countries. As Table 2
reports, we selected laws that had less dispersion in their various dimensions, although
heterogeneity across countries cannot be ruled out.
The choice of dates for the U.S. merits discussion because of different histories of
regulation at the state level. Despite its federal structure, Fishback claimed that the “geography of
adoption showed that neighboring states were likely to adopt legislation with similar features
within the same time frame.” 74 Twenty-two states adopted accident compensation between 1911
69

For instance, following the 1905 Berne conference Belgium agreed to restrict women’s work to 11 hours, but delayed
passage until 1909. Certain aspects of the law were only implemented in 1911. Lowe, International Protection, p. 126.
70
U.S. Commissioner of Labor, Twenty-fourth Report, p. 4.
71
Hagemann, “Verien,” p. 159.
72
Bortz, “Revolution,” pp. 674-83.
73
Huberman and Lewchuk, ”European Integration”; for correlation across U.S. jurisdictions, see Fishback, Holmes, and
Allen, “Lifting the Curse.”
74
Fishback, “Progressive Era,” p. 302.

34
and 1914 alone. 75 For other regulations, legislation was most common in industrial northern states
with the largest share of workers in manufacturing and import competing activities—key sectors
in our analysis. As for dates of introduction, years recorded in Tables 1 approximate those
reported by Commons and Andrews. For women’s hours, Common and Andrews gave 1908, the
year when the Oregon ten-hour law for women was upheld, to mark the beginning of “enforceable
hour limitation laws for women.” 76 Based on our procedure, we estimated that night work of
women was introduced in 1913.
The list below gives sources consulted for Tables 1 and 2. To avoid duplication, other
sources consulted in preparation of the tables and cited in the text appear in the full list of
references to this paper.
Old World
Bellom, M. État actuel de la question des accidents du travail dans les différents pays. Congrès
International des Accidents du Travail, Rapports. Brussels: P. Weissenbruch, 1897.
Brooke, Emma. 1898. Factory Laws of European Countries. London: Grant Richards, 1898.
Droz, N. État de la question des accidents du travail. Congrès International des Accidents du
Travail, Rapports, vol. 1. Paris, 1889.
Fraser, Derek. The Evolution of the British Welfare State. Second edition. London: Macmillan,
1984.
Goulart, Pedro and Arjun S. Bedi. “A History of Child Labour in Portugal.” Institute of Social
Studies, working paper no. 448, 2007.
International Association for Labour Legislation (IALL). Report of the 4th General Meeting of
the Committee of the IALL. Geneva, September 26-29, 1906. London; Labour
Representative Printing & Publishing, 1907.
IALL. First Comparative Report on the Administration of Labour Laws: Inspection in Europe.
London: P. S. King & Son, 1911.
International Labour Office. ILO. Factory Inspection: Historical Development and Present
Organization in Certain Countries. Geneva: ILO, 1923.
ILO. “Some Problems of Factory Inspection.” International Labor Review 8 (December1923):
789-810.
ILO. The Organisation of Labour Inspection in Industrial and Commercial Undertakings.
Geneva: ILO, 1939.
Keeling, Frederick. Child Labour in the United Kingdom. London: P.S. King & Son, 1914.
Price, George M. “Administration of Labor Laws and Factory Inspection in Certain European
Countries. Monthly Labor Review 16, no. 6 (1923): 1153-71.
Rimlinger, Gaston. V. Welfare Policy and Industrialization in Europe, America and Russia. New
York: Wiley, 1971.
Silvestre, Javier. “Workplace Accidents and Early Safety Policies in Spain, 1900-32.” Social
History of Medicine 21, no. 1 (2008): 67-86.
United Kingdom. Parliamentary Papers. International Conference on Labour, vol. LXXIII, 1905.
United States. Department of Labor. Workmen’s Compensation Laws of the United States and
Foreign Countries. Bulletin of the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Department of Labor,
no. 126, 1914.
75
76

Fishback and Kantor, Prelude, p 58.
Commons and Andrews, Principles, pp. 97-102. The citations are from pages 100, 102.

35
Villard. H.G. Workmen’s Accident Compensation and Insurance in Belgium, Norway, Sweden,
Denmark and Italy. New York, 1913.
New World
Argentina
Bonaudo, Marta and Elida Sonzogni. “To Populate and to Discipline: Labor Market Construction
in the Province of Sante Fe, Argentina 1859-1890.” Latin America Perspectives 26, no. 1
(1999): 65-91.
Guy, Donna J. 1981. “Women, Peonage, and Industrialization: Argentina 1810-1914.” Latin
America Research Review 16, no. 3 (1981): 65-89.
Pichetto, Juan Raul. “The Present State of Social Legislation in the Argentine Republic.”
International Labour Review 46 (1942): 385-99.
Australia
Castles, Francis G. The Comparative History of Public Policy. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1989.
Clark, Victor. The Labour Movement in Australasia; A Study in Social Democracy. London,
1907.
Jones, Michael. The Australian Welfare State: Evaluating Social Policy. Sydney: Allen and
Unwin, 1980.
Kewley, Thomas H. Australia’s Welfare State: The Development of Social Security Benefits.
Melbourne: Macmillan, 1969.
Platt, Desmond C. Social Welfare, 1850-1950: Australia, Argentina, and Canada Compared.
Basingstoke, Hampshire: Macmillan, 1989.
Smith, Yvonne. Taking Time: A Women's Historical Data Kit. Melbourne: Union of Australian
Women, 1988.
Canada
Government of Canada, Department of Labour. Labour Legislation in Canada. Ottawa, 1918.
MacDowell, Laurel Sefton, and Ian Radforth, eds. Canadian Working Class History-Selected
Readings. Toronto: Canadian Scholars Press, 1992.
Rouillard, Jacques. Les Travailleurs du Coton au Québec, 1900-1915. Montréal: Les Presses de
l’Université du Québec, 1974.
Mexico
Freer, Aurora Gómez-Galvarriato. The Impact of the Revolution: Business and Labor in the
Mexican Textile Industry, Orizaba, Veracruz 1900-1930. Ph.D. diss., Harvard University,
2000.
United States
Abbott, Edith. Women in Industry: A Study in American Economic History. New York: D.
Appleton, 1910.
Baker, Elizabeth Faulkner. Protective Labour Legislation. New York: Longmans, Green, 1925.
Commons, John R. History of Labor in the United States. New York: Macmillan, 1935.
Commons, John R., and John B. Andrews. Principles of Labor Legislation. Fourth edition. New
York: Harper and Brothers Publishers, 1936

36
Goldin, Claudia. Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American Women.
New York: Oxford University Press, 1990.
Jones, Ethel B. “State Legislation and Hours of Work in Manufacturing.” Southern Economic
Journal 41, no. 2 (1975): 602-12.
United States. Department of Commerce. Historical Statistics of the United States. Washington
D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1975.

37
Model and Robustness Checks
In Table A1 we present additional robustness checks of the baseline directed dyad event
history analysis. In column 1 we use the Polity IV measure of competition of political
participation (PARCOMP in the Polity IV manual) as an alternative to voter turnout. 77 This
variable takes the values 0,1,2,3,4, or 5. A value of 0 implies no oppositional activity; 5 is
associated with regular voluntary changes in power at the national level, without coercion or
disruption. The results are in line with our previous findings. Political competition matters in the
New, but not in the Old World.
Column 2 substitutes the ratio of bilateral trade (exports and imports) to GDP for the trade
cost variable. Greater trade is positively associated with convergence. The point estimate is
statistically significant at the 11 percent level. In this model the marginal effect of A’s GDP
becomes significant at the better than the 10 percent level, while the point estimate is close to that
in other specifications.
To deal with the issue of missing pairs, we tested probit models using the country-year as
the unit of observation, thereby allowing countries which had not already adopted a particular
standard to be included. 78 To account for international effects, we added the standards of all
trading partners divided by bilateral trade costs, summed across all countries in the sample. Most
likely, this variable is plagued with measurement error since the functional form is arbitrary, a
problem which underscores our choice of the directed dyad approach. It is not surprising that the
probits give a small marginal impact of trading partners’ labor standards, and whose sign is
indefinite and with large standard errors. We find no consistent evidence on the impact of the
turnout variable or GDP per capita which was only statistically significant for the probability of
adoption of limits on women’s working hours and night work. Levels of voter turnout (not
interacted) are statistically significant for accident insurance and limits on women’s night work.
Like the convergence equation, the country-year event analysis has potential problems related to
the spatial-correlation of error terms and endogeneity between a country’s explanatory variables
and neighbors’ error terms.
We also estimated a Heckman selection model which allows for correlation between the
error term in the convergence equation (converted from a logit to a probit) and the probability B
had one or more standards and, hence, eligible to be included in the sample or not. We use the
full list of variables from the baseline model, plus union density and agricultural share of country
B, and the share of the population in country B over 65 as excluded determinants of the selection
process. 79 The selection model cannot reject the null that there is no correlation between the error
terms of the two equations (p-value 0.16). Results in the outcome equation are qualitatively in
line with our baseline findings. Trade costs are still highly significant and country A’s variables
matter in the same way. However, the standard errors on country B’s per capita income are larger
than the baseline, making this variable not statistically significant. In other words, after
controlling for sample selection, A’s decision to converge is not based on the income per capita
of B.

77

Marshall and Jaggers, Polity IV Project.
Results for unreported regressions available upon request.
79
In the bivariate probit model (N = 4,241) for which we have all the necessary covariates, 46.4 percent of countries had
no standards to emulate.
78

38
REFERENCES
Aidt, Toke S., Jaysari Dutta, and Elena Loukoianova. “Democracy Comes to Europe: Franchise
Extension and Fiscal Outcomes 1830-1938.” European Economic Review, no. 2 (2006): 24983.
Annuaire Statistique. Various years. Paris.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. “The WTO as a Mechanism for Securing Market Access
Property Rights.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 15, no. 3 (2001): 69-88.
Boehmke, Frederick J. “Policy Emulation or Policy Convergence? Potential Ambiguities in the
Dyadic Event History Approach to State Policy Emulation.” Unpublished manuscript.
University of Iowa, Department of Political Science, 2008.
Boot, H.M., and J.H. MainDonald. “New Estimates of Age- and Sex-Specific Earnings and the
Male-Female Earnings in the British Cotton Industry, 1833-1906.” Economic History Review
61, no. 2 (2008): 380-408.
Bortz, Jeffrey. “The Revolution, the Labor Regime and Conditions of Work in the Cotton Textile
Industry in Mexico.” Journal of Latin American Studies 32, no. 3 (2000): 671-703.
Brown, Drusilla K. “Labor Standards: Where Do They Belong on the International Trade
Agenda?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 15, no. 3 (2001): 89-112.
Brown, John C. “Imperfect Competition and Anglo-German Trade Rivalry: Markets for Cotton
textiles Before 1914.” Journal of Economic History 55, no. 3 (1995): 494-527.
Chatelain, L. La protection internationale ouvrière. Paris: Arthur Rousseau, 1908.
Conybeare, John A.C. Trade Wars: The Theory and Practice of International Commercial
Rivalry. New York: Columbia University Press, 1987.
Coppa, Frank J. Planning, Protectionism, and Politics in Liberal Italy: Economics and Politics in
the Giolittian Age. Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press, 1971.
Davis, Christina L. Food Fights Over Free Trade: How International Institutions Promote
Agricultural Trade Liberalization. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2005.
Drummond, Ian M. Progress Without Planning: The Economic History of Ontario from
Confederation to the Second World War. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1987.
Engerman, Stanley J. “The History and Political Economy of International Labor Standards.” In
International Labor Standards: History, Theory, and Policy Options, edited by Kasushik Basu,
Henrik Horn, Lisa Roman, and Judith Shapiro, 9-83. Oxford: Blackwell, 2003.

39
Findlay, Ronald and Kevin H. O’Rourke. Power and Plenty: Trade, War, and the World
Economy in the Second Millennium. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2007.
Fishback, Price. “The Progressive Era.” In Government and the American Economy: A New
History, edited by Price Fishback et al., 288-322. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007.
Fishback, Price, Rebecca Holmes, and Samuel Allen. “Lifting the Curse of Dimensionality
Measures of the States’ Labor Legislation Climate in the United States During the Progressive
Era.” Labor History 50, no. 3 (2009): 313-46.
Fishback, Price and Shawn Kantor. A Prelude to the Welfare State: The Origins of Workers’
Compensation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000. À
Follows, J.W. Antecedents of the International Labour Organization. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1951.
Fontaine, Arthur. “A Review of International Labour Legislation.” In Labour as an International
Problem, edited by E. John Solano, 161-97. London: Macmillan, 1920.
Fuchs, Frieda. “Institutions, Values and Leadership in the Creation of the Welfare States: A
Comparison of Protective Labor Legislation in Britain and France.” Ph.D. diss., Harvard
University, 2001.
Greenhill, Brian, Layna Mosley, and Aseem Prakash. “Trade-based Diffusion of Labor Rights: A
Panel Study, 1986-2002.” American Political Science Review 103, no. 4 (2009): 669-90.
Hacker, Jacob S., and Paul Pierson. “Business Power and Social Policy: Employers and the
Formation of the American Welfare State.” Politics and Society 30, no. 2 (2002): 277-325.
Hagemann, Harold. “The Verein fùr Sozialpolitik: From Its Foundation Until World War I.” In
The Spread of Political Economy and the Professionalisation of Economists, edited by M. M.
Augello and M. E. L. Guidi, 152-75. London: Routledge, 2001.
Hall, Peter. “The Role of Interests, Institutions, and Ideas in the Comparative Political Economy
of the Industrialized Nations.” In Comparative Politics: Rationality, Culture, and Structure,
edited by Mark Lichbach and Alan S. Zuckerman, 175-207. New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1997.
Hennock, E.P. British Social Reform and German Precedents: The Case of Social Insurance
1880-1914. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987.
Hennock, E.P. The Origin of the Welfare State in England and Germany, 1850–1914: Social
Policies Compared. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Huberman, Michael. “Working Hours of the World Unite? New International Evidence of
Worktime, 1870-1913.” Journal of Economic History 64, no. 4 (2004): 964-1001.

40
Huberman, Michael and Wayne Lewchuk. “European Economic Integration and the Labour
Compact, 1850-1913.” European Review of Economic History 7, no. 1 (2003): 3-41.
Humair, Cédric. Développement économique et État central (1815-1914). Un siècle de politique
douanière suisse au service des élites. Bern: Lang, 2004.
Irwin, Douglas A. “Mulitlateral and Bilateral Trade Policies in the World Trading System: An
Historical Perspective. In New Dimensions in Regional Integration, edited by J. de Melo and
A. Panagariya, 90-127. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
Jacks, David S., Christopher M. Meissner, and Dennis Novy. “Trade Costs, 1870–2000.”
American Economic Review 98, no. 2 (2008): 529-34.
Jacks, David S., Christopher M. Meissner, and Dennis Novy. “Trade Costs in the First Wave of
Globalization.” Explorations in Economic History 47, no. x (2010):
Jacks, David S., Christopher M. Meissner, and Dennis Novy. “Trade Booms, Trade Busts and
Trade Costs.” NBER Working Paper No. 15267, 2009.
Jay, Raoul. La limitation légale de la journée de travail en Suisse. Paris: Larose, 1891.
Jay, Raoul. La protéction légale des tavailleurs. Premiers elements de la legislation ouvrière. 2nd
edition. Paris, Larose, 1910.
Kertesz, Adolf. Die Textilindustrie sämtlicher Staaten. Braunschweig: F. Vieheg, 1917.
Lake, David A. “Open Economy Politics: A Critical Review.” Review of International
Organization 4, no. 3 (2009): 219-44.
Lampe, Markus. “Effects of Bilateralism and the MFN Clause on International Trade: Evidence
for the Cobden-Chevalier Network.” Journal of Economic History 69, no. 4 (2009): 1012-40.
Lazer, David. “The Free Trade Epidemic of the 1860s and Other Outbreaks of Economic
Discrimination.” World Politics 51, no. 4 (1999): 447-83.
Lindert, Peter H. Growing Public: Social Spending and Economic Growth Since the Eighteenth
Century. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Lowe, Boutelle E. The International Protection of Labor: International Labor Organization,
History and Law. New York: Macmillan, 1935.
Maddison, Angus. The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective. Paris: OECD, 2001.
Mahaim, Ernest. “La conference de Berne concernant la protection ouvrière. Revue économique
internationale, no. 1 (1905): 1-29.

41
Marshall, Monty G. and Keith Jaggers. Polity IV Project: Political Regime Characteristics and
Transitions, 1800-1999. Dataset Users' Manual. Integrated Network for Societal Conflict
Research (INSCR) and Center for International Development and Conflict Management
(CIDCM). University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, 1999.
Messerlin, Patrick and Stephane Becuwe, “Intra-Industry Trade in the Long Run: The French
Case, 1850-1913.” In Imperfect Competition and International Trade, edited by David
Greenway and P.K.M. Tharakan, 191-215. Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1986.
Métin, Alfred. Les traités ouvriers: Accords internationaux de prévoyance et de travail. Paris:
Armand Colin, 1908.
Mitchell, Brian. International Historical Statistics. Fourth Edition. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2003.
Moehling, Carolyn. “State Child Labor Laws and the Decline of Child Labor Law.” Explorations
in Economic History 36, no. 1 (1999): 72-106.
Pahre, Robert. Politics and Trade Cooperation in the Nineteenth Century. The ‘Agreeable
Customs’ of 1815–1914. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Putnam, Robert D. “Diplomacy and Domestic Politics: The Logic of Two-Level Games.”
International Organization 42, no. 3 (1988): 427-60.
Rahikainen, Marjatta. “Child Labour Legislation in Nineteenth Century Finland.” Scandinavian
Economic History Review 49, no.1 (2001): 41-62.
Rodgers, Daniel T. Atlantic Crossings: Social Politics in a Progressive Age. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1998.
Rodrik, Dani. One Economics, Many Recipes: Globalization, Institutions, and Economic Growth.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2007.
Sabel, Charles and Jonathan Zeitlin. “Historical Alternatives to Mass Production: Politics,
Markets and Technology in Nineteenth-century Industrialization.” Past & Present 108 (1985):
133-76.
Saxonhouse, Gary and Gavin Wright. “Technological Evolution in Cotton Spinning, 1878-1933.”
In The Fibre That Changed the World: The Cotton Industry in International Perspective,
1600-1990s, edited by Douglas A. Farnie and David J. Jeremy, 129-52. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2004.
Shotwell, James T., ed. The Origins of the International Labour Organization. New York:
Columbia University Press, 1934.
Simmons, Beth A., Frank Dobbin, and Geoffrey Garrett, eds. The Global Diffusion of Markets
and Democracy. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008.

42

Trentmann, Frank. Free Trade Nation: Commerce, Consumption, and Civil Society in Modern
Britain. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.
U.S. Commissioner of Labor. Twenty-fourth Annual Report of the Commissioner of Labor.
Workmen’s Insurance and Compensation Systems in Europe. Vol.1 Washington, D.C.: GPO,
1911.
Van Daele, Jasmien. “Engineering Social Peace: Networks, Ideas, and the Founding of the
International Labour Organization.” International Review of Social History 50, no. 4 (2005):
435-66.
Vogel, David. Trading Up: Consumer and Environmental Regulation in a Global Economy.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995.
Volden, Craig. “States as Policy Laboratories: Emulating Success in the Children’s Health
Insurance Program.” American Journal of Political Science 50, no. 2 (2006): 294-312.
Von Laue, Theodore H. “Factory Inspection Under the ‘Witte System’: 1892-1903.” American
Slavic and East European Review 19, no. 3 (1960): 347-62.

43

1.00

Percent of countries

0.80

BEL
FIN
NLD
USA

0.60

BLG
RUS
ITA
NOR

DEN
GBR

0.40
SWE
FRA

0.20

AUS
CAN
AUT

CHE/1833
DEU/1853

0.00
1870

1880

1890

1900

1910

FIGURE 1
INTERNATIONAL DIFFUSION OF MINIMUM AGE LAW
Source: Years from Table 1.

44

82

0.95

72

Labor standards

52

0.85

42
0.80

32
22

0.75

12
2

0.70
1880

1890

1900

1910

Total labor standards (max. = 90)
Average trade costs, tariff equivalent terms

FIGURE 2
INTERNATIONAL DIFFUSION OF MINIMUM AGE LAW
Sources: Trade costs from Jacks, Meissner, and Novy, “Trade Costs, 1870–2000.” Labor
standards
from Table 1.

Trade costs

0.90

62

45

TABLE 1
LABOR MARKET REGULATION, GDP PER CAPITA, AND VOTER TURNOUT

Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Hungary
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Russia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United
Kingdom
Argentina
Australia
Canada
Mexico
United States

Night
Introduction
Work
of Factory Minimum Women
Inspection Age 12 Prohibited
1883
1885
1895
1889
1889
1909
1905
1905
1909
1873
1901
*
1889
1889
*
1874
1871
1892
1853
1853
1891
1893
1884
1909
1906
1907
1907
1895
1889
1889
1892
1892
1909
1893
*
1909
1882
1907
1905
1907
*
1909
1889
1881
1909
1877
1833
1894

11 Hour
Working
Day
Women
1895
*
1913
*
*
1892
1891
*
*
1889
*
*
*
*
*
1894

Accident
Compensation
1887
1903
1908
1898
1893
1898
1884
1907
1898
1901
1894
1913
1903
1900
1901
1911

GDP Voter
Per Turnout
Capita 18901900
1900
2882
0
3731
.50
1223
0
3017
.33
1668
0
2876
.65
2985
.80
1682
1785
0
3424
.25
1877
.30
1302
0
1237
0
1789
0
2561
.09
3833
.72

1833

1901

1844

1850

1897

4492

.36

*
1885
1888
1913
1893
(1911)

*
1885
1885
*
1889
(1912)

*
1896
1910
*
1913
*

*
1873
1910
*
1892
*

1915
1914
*
*
1911
(1914)

2756
4013
2911
1366
4091

0
.46
.61
0
.35

Notes: * Indicates did not enact such a regulation. - Indicates information not available. GDP
in 1990 international GK$. Voter turnout measured as a percentage of electorate. Figures in
parentheses record when ten most populous states adopted legislation.
Sources: See appendix; GDP: Maddison, World Economy; vote: Lindert, Growing Public,
and Toke Aidt, personal communication.

46
TABLE 2
DIMENSIONS OF LABOR LEGISLATION

Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Hungary
Italy
Netherland
s
Norway
Portugal
Russia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United
Kingdom
Argentina
Australia
Canada
Mexico
United
States

Factory Inspection 1914
Workers
(’000)
Inspectors /Inspectors
80
8.75
33
12.12
75
30
121
279
43
29

5.33
8.63
6.61
10.75

Night Rest
for Women
(hours)

1910
11
8
8

1919
11
11
9

Age
Restriction
Night Labor
Women
(years) 1910
18
21
18
18
18
16

51.72

9
9
9
9

11
11
11
11
11

92

4.35

10

11

35

4.40

201
61
45
20

11.51
6.56
4.44
5.00

11
8
8
8
11
10

206

12.14

12

50
58

6.72
8.62

12
12

Minimum Age Accident
(years)
Comp.
cost/wag
es
c1900 1919 (%) 1910
14
14
0.72
12
14
3.10
12
10
14
0.75
13
13
12
9

13
14
12
12

16

12

13

11
11
11
11
11
11

18
21
15
14
18
18

12
10
12
10
12
14

14
12
12
10
13
13

12

all

11

14

14
14

10
14
14

12
12

18
18

2.10
1.08
1.95

1.63
1.36
1.50
1.21
0.73

12
114

10.53

16

14

14

1.56

Notes: Australia is New South Wales; Canada is Ontario. Figures for U.S. for night work and age
limits are the modal state values for the closest years to 1900, 1910, and 1919, Employers’ cost
for accident compensation as share of wage bill is average from year of adoption until 1911. U.S.
figure is mean value for the first ten states that adopted compulsory accident insurance.
Sources: Factory inspectors and numbers of workers: ILO, Factory Inspection, and “Some
Problems”; Price, “Administration”; Silvestre, “Workplace Accidents”; Mitchell, Historical
Statistics; figure for U.S. is for Pennsylvania and employment of gainful workers from U.S.

47
Historical Statistics, D26-28, p. 130. Night rest for women, age restriction for women, and
minimum age: sources for Australia and Canada listed in the Appendix. U.S from Fishback,
Holmes, and Allen, “Lifting the Curse,” pp. 58-62; Engerman, “History and Political Economy,”
pp. 52-54; Goldin, Understanding, pp. 190-91, pp. 76-77; Moehling, “State Child Laws.” All
other countries from Brooke, Tabulation; Engerman, “History and Political Economy,” pp. 1222, 52-54; Fallows, Antecedents; Keeling, Child Labour. Employer costs for accident
compensation as share of wage bill: U.S. Commissioner of Labor, Twenty-fourth Report; figure
for U.S. is from Fishback and Kantor, Prelude, p. 58.

48

TABLE 3
EXPORT AND IMPORT MARKETS IN 1913 FOR EUROPEAN MANUFACTURERS:
COTTON TEXTILES, SILK, LACE, AND WOOLENS
(millions of marks)

Exporter
A-H
Belgium
France
Germany

(1)

(2)

AustriaHungary

Belgiu
m
3.8

(3)

(4)

(5)

German
Great
France
y Britain
6.4
186.8

109.3
256.9
166.2

28.1
141.7
462.4
275.3

(6)

(7)

(8)

Nether- Switzer
Italy
lands
-land

(9)

(10)

Other America
Europe
s

26.7
25.6
91.7
56.3

9.2
38.7
11.5
90.7

56.3
3.2
122.2
100.5

110.5
68.6
58.4
138.7

22.1
40.7
312.3
266.7

32.1

124.7
0.5

64.0
106.6
0.0

467.7
95.8
9.3
28.4

1076.6
150.3
10.6
117.1

0.07

0.16

=100%

16.9
12.0
197.3

330.5
45.8

64.2

GB
Italy
Netherlands
Switzerland

24.7
30.2
0.0
25.8

153.7
4.0
73.2
8.2

209.4
59.0
1.0
24.0

503.8
94.6
44.2
101.8

63.6
45.3
109.1

0.0
16.7

3.6

Country
import share
of all items
imported in
Europe (%)

0.06

0.11

0.10

0.21

0.20

0.04

0.05

(11)

Asia
20.4
10.9
64.8
83.2
1329.
3
44.7
76.2
14.0

Exports
to Exports to
Europe Europe as
as share
share of
all
of items excountry ported in
exports Europe(%
(%)
)
0.89
0.93
0.77
0.73

0.06
0.13
0.21
0.17

0.40
0.70
0.67
0.71

0.27
0.08
0.03
0.05

=100%

49
Notes: All values in millions of German marks.
Source: Kertesz, Textilindustrie.

TABLE 4
BILATERAL LABOR ACCORDS
Year
1870
1871
1872
1874
1877
1880
1882
1882
1894
1897
1899
1899
1901
1904
1904
1904
1904
1905
1905
1905
1906
1906
1906
1906
1906
1906
1906
1907
1909
1909
1909
1910
1910
1910
1910
1911
1911

Countries
Great Britain Netherlands
Great Britain Netherlands

Agreement

MFN

Emigration of Indian labor to Surinam

Labor recruitment (Guinea)
Emigration of Indian labor to French
Colonies
France - Great Britain
1860/1873
China - Peru
Commerce, navigation and emigration
China - Spain
Emigration of Chinese labor to Cuba
China - United States
Emmigration of Chinese labor to USA
Hawaii - Portugal
Commerce, navigation and emigration
Belgium - France
Saving funds
Emmigration of Chinese labor to
China - United States
USA
Belgium - France
Saving funds
Germany - Great Britain Colonial labor
China - Mexico
Labor mobility
Great Britain - Portugal Labor mobility between Transvaal and Mozambique
France - Italy
Comprehensive labor treaty
1898
China - Great Britain
Chinese labor
Italy - Switzerland
Accident compensation
1904
Germany - Italy
Accident compensation
1904/1906
Austria - Germany
Accident compensation and labor legislation
1905
Belgium - Luxembourg Accident compensation
Germany - Luxembourg Accident compensation
France - Italy
Saving funds
Belgium - France
Accident compensation
1881
Emigration from New
France - Great Britain
Hebrides
1907
Germany - Sweden
Accident compensation
1906/1911
Belgium - Luxembourg Accident compensation
France - Italy
Accident compensation
France - Luxembourg
Accident compensation
Germany - Netherlands Accident compensation
France - Great Britain
Accident compensation
Great Britain - Sweden Accident compensation
Austria-Italy
Accident compensation
1903/1906
Belgium - France
Accident compensation
France - Italy
Protection of young persons
France - Italy
Social insurance laws
France - Great Britain
Accident compensation
Germany - Sweden
Accident compensation
Denmark - France
Arbitration

2
1912
1912
1912
1913
1913
1913
1914

Belgium - Germany
Germany - Italy
Germany - Spain
Italy - United States
Belgium - Germany
France - Switzerland
Germany - Netherlands

Accident compensation
Accident compensation
Maritime accidents
Accident compensation
Accident compensation
Pensions
Accident compensation

Source: Lowe, International Protection, and Pahre, commercial treaty data set.

1904/1906
1913
1906

TABLE 5
DETERMINANTS OF CONVERGENCE IN LABOR REGULATIONS FOR COUNTRY PAIRS, 1881-1913
(1)

(2)

(3)

Baseline

Short

Europe

(4)
New
World

(5)

(6)
Attendance

Only

Country
Fixed
Effects

Baseline

Only

-0.04
[0.024]*
-0.027
[0.018]
0.022
[0.019]
0.025
[0.018]

-0.057
[0.020]***
-0.033
[0.015]**
0.027
[0.017]
0.021
[0.018]

-0.067
[0.038]*
-0.039
[0.027]
0.035
[0.030]
0.015
[0.028]

0.065
[0.066]
0.004
[0.072]
0.011
[0.065]
0.017
[0.042]

-0.627
[0.261]**
-0.431
[0.174]**
0.364
[0.195]*
0.292
[0.178]

-0.051
[0.022]**
-0.028
[0.017]*
0.022
[0.017]
0.02
[0.018]

0.019
[0.024]
0.002
[0.026]
-0.123
[0.040]***
0.005
[0.013]
0.286
[0.063]***
-0.003

0.013
[0.014]
0.001
[0.015]
-0.153
[0.026]***
0.006
[0.013]
0.273
[0.054]***
---

0.031
[0.020]
-0.019
[0.021]
---

-0.038
[0.193]
0.088
[0.208]
---

-2.863
[2.748]
3.345
[6.920]
---

0
[0.016]

0.262
[0.135]*
---

-0.143
[0.843]
---

---

---

---

0.023
[0.021]
-0.007
[0.023]
-0.141
[0.039]***
-0.011
[0.018]
0.262
[0.063]***
---

at IALL

INTERNATIONAL FORCES
Trade costs
ln (GDP B)
ln (Population B)
Turnout B
DOMESTIC FORCES
ln (GDP A)
ln (Population A)
New World A
Turnout A
New World A x turnout A
Union density A

2

Share of labor in agriculture A
Share of population 65+ A

[0.002]*
-0.019
[0.080]
0.002
[0.006]

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

TABLE 3 continued
(1)
(2)
Lagged level of similarity
in labor standards

-0.01
[0.006]

-0.01
[0.005]*

-0.022
[0.009]***

0.034
[0.019]*

-0.27
[0.206]

-0.011
[0.006]*

-0.021

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

INTERNATIONAL FORCES:
ROBUSTNESS CHECKS
Absolute value of
ln (GDP per capita A) - ln (GDP per
capita B)
Absolute value of
(turnout A) - (turnout B)
log (Distance km. between capitals)

---

---

---

---

---

Both A & B attended IALL in 1901

[0.016]
-0.007
[0.020]
-0.015
[0.006]***
-0.022
[0.011]*
---

---

---

---

---

Both A & B attended IALL in 1905

---

---

---

---

---

Both A & B attended IALL in 1913

---

---

---

---

---

0.049
[0.026]*
-0.016
[0.018]
0.099
[0.060]*

2,875
0.05

2,875
0.05

1,661
0.04

375
0.2

2,704
0.05

Shared border

Observations
Psuedo-R-Squared

2,875
0.05

3
* = Significant at 10 percent level.
** = Significant at 5 percent level.
*** = Significant at 1percent level.
Notes: Standard errors in brackets clustered at the country pair level. Estimation is by maximum likelihood for a logit model.
The dependent variable is 1 when there is convergence on any of five labor standards. Columns 1-4 and 6 report average
marginal effects; column 5, logit coefficients. Quinquennial dummies are included but not reported.
Sources: Trade costs, distance, and border: Jacks, Meissner, and Novy, “Trade Costs, 1870–2000,” and “Trade Costs in First
Wave”; GDP and population: Maddison, World Economy; agriculture and population shares: Lindert, Growing Public, and
Mitchell, Statistics; vote turnout: Table 1; union density: Gerald Friedman, personal communication; IALL: Follows,
Antecedents, and Shotwell, Origins.

TABLE 6
DETERMINANTS OF CONVERGENCE BY TYPE OF LABOR REGULATIONS
(1)
Convergence in Women's Night
Work, Women's Max. Hours,
Minimum Working Age for
Children

(2)
Convergence in Accident
Compensation or Factory

0
[0.01]
0.01
[0.01]
-0.01
[0.01]
0.03
[0.01]***

-0.05
[0.01]***
-0.04
[0.01]***
0.04
[0.02]**
0
[0.02]

0.03
[0.01]***
-0.03
[0.01]***
-0.01
[0.01]
0.03
[0.01]***

-0.03
[0.01]**
0.03
[0.01]***
-0.19
[0.03]***
-0.02
[0.01]

0.03
[0.03]

0.29
[0.05]***

-0.01

0.02

[0.00]*

[0.01]***

0.02

-0.08

[0.01]***

[0.01]***

INTERNATIONAL
FORCES
Trade costs
ln (GDP B)
ln (Population B)
Turnout B
DOMESTIC FORCES
ln (GDP A)
ln (Population A)
New World A
Turnout A
New World A x turnout
A
Lagged level of
similarity
in column 1 labor
standards
Lagged level of
similarity
in column 2 labor
standards
Observations
Psuedo-R-Squared
* = Significant at 10 percent level.
** = Significant at 5 percent level.
*** = Significant at 1percent level.

2884
0.10

Inspection Laws

2

Notes: Standard errors in brackets clustered at the country pair level. Columns 1 and 2 report
average marginal effects. Estimation is by maximum likelihood for a multinomial logit. The
omitted category is no convergence. Quinquennial dummies are included but not reported.
Sources: Table 5.

3

TABLE A1
DETERMINANTS OF CONVERGENCE: ROBUSTNESS CHECKS

INTERNATIONAL FORCES
Trade costs
ln (GDP B)
ln (Population B)
Turnout B
DOMESTIC FORCES
ln (GDP A)
ln (Population A)
New World A
Turnout A

(2)
Political
Competition

(3)
Trade
Share

-0.04
[0.02]**
-0.04
[0.02]**
0.03
[0.02]*
---

---

0.02
[0.02]
0
[0.02]
-0.2
[0.08]**
---

New World A x turnout A

---

Lagged level of similarity
in labor standards

-0.01
[0.01]

ROBUSTNESS CHECKS
Total trade/GDP country A

---

-0.03
[0.02]**
0.03
[0.02]
0.02
[0.02]
0.03
[0.01]*
-0.01
[0.01]
-0.15
[0.03]***
0.01
[0.01]
0.24
[0.05]***
-0.01
[0.01]

0.24
[0.16]

Competition of participation-Polity IV in A

0
[0.00]

---

Competition of participation-Polity IV in A x New World

0.05
[0.02]*

---

Competition of participation-Polity IV in B

0
[0.00]

---

Observations
Psuedo-R-Squared
* = Significant at 10 percent level.
** = Significant at 5 percent level.

2,778
0.04

2,884
0.05

4
*** = Significant at 1percent level.
Notes: Standard errors in brackets clustered at the country pair level. Estimation is by
maximum likelihood for a logit model. We report average marginal effects. The
dependent variable is 1 when there is convergence on any of five labor standards.
Quinquennial dummies are included but not reported.
Sources: Political competition: Marshall and Jaggers, Polity IV Project. Other variables,
see Table 5.

