                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   CREDIT DEFAULT SWAPS AND THE CREDIT CRISIS

                                          René M. Stulz

                                       Working Paper 15384
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15384


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2009




I am grateful for comments from Viral Acharya, Harry DeAngelo, Bernadette Minton, Til Shuermann,
and Andrei Shleifer. I thank Mike Anderson and Jérôme Taillard for assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Credit Default Swaps and the Credit Crisis
René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 15384
September 2009
JEL No. G01,G13,G14,G18,G21,G24,G28

                                               ABSTRACT

Many observers have argued that credit default swaps contributed significantly to the credit crisis.
Of particular concern to these observers are that credit default swaps trade in the largely unregulated
over-the-counter market as bilateral contracts involving counterparty risk and that they facilitate speculation
involving negative views of a firm’s financial strength. Some observers have suggested that credit
default swaps would not have made the crisis worse had they been traded on exchanges. I conclude
that credit default swaps did not cause the dramatic events of the credit crisis, that the over-the-counter
credit default swaps market worked well during much of the first year of the credit crisis, and that
exchange trading has both advantages and costs compared to over-the-counter trading. Though I argue
that eliminating over-the-counter trading of credit default swaps could reduce social welfare, I also
recognize that much research is needed to understand better and quantify the social gains and costs
of derivatives in general and credit default swaps in particular.


René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
      In the banking sector, the credit crisis has brought about a destruction of wealth of a

magnitude that has not been seen since the Great Depression. In trying to understand why banks

collapsed, why housing prices fell so dramatically, and why the credit markets froze, many

observers have identified credit default swaps to be a prominent villain. CBS called credit default

swaps on subprime mortgages the “bet that blew up Wall Street”.1 With Google, a search under

“worst Wall Street invention” comes up with credit default swaps first. A hedge fund manager

said that they are “the dark matter of the financial universe.”2 George Soros, the hedge fund

manager, and many others want most or all trading in credit default swaps to be banned. Some

have argued that over-the-counter trading of credit default swaps should be eliminated but that

exchange trading would be acceptable.

        In their simplest form, credit default swaps are a straightforward type of financial derivative.

They make a payment to the buyer, generally called the protection buyer, equal to losses on bonds

or loans resulting from default (or, in some cases, a debt restructuring) by a company. The seller,

usually named the protection seller, receives a periodic fee for agreeing to make these payments.

A simple way to understand these contracts is that they are functionally equivalent to default

insurance contracts. The insured event is the loss arising from a default; the premium paid is the

fee; the policy limit, i.e., the maximum covered loss, is called the notional amount; in contrast to

typical insurance policies, credit default swaps have no deductible. Importantly, however, one has

to be exposed to a risk to obtain an insurance contract; for instance, to buy insurance on a house,

one has to own the house; with credit derivatives, one can buy protection without being exposed

to the risk that the protection insures.

      Of course, as with all derivatives, credit default swaps take many forms. Default swaps could

be purchased to insure portfolios of subprime mortgages and, in securitizations, slices of such

portfolios. Default swaps offering protection against defaults on portfolios of subprime mortgages

1
    “The bet that blew up Wall Street,” CBSD, 60 minutes, Oct. 26, 2008.
2
    “The $55 trillion question,” by Nicholas Varchaver, Fortune Magazine, September 30, 2008.

                                                     2
made it possible for investors to take exposure to subprime mortgages without taking positions in

the mortgages themselves. During the boom that preceded the credit crisis, the demand for

exposure to subprime mortgages grew so quickly and so intensely that there were not enough

subprime mortgages to satisfy that demand. Eventually, investors acquired such exposure

synthetically through credit default swaps.

    Credit default swaps have both social benefits and social costs. The social benefits are that

they make it easier for credit risks to be borne by those who are in the best position to bear them,

that they enable financial institutions to make loans they would not otherwise be able to make,

and that their trading reveals useful information about credit risk. These arguments for credit

derivatives are standard among economists. Among others, Alan Greenspan made them often. For

instance, in 2004, while still chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, he stated that credit

derivatives and other complex financial instruments contributed “to the development of a far

more flexible, efficient, and hence resilient financial system than existed just a quarter-century

ago.”3 However, the fact that the credit crisis led him to conclude that the “whole intellectual

edifice” which underlies the use of credit derivatives and complex financial instruments

“collapsed in the summer of last year” because of risk management mistakes offers strong

testimony that the costs associated with credit derivatives have to be taken as seriously as their

benefits.4

    There are fundamentally three reasons why observers argue that credit default swaps

contributed to the crisis and are dangerous. The first argument is that derivatives in general and

credit default swaps in particular made possible the credit boom that ended in the credit crisis.

The second argument is that financial institutions have positions in credit default swaps for

trillions of dollars of notional amount and that these positions have created systemic risk. These

massive exposures are alleged by many to have necessitated the indirect bailout of Bear Stearns

3
  Alan Greenspan, Economic flexibility, speech to HM Treasury enterprise Conference, 2004, London,
U.K.
4
  Testimony of Dr. Alan Greenspan, Committee of Government Oversight and Reform, October 23, 2008.

                                                 3
by the Federal Reserve and to have led to the direct bailout of AIG at a cost to taxpayers of

billions of dollars. Further, according to some observers, these exposures led to a crisis of

confidence in financial institutions following the collapse of Lehman as market participants were

left guessing how much banks might have to pay on credit default swaps. Lastly, observers argue

that the lack of transparency of the credit default swap market has made it possible for market

participants to manipulate that market, thereby making it appear that some financial institutions

were much weaker financially than they actually were and threatening the soundness of the

financial system. Such manipulations are often argued to have been partly responsible for the fall

of Bear Stearns and Lehman.

    Though many have argued that derivatives and especially credit defaults swaps should be

banned, others have claimed that the problems caused by credit default swaps during the credit

crisis resulted from the way they trade and from the fact that they were largely free from

regulation. A common argument is that these derivatives should not trade over the counter as they

do, but instead should trade on exchanges. Others have argued that requiring the trading of credit

default swaps to have some features of exchange trading would be sufficient to eliminate much of

the risk they might pose to the financial system.

    My focus in this paper is mostly on how the way credit default swaps trade contributed to the

crisis and poses risks. I first review the mechanics of credit default swaps providing insurance

against the default of individual companies before turning to the swaps used to take positions on

subprime mortgages. I then examine the growth of the credit default swap market and provide

data on the size of the market. I show that how credit default swaps are traded has created risks

for the financial system and evaluate how these risks would have been different with exchange

trading. Finally, I turn to the claims that these derivatives enabled investors to manipulate the

value of financial institutions. I conclude with an assessment of the social costs and benefits of

credit derivatives in light of the credit crisis.



                                                    4
1. Credit default swaps

      The best way to understand a plain vanilla credit default swap (CDS) is as an insurance

contract against the cost of default of a company – the “name” or the “reference entity” in the

language of the CDS market. Suppose that you hold Ford bonds and are concerned about Ford’s

default risk. You could insure your bond holdings with a CDS. As with a typical insurance

contract, you would pay premiums over time. If Ford does not default, you lose the premiums. If

Ford defaults, the credit default swap allows you to exchange the Ford bonds you hold, which are

now worth little, for the principal amount of the bonds, or alternatively, depending on the details

of the contract, for a payment equal to the principal amount of the bonds you hold minus their

current value at the time of default. By having taken a position in a CDS on Ford, you protected

your investment against a Ford default. Your Ford bond could lose value even if Ford does not

default, for instance if interest rates increase or Ford’s credit falls without a default, but in that

case you would receive no payment from the Ford CDS.

      Despite all the suggestions that CDS are somehow nefarious, there is nothing particularly

exotic about them. They are as easy to understand as insurance contracts - they are easier to price

than some insurance contracts and harder than others. However, with some exceptions, insurance

contracts do not trade. In contrast, CDS contracts trade over-the-counter. The market is a dealers’

market. Dealers trade with end-users as well as with other dealers.

      You would not be alone in buying protection on Ford. The Depository Trust & Clearing

Corporation (DTCC) keeps a trading information data warehouse that is freely accessible.5 For

the week ending on May 15, 2009, the DTCC had 5,387 contracts registered with it on Ford

Motor Company, 1,583 on Ford Motor Credit Company, and 4,649 on Ford Motor Credit

Company LLC. The total notional amount of CDS on Ford Motor Company was for $36 billion.

For comparison, on December 31, 2008, the automotive sector of Ford had total debt of $25.8


5
    http://www.dtcc.com/products/derivserv/data/index.php .


                                                      5
billion. It is not unusual for the total notional amount of CDS written on a name to exceed the

total amount of debt issued by that name.

       There is also a large market for CDS indices, which are averages of credit-default swaps on

different names. There are indices for corporates for Europe (iTraxx Europe), the U.S. (CDX

North America), as well as other regions. To understand how these indices work, let’s consider

the iTraxx Europe. The index represents a basket of 125 CDS referencing European investment

grade credits. New series are introduced on March 20 and September 20 of each year. There also

exist individualized (bespoke in the language of the industry) CDS contracts on baskets of names.

       Liquidity is generally considered to be a measure of how expensive it is for a market

participant to trade quickly (see Grossman and Miller (1997)). In an illiquid market, selling a

position quickly is very expensive because the seller has to discount the price to attract buyers.

Similarly, the buyer has to offer a substantial markup to attract sellers. In contrast, in a highly

liquid market, one can buy or sell quickly without having to pay much for the benefit of

immediacy. The CDS market for a name is often more liquid than the market for the name’s

bonds, which makes the CDS market a better market to assess a company’s credit than the market

for its bonds. There are at least three reasons for that. First, CDS are ideally suited to express

credit views. Since they do not include funding, their price is typically less affected by liquidity

considerations than the price of bonds.6 Further, firms have all sorts of different bonds whose

prices are affected by call provisions, covenants, coupon, maturity, liquidity, and so on; in

contrast, CDS are like standardized bonds. Second, CDS on a name can be used for hedging by

investors who hold different bond issues – and also by companies that have receivables from that

name or banks that made loans to it. This demand for CDS makes the market deeper. Finally, it is

generally harder to go short in a company’s bonds or loans than it is to buy protection in the CDS

market. Many economists would argue that the greater ability to go short means that the market



6
    See, for instance, Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005).

                                                        6
for CDS reacts more quickly to new information.7 An empirical study of how information gets

incorporated in bond prices and in CDS prices shows that information mostly flows from CDS

prices to bond prices (Blanco, Brennan, and Marsh (2005)). This greater efficiency of the CDS

market in incorporating information benefits the pricing of all securities of a firm. As we will

discuss later, however, the ability to take short positions through the CDS market has led some to

argue that this makes the CDS market destabilizing.

    In principle, CDS should make financial markets more efficient and improve the allocation of

capital because they make it possible for credit risk to reside with the investors who are best

equipped to bear it and introduce greater transparency in the pricing of credit. Historically, the

investors who funded companies through debt had to bear the credit risk of these companies.

Now, the investors who provide the capital need not be those who bear the credit risk, which can

reduce the cost of capital for firms and make it easier for them to raise funds to take advantage of

their growth opportunities.

    The separation of risk-bearing and funding made possible by credit derivatives has the

potential to create problems in that lenders who fund companies but do not bear their risks have

less incentive to monitor their loans. Consider a bank that made a large loan to a firm. The market

knows that the bank made the loan and believes that the other debt of the firm is safer because it

expects the bank to monitor the loan carefully. However, if the bank has protected itself by

buying protection, its incentives to monitor the loan may have become less powerful – it would

gain nothing from expending resources to discover problems at the firm since if the firm had

problems that led it to default on its debt, the bank would receive the full principal amount of the

loan, but from the seller of protection instead of from the firm. The seller of protection cannot

monitor the firm in the same way as the bank would because it has no contractual relationship

with the firm. As a result, the market’s assessment of the firm’s credit risk is based on the wrong


7
  See Diamond and Verrecchia (1987) for a model of how the speed with which information is incorporated
into prices is affected by obstacles to short sales.

                                                   7
premise, namely that there is a bank monitoring the firm carefully, and, as a result, there may be

too little monitoring of the firm. However, in practice, banks have many reasons to monitor their

customers. Further, it may be expensive for them to buy protection because counterparties will

assume that the bank is better informed than they are and will only trade at prices that protect

them against making losses because of this information asymmetry.

       The ability of banks to hedge loans that they make also has benefits, however. For example,

banks can keep lending to firms with which they have close relationships because they can limit

their exposure to such firms through the use of CDS. As a result, firms can get more credit than

they would otherwise receive and on better terms. Despite the advantages of CDS for banks, they

have used them only to a limited extent to hedge loans. Few banks take positions in CDS and

Minton, Stulz, and Williamson (2009) show that the 23 U.S bank holding companies with CDS

positions in 2005 hedged on average 2% of their loans with these instruments. Further, only 2%

of the gross CDS positions of these banks were used for hedging – the other positions were held

in their dealer business. In addition to the information asymmetry problem already discussed,

another reason why banks’ use of CDS to hedge is limited is that, while the CDS market is

typically quite liquid for large companies, it is usually not liquid for the smaller companies that

banks make a lot of loans to. Interestingly, there was a sharp increase in net hedging in 2007.

       The availability of CDS contracts can change the incentives of investors. Consider an

investor who holds bonds of a company in financial distress. This company may approach the

investor to suggest a restructuring of its debt. The attitude of the investor towards the company’s

proposal will depend on whether the investor hedged his position through a CDS or not.8 Suppose

the investor hedged his position through a CDS. Some CDS contracts treat a restructuring of debt

as a credit event, i.e., an event that causes a payout, while others do not. In addition, however,

even if the CDS treats a restructuring of debt as a credit event, not all restructurings qualify – an

exchange of new bonds for the old ones would not qualify. If the investor has a CDS contract that

8
    For a detailed analysis, see Yavorsky (2009).

                                                    8
does not treat a restructuring as a credit event, he would receive nothing from the CDS when he

agrees to the firm’s debt restructuring but he may make a substantial loss on his bond holdings.

That investor might be better off to resist the restructuring and see the firm file for bankruptcy, in

which case the CDS would compensate the investor for his loss. An investor who bought

protection might even find it optimal to buy enough bonds to block a restructuring.

    If CDS are functionally equivalent to insurance contracts, would we be better off if all

insurance contracts traded, or is it that CDS should not trade because insurance contracts typically

do not? Valuable information about a firm’s credit risk can be produced through trading in the

CDS market. No such information would be produced with trading on somebody’s house

insurance policy because the financial reward to anybody who finds that the insurance policy is

mispriced would be trivial. However, there is another fundamental difference between traditional

insurance and CDS contracts. Insurance companies manage risk through diversification. A large

portfolio of house insurance policies has close to no risk. Not so for a large portfolio of CDS

contracts because such a portfolio is sensitive to macroeconomic factors that are not diversifiable.

Firms are more likely to default in recessions. The ability to trade CDS is therefore a key risk

management tool for writers of protection to achieve a level of risk that they can be comfortable

with.



2. Subprime derivatives

    As is now well-known, subprime mortgages have significant default risk. As with other

mortgages, subprime mortgages are securitized, so that the financial institutions originating

mortgages do not have to keep them on their books.9 Mortgages are placed in a pool and notes are

issued against that pool. The notes issued against the pool, often called tranches, differ in their

priority in receiving payments from the mortgages. The most senior tranche has a first claim on


9
 See Ashcraft and Schuermann (2008) for a description of the securitization of subprime mortgages and an
analysis of the problems that arise in securitization of these mortgages.

                                                   9
interest payments and mortgage payoffs among the holders of notes. Many of the notes, and

generally all of the most senior notes, have a rating from a credit-rating agency. The super-senior

notes always have an AAA rating. As mortgages default, the lowest rated securities suffer first

from the default losses. As default losses mount, it becomes possible for the highly rated

securities to suffer from default losses as well.

    Consider now AAA rated debt issued against a pool of mortgages. This debt would promise a

coupon, generally set at a premium above a floating rate such as LIBOR. A financial institution

could choose to hold that debt. If the financial institution wants to insure that debt, it could do so

by purchasing protection through a CDS. However, there is a complication with subprime

securitized debt. The debtholders receive cash flows from the pool of mortgages. These cash

flows can decline because of defaults on the mortgages that are securitized (or for some other

reasons). With corporate debt, default leads to restructuring or bankruptcy. With securitized

subprime debt, default on the underlying mortgages leads to a reduction in debt payments and not

to bankruptcy. Because of this, CDS written on securitized debt work differently from CDS

written on corporate debt. Suppose that an investor holds a AAA tranche with a principal amount

of $100 million and the other tranches of the securitization have been wiped out; further, suppose

that during a month $1 million of mortgages default so that the principal balance falls from $100

million to $99 million. At that time, the investor would be paid $1 million from the CDS. The

CDS would still exist after that payment and would make payments as mortgages default until

maturity of the contract or, if earlier, until the mortgages in the pool cease to exist.

    Lower-rated tranches from subprime securitizations were often repackaged in the form of

collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). With a CDO, debt issues or loans are placed in a pool and

securities are issued against the pool. One popular type of CDO would put bonds rated BBB in a

pool and then issue securities against that pool. Despite the fact that the pool had BBB securities,

it would issue perhaps 70% of securities rated AAA. CDS were written to provide protection to



                                                    10
holders of CDOs as well. CDOs are difficult to price, which means that credit-default swaps on

CDOs are hard to price as well.

    A CDO can be created synthetically. One way to do so is to purchase a portfolio of low risk

securities, such as treasuries, sell protection against a reference portfolio of subprime mortgages

and other debt, and issue securities against that portfolio. Buying treasuries and selling protection

through CDS is approximately equivalent to holding a portfolio of debt. For example, a trust

could issue securities to buy $1 billion of treasuries and write protection on $1 billion of subprime

mortgages. Suppose that the value of the subprime mortgages falls because of defaults, so that the

CDS written by the pool has to make a $100 million payment on the CDS. The trust would sell

$100 million of treasuries to fund that payment. The value of the trust is closely related to the

value of an investment of $1 billion in subprime mortgages. With this approach, CDOs can be

created synthetically by issuing securities against a portfolio of treasuries and short CDS

positions. With a synthetic CDO, credit losses hurt the investors in the CDO and benefit the

writers of the CDS. On net, there is no loss – it is only wealth redistribution.

    In 2006, indices of CDS on subprime securitizations were introduced. These indices are

called the ABX indices. They represent a basket of CDS contracts on securitized subprime

mortgages. When subprime origination was active, ABX indices were created every six months.

An index would be based on an average of CDS for same seniority securitization tranches. For

instance, the AAA index for 2007-1 was based on an average of individual CDS on the largest

AAA-rated securitization tranches issued in the second half of 2006. The index level would

behave like a bond price – as the risks of default losses increase, its level would fall. In 2007,

these indices fell sharply, reflecting a loss in value of subprime securities.

    The ABX indices made it possible for investors to take views on the subprime market

without owning subprime mortgages directly or indirectly. Investors could purchase or sell

insurance on the ABX indices. As a result, it was possible for investors to take more exposure to

subprime mortgages than there were such mortgages. Data on subprime CDS positions only

                                                  11
became available late in the fall of 2008 through the DTCC data warehouse. This data is

incomplete. The DTCC estimated that less than 1% of the CDS registered with it were CDS

contracts involving the ABX – in other words a notional amount of less than $330 billion – as of

early November. It is possible that the size of the subprime CDS market was much larger because

not all contracts are registered with the DTCC, because many contracts may have been unwound

by the time the DTCC started reporting contracts, and perhaps because there were many contracts

on subprime that did not use the ABX indices.

       Subprime CDS provided investors with the ability to go short on subprime securities and to

hedge such securities. Both benefits should have been valuable. The price discovery provided by

the ABX indices was valuable since it helped financial institutions and investors assess the value

of subprime securities.10 However, it is not clear how good that price discovery was. Many

observers argue that at times price movements in the ABX indices overreacted to changes in

expected default losses on subprime mortgages – in fact, Stanton and Wallace (2009) provide

evidence that for some of these indices at some times the implied probabilities of default on the

underlying mortgages were greater than 1.11 The hedging benefit of CDS should have made it

possible for subprime risk to be located with those investors and institutions for which bearing

such risk was most valuable.

       Large providers of protection on subprime risks were various insurance companies. Monoline

insurance companies are specialized insurance companies that insure debt. Historically, they

mostly insured municipal bonds. As the subprime securitization market grew, monolines became

more and more active in providing insurance on the higher rated tranches in subprime

securitizations. They acquired extremely large subprime exposures this way. As we will discuss

extensively later, AIG also insured much debt with subprime collateral. Unfortunately, some of

the hedging benefit turned out to be illusory because parties providing the hedging did not have


10
     See Gorton (2008) for the role of price discovery through the ABX indices in the subprime crisis.
11
     See also Bank of England (2008).

                                                       12
the ability to bear the risk ex post and the risk these parties were bearing led some of them to be

bailed out.



3. The size of the CDS market

     Because CDS are traded over-the-counter and are not regulated, there is no official record of

CDS contracts. The Bank for International Settlements (BIS) has statistics on the CDS market

only since the end of 2004 based on survey data.12 By then, the CDS market had been alive for

roughly ten years, but its size in the 1990s was trivial – an estimate for 1998 is that at that time

the size of the market was $180 billion.13 By 2004, the total notional amount was $6 trillion. At

the end of June 2008, the size of the market, at $57 trillion, was almost ten times bigger.

However, the size of the market fell sharply in the second half of 2008.14 The BIS reported that

the size of the credit default swap market at the end of 2008 was $41 trillion. When the BIS

started keeping track of CDS contracts, single-name contracts were 80% of the market; at the end

of June 2008, these single-name contracts were only 58% of the market. Figure 1 shows the

evolution of the size of the CDS market.

     All major dealers register their plain vanilla credit default swaps with the DTCC warehouse.

The size of the market as measured by the CDS registered with the DTCC is much smaller, $29

trillion on May 22, 2009. With the registry, the DTCC can make sure it counts each CDS contract

only once. It is harder to make sure of that with surveys, so it is possible that surveys inflate the

size of the market, but since not all contracts are registered with the DTCC, the DTCC under-

estimates the size of the market to some extent. Of the $29 trillion of default swaps registered

with the DTCC on May 22, 2009, $15 trillion were single-name swaps.


12
   http://www.bis.org/statistics/derstats.htm .
13
   One of the first CDS was default insurance on Exxon provided by the EBRD to JP Morgan. See Tett
(2009). The estimate for 1998 is in Acharya, Engle, Figlewski, Lynch, and Subrahmanyam (2009).
14
   The International Swaps and Derivatives Dealers Association (ISDA) conducts a survey of the CDS
market as well and its estimate for mid-year in 2008 is slightly lower and shows a decrease from the end of
2007.

                                                    13
    There is no net outstanding supply of credit default swaps. For each buyer of protection, there

is a seller of protection. From that perspective, the total market value of the outstanding CDS is

zero. However, it is also interesting to consider the market value of the protection bought through

CDS. If protection is bought on a firm that has no significant risk of default, the value of the

protection will be trivially low even if the protection is bought on a large notional amount.

However, if a name’s probability of default is close to one and the expected recovery is close to

zero, the value of the protection bought is close to the notional amount of the swap. As with all

derivatives, there is a dramatic difference between the total notional amount outstanding and the

market value of the contracts outstanding for CDS. The BIS survey estimates the market value of

the contracts outstanding at $5.6 trillion at the end of December 2008. Figure 2 shows the

evolution of the market value of the contracts from 2004 to the end of 2008. A striking

development that took place in 2008 is that the CDS market size fell when measured using the

total notional amount of credit swaps, but it increased sharply when measured using the market

value of the outstanding swaps. At the end of December 2007, the market value of the swaps was

$2 trillion, so that the size of the market almost tripled using market values. Such an evolution is

not surprising because default risks increased for many companies in 2008.



4. CDS, over-the-counter markets, and exchanges

    To understand the benefits and costs of over-the-counter (OTC) trading for CDS, it is best to

start with a simple example. Suppose that you are a hedge fund manager and are pessimistic

about the future of the credit of bank holding company X. A simple way to express your view is

to buy protection on bank X through a five-year credit default swap. To enter the swap, you call

up dealers to obtain quotes. You might call Goldman Sachs, Deutsche Bank, and Natixis because

you typically deal with them. Say Natixis offers the best deal and you take it. You then agree to

make regular payments, say quarterly, at an annual rate of 100 basis points on a notional amount

of $10 million. Until April of this year, when you entered the CDS, the CDS was priced so that

                                                14
the market’s assessment of the present value of the payments the buyer of protection expected to

make roughly equaled the present value of the payment he expected to receive in the event of a

default of bank X. In other words, the terms of the CDS were set so that it had no economic value

from the market’s perspective at inception – if you sold the contract one second after you entered

it, you got nothing for selling it. Since April 2009, CDS contracts initiated in North America have

a fixed payment of either 100 basis points or 500 basis points per year.15 If the net present value

of the protection you receive on company X is positive when you pay 100 basis points per year,

then you have to make an initial payment to the seller of protection corresponding to that net

present value.

     Immediately after you enter the swap, Natixis has an exposure to bank X. Should bank X

default and the bonds of bank X become worth 40 cents on the dollar, Natixis would have to pay

$6 million. Derivatives dealers are in the business of making markets for derivatives, not of

taking exposures to the credit risk of companies. Natixis would therefore immediately look for

ways to hedge or transfer its exposure. Most likely, Natixis would buy protection on bank X from

some other dealer, say UBS, who might also turn around and buy protection, say from Goldman

Sachs. However, eventually, somebody has to bear the risk from the credit default swap you

entered. Suppose that another hedge fund, Contrarian, wants to sell protection on bank X and

agrees to sell protection on bank X to Goldman Sachs. Contrarian would hold a position that is

the opposite of the one you have.

     With this example, in a sense you buy protection on bank X from Contrarian. However, three

intermediaries make this happen, namely Natixis, UBS, and Goldman Sachs, and you will never

know that Contrarian is the ultimate seller of protection. There is a whole chain of credit default

swap between you and the end-user who has the opposite position. More specifically, in this

example, there are four CDS of $10 million notional each. The size of the OTC market for

15
  A number of changes took place in North America for CDS contracts in April 2009. These changes are
generally described under the name of the “CDS Big Bang” (see Markit (2009)). The objective of these
changes was to standardize the single-name CDS contracts.

                                                  15
derivatives is increased by the fact that after an end-user has entered a derivatives position, a

search process starts which ends when a party is identified who is willing to hold the opposite

position.

       So, you made a phone call, or exchanged electronic messages, and agreed to terms to enter a

CDS contract with Natixis.16 Now, the trade has to clear, which means that both you and Natixis

have to formally ratify the agreement you made so that everybody involved agrees to the rights

and obligations you acquired through your phone call. The trader at Natixis will be off to other

trades immediately after talking to you. Back offices now get involved. First, the back office at

Natixis captures the trade – it records it. Second, it verifies it with your back office. However,

when the back office from Natixis contacts your back office, they might think that they have a

contract on $20 million notional instead of $10 million notional. At that time, this disagreement

would have to be resolved. Third, the trade is confirmed after possible disagreements have been

resolved. The clearing process for derivatives consists of all the steps that take place from the

trade completion to the settlement. The settlement is when a party receives cash from the

counterparty to fulfill the obligation agreed to through the trade.

       It should be immediately clear that a disorganized clearing process can create substantial risk.

Suppose that for whatever reason confirmation does not take place. It could be that the back

office of Natixis was too busy and forgot, or that the trader forgot to inform the back office

properly. However, the trade with UBS was cleared properly. In this case, Natixis might have

hedged a position that it might not have because the trade was never confirmed. Instead of having

no exposure, it would now have a risky CDS contract on its books.

       After you enter the contract, its life might be just as you expected when you entered the

contract. Perhaps you had decided to hold on to the contract until either bank X defaults or the

CDS matures. If bank X defaults, Natixis makes the promised payment. Throughout the life of the

contract, you are never concerned about Natixis’ ability to honor the promise it made to you.

16
     There are also some fully automated platforms on which you could trade.

                                                     16
    What about a less run-of-the mill outcome? Two such outcomes are interesting. First, after

some time, you could decide that you don’t want to hold the contract to maturity. I call this case

the exit case. Second, the financial situation of Natixis could deteriorate so that the market might

become concerned about its ability to honor its promises. I call this the counterparty risk case.

    Consider first the exit case. There are at least three ways to exit a CDS position. First, you

could go to Natixis and negotiate terms under which the CDS agreement would be terminated. If

the credit of bank X deteriorated since the inception of the swap, the swap became more valuable

to you because it became more likely that Natixis would have to make a payment as a result of a

default of bank X. In this case, you would receive a payment from Natixis upon termination.

Alternatively, if the credit of bank X improved, you would have to make a payment to Natixis.

Second, you could enter a contract to sell protection on bank X for the same notional amount as

your contract with Natixis with some other dealer that matures when your CDS matures. In this

case, assuming that there is no uncertainty about whether the dealers will honor their promises,

the two CDS you have essentially offset each other and you are no longer exposed to the credit

risk of bank X. Third, you could go to a dealer and enter an agreement that this dealer will take on

your obligation to Natixis. Such an agreement is called a novation.

    If you went back to Natixis to reach an agreement to terminate the contract, it would be a

bilateral negotiation. Natixis might not offer you favorable terms because if it agreed it would

have to find a way to offset the CDS it entered into to offset your swap. Natixis might also feel

that it has some market power. It might charge a termination fee. Entering an offsetting swap is

simple, but you still have some risk since the new swap counterparty might default and then you

will still have your original swap. Novation can eliminate all your risk. However, somebody else

has to assume the counterparty risk – and, at times, may require to be paid for that.

    With novation, it is important for Natixis to know that the counterparty has changed and to

agree to the change. Natixis might be concerned about its exposure to the new dealer and might

refuse the novation. A sign that Bear Stearns’ situation was desperate was when counterparties to

                                                 17
Bear Stearns wanted to novate their trades and eventually they could not find dealers willing to

novate.17 Again, the role of the back office is crucial here. Suppose that you thought you had

novated the contract, but Natixis never agreed. In this case, you would still be the purchaser of

protection from Natixis’ perspective. However, the situation would be troublesome for the dealer

with whom you novated the swap. That dealer might have thought it had a swap buying

protection on bank X when it did not.

     As we saw, the market for CDS grew very quickly and became enormous. Not surprisingly,

this growth was accompanied by growing pains. Traders want to trade and often worry little about

whether the back office follows. Back offices are not prestigious. They are hidden. Banks may lag

in staffing back offices for new types of derivatives. Not surprisingly, as the market’s growth

accelerated, back offices often did not follow. For instance, in 2004, according to an ISDA

survey, the average time to confirmation for a credit derivative was 25 days.18 There was

uncertainty as to the status of default swaps. A few years back, it might have taken a couple of

weeks for Natixis to be informed of the novation, and sometimes these communications fell

through the cracks. The New York Fed worked hard to get the industry to solve these problems

and had significant success. Nevertheless, after Bear Stearns was acquired by JPMorgan Chase,

its new owners discovered a large amount of unconfirmed CDS.19 However, according to ISDA

(2009), at this time, 92% of confirmations for credit derivatives are done electronically. Of these

confirmations, more than 60% are done the same day and more than 90% within a day.

     Let’s now look at the case of counterparty risk. Suppose that you just entered the swap and

Natixis files for bankruptcy or is simply closed by regulators. In this case, the swap would have

no value because you just entered it. To re-establish your position, you would have to enter the

same swap with somebody else. If nothing changed due to the bankruptcy, you would do so on


17
   See Cohan (2009) , p. 27-30, for a description of discussions at Goldman Sachs about whether to novate
a trade in March 2008 for a hedge fund that had Bear Stearns as a counterparty.
18
   Ledrut and Upper (2007) review some of the evidence on backlogs.
19
   See Tett (2009), p. 224.

                                                    18
terms similar to those that prevailed before the bankruptcy. You would still make a loss that you

would want to be compensated for because you would incur transaction costs. However, it could

be that the Natixis bankruptcy disrupts markets. In this case, the market might lack liquidity, so

that you would have to agree to less favorable terms to re-establish the swap, which would

increase the replacement cost for you beyond the cost implied by the bid-ask spread. These

replacement costs would be magnified if the position you seek to replace is larger than a standard

size position.

    What if Natixis fails after some time? In this case, the impact of the failure on your CDS

position depends on whether you gained from the swap or lost. If Natixis fails, the swap is

terminated. If bank X’s credit worsened, you gained on your swap. Your gain is at risk in the

event of termination. If bank X’s credit improved, most likely you will owe to the bankruptcy

estate of Natixis. Irrespective of whether you gained or lost, the precise quantification of the gain

or loss can be complicated because termination of the swap leaves you in a different situation

from the one you were in before the termination. To be in the same situation as you were in

before the termination, you would have to replace the swap which would involve costs that you

would want to be compensated for by Natixis.

      A well-established solution to address the issue of counterparty risk is a bilateral mark-to-

market and collateral agreement. With such an agreement, the counterparty whose position in the

swap has negative value has to post collateral based on the market value of the swap. As the

market value of the swap falls further, the party has to post more collateral. Consider the case of

your swap on bank X. Suppose that the value of the protection you bought is now $2 million.

With a collateral agreement, Natixis might have to post collateral worth $2 million. With this

agreement, you would lose nothing if you could turn around immediately after the failure of

Natixis and enter the same swap for $2 million. However, the failure of Natixis could have made

the markets dysfunctional and you might not be able to replace the swap at all for some time or

only at a cost much higher than $2 million. In this case, despite the existence of a collateral

                                                 19
agreement, you could make a large loss because of the failure of Natixis. You would have a

claim against the bankruptcy estate of Natixis if you suffered a loss in excess of the collateral you

had in your possession. If you had multiple swap positions with Natixis, the positions would be

netted against each other if they were made under the same contractual framework (the same

master agreement), so that you would owe Natixis the net amount or you would be owed the net

amount.

    How would your trade in the CDS have worked differently had the CDS traded on an

exchange? Derivatives are standardized on exchanges. Consequently, you would have had to

choose a contract that is available on an exchange. You would have placed an order with a broker

to open a CDS position. On the exchange, your trade would have taken place when somebody

else would have been willing to take the opposite position. However, in contrast to the OTC

market, your counterparty would not be a dealer, but it would be the clearinghouse of the

exchange. The exchange clearinghouse clears all contracts traded on the exchange and serves as

the counterparty. The promise of your CDS contract would be honored as long as the

clearinghouse has the resources to do so. The ability of the clearinghouse to honor the promises

of the contracts it clears depends on its resources, including its capital, and on its risk

management. Clearinghouses use margin agreements to reduce their risk. With these agreements,

parties to a contract have to put up collateral when they open the contract. This collateral is called

the initial margin. Each day, the contract is marked to market and the mark-to-market gains and

losses are settled. Through judicious use of margin levels, a clearinghouse can make its risk of

default low – if the margin were 100% of the notional amount of a credit default swap there

would be no risk of default for the clearinghouse. As long as a day’s loss on a contract is less than

the margin, the clearinghouse can make up the loss by holding on to the collateral. There would

be no chain of contracts if the contracts are traded on exchanges. Trade prices on exchanges are

publicly available, so that there is transparency. In addition, regulators could identify the

counterparties to trades through the clearinghouse should they have a need to do so.

                                                 20
5. Counterparty risks, the credit-default swap market, and the crisis

     Though it is common to hear that CDS contributed significantly to the crisis, it is important to

understand that in many ways the CDS market worked remarkably well during the credit crisis.

According to participants, much of the market for CDS remained fairly liquid for at least the first

year of the credit crisis – i.e, from late July 2007 to late July 2008. Further, the market handled

extremely large defaults well organizationally. A good example is how well it processed the

default of Lehman. The notional amount of protection bought on Lehman is unclear. Different

estimates have been circulating, ranging from $72 billion to $400 billion for the total notional

amount of CDS written on Lehman.20 However, one estimate is unquestionable: the DTCC had

contracts on Lehman for a notional amount of $72 billion registered in its warehouse. Protection

sellers had to pay 91.375 cents on the dollar to settle the contracts. The settlement for these

contracts went smoothly. Importantly, the net exchanges of cash for Lehman, despite the wild

rumors in the markets, were rather small: $5.2 billion were exchanged through the DTCC. The

net amounts were small because many institutions were both buyers and sellers of protection on

Lehman, so that their net position was small. As mentioned before regarding the DTCC, not all

contracts are registered through the DTCC, so that additional contracts referencing Lehman

existed, but we cannot know the total notional amount of these contracts.

     If the CDS market worked well, why is it considered to have been so dangerous? Though

financial crises keep occurring, it is not uncommon for the recent financial innovations to be

blamed and for legislation to ban them. The crash of one of the first famous bubbles, the South

Sea Bubble in 1720, was followed by a ban on joint stock companies in 1720 and by the Barnard

Act in 1734 that banned option trading. However, there were problems with CDS exposures


20
   The amount of $72 billion is the amount reported by the DTCC of swaps that settled through the DTCC.
The amount of $400 billion was reported by the Financial Times on October 6, 2008, quoting a Citi analyst
stating that “there could be $400bn of credit derivatives referenced to Lehman.” in “Fed to hold CDS
clearance talks,” by Aline van Duyn and Hal Weitzman, FT.com, October 6, 2008.

                                                   21
during the crisis. One problem is that while collateral arrangements were frequent, they were not

universal. According to an ISDA survey, 63% of derivatives contracts were subject to such

agreements in 2007, compared to 30% in 2003. When a dealer defaults on swaps not covered by

collateral agreements, the counterparties can make large losses.

       Another major reason for concerns about the CDS market is the size of gross exposures of

dealers. In 2008, the CDS contracts outstanding of JP Morgan Chase had a notional amount of

almost $8 trillion, and those of Citi, almost $3 trillion. Investment banks did not provide as much

information about their derivatives exposures, but it was estimated that the CDS of Bear Stearns

amounted to a total notional amount of $2.5 trillion.21 Under normal circumstances, these gross

exposures are not much of a problem. The estimate of the cost to JP Morgan Chase of replacing

the CDS contracts on which it was owed if counterparties were to default, after taking into

account bilateral netting and collateral agreements, was just $44 billion at the end of 2008

according to its 2008 annual report. To put this amount in perspective, JPMorgan Chase’s

shareholder equity at the end of 2008 was $166 billion. However, even that amount may overstate

the exposure of JP Morgan Chase because it ignores some forms of collateral. The bank does not

report the impact of netting for credit derivatives separately. However, this impact is large for its

overall derivatives portfolio. As of the fourth quarter of 2008, the bank had derivatives

receivables of $2.7 trillion, but after netting this amount was only $266 billion.

       A dealer’s net derivatives receivables could be zero and the dealer might still pose significant

risks to the financial system. Consider a dealer who hedges all CDS on its books through matched

trades. The dealer has $1 trillion notional of protection bought and $1 trillion notional of

protection sold. Effectively, the dealer has $2 trillion of gross exposure. However, the net amount

is $0. For every swap, there is an offsetting swap on the books. Suppose that all the dealer’s

contracts have mark-to-market and collateral agreements. Does that mean that there is no risk? A



21
     See “JP Morgan CDS exposure may top $10trn notional,” by Peter Madigan, Risk, April 2008.

                                                    22
default of this hypothetical dealer still has the potential to create havoc in the financial markets

for at least five reasons:



    1) Writers of protection on the dealer will make losses. These losses could potentially be

        large even with collateral agreements. With an unexpected default, there is a jump to

        default for the CDS which can lead to a large change in value. To see this, suppose that

        the market expects that there is a 20% chance a dealer will default and the recovery is

        expected to be 40%. Ignoring the time value of money, risk premia, and liquidity effects,

        the value of a $10 million notional CDS for the protection buyer would be $800,000. At

        the default, the value of the CDS would be $6 million. The protection seller would lose

        $5.2 million on the day of default. Such losses could possibly lead to some other dealer

        default if another dealer has a large net exposure as a protection seller on the defaulting

        dealer. Such a situation is not dissimilar to the situation for CDS on Lehman the last

        working day before the bankruptcy filing. On that day, it cost roughly $700,000 to insure

        $10 million of Lehman debt for a year, so that a buyer of protection against Lehman on

        Friday would have earned a huge gain since the swaps paid off more than $9 million on

        settlement.

    2) Counterparties to the dealer have to replace the CDS they have with the dealer to keep

        their exposures unchanged. This can take time and can be costly, especially if the dealer’s

        collapse renders the market less liquid or even disfunctional. As a result, counterparties to

        the defaulting dealer can be exposed to risks over some period of time, which could lead

        to further defaults and instability. An especially worrisome situation would be one where

        a large financial institution collapses immediately after the dealer’s default. In that case,

        financial institutions that had hedged their counterparty risk to that financial institution

        through the defaulting dealer might be unprotected which could lead to further defaults.



                                                 23
    3) Collateral is at times re-hypothecated. Re-hypothetication essentially means that the

        collateral is used as collateral by the dealer to borrow. A CDS counterparty could

        therefore have its collateral at the dealer, the dealer could have used it to borrow, and

        consequently the collateral would not be held by the dealer at the time of failure. In such

        a situation, the counterparty’s excess collateral might be difficult to recover, further

        compounding the uncertainty resulting from the dealer’s failure.

    4) There is limited transparency about the exposures of dealers to derivatives. As a result, it

        is not possible for counterparties to assess the risk they are exposed to by transacting with

        dealers following a large shock. It can become optimal for individual counterparties to

        stop transacting with a dealer when its financial situation is uncertain, which can lead to a

        run on the dealer and gridlock in the financial system.

    5) Failure of a financial institution can lead to contagion. With contagion, investors become

        concerned about the credit risk associated with other financial institutions. This contagion

        can lead to large changes in the value of credit default swaps. Such contagion can be

        created by uncertainty about CDS exposures of financial institutions.



    In the OTC market, dealers typically have balanced books. There will be a balance of gains

and losses resulting from a dealer failure. Collateral will protect the parties who had made gains

before the failure. In normal times, we would expect all parties to replace the swaps they had, so

that there will be some balance in the markets between parties trying to buy protection and parties

trying to sell protection. In an orderly and well-functioning market, we would expect these

opposite parties to find each other and make deals to replace the contracts they had with the failed

dealer. However, in more turbulent times, this process will not evolve smoothly. To understand

this, remember that when a party wants to enter a CDS contract, a dealer typically accommodates

that party but with the intention of immediately offsetting the trade so that the dealer has no

exposure. When markets function poorly, the dealer cannot have that expectation and may be

                                                 24
extremely reluctant to make a market. As a result, it may be harder and more expensive to find

replacement contracts than usual. The dealer’s failure could lead to a situation where some

counterparties, including other dealers, become unhedged and vulnerable to further shocks. In

addition, counterparties could make losses because of changes in the market value of contracts

since the last posting of collateral.

    With a dealer failure, the losses on CDS from the dealer’s counterparties net out in the

economy when the dealer has a matched book except for deadweight costs. Consider the simple

case where A bought protection on X from the defaulting dealer and B sold protection on X to the

defaulting dealer. A has made gains on the contract but is protected with collateral. If the dealer

fails, on net, the gain of A is the loss of B except for deadweight losses. Large deadweight losses

can arise because of potential difficulties and costs in replacing hedges and because of the costs

of dealing with the bankruptcy estate for the two counterparties. For instance, with chaos in the

markets, neither A nor B could find replacement swaps quickly and A being unhedged might fail

as a result.

    Though Lehman was a big CDS dealer, CDS were not the cause of Lehman’s failure. Neither

were they the direct cause of Bear Stearn’s demise. Exposure to CDS played a big role in AIG’s

failure, but AIG made even larger losses on its portfolio of securities. AIG did not behave like a

dealer. It did not run a matched book. It did not appear to hedge. What AIG did was provide

credit insurance on AAA tranches in securitizations – on an extremely large scale. As of June 30,

2008, it had written a net amount of $411 billion notional of credit derivatives on super senior

tranches of securitizations. Included among these credit derivatives were derivatives on super-

senior tranches of CDOs with subprime collateral for a notional amount of $55.1 billion. At the

time that AIG wrote the credit protection, all the CDO tranches were rated AAA. The probability

of a default on an AAA-rated obligation is in principle extremely small, less than 0.1% per year,

so that AIG – and the regulator of the subsidiary that wrote the protection, the Office of Thrift

Supervision – could reasonably think that there was little risk in selling protection on such

                                                25
tranches. For instance, Moody’s estimated in 2008 that the probability of a default on AAA-rated

corporate debt over five years to be 0.09% using data from 1970 to 2007 (Moody’s (2008)). 22 In

almost all possible states of the world, the AAA tranches of CDOs with substantial subprime

collateral would not have defaulted. However, they did have a significant probability of default in

what appeared to be an exceedingly low probability outcome based on historical data, namely a

major downturn in the housing market throughout the U.S. As such a downturn happened, these

tranches lost substantial amounts of value. By October 10, 2008, the value of these super-senior

tranches was $36.2 billion and the value of the super-senior tranches still rated AAA was only

$16.4 billion. As a result, the value of the credit default swap liability of AIG became very large

when marked to market. The insured assets were held by banks across the world. AIG’s

agreements required the posting of collateral following a decrease in its credit rating and the

collateral requirements were more stringent as its credit rating fell more. As the value of the

securities fell, AIG made more losses. By August 2008, AIG had a total amount of unrealized

losses on its credit default swaps of $26.2 billion and had posted collateral worth $16.5 billion. In

addition to its losses on CDS, AIG also made large losses related to subprime and other fixed-

income securities involving securitizations. Impairments on AIG’s investment portfolio as of

September 30, 2008, amounted to $32 billion, an amount exceeding the mark-to-market losses on

its credit default swaps.

     On September 15, credit default swaps on AIG were priced so that to insure $10 million of

debt for five years, the buyer of protection had to pay $2.5 million upfront plus $500,000

annually. On September 16, after having been downgraded by S&P and Moody’s, AIG had to

post $14.5 billion additional collateral. It could not meet these collateral requirements without a

bailout. Had it not posted collateral, it would have been in default. A collapse of AIG would not

have been a benign event for the markets. However, it is not at all clear that the biggest problem


22
  Moody’s denotes its top rating by Aaa. AAA is the top rating for Standard and Poor’s. I use AAA to
denote the top rating throughout.

                                                   26
associated with this collapse would have been the default on the CDS. AIG would also have

defaulted on its debt and its commercial paper at a time when there already was a run on money

markets. Such an outcome would have been disastrous compared to the impact of default on

CDS.

       The CDS counterparties of AIG would have made losses, but they also were protected by

collateral and some had bought protection on AIG. Most if not all of these counterparties were

financial institutions. Financial institutions have to hold capital to meet regulations. They

generally view holding regulatory capital to be costly to their shareholders. Because of the way

capital requirements are determined, financial institutions generally were able to hold less

regulatory capital if they packaged loans in securities and held them on their balance sheet than if

they just kept the loans on their balance sheet.23 Further, some financial institutions apparently

believed that it was quite advantageous for them to hold super-senior tranches of securitizations

on their books if they insured them with CDS. There was therefore a large demand for insurance

of super-senior tranches that was partly met by AIG. Regulators across countries allowed

financial institutions to set aside less capital because these institutions had bought protection with

AIG. Had AIG collapsed, these financial institutions would have made losses on their hedged

holdings of AAA securities to the extent that they were insufficiently protected by collateral and

by protection bought against a default from AIG. In addition, these institutions might have found

it impossible to replace the insurance provided by AIG and, as a result, would have been less well

capitalized. As these institutions became less well capitalized, they might have needed to reduce

the loans they made and to raise new capital.

       Importantly, however, the starting point for all that demand for insurance of securitized debt

was the fact that the securities had an AAA ratings and that financial institutions in some

jurisdictions received regulatory capital relief (the extent of which varied across jurisdictions)

from holding securitizations tranches with an AAA rating and hedging them with CDS. With

23
     For good examples, see Goldman Sachs (2009).

                                                    27
such a rating, the securities were viewed as having low risk of default. The fair value of the

securities fell sharply, but some of that decrease may have had nothing to do with the increase in

the risk of default or with actual defaults. Rather, that value may have fallen because the

securities became less liquid and investors required a larger risk premium to hold them. However,

AIG had to put up collateral regardless of the reason of the decrease in the value of the securities.

This was a situation totally different from the situation AIG would have faced in its insurance

business: if a hurricane moves away from the coast at the last minute, so that there is no

destruction, the insurance company pays nothing. If the value of the securities decreased more

than warranted by the increase in the expected default losses, AIG could expect to receive some

of the collateral back later as market conditions returned to normal. In the meantime, however,

AIG did not have the cash to put up collateral.



6. Are there benefits to OTC trading?

     An observer has argued that “Without OTC derivatives, Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers and

American International Group (NYS: AIG) would never have failed.”24 Many espouse such a

view. We discussed extensively the case of AIG in the previous section. Both Bear Stearns and

Lehman Brothers failed because market participants, rightly or wrongly at the time, believed that

there was a high probability that the assets of these institutions were worth less than their

liabilities. Derivatives were not the proximate cause of their collapse. However, it is undoubtedly

true that without derivatives, their assets and liabilities would have been quite different. From

listening to the press and to such observers, it almost seems as if exchange trading could remove

the problem of counterparty risk and create transparency and order in the market for derivatives.

Why would we not want, then, for all derivatives trading to take place on exchanges? If

exchange-trading is so beneficial, why don’t derivatives trade exclusively on exchanges?


24
  “Kabuki on the Potomac: Reforming credit default swaps and OTC derivatives,” Chris Whalen, The
Institutional Risk analyst,” May 18, 2009.

                                                  28
    Derivatives have been around for centuries. However, the most successful derivatives trading

today are relatively new. The first interest-rate swap agreement dates of the early 1980s. The first

CDS was introduced in 1994. When these derivatives were introduced, there were long

negotiations before an agreement was signed. Each new deal took much time and effort. Some

derivative types have a high volume of trading – some standardized CDS index contracts are

examples of high trading volume derivatives. Other types of derivatives do not trade. They are

used to solve specific risk management problems of an end-user. It is easy to innovate over the

counter. Anybody who thinks that a new type of derivative might solve a one-time problem for a

single firm can introduce that derivative. No approvals are required except for approvals within

the firm of the individual who designs the derivative. Innovation on exchanges is much harder.

Exchanges are regulated and contracts have to be approved by regulators. It only makes sense to

go through the process of introducing a contract when it can be expected to have a volume high

enough to justify the expense of getting approvals and setting the exchange up for trading the

contract.

    The OTC market is perfect for innovation in financial products. This explains why

derivatives usually start their life on the OTC market rather than on exchanges. However, there is

a substantial amount of standardization in derivatives trading. As interest rate swaps became

better known, the industry formed an association, the International Derivatives and Swaps

Association (ISDA), which devised standardized agreements. When parties trade derivatives, they

enter a so-called ISDA Master Agreement. The Master Agreement is an ISDA document that has

many options that the counterparties to derivatives trades select to form the basis of the

contractual agreement they enter into when they trade derivatives. Once the parties have agreed

on a specific derivatives trade, they use confirmations that are standard ISDA forms. Despite this

standardization, however, there is an incredible diversity of derivatives contracts. Because the

market is an OTC market, there are infinite variations of amounts and maturities counterparties

can choose. They can also choose new forms of derivatives and combine derivatives as they see

                                                29
fit. In contrast, exchanges do not typically let derivatives traders set the terms of the contracts.

Instead, derivatives traders have a choice of contract terms and cannot depart from these terms.

       Why are exchanges inflexible while the OTC markets are so flexible? If you want to enter a

derivatives contract, you need to find the counterparty that offers you the best deal. Exchanges

are places where potential counterparties congregate – sometimes only electronically. As a result,

if an exchange is successful with a type of derivative, investors and firms interested in taking

positions in that type of derivative will go to the exchange to achieve their goal. It only makes

sense to go to the exchange when there is liquidity for the type of derivative you want to trade –

namely, when you want to trade, a counterparty is available quickly and there is competition

among available counterparties so that you have little impact on prices when you trade.

Exchanges create pools of liquidity by standardization – they have few contract types trading.

With this standardization, investors and firms give up the opportunity to get a contract that fits

exactly their needs for the benefit of trading in a liquid contract.

       The OTC market addresses the search process differently.25 Dealers are available to respond

to the demand for contracts by investors. Dealers then search for counterparties that will take the

risk off their hands. They are organized for that purpose by having traders and sales people

devoted to the task of selling and buying derivatives. They provide liquidity to end-users by

taking on positions. Exchanges do not take positions. Any derivative’s trade on an exchange is

between counterparties rather than with the exchange; once a trade has taken place, the exchange

steps between the counterparties in its clearing function.

       Exchanges offer a very efficient solution when they succeed in drawing large pools of

liquidity. However, creating such pools for derivatives can be difficult because there is often a

demand for terms that meet specific hedging needs. Consider a manufacturing firm that wants to

sell forward its anticipated Euro receipts from exports to Germany. It expects to receive the Euros

at some known future date. On exchanges, the contracts mature at specific dates. The closest date

25
     See Duffie, Garleanu, and Pedersen (2005).

                                                  30
at which a futures contract matures for Euros might be two weeks away and the contract for that

date may not be very liquid. An OTC dealer could offer a contract that matures on the day that the

exporter expects to receive the Euros and for the exact number of Euros he expects to receive.

The exporter might prefer to pay more for the service from the dealer than what he would have to

pay through the exchange for the benefit of having a contract that exactly meets his needs. In this

case, the issue is one of maturity, but most hedging demands from end-users can be met at a cost

on the OTC market irrespective of how specialized they are.

    We saw that a benefit of exchange trading is the existence of a clearing house that becomes

counterparty to all trades. There is no reason for the use of clearing houses to be restricted to

exchange trading. Clearing houses are used for some derivatives trades in the over-the-counter

market. By using a clearing house, the derivatives traders substitute the credit risk of the clearing

house for the credit risk of the dealer. Regulators have been pushing for the use of clearing houses

as counterparties for CDS contracts both in the U.S. and in Europe. This effort has had some

success and it is possible, perhaps even likely, that eventually some types of CDS will have to be

cleared. Ice Trust, part of the Intercontinental Exchange, started clearing CDS index contracts in

March 2009. By August 2009, the open interest on contracts cleared through Ice Trust was in

excess of $180 billion and Ice Trust had cleared more than $1 trillion notional amount of

contracts.

    Use of clearing houses for derivatives trading could decrease the risks posed by derivatives

exposures for the financial system. There are three reasons for this. First, a clearing house that

acts as counterparty can diversify and manage risks associated with the failure of individual

counterparties, so that the failure of an individual counterparty could easily be absorbed as long

as the clearing house has enough resources. Second, with a clearing house, all of the dealer’s

exposures in the contracts cleared through the clearing house are netted. If all derivatives traded

through that clearing house, then the exposure of the clearing house to the dealer would only be

the net exposure of all of the dealer’s derivatives trades to the clearing house. In contrast, the

                                                 31
OTC market only allows netting of contracts with a single counterparty. A clearing house can

therefore reduce total counterparty exposure. With multiple clearinghouses and clearinghouses

specialized to derivatives types, however, it is possible that the netting that takes place through

clearinghouses is less than the netting that would take place without clearinghouses.26 Third, a

clearing house can monitor the exposures of its counterparties and prevent counterparties from

taking additional exposures.

       The use of a clearinghouse is not a magic bullet to eliminate systemic risk associated with

OTC trading of derivatives.27 A clearinghouse may be at a disadvantage in monitoring some

counterparties compared to dealers. A dealer who trades hundred times a day with another dealer

most likely will have a better assessment of the credit of that dealer than a clearinghouse that

interacts with the dealer for only one type of derivatives trades would. The stakes for dealers are

high because they may have very large intra-day net exposures at times with another dealer. In

addition, a clearinghouse is inefficient at dealing with products that are not very liquid. Typically,

new financial products start their lifecycle with low liquidity. With such products, the

clearinghouse has to build its own models to evaluate the risk. Dealers may be better at building

such models because they devise the products and trade them. A clearinghouse may save costs of

building models by making such products ineligible to clear, in which case the requirement of

using a clearinghouse would make it impossible to use derivatives that may be quite efficient at

allocating risk in the economy and would prevent financial innovation.

       Importantly, a clearinghouse resolves counterparty risk only to the extent that it has enough

resources to draw on to deal with the failure of counterparties. Suppose that a dealer has trades

booked through a clearinghouse and the dealer fails. If the net position is small, the clearinghouse

will have no problem dealing with the failure. However, the resources of U.S. clearinghouses are

limited and they would have been strained by the ongoing problems of AIG. For instance, CME


26
     See Duffie and Zhu (2009).
27
     See Pirrong (2009) for a more detailed analysis.

                                                        32
Clearing, the largest futures clearing house in the U.S., can draw on resources of $64 billion to

cope with failures. The taxpayer bailout of AIG is a multiple of that amount. The CDS that AIG

wrote were highly specialized, so that most likely it would not have been feasible for a clearing

house to become a counterparty to such derivatives. As a result, unless there had been a ban on

CDS not cleared through a central counterparty, the problems of AIG would not have been

avoided by the availability of a clearing house.

    In summary, the OTC market is better at enabling innovation, at addressing specific

derivatives requirements from end-users, and at finding counterparties when liquidity for a

derivative on an exchange would be low. In contrast, exchanges are more efficient when there is a

large volume of trading for standardized contracts. The OTC market can compete well with

exchanges precisely because of this customization. There is a huge OTC forward currency market

– a market for the purchase of foreign currencies for future delivery. There is a large parallel

current futures market on exchanges which offers similar contracts. The forward and futures

currency markets have lived side-by-side for more than thirty years.



7. Transparency, instability, and manipulation

    With OTC trading, the trades are not public. There can be derivatives trades that almost

nobody will ever know about. This lack of transparency can create problems. To start with, it

means that exposures to derivatives are not well-known. Financial institutions have some

disclosures for derivatives. However, as evidenced following the Lehman bankruptcy, these

disclosures do not make it possible to assess precisely the vulnerability of a financial institution to

a dealer default. Lack of understanding of such vulnerability can lead to runs on institutions and

hence to instability. Yet, it would not be in the interests of financial institutions to be too

transparent about their derivatives positions. Such transparency could make it difficult for an

institution to trade or to take advantage of its views on the market. It was clear in 2008 that

regulators had an insufficient understanding of dealers’ derivatives exposures and that a better

                                                   33
understanding would have been beneficial. Information available to regulators need not be

available to the general public. Consequently, the issue of transparency for regulators is distinct

from the issue of transparency to investors.

       Lack of transparency for investors means that it is at times difficult for them to know whether

they are taken advantage of in a transaction. This concern was important to the SEC for bonds

and the SEC mandated the introduction of a system called TRACE where trade prices are

reported. Empirical evidence shows that TRACE reduced trading costs for retail investors. 28

Retail investors are not important in the OTC derivatives markets. Institutional investors should

be able to fend for themselves. If they can’t, they should not be dealing in derivatives over the

counter. It is therefore not clear that transparency for investors is valuable in the OTC derivatives

markets. There is an optimal level of transparency in a market. There is considerable transparency

for some types of derivatives and very little for others. End-users would certainly choose lower

trading costs if, with lower trading costs, they still had the same choice of derivatives. However,

the almost infinite menu of derivatives available to end-users may not be consistent with a market

with trade transparency. Less choice in derivatives forces end-user hedgers to bear more risk

because they are less likely to be able to take a position in a derivative that exactly matches their

needs. The fact that derivatives trade on OTC markets in derivatives that are similar to exchange-

traded derivatives is clear evidence that standardization has costs for end-users.

        In the fall of 2008, many executives were complaining that the market for CDS was being

manipulated so that increases in CDS premiums created panic and drove down stock prices.

There were extreme movements in CDS premiums, but in troubled times it can be difficult to

assess whether such extreme movements are irrational or reflect actual changes in default

probabilities and recovery estimates. At times, the cost of insuring Morgan Stanley’s debt was in

excess of 1,500 basis points per year (in other words, to insure $100 principal amount of debt,



28
     See, for instance, Goldstein, Hotchkiss, Sirri (2007).

                                                         34
you would have to pay $15 per year).29 The argument that there was manipulation only made

sense to the extent that data on CDS premiums was public and widely followed. However,

information reported about CDS premiums does not indicate how deep the market is. It is hard, if

not impossible, to successfully manipulate a liquid market through trading. If the market for CDS

on a name is not highly liquid at a point in time, however, that market could be manipulated, in

that small trades could move prices. Usually, such manipulation might not be profitable because if

the market is not liquid it is difficult to establish large positions to take advantage of the

manipulation. With CDS, however, the manipulator might be able to benefit by establishing

positions in the name’s stock and debt. Hence, few well-placed trades in the name’s CDS could

give the impression that the name is in trouble, which would drive down the name’s stock price

and debt prices. The manipulator could then benefit by having established short stock and debt

positions. It would make sense that financial institutions could be especially vulnerable to such

actions because they are susceptible to runs.

     So far, despite all the talk of manipulation, the SEC has filed no action on manipulation. This

may mean that there is no evidence. But it could also mean that, because of the lack of trade

reporting, it is too difficult to find such evidence. Again, however, it is important to separate

transparency to regulators from transparency to the public. Regulators can only investigate

manipulation if they can find who traded what and when. Trade reporting could also help in

identify potential insider trading, as there is evidence in the literature that investors at times can

use the CDS market to exploit insider information.30

     Exchanges of information, including text messages, among CDS traders have been viewed

with suspicion. However, the fact that traders in CDS exchange a lot of information during the

day is not evidence of manipulation. Dealer markets work through traders talking to each other.

29
   Even firms like Berkshire Hathaway have experienced sharp increases in the cost of protection – from
early September to mid-November 2008, the cost of insuring Berkshire Hathaway’s debt increased from
140 basis points a year to 415 basis points a year, apparently on rumors that a derivatives bet could turn out
to be hugely expensive.
30
   See Acharya and Johnson (2007).

                                                      35
That is partly how liquidity is created. Traders who attempt to manipulate the market can be

punished by the traders who then refuse to trade with them or exchange information with them.

     The chairman of the SEC and others have expressed concerns about naked positions in CDS –

i.e., situations where an investor buys protection without owning bonds issued by the name –

because they enable investors to effectively sell debt short and, presumably, to push debt prices to

levels not justified by fundamentals.31 As already discussed, the ability to sell short can make

markets more efficient. However, it is also possible that at times the ability to sell short can make

markets inefficient, perhaps through the manipulation discussed earlier. Though it is generally

believed among financial economists that restrictions to trade in assets and derivatives hurt

efficiency, neither the theoretical case for this belief nor the empirical evidence are completely

unambiguous.32 For instance, the ability to trade CDS at low cost could make it easier for

uninformed investors to move prices influenced by sentiment. In crisis periods, well-informed

investors might be constrained in their ability to deploy capital to correct the impact on prices of

uninformed investors, so that the ability to take short positions on a firm’s credit through the CDS

market might actually be destabilizing.33 Perhaps this kind of mechanism explains that more than

two months after the failure of Lehman a prominent observer could conclude that “now CDS

spreads tell us precisely nothing about expected default rates.”34

     Prohibiting naked positions in CDS would destroy most of the CDS market. Derivatives

markets are liquid because of speculators and because of dealers. If a market is reduced to having

only hedgers, the market cannot be liquid and little hedging takes place. Speculators have to be

able to trade on either side of a market for there to be trading in that market. Prices cannot be

efficient if investors who see profit opportunities cannot exploit them. Dealers have to be able to

31
   Note that naked positions in CDS have no resemblance to naked short positions in the stock market.
Naked short positions in the stock market are illegal and are positions where the short-seller fails to deliver
the stock sold short.
32
   Khanna and Matthews (2009) show conditions under which manipulation through short-sales can
succeed and make the market inefficient.
33
   See Shleifer and Vishny (1997) for an analysis of this issue.
34
   Felix Salmon, “In defense of the CDS market,” Portfolio.com, December 9, 2008.

                                                      36
offset their positions to manage their risks. The CDS market would stop being a source of credit

information and a means of credit hedging if buyers of protection could only do so if they owned

the underlying bond. There is no evidence I know of which suggests that removing naked buying

of protection would help the economy any more than attempts to reduce stock short-sales did –

most likely, once the scientific evidence is in, we will find out that the attempts to reduce short-

sales of stocks hurt the stock market and the economy and worsened the credit crisis.



8. Conclusion

    Fundamentally, the dramatic problems of the credit crisis were not caused by derivatives.

Neither Bear Stearns nor Lehman failed because of derivatives. AIG could have made the same

losses as it made on selling protection on CDOs had it borrowed to buy super-senior tranches of

CDOs, believing that such tranches were safe, and in fact it did. Investors and financial

institutions generally believed that ex ante AAA tranches of securitization had a very small

probability of default. Ex post, it turned out that many AAA tranches unexpectedly lost a lot of

value. Because these tranches were held in large amounts by levered institutions, the losses on

these tranches led to knock-on losses, reduced confidence in financial institutions, and made it

harder for banks to make loans. In all this, derivatives exposures at times increased uncertainty

about the financial health of some institutions and led to losses at some institutions, but they also

enabled institutions to hedge and hence to reduce the impact of the fall in subprime securities and

in other securities. It may well be that more robust derivatives markets in housing would have

produced useful information for investors that would have changed the evolution of housing

markets before the crash and would have enabled investors to hedge against drops in house

prices.

    Economists have generally believed that derivatives increase economic welfare by facilitating

risk-sharing among investors, by improving price discovery, and by making the allocation of

capital more efficient. These arguments apply as well to credit derivatives. However, as we have

                                                 37
seen repeatedly in this paper, there are legitimate reasons to be concerned about potential

problems that can be created because of exposures to derivatives and because of the trading of

derivatives. A growing number of financial economists are concerned that these problems were

not just potential problems and that in fact derivatives did destabilize markets. With their

arguments, it is legitimate to ask whether the social benefits of some types of derivatives are large

enough to offset their costs. It is fair to say that, at this time, while the theoretical literature can be

used by each side to make its case, there is a dearth of serious empirical studies on the social

benefits and costs of derivatives that would help in advancing this debate. Without such studies, it

will be more difficult for financial economists who view derivatives to be valuable to convince

their colleagues – and a large share of the public – that derivatives contribute to social welfare

and played a positive role in the extraordinary economic growth of the last thirty years.




                                                    38
                                             References

Acharya, Viral V., Robert F. Engle, Stephen Figlewski, Anthony W. Lynch, and Marti G.
   Subrahmanyam, 2009, Centralized clearing for credit derivatives, in Restoring financial
   stability, Viral V. Acharya and Matthew Richardson, editors, Wiley, New York, New York.

Acharya, Viral V., and Timothy C. Johnson, 2007, Insider trading in credit derivatives, Journal of
   Financial Economics 77, 110-141.

Aggarwal, Rajesh, and Guojan Wu, 2006, Stock market manipulations, Journal of Business 79,
   1915-1953.

Ashcraft, Adam B., and Till Schuerman, 2008, Understanding the securitization of subprime
   mortgage credit, unpublished working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York,
   NY.

Bank of England, 2008, Financial Stability Report, Issue 23.

Blanco, Roberto, Simon Brennan, and Ian W. Marsh, 2005, An empirical analysis of the dynamic
   relation between investment-grade bonds and credit default swaps, Journal of Finance 60,
   2255-2281.

Cohan, William D., 2009, House of cards, Doubleday, New York, NY.

Diamond, Douglas W. and Robert E. Verrecchia, 1987, Constraints on short-selling and asset
   price adjustment to private information, Journal of Financial Economics 18, 277-312.

Duffie, Darrell, Nicolae Garleanu, and Lasse Pedersen, 2005, Over-the-counter markets,
   Econometrica 73, 1815-1847.

Duffie, Darrell, and Haoxiang Zhu, 2009, When does a central clearing counterparty reduce
   counterparty risk, unpublished working paper, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA.

Goldstein, Michael A., Edith S. Hotchkiss, Erik R. Sirri, 2007, Transparency and liquidity: A
   controlled experiment on corporate bonds, Review of Financial Studies 20, 235-273.

Goldman Sachs, 2009, Effective Regulation – Part I: Avoiding another meltdown,
   http://www2.goldmansachs.com/ideas/public-policy/effective-regulation.html

Gorton, Gary B., 2008, The subprime panic, unpublished working paper, Yale University, New
   Haven, CN.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Merton H. Miller, 1987, Liquidity and market structure, Journal of
   Finance 43, 617-633.

ISDA, 2009, Operations benchmarking survey, ISDA, New York, NY.

Khanna, Naveen, and Richmond D. Matthews, 2009, Bear raids and short sale bans: Is
   government intervention justifiable, unpublished working paper, Michigan State University,
   East Lansing, MI.


                                                39
Longstaff, Francis A., Sanjay Mithal and Eric Neis, 2005, Corporate yield spreads: Default risk or
   liquidity? New evidence from the credit default swap market, Journal of Finance 60, 2213-
   2253.

Markit, 2009, The CDS Big Bang: Understanding the changes to the global CDS contract and
   North American Conventions, available at
   http://www.markit.com/cds/announcements/resource/cds_big_bang.pdf.

Moody’s, 2008, Corporate one-to-five-year rating transition rates, special comment, Moody’s,
  New York, NY.

Minton, Bernadette, René M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson, 2009, How much do banks use credit
   derivatives to hedge loans?, Journal of Financial Services Research 35, 1-31.

Pirrong, Craig, 2009, The economics of clearing in derivatives markets: Netting, asymmetric
    information, and the sharing of default risks through a central counterparty, unpublished
    working paper, University of Houston, Houston, TX.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52, 25-
    55.

Stanton, Richard, and Nancy Wallace, 2009, The bear’s lair: Indexed credit default swaps and the
    subprime crisis, unpublished working paper, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley,
    CA.

Tett, Gillian, 2009, Fool’s Gold, Free Press, New York, NY.

Yavorsky, Alexander, 2009, Analyzing the potential impact of credit default swaps in workout
   situations, Moody’s Investors Services, New York, NY.




                                                40
Figure 1. Credit default swaps notional amount outstanding, 2004-2008.
                The data is obtained form the BIS bi-annual derivatives survey.




                                              41
Figure 2. Market value of credit default swaps outstanding, 2004-2008.
     The data is obtained form the BIS bi-annual derivatives survey.




                                 42
