                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE EFFECTS OF SCHOOL DESEGREGATION ON CRIME

                                           David A. Weiner
                                            Byron F. Lutz
                                            Jens Ludwig

                                        Working Paper 15380
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15380


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2009


The authors contributed equally and are listed in reverse alphabetical order. This research was supported
by grants from the Spencer Foundation and the National Science Foundation (SES-0820033). Thanks
to Jonathan Guryan and Sarah Reber for sharing their programs and data, to Laurel Beck, Samuel Brown,
Michael Corey, Heather Harris, Shoshana Schwartz, Daniel Stenberg and Jake Ward for excellent
research assistance, and to Elizabeth Ananat, Josh Angrist, Pat Bayer, Hoyt Bleakley, Liz Cascio,
Kerwin Charles, Charles Clotfelter, Philip Cook, David Deming, David Figlio, Jack Greenberg, Jonathan
Gruber, John Horton, Steve Levitt, Erzo Luttmer, Ofer Malamud, Tom Miles, Derek Neal, Robert
Sampson, Michael Tonry, Elizabeth Vigdor, Jacob Vigdor, William Julius Wilson, Jeff Wooldridge
and seminar participants at Brown University, the Brookings Institution, Duke University, the University
of California at Berkeley, the University of Chicago Law School and Graduate School of Business,
Harvard University, the University of Maryland, the University of Wisconsin, and meetings of the
American Economic Association, Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management, and National
Bureau of Economic Research for helpful comments. All opinions are of course our own and do not
necessarily represent the views of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors or its staff. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by David A. Weiner, Byron F. Lutz, and Jens Ludwig. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of School Desegregation on Crime
David A. Weiner, Byron F. Lutz, and Jens Ludwig
NBER Working Paper No. 15380
September 2009, Revised August 2010
JEL No. I2,J15,J18,K42

                                               ABSTRACT

One of the most striking features of crime in America is its disproportionate concentration in disadvantaged,
racially segregated communities, which has long raised concern that segregation itself may contribute
to criminal behavior. Yet little is known about whether government efforts to reduce segregation can
reduce crime. We address this question by studying the most important large-scale policy to reduce
segregation in American life - court-ordered school desegregation. Our research design exploits variation
across large urban school districts in the timing of when they were subject to local Federal court orders
to desegregate. We find that for black youth, homicide victimization declines by around 25 percent
when court orders are implemented; homicide arrests decline significantly as well. We also find evidence
for spillover effects on other age and race groups, consistent with data indicating a sizable amount
of offending across groups and with the fact that offending by different groups is also linked through
the police budget constraint. Economic models for a "market for offenses" suggest the influence of
this second mechanism should attenuate over time as victims respond to a shift in the supply of offenses
by reducing investments in crime prevention. Consistent with this theory, we find police spending
declines several years after court desegregation orders are enacted. The only detectable life-course-persistent
effects are found among birth cohorts that attended desegregated schools.


David A. Weiner                                        Jens Ludwig
University of Pennsylvania                             University of Chicago
3718 Locust Walk                                       1155 East 60th Street
McNeil Building                                        Chicago, IL 60637
Philadelphia, PA 19140                                 and NBER
wdavid@sas.upenn.edu                                   jludwig@uchicago.edu

Byron F. Lutz
Federal Reserve Board of Governors
Research Division
20th and C Streets, NW
Washington, DC 20551-0001
http://byron.marginalq.com/
Byron.F.Lutz@frb.gov




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w15380
                                             I. INTRODUCTION

         One of the most striking features of crime in America is its disproportionate

concentration in disadvantaged, racially segregated communities. For example, in 2008 the

homicide rate in Hyde Park, the economically and racially mixed neighborhood that is home to

the University of Chicago, was 3 per 100,000. In directly adjacent Washington Park, where over

half of residents are poor and 98 percent are African-American, the homicide rate was nearly 20

times as high (57 per 100,000). 1 Nationwide, homicide is by far the leading cause of death for

African-Americans ages 15-24, responsible for more deaths in 2006 than the nine other leading

causes combined. Because homicide is concentrated among young people, nearly as many years

of potential life are lost among blacks from homicide as from the nation’s leading killer, heart

disease. 2 The costs of crime to society as a whole are also enormous, equal to perhaps 10 percent

of GDP in developed nations (Anderson, 1999; Entorf and Spenger, 2002; Ludwig, 2006).

         These patterns have generated long-standing concern that segregation itself might cause

crime. For example, in its explanation of the riots of 1967, the so-called “Kerner Commission”

cited the destructive role of “the black ghettos where segregation and poverty converge on the

young to destroy opportunity and enforce failure. Crime, drug addiction, dependency on welfare,

and bitterness and resentment against society in general and white society in particular are the

result.” 3 While economists have long been interested in the causes of racial segregation

(Schelling, 1969; Becker and Murphy, 2000; Card, Mas and Rothstein, 2008), recent years have

seen a growing literature about the possible effects on behavior from segregation and non-market

social interactions more generally (Cook and Goss, 1996; Glaeser, Sacerdote and Scheinkman,


1
  See www.cchsd.org/cahealthprof.html and https://portal.chicagopolice.org/portal/page/portal/ClearPath
2
  These calculations are for years of potential life lost before age 65. http://www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars/index.html
3
  http://www.eisenhowerfoundation.org/docs/kerner.pdf
1996; Cutler and Glaeser, 1997; Becker and Murphy, 2000; Gaviria and Raphael, 2001). The

mechanisms that produce segregation can also contribute to increased variation across areas in

the quality of local public goods such as schools or police (Becker and Murphy, 2000), which

could also influence the costs and benefits of crime.

       Previous studies provide evidence that criminal behavior is affected by social context, but

these studies are not informative about whether large-scale policy efforts to re-sort people across

social settings can reduce the overall volume of crime in society. A large non-experimental

literature seems to find the strongest evidence for “neighborhood effects” in the area of criminal

behavior (Sampson et al., 2002). While these studies are susceptible to concerns about selection

bias arising from endogenous sorting of people across settings, studies using stronger research

designs yield similar findings. Kling, Ludwig and Katz (2005) find that winning a randomized

housing-voucher lottery that enables families to move into less-distressed areas reduces violent-

crime arrests for youth by 38 percent, although property-crime arrests increase among males.

Deming (2009) finds winning a public school-choice lottery in Charlotte reduces the chance of

felony arrest for high-risk youth by 46 percent. Cullen, Jacob and Levitt (2006) find that winning

a lottery to attend a higher-achieving school in Chicago reduces arrests by nearly 60 percent.

       But lottery studies of moderately-sized housing or school choice programs can only

identify partial equilibrium effects, in part because they only consider the effects of moving on

the movers. If peer influences on behavior are constant and linear in peer characteristics, or if the

effects on criminal behavior observed in the lottery studies are caused by moving to higher-

quality schools and if school quality is in fixed supply, then re-sorting people across social

settings could simply redistribute crime, not change the overall crime rate. The intended effects

                                                -2-
of large-scale desegregation efforts could also be offset by private responses, which could range

from enrolling children in private school to residential relocation to outright violence. Evidence

about general equilibrium effects will necessarily require research designs that do not have the

benefit of randomized variation from wait-list lotteries for government programs.

         Our paper seeks to empirically estimate the system-level impacts on crime from one of

the largest-scale government efforts to reduce segregation in American life – court-ordered

school desegregation. Government efforts to desegregate K-12 schools began with the U.S.

Supreme Court’s 1954 decision in Brown v. Board of Education (347 US 483), 4 which former

Solicitor General Walter Dellinger called “the most important legal, political, social and moral

event in twentieth-century American domestic history” (Williams, 1998, p. 400). Our study

exploits the fact that most large school districts were slow to desegregate after Brown, and so

were forced to desegregate by local Federal courts in response to lawsuits by the NAACP.

Idiosyncratic differences across districts in the timing of court desegregation orders is our source

of identifying variation, which is plausibly orthogonal to other determinants of youth outcomes

given that the NAACP seems to have filed cases strategically when and where they were most

likely to win, rather than to maximize short-term social benefits. Guryan (2004) and Reber

(2005) show that these court orders reduce levels of school segregation, despite movement of




4
  Only one previous study we know of has examined the issue of how school segregation in general is related to
crime. In concurrent work (we became aware of the then-unpublished paper after we had begun work on this study),
LaFree and Arum (2006) ask whether people brought up in different states, with different levels of school
desegregation, are differentially likely to be incarcerated as adults, holding state of residence in adulthood constant.
However their study may be susceptible to bias if the propensity of people with different levels of crime risk to
move out of state are related to levels or changes in school segregation, or if omitted state policies or other social
factors are correlated with levels or changes in school segregation.
                                                         -3-
whites to suburbs and private schools. Guryan (2004) finds that these court orders reduce black

dropout rates by around 25 percent, with no detectable effects on the schooling of whites. 5

         Our main finding is that court-ordered school desegregation is associated with very large

declines in homicide victimization rates for school-age blacks, around 25 percent, with equally

large declines in homicide arrests. We focus on homicide because this is widely regarded as the

most reliably measured crime, and accounts for a disproportionate share of the total costs of

crime. These crime impacts on school-age blacks are presumably due at least in part to their

improved schooling outcomes; we find effects that are as large during the summer months as

during the school year, and these effects persist into middle age. Our estimates can explain about

one-quarter of the dramatic (but not widely-noted) convergence over time in black and white

offending rates: From 1969 to 1999, the ratio of violent crime arrests to blacks vs. whites under

18 declined from 12:1 to 4:1, with most of the convergence occurring during the 1970s (Cook

and Laub, 1998, 2002) – when most of the court orders we study were imposed.

         Also of key interest are the spillover effects induced by court school-desegregation

orders. Social interactions occur disproportionately, but not exclusively, among people of the

same “type” (defined by age and race). Below we present some tabulations from FBI crime data

documenting that a substantial amount of violent offending occurs across race and age groups.

Criminal behavior of different groups is also connected through the law enforcement budget

5
  Guryan (2004) finds effects of these orders on schooling outcomes of blacks both in and outside the south, and
Reber (2010b) finds a similar effect in Louisiana. Lutz (2005) finds the termination of court-ordered desegregation
reduces black educational attainment, but only outside of the south. These studies are not necessarily in conflict in
part because the phase-out of desegregation studied by Lutz occurred in a very different environment from the one
in which these orders were implemented. Residential segregation has decreased significantly (Glaeser and Vigdor
2003), funding is more equalized across school districts (Card and Payne 1998; Murray et al., 1998; Hoxby 2001)
and attitudes toward race have changed dramatically (Schuman et al., 1985; Quillian 1996). Desegregation may have
caused permanent changes that outlive the end of court involvement. Finally, southern policy makers may take
compensatory actions to help mitigate any negative impact from terminating a desegregation plan (Lutz, 2005).
                                                        -4-
constraint. A shock that reduces the number of offenses by any one group frees up the amount of

police resources available to investigate crime by members of any group. These two mechanisms

help explain why we see short-run declines in victimization among whites and black adults, as

well as offending reductions by black adults.

           Economic models of the “market for offenses,” which emphasize that crime is a function

of victim as well as offender behavior, predict the second mechanism described above (freed-up

police resources) may be partly transitory because potential victims should eventually respond to

beneficial changes to the supply of offenses by reducing protective behaviors (Ehrlich, 1981;

Cook, 1986; Philipson and Posner, 1996). Consistent with this theory, we find that several years

after court desegregation orders are enacted, the public “consumes” part of the benefits from

reduced youth crime as curtailed spending on police. Over the longer term, the only detectable

life-course-persistent effects are found among birth cohorts that actually attended desegregated

schools. One general implication is that studies that do not account for compensating changes in

avoidance behavior will understate the welfare effects of crime-prevention programs. 6

           With any quasi-experimental research design, including our difference-in-differences

approach, there is always some uncertainty about whether the causal relationship of primary

interest has been isolated successfully. Several supplemental findings point suggestively in the

direction of our having isolated a real behavioral response to court-ordered school desegregation.

First, our results are robust to conditioning on census region-year fixed effects, county-specific

linear trends, and interactions of year effects with baseline county socio-demographic

characteristics. Second, we find no systematic evidence of pre-existing homicide trends for black


6
    This is an important point in environmental economics as well; see Neidell (2009) and Moretti and Neidell (2010).
                                                         -5-
youth, black adults, white youth, or white adults in the years before these court desegregation

orders are enacted. Third, we show our results are not due to compositional changes in the

counties that we are studying (migration), or to measurement error in the county population

counts that are the denominators of our homicide rates. Fourth, we find that black homicides

declined the most in those districts that experienced the largest declines in school segregation

levels. Fifth, we find no relationship between the timing of these court orders and the level or

change in political composition of local federal courts. Sixth, the results do not seem to be due to

increased policing, since spending on police declines over time; evidence that this is not a

spurious finding comes from the fact that we do not see declines in spending on education or fire

protection. Finally, we carry out a number of falsification tests and show these court orders have

no “effect” on youth or adult mortality rates from causes that should not be affected by court

orders (e.g. death from illness), or on other black teen and adult outcomes that should not be

directly affected by changes in criminality among black youth, namely black employment rates.

       The evidence taken together suggests that an omitted-variables counter-explanation for

our findings would have to meet a very stringent set of criteria. It would have to be a shock that

was almost exactly contemporaneous with desegregation (given the lack of evidence for pre-

trends) yet was geographically constrained to the specific school districts being placed under

order (given the robustness to region-year effects), that did not impact other important measures

of social well being or behavior, that did not involve migration, and that was largest in places

where school desegregation was most effective at achieving racial integration.

       Section II provides some history behind the court orders we study, which is important to

our claim that the timing of these orders is plausibly orthogonal to trends in other determinants of

                                                -6-
youth outcomes. A framework for thinking about how these orders might influence crime is

presented in Section III. Our data and methods are presented in Sections IV and V, results are in

Section VI, and implications are discussed in Section VII.

                                        II. BACKGROUND

       Shortly after Brown, the Supreme Court declared school districts should desegregate

“with all deliberate speed” (Brown II; 349 U.S. 294, 1955). What this meant in practice was not

specified, and details were left to the lower Federal courts. Few districts saw much desegregation

for many years. Smaller districts, particularly in the South, began to desegregate in the 1960s

after the Federal government threatened to withhold Title I funds (Cascio et al., 2010). Large

districts were slower to desegregate in a meaningful manner, although by 1966 virtually all

school districts had engaged in at least token desegregation (Cascio et al., 2008). Most of the

nation’s largest districts had to be ordered to desegregate as a result of individual cases filed in

local Federal court, since Brown directly bound only five districts (Klarman, 2004).

       Our key identifying assumption is that among the set of large school districts ever subject

to court desegregation orders, the timing of when these orders went into effect is unrelated to

trends in other determinants of youth outcomes. This assumption seems plausible given that a

large share of desegregation lawsuits were filed by the NAACP, which, given resource

constraints, was selective in deciding when and where to file. The NAACP used a strategy

starting well before Brown of filing lawsuits to establish a series of favorable legal precedents,

rather than maximize short-term welfare gains. For example Brown targeted Kansas because the

black-white school resource gap was more modest there than in other places, which was intended

to focus the Supreme Court squarely on the question of segregation itself (Appendix A). Guryan

                                                 -7-
(2004) provides a model showing this is optimal in a legal system that assigns great importance

to precedent.

        Following the Brown and Brown II decisions, many large school districts enacted

“freedom of choice” plans that ostensibly gave minority students the option to attend different

schools, but in practice did not achieve much desegregation. These placement plans were

prohibited by the Supreme Court in 1968 in Green vs. New Kent County, Virginia (391 U.S.

430), which in turn led to a surge of litigation activity in the lower Federal courts. Our focus is

mostly on these major local Federal court decisions following Green, which, as we demonstrate

below, actually helped desegregate schools. Finally, federal courts seem to have varied

considerably in how they handled these desegregation cases (Klarman, 2007).

        While this history suggests that the timing of local Federal court desegregation orders is

plausibly orthogonal to trends in local social conditions, Southern districts do seem to have been

disproportionately likely to be subject to court orders earlier in the period (see Figure 1). This

regional patterning is itself the product of the evolution of legal doctrine, 7 and suggests the

importance for our analysis of adequately controlling for region-specific trends in crime.

                                 III. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

        Court school-desegregation orders could in principle generate nearly immediate changes

in crime for purely mechanical reasons, by incapacitating youth on long bus rides. School

desegregation could also potentially have abrupt effects on criminal behavior by blacks of all

ages by changing perceptions of self worth (e.g., Clark, 1950), by reducing prejudice, as

7
  Prior to 1973, court-ordered desegregation could only occur in districts proved to have engaged in de jure
segregation. The 1973 Keyes v. Denver School District decision (413 U.S. 189) ruled court-ordered desegregation
could proceed in areas that had de facto segregation resulting from past state action, which made desegregation
lawsuits more viable outside of the South.
                                                      -8-
suggested by the “contact hypothesis” in social psychology (Allport, 1954, Pettigrew, 1998;

Pettigrew and Tropp, 2006), and by changing fundamental attitudes about American society, as

suggested by the quote above from the Kerner Commission.

         But several of the most important candidate mechanisms through which court orders

might affect criminal behavior would be expected to have cumulative effects over time, as

minority youth have increased exposure to more pro-social and developmentally productive peer

groups and to higher-quality schools. These changes may directly influence youth behavior, as

suggested by a large literature on contagion models or “peer effects,” 8 and may also reduce

criminal behavior through improved schooling outcomes that increase both the opportunity costs

of crime (Becker, 1968) and the cognitive, socio-emotional, and behavioral skills that enable

youth to stay out of trouble (Oreopoulous and Salvanes, 2009).

         The schooling mechanism even by itself might be quite large. Guryan (2004) finds

desegregation orders reduce black dropout rates by around 25 percent, which the estimates from

Lochner and Moretti (2004) suggest should in turn reduce black homicide arrests by at least 20

percent, 9 consistent with the idea that criminal offending is concentrated in the left tail of the

behavioral distribution (Wolfgang et al., 1972; Tracy et al., 1990). Lochner and Moretti’s (2004)

study seems to suggest that the main effect of schooling is to act on the extensive margin of


8
  Epidemic models emphasize the tendency of “like to beget like” through peer interactions with higher local crime
rates serving to reduce the actual or perceived probability of arrest as well as the stigma of criminal behavior (Sah
1991; Cook and Goss 1996; Glaeser, Sacerdote, and Scheinkman 1996).
9
  Lochner and Moretti (2004) suggest that a 10 percentage point increase in high school graduation rates would
reduce overall violent crime arrest rates for blacks by 25 percent [see their footnote 36]. Their Table 11 shows that
for blacks and whites pooled together, the estimated effect of dropout rates on murder specifically is about 2.66
times as large as the effect on the overall violent crime rate. If the ratio of effects on murders versus all violent
crimes is the same for blacks and whites, then a 10 percentage point increase in graduation rates would reduce
murder arrests for blacks by two-thirds (0.10 * 2.66 = 0.67). Guryan estimates a 3 percentage point decline in black
dropout rates following desegregation, which suggests we should expect a decline in black murder offending by
(3/10)*(2/3) = 20 percent.
                                                        -9-
criminal involvement (offending rate) rather than on the intensive (severity) margin, since they

do not find any substitution from more to less serious crimes.

         A key concern with court-ordered school desegregation was the possibility that whites

would react in ways that create negative spillovers and undo some of the intended benefits of the

court orders. For example, surveys conducted shortly after Brown found that 15-25 percent of

Southern whites endorsed the use of violence if necessary to preserve racially segregated

schooling (Klarman, 2007, p. 192), and many cities experienced riots while trying to desegregate

the schools (Rodgers and Bullock, 1972; Greenberg, 2004; Williams, 1998).

         Less obvious at the time these orders were being enacted was the possibility of beneficial

rather than harmful spillover effects. One reason declines in criminal behavior by minority youth

could benefit other groups is because a sizable share of homicide offending occurs across race

and age lines. For example, Table 1 shows that for black homicide offenders ages 15-24, over

half of victims were 25 and over, and nearly one out of five victims was white (see Appendix B

for details; see also Cook and Laub, 1998). Because previous research in criminology suggests

victims often contribute to the initiation or escalation of violent events (Wolfgang, 1958,

1967), 10 desegregation orders could potentially reduce offending as well as victimization rates of

other groups by making black youth less “victimogenic.” Table 1 shows that among black

offenders ages 35+, roughly 15 percent of victims were under age 25.

         The criminal behavior of different groups is also linked through the police budget

constraint. If police resources are fixed in the short term, any shock that reduces the supply of


10
   Far and away the most common motivation to commit homicide is an altercation (FBI, 2007; Chicago PD, 2008).
The characteristics of homicide offenders and victims are quite similar, with the vast majority of both groups having
a prior arrest record (Chicago PD, 2008; Schreck et al., 2008).
                                                       - 10 -
offenses among any sub-group has the effect of increasing the police resources available to

investigate or deter crimes committed by any group , which leads to more deterrence, less

offending, yet more deterrence, still less offending, and so on. This type of feedback process is

the reverse of what Kleiman (1993) calls “enforcement swamping.” This could be an important

mechanism since blacks under 25 account for one-fourth of homicide arrests (Table 1), and the

elasticity of serious crimes like murder with respect to police resources has been estimated to be

as large as -1.0 (Levitt, 2002, Evans and Owens, 2007).

       The economic theory of a “market for offenses” predicts police resources should not be

static in perpetuity, and that the magnitude of the reverse-enforcement-swamping mechanism

should attenuate over time as potential victims respond to changes in the supply of offenses by

reducing crime-avoidance behaviors (Ehrlich, 1981; Cook, 1986). This idea can be illustrated

with a simple model adapted from Philipson and Posner (1996). Let the share of youth engaged

in crime, S(K,P), be a function of their human capital, K, and the public’s effort to protect itself

against crime, P, so that dS/dK≤0 and dS/dP≤0. Imagine P is the share of households protected

against criminal attack because there is a policeman nearby, so increased spending on police

increases P. Spending on police is a function of crime, P(S), with dP/dS≥0. The equilibrium

crime rate, C*, occurs where the amount of police spending that people will support as a result of

the level of local youth crime is just equal to that level of youth crime, so that:

(1)    C* = (1 – P*)S*

       Now consider the effects of a policy that increases the human capital of youth, K:

(2)    dC/dK = (1 – P)dS/dK – (dP/dS)dS/dK



                                                - 11 -
         The first term in equation (2) will be negative (less crime), although the second term will

be positive since the decline in crime leads to a decline in protective activities. Philipson and

Posner note that the change in avoidance behavior may occur with some delay, which they argue

is one explanation for why crime trends are cyclical over time.

                                                    IV. DATA

         Our study focuses on the set of large school districts subject to court orders that were

included in a dataset compiled by Welch and Light (1987) for the U.S. Commission on Civil

Rights; the districts and the year of their court desegregation order are listed in Appendix Table

A1. These data cover all districts that in 1968 were 20-90 percent minority with enrollments of

50,000+, and a random sample of districts that were 10-90 percent minority with enrollments of

between 15,000-50,000. This sample is not representative of all districts in the U.S., but is still of

great interest given it accounts for such a large share of minority students – and crime – in the

U.S. 11 We seek to identify the effect of court ordered desegregation in these districts.

         Our main data sources are homicide victimizations measured by the Vital Statistics (VS)

and homicide offending measured by the FBI’s Supplemental Homicide Reports (SHR), both

aggregated to the county level. We have also examined other types of crimes using data from the

FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports. But these data have a great deal of measurement error,

particularly at the county level (Maltz, 1999), and so our results for these other crimes are

imprecisely estimated and ultimately not very informative (see the discussion in Appendix B).

         One complication of working with county-level crime data is that the Welch and Light

dataset is at the level of the school district. For 37 percent of the districts in our sample, the

11
  In 1968 these districts accounted for 45 percent of minority enrollment in the U.S.; the counties containing these
districts had nearly half of all homicides to blacks in the U.S., and just over one-third of all homicides to whites.
                                                        - 12 -
school district boundary follows the county boundary. This figure is higher in the South (65

percent). We believe the county should be the preferred unit of analysis even if homicide data

were available at the district level, because county data are less susceptible to problems from

“white flight” in response to court orders. So long as whites stay in the county, movement to

nearby school districts or private schools will not generate any mechanical change in homicide

rates (this is also true for blacks). We devote substantial attention below to showing our results

are not due to compositional changes in the populations living in our counties.

         The VS provides a census of all deaths and enables us to measure homicide victimization

rates by county and year to separate age-race groups over the period from 1959 through 1988.

We can use the SHR to capture information on homicide victims and, when police have made an

arrest, offenders. During our study period the ratio of homicide arrests to homicide events is

around 0.77. The main limitation of the SHR for our purposes is that the dataset starts only in

1976, which limits our ability to measure short-term effects of court orders since a large share of

orders were enacted by then (Figure 1). County population comes from the Census Bureau and

VS interpolations for inter-censal years. We show below that our results are not an artifact of

measurement error in population counts during inter-censal years. 12

         Table 2 shows our analytic sample consists of large counties, with a mean population of

around 677,000 over our study period. Around 17 percent of county residents are African-

Americans. Homicide victimization rates to white youth 15-19 increase dramatically from 1960


12
  The potential concern would be that if whites are moving out of a county after a court desegregation order is
enacted during the inter-censal period, then if the interpolation between census years overstates the number of
whites living in the county in a given year, the estimated white homicide rate would be too low and our estimates
would overstate the effects of desegregation orders in reducing white homicides. A similar problem could in
principle occur for blacks, although the reverse bias may be more likely if blacks are moving into rather than out of
desegregating school districts. In any case in practice this does not seem to be a problem, as described below.
                                                        - 13 -
to 1980, from 2.3 to 9.7 per 100,000, while victimization rates to blacks 15-19 start off much

higher (20.3 per 100,000), almost double from 1960 to 1970, and then decline in the 1970s.

                                                    V. METHODS

        Our basic empirical approach is to examine how homicide victimization rates for whites

or blacks in county i in year t, y it , change in response to court school desegregation orders. Our

key explanatory variables are indicators D p ,it equal to one if in calendar year t, district i had a

desegregation plan implemented p years beforehand, 0 otherwise. In most models we use the

year before the plans are implemented as our reference point. We define indicators for the period

6 or more years before the orders go into effect, for each of the five years individually before

orders are enacted, for each of the six years individually after orders are enacted, and the period

7 or more years after the orders are implemented, although we also estimate more parsimonious

specifications. We condition on county and census region-year fixed effects, γ i and ψ t , r , the

latter being particularly important given Figure 1 shows some regional pattern to the timing of

court orders in our sample of counties. Our main estimating equation is given by (3).

(3)             yit = α + ∑ β p D p ,it + γ i + ψ t , r + ε it
                            p∈Ψ



        The coefficients of interest, the βp vector, are identified under the assumption that, in the

absence of the desegregation plans, homicide rates would have trended similarly in districts

which had desegregation plans implemented at different times. The vector of pre-desegregation

coefficients provides a partial test of this assumption. Our specification also allows for effects

that are either immediate or gradually unfold over time, which is important because it might take



                                                           - 14 -
several years for a given age cell to have been fully “treated” following a court order and the

behavioral effects of desegregation could increase with time spent in desegregated school.

         It is important that the entire βp vector be identified from the same set of counties, to

avoid confusing the time path of how areas respond to desegregation with changes in the

composition of counties in our analytic sample. Therefore in generating our “event-study”

figures below we restrict our sample to counties that contribute to each of the first six points in

the post-desegregation vector and at least four of the last five years in the pre-desegregation

vector. 13 This removes around 8 percent of the county-year observations from the sample.

Estimates from the full sample turn out to be quite similar.

         In our main set of estimates, we treat the individual counties as the observational unit and

estimate equation (3) without weighting by county population, to estimate the effect of school

desegregation on the average county. However the results are similar when we estimate the

effects on the average juvenile instead, by using each county’s juvenile population as weights.

         We initially estimate equation (3) using OLS in levels, and calculate standard errors

clustered at the county level to account for serial correlation (Bertrand et al., 2004). This might

not be the right functional form, though, since there is substantial cross-sectional variation in

homicide rates, particularly for black youth (Figure 2). Estimating a proportional effects model is

complicated by the fact that many counties record no youth homicides in some years.

         We first re-estimate (3) using the “log linear dummy model” from Pakes and Griliches

(1980). The homicide rate is transformed by replacing zeros with ones, and then logged. A


13
  Note that we lack reliable Vital Statistics data for 1967. A large number of school districts desegregated between
1968 and 1972. Requiring counties to contribute to all of the last five points of the pre desegregation vector would
result in the loss of a significant percent of the sample.
                                                       - 15 -
dummy variable is included as an explanatory variable that is equal to one in all cases where the

true homicide rate is zero. This allows us to estimate proportional responses using a linear

model, but is biased because the dummy variable is endogenous.

           We also estimate a fixed-effect Poisson count model using a quasi-maximum likelihood

(QML) approach (Wooldridge, 1999; see our Appendix C for details). This estimator maximizes

the same log-likelihood function as the standard fixed-effect Poisson model, but rather than

assuming mean-variance equality, relies on a robust standard error calculation instead. The

model is fully robust to distributional misspecification. We use total homicide counts for the

relevant age-race group as the dependent variable, and control for the county population in that

age-race group as the exposure variable. 14 (The computer code is available upon request.)

           We also experiment with re-estimating different versions of equation (3), including a

model that conditions on county-specific linear trends, and what we call a “base demographic

model” that non-parametrically allows different “types” of counties to have different crime

trends over time by interacting year fixed effects with a series of county characteristics measured

in the 1960 Census (median household income, percent of population over age of 25 with a high

school degree, the percent of employment in manufacturing, and percent non-white). Time-

variant demographic variables are not included in the model because they may be endogenous to

desegregation. We have experimented with including a time-varying measure of non-school

desegregation race riots (such as the 1965 Watts Riot), which has no effect on our results.

                                                    VI. RESULTS




14
     The results are quite similar whether we use the offender or the victim population as the exposure variable.
                                                          - 16 -
       In this section we first document that court-ordered school desegregation does indeed

successfully re-sort minority children across schools and increase their exposure to white

children, replicating the results from Guryan (2004) and Reber (2005). We then present our

results suggesting that these court orders reduce homicide victimization rates to black youth by

around 25 percent, and for black adults and white youth, before turning to our results for

homicide offending, a discussion of mechanisms, and then a variety of specification checks.

       A. Impacts on School Segregation

       The top panel of Figure 3 shows that following court desegregation orders, there is a

sharp drop in the dissimilarity index, which ranges from 0 to 1 and is the percent of black

students who would need to be reassigned to a different school for perfect integration to be

achieved given the district’s overall racial composition. The figure plots the regression

coefficients on our indicator variables for years before and after desegregation orders go into

effect (the year before is the reference period), using OLS to estimate equation (3) conditioning

on county and region-year fixed effects. We see little evidence of pre-existing trends in our

counties in the years prior to the court orders, followed by a large drop in the dissimilarity index.

Within two years the impact is 0.2, a large share of the 1968 mean of 0.71 in our sample. Panel B

of Figure 3 shows there is also an increase in the exposure index (percent of white students in the

average black student’s school) of 0.15 within two years, relative to the 1968 mean value in our

sample of .28. The results in panels A and B are quite similar to those in Reber (2005).

       In Panel C we present some original results showing that court-ordered desegregation

reduces the number of schools within a district by 3 to 5 percent. Predominantly minority schools

seem to have been most likely to be closed (Hamilton, 1968; Butler, 1974; Orfield 1975; Haney

                                                - 17 -
1978), which suggests that average school quality in these counties could have increased (as does

our finding below that desegregation was associated with an increase in education spending).

B. Homicide Victimization

       The results shown in Table 3 suggest black homicide victimization rates in the Vital

Statistics declined substantially following implementation of court school-desegregation orders.

These results come from estimating a parsimonious version of equation (3) where the key

explanatory variables are indicators for whether the county-year observation falls within the first

five years after a desegregation order is imposed, or 6 or more years after such an order.

       Our preferred QML count model suggests that for black youth of high school age (15-19)

homicide victimization rates declined by 17 percent the first 5 years after the court orders (the

QML coefficients can be interpreted as the percent change in the homicide rate – see Appendix

C). The effect seems to persist, with an estimated decline of 27 percent in the period 6+ years

after the court orders, although we note that this coefficient is identified from an unbalanced set

of counties. Estimates from OLS in levels or the log dummy model are slightly smaller in

proportional terms, but qualitatively similar.

       As noted above, school-age offenders often kill older people, and so in the other panels of

Table 3 we expand our focus to older victims as well. Compared to the results for black victims

15-19, the estimated effects are of about the same size in proportional terms for victims ages 15-

24 and 25-34, and are slightly smaller for victims ages 35-44. In what follows we typically show

results for both the 15-19 and 15-24 year old groups. In addition to accounting for teen offenses

against young adults, focusing on 15-24 year olds brings more data to bear and by 6 years out,

most 15-24 year olds would have been spent time in school after desegregation was enacted.

                                                 - 18 -
       Note that all of our estimates in Table 3 condition on region-year fixed effects. Table 3

shows that our results are also robust to conditioning on county-specific linear trends, and to

conditioning on interactions of baseline county characteristics and year fixed effects, which is a

non-parametric way to allow different types of counties to follow different homicide trends. The

point estimates barely change with these additional controls included in the model.

       Table 4 shows that desegregation orders seem to reduce homicide victimizations to

whites as well. We generally do not see any statistically significant impacts of desegregation

orders on white homicides during the first five years after these orders go into effect. But 6+

years after these orders are in effect, victimizations to whites 15-19 decline by 23 percent. We

also see signs that homicide victimization rates might have declined for older whites as well

(ages 25-34 and 35-44), although these results are sensitive to our estimation choices.

       The key identifying assumption behind our study is that the timing of when these

desegregation orders go into effect is unrelated to trends in other determinants of youth

homicide. To explore this issue, we estimate the time path of homicide victimization rates using

equation (3), which includes a full set of indicators for the years before and after these court

orders go into effect. These specifications require estimating a large set of parameters and are

quite demanding of the data, so in our event-history graphs the 95 percent confidence intervals

(represented by the dashed lines in the figures) can often be quite sizable.

       With that caveat, Figure 4 presents results for black victims ages 15-24 and 25-34. There

is very little evidence of any pre-existing trend in homicide rates before desegregation orders go

into effect for both age groups. Then when the court desegregation orders are implemented, we

see a break in trend. The estimates for 15-19 year olds – which focus on a smaller age cohort and

                                                - 19 -
hence use much thinner data – are uniformly imprecise and therefore not so informative

(Appendix Figure A1).

        Figure 5 shows that there is no evidence of pre-existing trends in white homicide

victimization rates either. Compared to the results for blacks, there appears to be more of a delay

in when white victimization rates decline following implementation of the desegregation orders.

The gradual impact of desegregation orders on white and to some extent black homicide

victimizations might reflect the fact that the share of prime-age offenders exposed to school

desegregation, as well as the average duration of this exposure, increase over time. 15

C. Homicide Offending

        Victimization data are only partially informative about behavioral responses by specific

age or race groups, given the amount of cross-group offending documented in Table 1. To

examine offending directly we use data from the SHR, which has the drawback of only providing

information on offenders when the police identify a suspect or make an arrest. Another very

important drawback is that the SHR data are available only back to 1976, and so estimates for

short-term effects of desegregation orders will not fully use data from the nearly 75 percent of

districts in our sample that enacted court orders before 1977 (Figure 1). We have more power

with the SHR to detect longer-term impacts on offending, since we can look at long-term

behavioral responses after 1977 even in counties that desegregated before that point.

        Given those qualifications, Table 5 provides evidence for a decline in homicide offending

by high-school aged blacks (15-19) after court desegregation orders go into effect. In order to see

the results of truncating the panel, in column 1 we replicate our main victimization results using

15
  The results for black age 35-44 victims and for white age 15-19 and 35-44 victims are shown in Appendix Figure
A1 and A2, respectively. The results for victims age 35-44 tend to be imprecisely estimated.
                                                     - 20 -
the VS data from just 1976 forward. We note that the victimization impacts for the subset of

counties that desegregated in 1977 or later are larger in absolute value compared to the results

from our full sample, which suggests that the effects on offending in our 1977+ sub-sample

presented in Table 5 could also be larger than what we would see in our full sample.

        For the sub-sample of counties for which we can estimate short-term offending effects, 16

our QML count model implies large declines in homicide arrests to black youth, equal to 30

percent during the first 5 years after the court orders and 52 percent 6+ years out. The OLS

results, though, are imprecise. There is some suggestive evidence that offending by whites

changed as a result of these orders as well, with a 22 percent decline in homicide arrests to

whites ages 15-19 in the first five years after the court orders are enacted.

        It is important to keep in mind that the SHR data underlying Table 5 are quite thin, so the

magnitudes of the estimates should be interpreted cautiously. Nevertheless, the fact that the

estimates point in the direction of potentially large effects seems consistent with other evidence

that criminal behavior is very sensitive to environmental influences, including the massive time-

series variation that we observe in overall U.S. crime rates. For example between 1984 and 1992

the homicide arrest rate to blacks 14-24 nationwide fully tripled, and then dropped by about one-

half over the next seven years (Levitt, 2004, p. 180). The magnitudes of our results also fit quite

comfortably alongside the partial equilibrium results from the housing and school-choice lottery

studies discussed above (Kling, Ludwig, and Katz, 2005; Cullen, Jacob and Levitt, 2006;

Deming, 2009). Ludwig and Kling (2007) find that racial composition may be the neighborhood



16
 The estimates are identified by variation in the date of desegregation within the group of post-1976 desegregators.
However, the full sample is used in estimation – the pre-1977 desegregators serve as a control group.
                                                       - 21 -
attribute that is most strongly associated with violent criminal behavior in the MTO housing

mobility experiment.

       Homicide offending seems to have declined among black adults as well as youth in the

years right after these school desegregation court orders are implemented, as shown in Table 5

(columns (5) – (8)). Our QML count model suggests that the magnitude of the effect in absolute

value (in proportional terms) is largest for youth and declines steadily with age. For example 6+

years after the court orders are enacted, the estimated effect on homicide arrests is equal to 52

percent for black youth 15-19 years of age, 35 percent if we expand the age group to include

older blacks (15-24), 22 percent among blacks 25-34, and 11 percent among blacks 35-44.

       Table 6 shows there are large declines in offending rates across age groups among blacks

following court desegregation orders, consistent with what we would expect based on the amount

of cross-group offending documented in Table 1. The magnitudes of these estimates should be

interpreted even more cautiously than those in Table 5, since we are now dividing our data up

into even more detailed offender-victim cells. We focus on 10-year age groupings (15-24, 25-34,

35-44) to help address the thinness of the data, and lump together data on white victims of all

ages for the same reason. The results shown in Table 6 suggest that the rate at which black

offenders 15-24 killed older adults as well as other 15-24 year olds declined following court

desegregation orders. The data provide at least suggestive evidence that the rate at which adults

offended against younger people also declined following desegregation orders, with an estimated

effect for the years 1-5 after the court desegregation orders are enacted equal to 43 percent for

black 35-44 year old offenders.



                                               - 22 -
        We cannot reject the null hypothesis that the entire decline in victimizations to (or

offending by) black adults 35-44 comes from fewer homicides that involve blacks 15-24 years

old as offenders (or victims, respectively). For the decline in victimizations to (or offending by)

black adults 25-34, we are able to reject the null hypothesis that all of this change comes from

fewer homicides that also involve blacks 15-24 on the other side of the homicide offending or

victimization boundary. But the results of our statistical tests are consistent with the possibility

that a large share of the homicide reduction among black 25-34 year olds comes from homicides

involving black 15-24 year olds. To reach these conclusions, we use the QML estimates and test

the cross-equation hypothesis that the entire change in the black adult victimization or offending

count is due to changes in homicides that involve blacks 15-24 years old (see Appendix D and

Appendix Tables A2 and A3 for details). While the statistical power of our tests is somewhat

limited, the findings are at least consistent with the idea that desegregation orders reduced

victimization and offending among older blacks in large part by making younger blacks less

criminogenic and victimogenic.

        We also look at the degree to which desegregation orders may have changed offending

rates across race groups in the short term (column (4)). While none of these point estimates are

statistically significant, the standard errors are so large we cannot rule out either a zero effect or a

very large effect.

        Table 7 provides evidence that the behavioral impact of court school-desegregation

orders on homicide offending may persist into adulthood for both blacks and whites. We focus

on results from the QML count model; OLS results are uniformly imprecise. Homicide arrest

rates for black 35-44 year olds whose counties desegregated 25 or more years ago (and so would

                                                 - 23 -
have been of school age when their county’s court desegregation orders were enacted) are

substantially lower than those for black 35-44 year olds whose county-year observations fall

within 20 years or less of enactment of a court order (the reference group of adults who were

already out of school when the court orders are enacted). The effect appears to be particularly

strong for homicides with black offenders and white victims.

         These results also seem to support a causal interpretation by showing that there is a fairly

sharp difference in the effect on cohorts that were born close together in time but differ in

whether they actually attended desegregated schools. Assuming that individuals finish high

school when they are 17 years of age, the 35-44 year old age cohort in our sample would have

been exposed to an average of only 1 year of school desegregation 20 to 24 years after the start

of desegregation. In contrast, the 35-44 year old age cohort would have been exposed to an

average of 4 ½ years of school desegregation 25 to 29 years after the start of desegregation. 17

Yet the coefficient for desegregation 25-29 years ago is more than twice as large as the

coefficient on desegregation 20-24 years ago and these coefficients can be statistically

distinguished from each other in all three cases (columns (2), (4) and (6)).

         It is not clear whether the short-term impacts of court desegregation orders on blacks who

were already adults at the time the orders are enacted (Tables 5 and 6) fade out over time because

any spillover effects are differenced away in this analysis (since outcomes for all birth cohorts

are measured at some point after the desegregation orders are enacted). At the very least, we can

say the only life-course-persistent changes in criminal behavior detectable by our data are for

those birth cohorts of school age when the court school desegregation orders are enacted.

17
  The 35-44 year old age cohort in the omitted category, less than 20 years after the start of desegregation, would
have been exposed to an average of 0.005 years of school desegregation.
                                                       - 24 -
Moreover the sharp difference in estimated long-run effects across cohorts helps rule out

confounding influences from changing county demographics or social policies, which we would

not expect to have such different influences on cohorts born just a few years apart.

D. Robustness and Falsification Tests

       Are the results that we estimate really due to school desegregation orders, or to some

other factors that might happen to be changing around the same time these court orders go into

effect? The fact that we do not see systematic differences in homicide between desegregating

counties and other counties in the immediate years before these court orders go into effect

provides some partial reassurance against a story focused on omitted variables bias. We have

also shown that our results are not sensitive to conditioning on interactions of year effects with

base-year demographic characteristics, or county-specific linear trends.

       We also obtain similar results when we weight by the relevant age-race population count

in each county, rather than calculate un-weighted estimates (Appendix Table A4). The pre/post

vector approach (Figures 4 and 5) produces similar results when the full sample of county-year

observations is used – that is, when we include the 8% of districts that do not meet the main

sample requirement of contributing a sufficient number of points pre- and post-desegregation.

(The results from the truncated model with points for 1-5 and 6+ years after the court orders,

displayed in all the tables, always use the full sample.) Our SHR offending results are similar

when we construct our rates using county-level counts of people living in jurisdictions that report

crime data to the FBI’s UCR system, rather than the Census-based county population estimates.

       As another check on omitted variables concerns, we find that there is no systematic

relationship between the politics of the local federal judges in each district and the timing of

                                               - 25 -
when court school-desegregation orders are enacted. We first estimate a cross-section regression

and find that the baseline political composition of each federal judicial district is unrelated to the

average year when court school-desegregation orders go into effect for the school districts in our

sample located within each judicial district. We also find that changes in the political

composition of these judicial districts over time are unrelated to the likelihood that a school

district is subject to a desegregation order (results available on request). 18

         Perhaps the main threat to inference with our study, aside from omitted variables, is the

possibility of cross-county population migration in response to school desegregation orders. One

way this could affect our results is through measurement error in our county population

variable. 19 Yet in Appendix Table A5 we show that our homicide victimization results are

qualitatively similar (though less precisely estimated) when we restrict ourselves to the year

before, year of, and year after each of the decennial censuses from 1960 through 1990, years in

which we expect measurement error in county population characteristics to be less pronounced

compared to years that fall further away from the decennial census. (Estimates that use just the

individual decennial census years are qualitatively similar, but much less precisely estimated).

         A different concern is that population migration could lead us to confound behavioral

responses by county residents with compositional changes in the county population over time.


18
   One measure of the politics of the local federal judges in each district is the party of the president who appointed
the judge. A different measure is the “common space scores” for judicial ideology from Poole and Rosenthal
(1997), which range from -1 for the most liberal judges to +1 for the most conservative. We constructed these
measures for each federal judge who was seated during the period from 1968 to 1982. Data from:
http://voteview.ucsd.edu/dwnomin_joint_house_and_senate.htm
19
   As noted previously, if the imputed Census population figures for inter-censal years fail to capture some
population loss in our counties, our estimates would overstate (in absolute value) any reductions in homicide. This is
mostly a concern for the white estimates, as desegregation would not be expected to produce black population loss.
Indeed, school desegregation might lead to black population gains, which would lead us to understate black
homicide reductions.
                                                        - 26 -
Yet Appendix E presents a detailed set of results showing there is no evidence of any effect of

these court desegregation orders on the log of the county population of 15 to 24 year old whites,

or log population of 15 to 24 year old blacks, or various county socio-demographic

characteristics. We also show in Appendix E that our results are qualitatively similar when we

use either MSAs as the unit of observation, or use data for larger geographic areas still –

bordering county groups. These units of observation are less likely to be influenced by migration

than are the smaller units of observation (usually counties) used elsewhere in the paper.

         A final way to address the possibility of bias from population migration and other forms

of omitted variable bias is to examine whether school desegregation orders have an “effect” on

outcomes that should logically not be affected. Table 8 presents the results from such a

falsification exercise. We estimate the effect of school desegregation orders on mortality rates

from major illnesses, 20 which should not be affected by the school or peer quality or community

attitudinal changes that we hypothesize drive our estimated effect of court school-desegregation

orders on homicide. Whether we use our OLS levels, QML count or log dummy model, the

estimated “effects” of desegregation orders on mortality from illness are much smaller in

magnitude than what we see for homicide victimization rates and are never statistically

significant for blacks or whites in any of our age groups (15-24, 25-34, or 35-44).

         Table 9 shows that the estimated “effects” of court-ordered school desegregation on

different measures of employment for minorities are always small and not close to statistically

significant. Put differently, the only estimated effect of court-ordered school desegregation on

20
  Specifically we look at the effect of desegregation on mortality from the following seven illnesses: septicemia,
neoplasms (cancer), respiratory (bronchitis, pneumonia, influenza, asthma, etc), circulatory (heart disease,
hypertension, etc), anemias, digestive and meningitis. The mortality rate from illness in our sample for those aged
15 to 19 is roughly similar to what we see for homicides (13.0 versus 10.7 per 100,000).
                                                       - 27 -
adults in our data is the one outcome (crime) that we expect to be linked to changes in criminal

behavior by youth.

E. Empirical Evidence on Mechanisms

         It is possible that the estimated changes in violence from school desegregation orders is

simply the mechanical result of incapacitating youth on long bus rides during the high-crime

hours after school, or, relatedly, simply the result of having black youth spend more time in the

communities around their new schools where policing quality may be higher. We test this

hypothesis by using SHR data on month-of-offense to examine effects on homicides over the

summer months versus during the academic year. 21 We find the estimated effects are about as

large for homicides over the summer as during the school year (Table 10).

         Consistent with the predictions of a “market for crime,” we find that the decline in the

supply of offenses by youth leads to a decline in police spending, but with some lag. Table 11

shows that during the first five years after the court orders are enacted there is no detectable

change in police spending, which implies that the decline in offending by black youth that we

document above increases the ratio of police resources to offenses in our counties. By six years

after the court desegregation orders are enacted, police spending declines by around $9 per

capita, equal to around 10 percent of the sample mean. This decline in police spending is not

simply a reflection of some general negative shock to local budgets, since we find that education

spending seems to have if anything increased, by around 6 percent, which in at least some

districts may have been due to the requirements of the federal judges enacting the court orders. 22


21
   The Vital Statistics (VS) data is available only on an annual basis. The VS data therefore cannot be used for this
type of analysis that compares homicides during the academic year versus summer months.
22
   Reber (2010a) also finds that court-ordered desegregation produced an increase in school spending.
                                                        - 28 -
Spending on fire protection services does not seem to change much at all after these court orders.

It is possible that some jurisdictions may have desegregated their police departments at the same

time they desegregated their schools, but is unlikely to explain our findings since McCrary

(2007) finds little impact on crime from changes in the racial composition of the local police.

         We can provide some indirect evidence on what behavioral mechanisms might matter

most by interacting changes in our measures of school segregation and other measures with our

indicators for implementation of court orders (the results are presented in Appendix Tables A10-

A11 and discussed in detail in Appendix F). Homicide victimization rates decline the most for

blacks in districts where exposure of blacks to whites in the public schools increases the most.

The fact that we observe the largest impacts on black homicide in places with the largest

“treatment dose” from court orders provides some additional support for the credibility of our

research design. But we note that these findings are at best suggestive, since those counties that

experience particularly large changes in school segregation may also experience particularly

large changes in other mechanisms that are not captured by our data. 23 Finally, in exploratory

analyses we find some suggestive evidence that the relationship between changes in school

segregation and criminal involvement could be non-linear, but these estimates are imprecise. 24



23
   Of particularly concern, the initial white share of the population and the extent of white flight are important
determinants of the change in black exposure to whites at the time of desegregation. If trends in homicides are
correlated with either the initial white population share or the extent of white flight, the change in exposure results
cannot be interpreted in a causal sense. However, including an interaction of the desegregation treatment variables
with both the initial white population share and the percent change in the white population in the years immediately
following desegregation in the specification displayed in column (1) of Tables A8 and A9 has essentially no effect
on the exposure index interaction terms (unreported).
24
   To generate these estimates we divide the sample into two bins, depending on whether the district's change in the
exposure index is above or below the median for our study sample, and allow the slope of the linear relationship
between changes in the exposure index and changes in homicide to differ for the two groups. The point estimates for
the interactions of these variables with our indicators for years 1-5 and 6+ after the court desegregation orders are
enacted tentatively point in the direction of a larger drop in homicides per unit of increase in the exposure index in
                                                        - 29 -
         Finally, there is another potential mechanism that would be relevant only for whites –

migration out of the desegregated school district. While there is no evidence of “white flight” out

of the counties, there is evidence that whites must be moving from school districts subject to

desegregation orders to other public school districts or private schools within the same county

that are not subject to court-ordered school desegregation. We find the ratio of white enrollment

in districts subject to court orders to the total number of white school-age children in the county

declines by between 4 and 6 percentage points after these court orders go into effect (Appendix

Table A12) – around a 15 percent decrease relative to the sample average of 0.39 (see also Reber

2005; and Baum-Snow and Lutz 2010). 25 If these new districts or private schools are less

criminogenic than the districts subject to desegregation orders, this could provide another

mechanism driving our result. One suggestive data point against this hypothesized mechanism is

that white homicide victimizations do not appear to decline more in desegregating districts with

the largest change (i.e. decline) in the percent of white children in the county enrolled in the

desegregated school district (Appendix F and Appendix Table A11).

                                            VII. CONCLUSIONS

         Our findings suggest the general potential for crime control from social policies that

affect the level of racial and economic segregation in America. Previous research using housing

those counties with the largest declines in the exposure index, although the standard errors are sufficiently large so
that we cannot rule out the null hypothesis that the effects across the two groups of counties are the same.
25
   This approach implicitly assumes that the school districts within the same county, but not in the Welch and Light
(1987) sample, were not under a court-ordered desegregation plan. Outside of the South, the assumption is likely
reasonable. With-in the South, some of these neighboring districts may have been under court-ordered desegregation
plans. However, these neighboring districts were on average much smaller than the large districts which are the
focus of this study and also had a smaller fraction of black students. These characteristics would have made them
substantially less likely to have had a court-ordered desegregation plan (Cascio et. al. 2008; note that virtually all
Southern districts which did not have court-ordered desegregation engaged in some form of voluntary
desegregation). Even if the neighboring districts were under court-ordered plans, the lower fraction of black students
would have made them attractive alternatives for families wishing to reduce the extent of contact with black students
(Baum-Snow and Lutz 2010).
                                                       - 30 -
voucher or public school choice lotteries founds that violent crime rates decline substantially

among minority youth who move into less disadvantaged neighborhood or school environments

(Kling, Ludwig and Katz, 2005; Cullen, Jacob and Levitt, 2006; Deming, 2009). A key concern

with studies of movers is that they cannot tell us whether policies to re-sort people across social

settings leads to less crime overall, or simply redistributes crime. Our results from “system-

level” data suggest that re-sorting policies may lead to overall declines in violent behavior.

       Our estimates suggest that the large-scale policy efforts to desegregate schools beginning

in the 1960s for the largest districts in the U.S. reduced homicide involvement for black youth,

with declines in victimization rates of around 25 percent and offending rates that might be as

large as 30-50 percent. The size of these estimates is fairly similar to the partial equilibrium

effects found in previous housing or school lottery studies (Kling, Ludwig and Katz, 2005;

Cullen, Jacob and Levitt, 2006; Deming, 2009). Because criminal offending is concentrated in

the left tail of the behavioral distribution, desegregation orders would need to change behavior

by just a small share of high-risk youth to generate large proportional changes in crime.

       Unpacking the mechanisms through which court school-desegregation orders affect

criminal behavior among black youth is somewhat challenging with our data, since these

desegregation orders are changing the schools as well as peer environments of youth, and, as the

Kerner Commission hypothesized, perhaps overall attitudes about American society as well.

Moreover the set of candidate mediating measures that can be well measured for our sample of

counties during our study period is somewhat limited. But changes in schooling attainment must

presumably be at least part of the story. The estimated declines in homicide arrests to black

youth are about as large in the summer as during the school year, and persist into middle age.

                                                - 31 -
Combining Guryan’s (2004) estimates of a 25 percent decline in black dropout rates with

Lochner and Moretti’s (2004) estimates for the schooling-crime relationship predicts a decline in

black youth homicide arrests of around 20 percent, a sizable share of our overall effect on arrests.

       We also find evidence of positive spillovers on other groups as well from court school-

desegregation orders. Specifically, we find that court school-desegregation orders generate

declines (at least in the short-term) in homicide victimization and offending rates among blacks

who were already adults at the time the court orders are enacted. That there would be some

decline in victimizations among black adults is not surprising, since Table 1 above shows that

there is a substantial amount of offending by school-age youth against adults. But offending

behavior by black adults could also be affected if desegregation orders make youth less likely to

contribute to the initiation or escalation of violent events. In fact our data do not allow us to rule

out the idea that most of the short-term decline in homicide offending by black adults is due to a

decline in homicides against black youth.

       Another reason offending rates by black adults may decline after court desegregation

orders are enacted is because declines in youth offending free up police resources for addressing

crimes committed by all groups. Table 1 shows that blacks 15-24 account for around one-fifth of

all homicide offenders in our sample. Our estimates suggest offending rates by this group decline

by as much as 30-50 percent. If the allocation of police resources is proportional to homicide

offending behavior, and if the decline in homicide offending by black youth reflects declines in

other criminal behavior by this group that we just cannot detect in the UCR because of data

limitations (see Appendix B), then the decline in homicide offending by black youth induced by

court desegregation orders may free up 6 to 10 percent of total police resources in the short term

                                                - 32 -
in these counties. Previous research in economics suggests that the elasticity of homicide with

respect to police resources may be on the order of about -1.0 (Levitt, 1997, 2002; Evans and

Owens, 2007). Police resources that are freed up by declines in youth offending may thus

account for a 6-10 percent decline in homicide offending by black adults, a sizable share of the

effects for these age groups shown in Table 5 (for example, the estimated 20 percent decline in

homicide arrests to blacks 25-34 or 35-44 in the first five years after a desegregation order).

        The economic model for a “market for offenses” suggests that victims will respond to

beneficial changes in the supply of offenses by reducing their preventive behaviors. Consistent

with this prediction, we find evidence that the public reduces police spending by around 10

percent by 6+ years after court school-desegregation orders are enacted.

        Our results may help explain around one-quarter of the convergence in black-white

homicide rates over the 1970s. Figure 6 shows that for black youth, homicide victimizations

peaked in the late 1960s and then started to decline sharply (see also Cook and Laub, 1998,

2002) – just as the set of large urban districts we study, which account for a large share of all

minority crime in the US, began to implement school desegregation orders. 26

        Since our estimates rely on studying desegregation orders that went into effect through

the early 1980s, there is naturally a question of whether or how our estimates might be relevant

for the effects of current desegregation efforts. One imperfect way to address this question is to

examine whether the estimated effects of desegregation orders vary between those enacted early

versus late during our study period. We find no evidence for this sort of heterogeneity in

26
  The large counties in our sample account for nearly half of black homicides in the US as a whole in 1968 and over
one-third of white homicides. Our estimates imply that over our study period desegregation orders in our counties
lowered the nationwide homicide rate to blacks 15-24 by 13 percent and lowered the rate to whites 15-24 by 7
percent, and might account for around one-quarter of the convergence in black-white homicide rates over the 1970s.
                                                      - 33 -
desegregation treatment effects (unreported). We also find little systematic evidence that the

specific design features of the desegregation plan influence the size of the effects on crime. 27

        Another reason that the effects of school desegregation could change over time is if a key

mechanism underlying our results was the mixing of students from different socio-economic

backgrounds. If that were true, then we might expect the effects of desegregation orders to

decline over time, since the difference in black vs. white poverty rates has declined. 28 Yet we

find no evidence that our estimated impacts vary according to the black-white difference in

median family income in each county during our study period (unreported).

        A complete benefit-cost analysis of policy efforts to de-segregate schools or other social

settings is beyond the scope of this paper, and would need to consider costs that come for

example from residential mobility and changes in urban land use patterns. Nevertheless our

paper suggests that at least the gross benefits from desegregating schools due to reductions in

violent crime may be quite large from a social welfare perspective. For example combining our

estimates for the decline in homicide victimizations among black and white youth with Cohen et

al.’s (2004) estimate of nearly $10 million in social costs per homicide imply benefits of nearly

$1,000 per black student and nearly $200 per white student from reductions in homicide, which


27
   Welch and Light (1987) provide a useful typology of the types of plans that were implemented, which include
several different types of “voluntary” plans such as magnet programs that provide students some choice over where
they attend school and are similar to those plans used most commonly today. “Involuntary” plans include rezoning
of school catchment boundaries and pairing-clustering plans that integrate groups of schools by grade, and are
thought to involve the greatest amount of busing among the different plan types. Welch and Light (1987, p. 27)
explain: “Pairing and clustering involves reassigning students between a pair or group of schools, usually via grade
restructuring, … [that] may have either contiguous or noncontiguous attendance zones. For example, a
(predominantly) white school and a (predominantly) black school, both offering grades K-6, could be paired by
converting one into a lower elementary school (grades 1-3) and the other into an upper elementary school (grades 4-
6).” When we re-estimate our main specifications including interactions between time since desegregation order and
plan type, we do not find any evidence for heterogeneity in treatment effects by plan type.
28
   The poverty rate for blacks and whites was 41.8 vs. 13.3 percent in 1965; 29.3 vs. 11.2 percent in 1995, and 24.9
vs. 10.6 percent in 2005.
                                                       - 34 -
are both large relative to the average per-pupil spending level of schools in our sample of around

$2,750. Our findings that victims compensate for reductions in youth criminality by scaling back

crime-prevention behaviors suggest these figures will understate the gross benefits from court-

ordered school desegregation. It is possible that some of our most cost-effective crime policies

might not have anything at all to do with the criminal justice system.




                                              - 35 -
REFERENCES

Allport, GW (1954) The nature of prejudice. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Anderson, David A. (1999) “The aggregate burden of crime.” Journal of Law and Economics.

  (October): 611-642.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel and Byron Lutz (2010) “School Desegregation, School Choice and Urban

  Population Decentralization,” Working paper, Brown Department of Economics..

Becker, Gary S. (1968) "Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach". The Journal of Political

  Economy. 76.

Becker, Gary S. and Kevin M. Murphy (2000) Social economics: Market behavior in a social

  environment. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004), “How Much Should We Trust

  Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 119: 1.

Blumstein, Alfred (2000) “Disaggregating the violence trends.” In The Crime Drop in America,

  Edited by Alfred Blumstein and Joel Wallman. NY: Cambridge University Press. pp. 13-44.

Boustan, Leah (2009) “Desegregation and Urban Change: Evidence from City Boundaries.”mimeo.

Butler, JS (1974) “Black educators in Louisiana – A question of survival.” Journal of Negro

  Education. 43: 22-24.

Card, David and Abigail Payne (1998) "School Finance Reform, the Distribution of School

  Spending and the Distribution of SAT Scores" Journal of Public Economics, 83(1), 49-82.

Card, David, Alexandre Mas, and Jesse Rothstein (2008) “Tipping and the dynamics of

  segregation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 123(1): 177-218.



                                               - 36 -
Cascio, Elizabeth, Nora Gordon, Ethan Lewis and Sarah Reber (2008) “From Brown to Busing”,

  Journal of Urban Economics, 64(2): 296-325.

Cascio, Elizabeth, Nora Gordon, Ethan Lewis, Sarah Reber (2010) “Paying for Progress:

  Conditional Grants and the Desegregation of Southern Schools”. Quarterly Journal of

  Economics.

Chicago Police Department (2008) 2006-2007 Murder Analysis in Chicago. Chicago, IL: Chicago

  Police Department. https://portal.chicagopolice.org/portal/page/portal/ClearPath

Clark, K. B. (1950). Effect of Prejudice and Discrimination on Personality Development.

  Washington, D.C.: Midcentury White House Conference on Children and Youth.

Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd and Jacob Vigdor (2006). “Federal Oversight, Local Control

  and the Specter of “Resegregation” in Southern Schools.” American Law and Economics

  Review.

Cohen, M.A., Rust, R.T., Steen, S., & Simon, T. T. (2004). Willingness-To-Pay for Crime Control

  Programs. Criminology, 42, 89-108.

Cook, Philip J. (1986) “The Demand and Supply of Criminal Opportunities.” Crime and Justice.

  Michael Tonry, Editor. The University of Chicago. pp. 1-27.

Cook, Philip J. and Kristin A. Goss (1996) “A selective review of the social-contagion literature.”

  Durham, NC: Working Paper, Sanford Institute of Policy Studies, Duke University.

Cook, Philip J. and John H. Laub (1998). The Unprecedented Epidemic in Youth Violence. In M.

  Tonry & M.H. Moore (Eds), Youth, Violence, Crime and Justice, A Review of Research (pp. 27-

  64). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.



                                                 - 37 -
Cook, Philip J. and John H. Laub (2002) After the Epidemic: Recent Trends in Youth Violence in

  the United States. In Michael Tonry, Editor. Crime and Justice, A Review of Research (pp. 1-37).

  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Cullen, Julie, Brian Jacob, and Steven Levitt (2006) "The Effect of School Choice on Participants:

  Evidence from Randomized Lotteries," Econometrica. 74:5.

Cutler, David M. and Edward L. Glaeser (1997) “Are ghettos good or bad?” Quarterly Journal of

  Economics. 112(3): 827-872.

Deming, David (2009) “The Effect of School Quality on Crime.” Working Paper, Harvard

  University.

Ehrlich, Isaac (1981) “On the usefulness of controlling individuals: An economic analysis of

  rehabilitation, incapacitation, and deterrence.” American Economic Review. 71(3): 307-322.

Entorf, Horst and Hannes Spengler (2002) Crime in Europe: Causes and Consequences. Springer.

Evans, William N. and Emily G. Owens (2007) “COPS and crime.” Journal of Public Economics.

  91: 181-201.

Federal Bureau of Investigation (2007) Crime In the United States, 2007. Washington, DC: U.S.

  Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Gaviria, Alejandro and Steven Raphael (2001) “School-based peer effects and juvenile behavior.”

  Review of Economics and Statistics. 83(2): 257-268.

Glaeser, Edward L., Bruce Sacerdote, and Jose A. Scheinkman (1996) “Crime and social

  interactions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. CXI: 507-548.

Greenberg, Jack (2004) Crusaders in the Courts: How a Dedicated Band of Lawyers Fought for

  the Civil Rights Revolution. NY: Basic Books.

                                                - 38 -
Guryan, Jonathan (2004). “Desegregation and Black Dropout Rates.” American Economic Review,

  94(4): 919-943.

Hamilton, CV (1968) “Race and education: A search for legitimacy.” Harvard Educational Review.

  38: 669-684.

Haney, J.E. (1978) “The effects of the Brown decision on black educators.” Journal of Negro

  Education. 47: 88-95.

Jacob, Brian A. and Jens Ludwig (2009) “The Effects of Family Resources on Children’s

  Outcomes.” Working Paper, University of Michigan.

Jaynes, Gerald David and Robin M. Williams (1989) A Common Destiny: Blacks and American

  Society. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

Klarman, Michael J. (2007) From Jim Crow to Civil Rights: The Supreme Court and the Struggle

  for Racial Equality. NY: Oxford University Press.

Kleiman, Mark (1993) “Enforcement swamping: A positive-feedback mechanism in rates of illicit

  activity.” Mathematical and Computer Modeling. 17(2): 65-75.

Kling, Jeffrey R., Jens Ludwig, and Lawrence F. Katz (2005) “Neighborhood Effects on Crime for

  Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment,”

  Quarterly Journal of Economics. 120(1). 87-130.

LaFree, Gary and Richard Arum (2006) “The impact of racially inclusive schooling on adult

  incarceration rates among U.S. cohorts of African Americans and whites since 1930.”

  Criminology. 44(1): 73-104.

Levitt, Steven D. (1997) “Using electoral cycles in police hiring to estimate the effect of police on

  crime.” American Economic Review. 87(3): 270-290.

                                                 - 39 -
Levitt, Steven D. (2002) “Using electoral cycles in police hiring to estimate the effects of police on

  crime: Reply.” American Economic Review. 92(4): 1244-50.

Levitt, Steven D. (2004) “Understanding why crime fell in the 1990s: Four factors that explain the

  decline and six that do not.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 18(1): 163-190.

Lochner, Lance and Enrico Moretti (2004). “The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from

  Prison Inmates, Arrests, and Self-Reports." American Economic Review. 94(1):155-89.

Ludwig, Jens (2006) “The Costs of Crime.” Testimony to the U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee,

  September 19, 2006.

Ludwig, Jens and Jeffrey R. Kling (2007) “Is Crime Contagious?” Journal of Law and Economics.

  50(3): 491-518.

Lutz, Byron F. (2005) “Post Brown vs. the Board of Education: The Effects of the End of Court-

  Ordered Desegregation.” Federal Reserve Board, Finance and Economics Discussion Series

  Working Paper 2005-64.

Maltz, Michael (1999) Bridging Gaps in Police Crime Data. Bureau of Justice Statistics,

  Washington, DC, NCJ1176365.

McCrary, Justin (2007) “The effect of court-ordered hiring quotas on the composition and quality

  of police.” American Economic Review. 97(1).

Murray, Sheila, William Evans and Robert Schwab (1998) "Education-Finance Reform and the

  Distribution of Education Resources" American Economic Review 88(4).

NAACP (2004) Remembering Brown 50 Years Later. Available at:

http://www.naacpldf.org/content/pdf/pubs/Remembering_Brown.pdf



                                                 - 40 -
Orfield, Gary (1975) “How to make desegregation work: The adaptation of schools to their newly

  integrated student bodies.” Law and Contemporary Problems. 39: 314-340.

Orfield, Gary and Susan Eaton (1996) Dismantling Desegregation: the Quiet Reversal of Brown v.

  Board of Education. New York: New Press: Distributed by W.N. Norton & Company.

Oreopoulous, Philip, and Kjell Salvanes (2009), “How Large are the Returns to Schooling? Hint:

  Money isn’t Everything.” Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper 15339.

Pakes, Ariel and Zvi Griliches (1980) “Patents and R&D at the Firm Level: A First Look”

  Economic Letters, Vol. 5.

Pettigrew, Thomas F. (1998) “Intergroup contact theory.” Annual Review of Psychology. 49: 65-85.

Pettigrew, Thomas F. and Linda R. Tropp (2006) “A meta-analytic test of intergroup contact

  theory.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 90(5): 751-783.

Philipson, Tomas J. and Richard A. Posner (1996) “The economic epidemiology of crime.” Journal

  of Law and Economics. 39(2): 405-433.

Public Agenda (1998) Time to Move On. New York, NY.

Quillian, Lincoln (1996) "Group Threat and Regional Change in Attitudes Toward African-

  Americans," American Journal of Sociology 102(3).

Reber, Sarah (2005) “Court-Ordered Desegregation”, Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 40, No.3.

Reber, Sarah (2010a) “From Separate and Unequal to Integrated and Equal? School Desegregation

  and School Finance in Louisiana.” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.

Reber, Sarah (2010b) “School desegregation and educational attainment for blacks.” Journal of

  Human Resources, forthcoming.



                                               - 41 -
Rodgers, Harrell R. and Charles S. Bullock (1972) Law and Social Change: Civil Rights Laws and

  Their Consequences. NY: McGraw-Hill.

Sah, Raaj (2001) “Social osmosis and patterns of crime.” Journal of Political Economy. 99(6):

  1272-1295.

Sampson, Robert J., Jeffrey D. Morenoff, and Thomas Gannon-Rowley (2002) “Assessing

  neighborhood effects: Social processes and new directions in research.” Annual Review of

  Sociology. 28: 443-478.

Schelling, Thomas C. (1969) “Models of segregation.” American Economic Review. 59(2): 488-

  493.

Schreck, Christopher J., Eric A. Stewart, and D. Wayne Osgood (2008) “A reappraisal of the

  overlap of violent offenders and victims.” Criminology. 46(4): 871-906.

Schuman, Howard, Charles Steeh and Lawrence Bobo (1985) Racial Attitudes in America,

  Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.

Sherman, Lawrence W. (2002) “Fair and Effective Policing.” In Crime: Public Policies for Crime

  Control. Edited by James Q. Wilson and Joan Petersilia. Oakland, CA: Institute for

  Contemporary Studies Press. pp. 383-412.

Tracy, Paul E., Marvin E. Wolfgang, and Robert M. Figlio (1990). Delinquency careers in two

  birth cohorts. New York: Plenum Press.

Vigdor, Jacob (2006) “The new promised land: Black-white convergence in the American South,

  1960-2000.” Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper 12143.

Welch, F. and A. Light. (1987). New Evidence on School Desegregation. Washington, D.C.:

  Unicon Research Corporation and United States Commission on Civil Rights.

                                               - 42 -
Weesie, J. (1999) “Seemingly unrelated estimation and the cluster-adjusted sandwich estimator.”

  Stata Technical Bulletin Reprints, vol. 9, pp. 231–248. College Station, TX: StataPress.

Williams, Juan (1998) Thurgood Marshall: American Revolutionary. NY: Three Rivers Press.

Wolfgang, Marvin E. (1958) Patterns in Criminal Homicide. Philadelphia, PA: University of

  Pennsylvania Press.

Wolfgang, Marvin E. (1967) “Victim precipitated criminal homicide.” In M. Wolfgang, Ed. Studies

  in Homicide. New York: Harper and Row.

Wolfgang, Marvin E., Robert M. Figlio, and Thorstin Sellin (1972) Delinquency in a birth cohort.

  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey, “Distribution-Free Estimation of Some Nonlinear Panel Data Models,”

  Journal of Econometrics, Vol. XC, 1999.




                                                - 43 -
                                            Figure 1
                               Desegregation Implementation Dates


                     15

                                                           South    Non-South
Number of Counties




                     10




                     5




                     0
                          60    65        70        75       80       85
                                     Implementation Year




                                               - 44 -
                                   Figure 2
    A. Distribution of 1975 Black Age 15 – 24 Homicide Rates per 100,000

                       .015




                        .01




                       .005




                           0
                               0           50         100           150            200

                                     Histogram         Kernel Estimate

    B. Distribution of 1975 White Age 15 – 24 Homicide Rates per 100,000



                  .1




                .05




                   0
                       0              5          10        15         20           25

                                   Histogram          Kernel Estimate

Note. The figures displays histogram and kernel density estimates of the 1975 age 15 – 24 homicide rate per 100,000.
The kernel density estimate uses a Epanechnikov function and a bandwidth of 1.2. The sample is restricted to the
counties in the Welch and Light (1987) sample with a major desegregation plan.



                                                  - 45 -
Figure 3: Effects of Court-ordered Desegregation on Segregation and Number of Schools
Panel A:
                                Black-White Dissimilarity Index, Region-Year
   0.15

    0.1
   0.05
      0
            -5     -4      -3     -2     -1      0       1      2      3       4      5       6      7
  -0.05
   -0.1
  -0.15
   -0.2
  -0.25

   -0.3


Panel B:
                                Black-White Exposure Index, Region-Year
    0.2

   0.15

    0.1

   0.05

      0
            -5     -4      -3     -2      -1      0      1      2       3      4       5      6       7
  -0.05

   -0.1


Panel C:

                     Log(Number of Schools) Region-year Base Demographic-Year
   0.06
   0.04
   0.02
       0
   -0.02    -5      -4     -3      -2     -1      0      1      2       3      4      5       6      7

   -0.04
   -0.06
   -0.08
    -0.1
   Note. The solid points display coefficient estimates-and
                                                         46 the
                                                             - dashed lines display the 95% confidence intervals
   around these estimates. The vertical axis displays the magnitude of the coefficient estimate. The horizontal
   axis displays years relative to the implementation of desegregation. Year “0” is the year immediately prior to
   the start of desegregation.
Figure 4: School Desegregation & Black Homicide Victimizations
Panel A: Age Cohort 15-24 QML Count
                        0.3
                        0.2
Proportional Change




                        0.1
                          0
                        -0.1      -5       -4      -3       -2      -1       0        1       2        3       4        5        6       7
                        -0.2
                        -0.3
                        -0.4
                        -0.5
                                                                    Years Relative to Start of Desegregation
Panel B: Age Cohort 15-24 OLS Level
                         15
                         10
Homicides per 100,000




                          5
                          0
                         -5       -5       -4      -3       -2      -1       0        1       2        3       4        5        6       7
                        -10
                        -15
                        -20
                        -25
                        -30
                                                                    Years Relative to Start of Desegregation
Panel C: Age Cohort 25-34 OLS Level
                        0.2

                        0.1
Proportional Change




                          0

                        -0.1      -5       -4      -3       -2      -1       0        1       2        3       4        5        6       7

                        -0.2

                        -0.3

                        -0.4

                        -0.5
                                                                    Years Relative to Start of Desegregation
Panel D: Age Cohort 25-34 OLS Level
                         30
                         20
Homicides per 100,000




                         10
                          0
                        -10       -5       -4      -3       -2      -1       0        1       2        3       4        5        6       7
                        -20
                        -30
                        -40
                        -50
                                                                    Years Relative to Start of Desegregation

                               Note. The solid points display coefficient estimates and the dashed lines display the 95% confidence intervals
                               around these estimates. Year “0” is the year immediately prior to the start of desegregation.
Figure 5: School Desegregation & White Homicide Victimizations
Panel A: Age Cohort 15-24 QML Count
                        0.3
                        0.2
Proportional Change




                        0.1
                          0
                        -0.1    -5       -4      -3       -2      -1       0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7
                        -0.2
                        -0.3
                        -0.4
                        -0.5
                                                                  Years Relative to Start of Desegregation
Panel B: Age Cohort 15-24 OLS Level
                          4
                          3
Homicides per 100,000




                          2
                          1
                          0
                         -1     -5       -4      -3       -2      -1       0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7
                         -2
                         -3
                         -4
                         -5
                         -6
                                                                  Years Relative to Start of Desegregation
Panel C: Age Cohort 25-34 QML Count
                        0.2

                        0.1
Proportional Change




                          0

                        -0.1    -5       -4      -3       -2      -1       0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7

                        -0.2

                        -0.3

                        -0.4

                        -0.5
                                                                  Years Relative to Start of Desegregation
Panel D: Age Cohort 25-34 OLS Level
                          3
                          2
Homicides per 100,000




                          1
                          0
                         -1     -5       -4      -3       -2      -1       0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7
                         -2
                         -3
                         -4
                         -5
                         -6
                         -7
                                                                  Years Relative to Start of Desegregation

                           Note. The solid points display coefficient estimates and the dashed lines display the 95% confidence intervals
                           around these estimates. Year “0” is the year immediately prior to the start of desegregation.
                                    Figure 6: Historical Homicide Rates for Individuals Aged 15-24


                        120                                                                                                  120



                        100                                                                                                  100




                                                                                                                                       Cumulative Desegregation Orders
                         80                                                                                                       80
Deaths/100,000 people




                         60                                                                                                       60



                        40                                                                                                    40



                         20                                                                                                       20



                          0                                                                                                        0
                              1950                   1960                     1970                     1980
                                Black Males   Black Females   White Males       White Females   Cumulative Desegregation Orders


                                                 Source: Jaynes and Williams (1989), pp. 458-9




                                                                     - 49 -
                                                               Table 1
                                                          Homicide Offending
                                                                       Victim
  Offender
                   Black 15-24      Black 25-34        Black 35+       White 15-24       White 25-34        White 35+           Total

Black 15-24           8461              5212              4098             1183               986             2207             22147
                      (.38)             (.24)             (.19)            (.05)             (.04)            (.10)            (1.00)
                      {.58}             {.31}             {.23}            {.09}             {.08}            {.12}             {.24}
Black 25-34           3653              7158              4935              488               723             1091             18048
                      (.20)             (.40)             (.27)            (.03)             (.04)            (.06)            (1.00)
                      {.25}             {.42}             {.28}            {.04}             {.06}            {.06}             {.19}
Black 35+             1728              3759              7727              184               297               608            14303
                      (.12)             (.26)             (.54)            (.01)             (.02)             (.04)           (1.00)
                      {.12}             {.22}             {.44}            {.01}             {.02}             {.03}            {.15}
White 15-24             455              326               236             6469              3590             3872             14948
                       (.03)            (.02)             (.02)            (.43)             (.24)            (.26)            (1.00)
                       {.03}            {.02}             {.01}            {.51}             {.28}            {.21}             {.16}
White 25-34             214              333               273             2889              4781             3844             12334
                       (.02)            (.03)             (.02)            (.23)             (.39)            (.31)            (1.00)
                       {.01}            {.02}             {.02}            {.23}             {.37}            {.21}             {.13}
White 35+               161              232               248             1406              2677             6428             11152
                       (.01)            (.02)             (.02)            (.13)             (.24)            (.58)            (1.00)
                       {.01}            {.01}             {.01}            {.11}             {.21}            {.36}             {.12}
Total                 14672            17020             17517             12619            13054             18050            92932
                       (.16)            (.18)             (.19)             (.14)            (.14)             (.19)           (1.00)
                      {1.00}           {1.00}            {1.00}            {1.00}           {1.00}            {1.00}           {1.00}
Note. The cells display the total number of homicides in our sample of counties over the years 1976 to 1988 for offenders of the given age
and race against victims of the given age and race. The data is from the Supplemental Homicides Report (SHR). Row percents are in
parentheses and column percents are in brackets.
                                           Table 2
                                     Descriptive Statistics
                              Full Sample           1960                1970             1980

                                  A. County Population Means

Total                            676517               573534           663642           709841
Total white                      551253               490995           550597           564368
Total black                      111646                82539           104269           125932
White 15-19                      44782                 33536            48789            48808
Black 15-19                      10909                  5648            10629            13706
White 15-24                      92149                 63904            96071           104377
Black 15-24                      20834                 11129            19098            26690
White 25-34                      84733                 64893            70071            96926
Black 25-34                      17114                 11956            13030            20757
White 35-44                      67789                 69536            63387            63523
Black 35-44                      12799                 11038            11589            13183

                                 B. Homicide rates per 100,000

Total                             10.8                   6.6             11.3             14.0
Total white                        5.9                   3.1             5.7              8.6
Total black                       34.4                  27.1             40.1             37.5
White 15-19                        5.7                   2.3             5.0              9.7
Bl k 15
Black 15-19
         19                       29.0
                                  29 0                  20.3
                                                        20 3             37.1
                                                                         37 1             25.8
                                                                                          25 8
White 15-24                        7.6                   3.4             5.8              12.4
Black 15-24                       45.2                  29.2             60.0             47.1
White 25-34                        9.7                   4.8             10.3             13.5
Black 25-34                       75.3                  77.1             86.4             86.3
White 35-44                        8.8                   4.6             8.5              11.6
Black 35-44                       63.1                  50.2             80.2             56.4
Note. The cells display county means. The data is restricted to counties with a school district
identified in the Welch and Light (1987) study as having had a "major" court-ordered desegregation
plan. The "Full Sample" column contains data from 1959 - 1988.
                                                  Table 3
                                        Black Homicide Victimization
                                           Proportional Response                           Levels
                                                             OLS Log
                                          QML Count                                          OLS
                                                              Dummy
                                         (1)        (2)         (3)               (4)        (5)         (6)

                                                                   A. Age 15 - 19

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5          -0.17       -0.16          -0.08         -5.89       -5.05       -5.14
                                        (0.07)      (0.07)        (0.05)        (2.86)      (2.84)      (3.01)

Post Desegregation Years 6+             -0.27       -0.28          -0.15         -6.52       -5.71       -6.26
                                        (0.09)      (0.09)        (0.07)        (3.93)      (3.87)      (4.00)

                                                                   B. Age 15 - 24

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5          -0.14       -0.11          -0.13         -8.91       -7.45       -8.59
                                        (0.04)      (0.04)        (0.05)        (2.76)      (2.58)      (2.85)

Post Desegregation Years 6+             -0.23       -0.21          -0.19        -10.55      -9.32      -11.27
                                        (0.06)      (0.06)        (0.08)        (3.81)      (3.59)     (3.69)

                                                                    C. Age 25-34

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5          -0.15       -0.11          -0.09        -10.90      -9.54       -9.68
                                        (0.04)      (0.03)        (0.05)        (4.90)      (4.88)      (5.21)

Post Desegregation Years 6+              -0.29      -0.21          -0.18        -23.61      -21.68     -21.54
                                        (0.05)      (0.04)        (0.07)        (6.30)      (6.36)     (6.97)

                                                                    D. Age 35-44

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5          -0.12       -0.12          -0.10        -12.28      -12.37     -10.04
                                        (0.05)      (0.05)        (0.05)        (4.82)      (4.86)     (4.86)

Post Desegregation Years 6+             -0.16       -0.15          -0.16        -20.47      -20.52     -15.74
                                        (0.10)      (0.08)        (0.07)        (9.10)      (7.92)     (8.26)

Number of observations                               3039          3039          3039       3039        3039

Region * Year Effects                      X          X             X              X          X           X
1960 County Charact. * Year                           X                                       X
County-Specific Linear Trends                                                                             X
Note. Standard errors clustered by county in parentheses. The unit of observation is county-year. The dependent
variable is the homicide count in columns (1) and (2), the log of the transformed homicide rate per 100,000 in
column (3) and the homicide rate per 100,000 in columns (4) - (6).
                                                    Table 4
                                          White Homicide Victimization
                                             Proportional Response                             Levels
                                                               OLS Log
                                            QML Count                                           OLS
                                                                Dummy
                                           (1)        (2)         (3)                (4)         (5)         (6)

                                                                      A. Age 15 - 19

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5            -0.05       -0.01          -0.07          -0.48       -0.38       -0.49
                                          (0.06)      (0.05)        (0.04)         (0.50)      (0.51)      (0.53)

Post Desegregation Years 6+               -0.23       -0.20          -0.24          -2.22       -2.24       -2.23
                                          (0.09)      (0.08)        (0.07)         (0.82)      (0.80)      (0.87)

                                                                      B. Age 15 - 24

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5            -0.05       -0.02          -0.07          -0.49       -0.52       -0.43
                                          (0.04)      (0.04)        (0.05)         (0.41)      (0.42)      (0.40)

Post Desegregation Years 6+               -0.18       -0.15          -0.24          -2.20       -2.22       -1.97
                                          (0.06)      (0.06)        (0.07)         (0.72)      (0.66)      (0.68)

                                                                      C. Age 25-34

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5            -0.04       -0.01          -0.10          -1.07       -1.04       -1.01
                                          (0.05)      (0.05)        (0.05)         (0.59)      (0.61)      (0.62)

Post Desegregation Years 6+                -0.06      -0.03          -0.14          -1.57       -1.47       -1.33
                                          (0.07)      (0.06)        (0.07)         (0.76)      (0.73)      (0.83)

                                                                      D. Age 35-44

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5            -0.06       -0.05          0.00           -0.29       -0.50       -0.18
                                          (0.05)      (0.05)        (0.05)         (0.68)      (0.60)      (0.73)

Post Desegregation Years 6+               -0.12       -0.11          -0.06          -1.27       -1.59       -0.97
                                          (0.06)      (0.06)        (0.06)         (0.74)      (0.72)      (0.85)

Number of observations                                3040           3040          3040         3040        3040

Region * Year Effects                       X           X              X             X            X           X
1960 County Charact. * Year                             X                                         X
County-Specific Linear Trends                                                                                 X
Note. Standard errors clustered by county in parentheses. The unit of observation is county-year. The dependent
variable is the homicide count in columns (1) and (2), the log of the transformed homicide rate per 100,000 in column
(3) and the homicide rate per 100,000 in columns (4) - (6).
                                                Table 5
                         Supplemental Homicide Report Data: Homicide Offenders
                            Age 15 - 19        Age 15 - 24        Age 25-35                      Age 35 - 44
                           VS:      SHR:     VS:       SHR:     VS:      SHR:                   VS:     SHR:
                          Victim Offender Victim Offender Victim Offender                      Victim Offender
                           (1)       (2)      (3)       (4)     (5)       (6)                   (7)       (8)

                                                          A. Black QML Count

Post Desegregation        -0.27       -0.30      -0.15      -0.23       -0.16      -0.20       -0.10      -0.19
Years 1 - 5               (0.16)      (0.14)     (0.12)     (0.12)      (0.06)     (0.11)      (0.07)     (0.10)

Post Desegregation        -0.43       -0.52      -0.26      -0.35       -0.25      -0.22       -0.09      -0.11
Years 6+                  (0.20)      (0.18)     (0.15)     (0.15)      (0.08)     (0.12)      (0.09)     (0.10)

                                                              B. Black OLS

Post Desegregation        -0.74       -5.53      -7.05      -1.41      -19.09      -4.80       -11.29     -4.37
Years 1 - 5               (4.91)      (6.25)     (3.69)     (5.67)     (11.66)     (6.21)      (6.11)     (5.55)

Post Desegregation        -3.34      -11.39      -9.75      -6.50      -24.55      -4.83       -13.50     -3.19
Years 6+                  (5.62)     (7.90)      (4.64)     (6.28)     (13.66)     (7.97)      (9.67)     (6.17)

                                                          C. White QML Count

Post Desegregation        -0.15       -0.22      -0.12      -0.17       -0.03      -0.11        0.01      -0.06
Years 1 - 5               (0.07)      (0.11)     (0.05)     (0.10)      (0.07)     (0.08)      (0.07)     (0.11)

Post Desegregation        -0.28       -0.12      -0.22      -0.15       -0.02      -0.11       -0.05       0.02
Years 6+                  (0.11)      (0.15)     (0.08)     (0.10)      (0.09)     (0.08)      (0.08)     (0.11)

                                                              D White OLS
                                                              D.

Post Desegregation        -2.98       -0.17      -2.02       0.34       -0.62      -0.04        0.95       0.98
Years 1 - 5               (1.22)      (1.18)     (0.70)     (1.03)      (0.77)     (0.84)      (1.61)     (1.37)

Post Desegregation        -4.80        1.47      -3.82       0.82       -1.04      -0.62        0.28       1.37
Years 6+                  (1.60)      (1.90)     (1.08)     (1.39)      (1.15)     (1.02)      (1.70)     (1.30)

Number of Obs.                        1349        1363       1349       1363        1349       1363        1349
Region * Year                X         X           X          X          X           X          X           X
Note. Standard errors clustered by county in parentheses. The unit of observation is county-year. The sample
runs from 1976 through 1988 and includes the districts listed on Table A1 (the same set of districts in the sample
used on Tables 1-4). The dependent variable is the homicide count in panels A and C and the homicide rate per
100,000 in panels B and D.
                                                          Table 6
                                        Across-Age & Across-Race Homicide Offending
                                                                       QML Count Model
                                                                                    Victim
                                             Offender       Black 15-24   Black 25-34     Black 35-44                     White
                                                                (1)           (2)             (3)                          (4)

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5                                       -0.46             -0.21             -0.23             -0.07
                                             Black 15-24             (.13)             (.21)             (.12)             (.12)
Post Desegregation Years 6+                                          -0.65             -0.18             -0.32             -0.12
                                                                     (.17)             (.25)             (.20)             (.15)

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5                                       -0.20             -0.33             -0.25             0.14
                                             Black 25-34             (.14)             (.11)             (.13)             (.16)
Post Desegregation Years 6+                                          -0.17             -0.33             -0.13             0.09
                                                                     (.17)             (.12)             (.15)             (.19)

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5                                       -0.43             -0.02             -0.27             -0.02
                                                                     (.15)             (.17)             (.14)             (.18)
                                             Black 35-44
Post Desegregation Years 6+                                          -0.28             0.06              -0.22             -0.07
                                                                     (.21)             (.19)             (.15)             (.22)

Number of observations                                               1336              1336              1209              1323
Region * Year Effects                                                 X                 X                 X                 X
Note. Standard errors clustered by county in parentheses. The unit of observation is county-year. The sample runs from 1976
through 1988 and includes the districts listed on Table A1 (the same set of districts in the sample used on Tables 1-4). The
estimates are produced using the QML count model. The dependent variable is the count of homicides by the black age-group
identified in the "Offender" column against the group identified in the "Victim" columns. The exposure variable is set equal to the
population count of the offender group. The number of observations refers to the black 15-24 offender row.
                                                                 Table 7
                                  School Desegregation and Long-Run Black Homicide Offending: Age 35 - 44
                                                                                       Proportional Response
                                                                                             QML Count
                                                                                        B. Black Age 35 - 44
                                                                A. Black Age 35 - 44                                              C. White Age 35 - 44
                                                                                          Offending Against
                                                                      Offending                                                       Offending
                                                                                               Whites
                                                                   (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)                            (5)         (6)

Post Desegregation Years 25+                                              -0.12                        -0.26                         -0.18
                                                                         (0.06)                       (0.12)                        (0.08)

Post Desegregation Years 20 - 24                                                      -0.08                        -0.13                         -0.01
(Average of 1 year of desegregated schooling)                                         (0.05)                       (0.11)                        (0.05)

Post Desegregation Years 25 - 29                                                      -0.19                        -0.40                         -0.21
(Average of 4 1/2 years of desegregated schooling)                                    (0.08)                       (0.16)                        (0.09)

Post Desegregation Years 30+                                                          -0.21                        -0.33                         -0.09
(Average of 9 years of desegregated schooling)                                        (0.12)                       (0.22)                        (0.13)

Number of observations                                                    2760        2760             2669         2669            2760         2760

Region * Year Effects                                                       X           X                X            X               X            X
Note. Standard errors clustered by county in parentheses. The unit of observation is county-year. The sample runs from 1976 through 1988 and
includes the districts listed on Table A1 (the same set of districts in the sample used on Tables 1-4). The dependent variable is the homicide count.
                                                                        Table 8
                                                        Falsification Test, Death From Illness
                                                 Age 15-24                              Age 25-34                                     Age 35-44
                                     Proportional Response      Level       Proportional Response            Level        Proportional Response        Level
                                        QML       OLS Log       OLS            QML       OLS Log             OLS             QML       OLS Log         OLS
                                       Count      Dummy         Level         Count      Dummy               Level          Count      Dummy           Level
                                         (1)        (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)               (6)             (7)        (8)            (9)

                                                                                              A. Black

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5          -0.04        -0.01         -0.32           0.07         0.05         -0.35           0.04         -0.02       -10.85
                                        (0.04)       (0.03)       (1.74)          (0.04)       (0.04)        (6.25)         (0.03)        (0.04)      (15.05)

Post Desegregation Years 6+              0.04         0.04         2.49            0.15         0.04          -0.48          0.08          -0.07       -21.60
                                        (0.05)       (0.05)       (2.92)          (0.09)       (0.06)        (9.84)         (0.06)        (0.06)      (24.88)

Number of observations                  3039          3039         3039            3040         3040         3040            3040         3040         3040

                                                                                              B. White

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5          -0.06        -0.03         -0.67          -0.03         -0.01         0.02           0.00         -0.02         0.22
                                        (0.03)       (0.04)       (0.48)          (0.03)       (0.04)        (1.01)         (0.03)        (0.03)       (3.33)

Post Desegregation Years 6+             -0.04         0.00        -0.23           -0.01         0.02          0.68           0.01          -0.07        -0.96
                                        (0.04)       (0.07)       (0.72)          (0.04)       (0.05)        (1.32)         (0.04)        (0.05)       (5.12)

Number of observations                  3040          3040         3040            3040         3040         3040            3040         3040         3040

Region * Year Effects                     X             X            X               X            X            X               X            X            X
Note. Standard errors clustered by county in parentheses. The unit of observation is county-year. The dependent variable is the count of deaths from illness in
columns (1), (4) and (7), the log of the transformed rate of death from illness per 100,000 in columns (2), (5) and (8), and the rate of death from illness per
100,000 in columns (3), (6) and (9).
                                                                      Table 9
                                         Effect of Desegregation Plan on Nonwhite and Black Employment
                                                                   1960 - 1990                                         1970 - 1990
                                                               Nonwhite Unemployment             Black Unemployment               Black Labor Force
                                                                      Rate * 100                       Rate * 100               Participation Rate * 100
                                                                  (1)           (2)                (3)           (4)               (5)           (6)
Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5                                     0.07           0.15             0.51           0.75              0.17          0.30
                                                                  (0.46)         (0.40)           (0.48)         (0.43)            (1.01)        (0.97)

Post Desegregation Years 6+                                       -0.06          -0.15             0.52           0.65              -0.37         -0.14
                                                                  (0.87)         (0.77)           (1.02)         (0.89)            (1.37)        (1.27)

Number of Observations                                              418           418               315           315               315            315
Region *Year Effect                                                  X             X                 X             X                 X              X
1960 County characteristics *Year Effect                                           X                               X                                X
Note. Standard errors clustered by county in parentheses. The dependent variable is given in the column headings. The unit of observation is the county-
year. The sample contains 1960, 1970, 1980 and 1990 in columns (1)-(2) and 1970, 1980 and 1990 in columns (3)-(6). The results for the 1960-1990 period
focus on "non-white" because that is the only minority classification available for the 1960 data point. The 1960-1990 data is bade on those aged 14 or more
and the 1970-1990 data is based on those aged 16 or more.
                                 Table 10
           Supplemental Homicide Report Data: Homicide Offenders
                                    Proportional Response: QML Count
                                    School Year             Summer
                                        (1)                    (2)

                                                      Black 15 - 19

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5               -0.35                     -0.22
                                             (0.16)                    (0.12)

Post Desegregation Years 6+                  -0.54                     -0.54
                                             (0.20)                    (0.18)

Number of observations                       1347                       1347
Region * Year Effects                         X                          X
Note. Standard errors clustered by county in parentheses. The unit of observation is
county-year. The sample runs from 1976 through 1988 and includes the districts listed
on Table A1 (the same set of districts in the sample used on Tables 1-4). The
dependent variable is the count of homicides.
                                                    Table 11
                          Effect of Desegregation Plan on Local Public Good Provision
                                                       (1)                  (2)                           (3)
                                                            A. Ratio of Police Expenditures to Population
                                                                         (sample mean: $92)
Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5                            -1.5                    -0.9                  -1.5
                                                         (2.1)                   (2.1)                 (2.2)
Post Desegregation Years +6                               -8.7                    -8.6                    -8.8
                                                         (4.0)                   (4.0)                   (4.2)
                                                B. Ratio of Education Expenditures to Population Age 5 - 19
                                                                     (sample mean: $2733)
Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5                         161.7                 162.2                 186.6
                                                       (83.9)                (78.9)                (79.7)
Post Desegregation Years +6                             141.5                   147.6                   197.8
                                                        (87.1)                  (86.0)                  (85.8)
                                                C. Ratio of Fire Department Expenditures to Population
                                                                       (sample mean: $41)
Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5                           -0.8                 -0.6                  -1.3
                                                        (1.5)                 (1.6)                 (1.5)
Post Desegregation Years +6                              -2.3                    -2.4                    -2.8
                                                         (2.2)
                                                         (2 2)                   (2.4)
                                                                                 (2 4)                   (2.5)
                                                                                                         (2 5)
Number of Observations                                   734                     734                     734
Region * Year Effect                                       X                      X                       X
1960 County characteristics * Year Effect                                         X                       X
County-Specific Linear Trends                                                                             X
Note. Standard errors clustered by county in parentheses. The unit of observation is county-year. The dependent
variables given in the panel titles are County Area tabulations from the Census Bureau's Census of Governments and are
measured in 1990 dollars. The sample includes the following years: 1962, 1967, 1972, 1977, 1982,1987 and 1992.
                             Appendix Table A1
      Counties and School Districts in Sample and Year of Desegregation
                                                              Desegregation
County         Desegregated School District Name     State
                                                                  Date
Jefferson        Birmingham                            AL        1970
Jefferson        Jefferson County                      AL        1971
Mobile           Mobile                                AL        1971
Pulaski          Little Rock                           AR        1971
Pima             Tucson                                AZ        1978
Alameda          Oakland                               CA        1966
Contra Costa     Richmond                              CA        1969
Fresno           Fresno                                CA        1978
Los Angeles      Long Beach                            CA        1980
Los Angeles      Los Angeles                           CA        1978
Los Angeles      Pasadena                              CA        1970
Sacramento       Sacramento                            CA        1976
San Bernardino   San Bernardino                        CA        1978
San Diego        San Diego                             CA        1977
San Francisco    San Francisco                         CA        1971
Santa Clara      San Jose                              CA        1986
Solano           Vallejo                               CA        1975
Denver           Denver                                CO        1974
Fairfield        Stamford                              CT        1970
Hartford         Hartford                              CT        1966
New Castle       Wilmington County (Wilmington)        DE        1978
Brevard          Brevard County (Melbourne)            FL        1969
Broward          Broward County (Fort Lauderdale)      FL        1970
Duval            Duval County (Jacksonville)           FL        1971
Hillsborough     Hillsborough County (Tampa)           FL        1971
Lee              Lee County (Fort Meyers)              FL        1969
Miami-Dade       Dade County (Miami)                   FL        1970
Orange           Orange County (Orlando)               FL        1972
Palm Beach       Palm Beach County (West Palm Beach)   FL        1970
Pinellas         Pinellas County (St Petersburg)       FL        1970
Polk             Polk County (Lakeland)                FL        1969
Volusia          Volusia (Daytona)                     FL        1969
Dougherty        Dougherty County (Albany)             GA        1980
Fulton           Atlanta                               GA        1973
                 Muscogee County (Columbus)            GA        1971
Cook             Chicago                               IL        1982
Winnebago                                              IL        1973
Allen            Fort Wayne                            IN        1971
Marion           Indianapolis                          IN        1973
St. Joseph       South Bend                            IN        1981
Sedgwick         Wichita                               KS        1971
Wyandotte        Kansas City                           KS        1977
Fayette          Fayette County (Lexington)            KY        1972
Jefferson        Jefferson County (Louisville)         KY        1975
Caddo            Caddo Parish (Shreveport)             LA        1969
Calcasieu        Calcasieu Parish (Lake Charles)       LA        1969
E. Baton Rouge   East Baton Rouge Parish               LA        1970
Jefferson         Jefferson Parish                  LA   1971
Orleans           New Orleans Parish                LA   1961
Rapides           Rapides Parish (Alexandria)       LA   1969
Terrebonne        Terrebonne Parish                 LA   1969
Bristol           New Bedford                       MA   1976
Hampden           Springfield                       MA   1974
Suffolk           Boston                            MA   1974
Baltimore City    Baltimore                         MD   1974
Harford           Harford County                    MD   1965
Prince George's   Prince Georges County             MD   1973
Ingham            Lansing                           MI   1972
Kent              Grand Rapids                      MI   1968
Wayne             Detroit                           MI   1975
Hennepin          Minneapolis                       MN   1974
Jackson           Kansas City                       MO   1977
St. Louis City    St. Louis                         MO   1980
Cumberland        Fayetteville/Cumberland County    NC   1969
Gaston            Gaston County (Gastonia)          NC   1970
Mecklenburg       Mecklenburg County (Charlotte)    NC   1970
New Hanover       New Hanover County (Wilmington)   NC   1969
Douglas           Omaha                             NE   1976
Essex             Newark                            NJ   1961
Hudson            Jersey City                       NJ   1976
Clark             Clark County (Las Vegas)          NV   1972
Erie              Buffalo                           NY   1976
Monroe            Rochester                         NY   1970
Cuyahoga          Cleveland                         OH   1979
Franklin          Columbus                          OH   1979
Hamilton          Cincinnati                        OH   1973
Lucas             Toledo                            OH   1980
Montgomery        Dayton                            OH   1976
Summit            Akron                             OH   1977
Comanche          Lawton                            OK   1973
Oklahoma          Oklahoma City                     OK   1972
Tulsa             Tulsa                             OK   1971
Multnomah         Portland                          OR   1974
Allegheny         Pittsburgh                        PA   1980
Philadelphia      Philadelphia                      PA   1978
Charleston        Charleston                        SC   1970
Greenville        Greenville County                 SC   1970
Richland          Richland County                   SC   1970
Davidson          Nashville                         TN   1971
Shelby            Memphis                           TN   1973
Bexar             San Antonio                       TX   1969
Dallas            Dallas                            TX   1971
Ector             Odessa                            TX   1982
El Paso           El Paso                           TX   1978
Harris            Houston                           TX   1971
Lubbock           Lubbock                           TX   1978
McLennan          Waco                              TX   1973
Potter            Amarillo                          TX   1972
Tarrant           Fort Worth                        TX   1973
Travis              Austin                                              TX              1980
Arlington           Arlington County                                    VA              1971
Norfolk City        Norfolk                                             VA              1970
Pittsylvania        Pittsylvania County                                 VA              1969
Roanoke City        Roanoke                                             VA              1970
King                Seattle                                             WA              1978
Pierce              Tacoma                                              WA              1968
Milwaukee           Milwaukee                                           WI              1976
Raleigh             Raleigh County (Beckley)                            WV              1973
Note. The sample is restricted to counties with a school district identified in the Welch and Light
(1987) study as having had a "major" court-ordered desegregation plan.
  Appendix Table A2: Offending Reduction for Different Age Groups Explained by Reduction in Offending Against Black 15-24 year-olds
                                                                     Number of Black Offenders
                                              15-24                             25-34                             35-44
                                                    Total 15-24                       Total 25-34                       Total 35-44
                                  Total 15-24       Offending        Total 25-34      Offending        Total 35-44      Offending
                                   Offending      Against Black       Offending     Against Black       Offending     Against Black
                                                      15-24                             15-24                             15-24
years 1 - 5   upper 95%                0.1             -0.9              0.2              0.2              0.0             -0.1
              point estimate          -3.2             -2.1              -2.6            -0.5              -1.2            -0.3
              lower 95%               -6.5             -3.3              -5.4            -1.1              -2.3            -0.5
              p-value                          0.34                              0.06                              0.10

years 6+          upper 95%                    -0.8               -1.4                  0.2                0.4                   0.5                0.1
                  point estimate               -4.9               -3.0                  -2.9               -0.4                  -0.7               -0.2
                  lower 95%                    -9.0               -4.6                  -5.9               -1.2                  -1.9               -0.5
                  p-value                               0.22                                     0.03                                     0.37
The "Total Offending" columns display the point estimate and confidence interval for the total decline in homicide offending for the group given in the column
header (number of homicides; estimates calculated from SHR columns of Table 5 and relevant sample means). The "Total Offending Against Black 15-24"
columns display the point estimate and confidence interval for the decline in homicide offending for the group given in the column header against black 15-
24 year-olds (number of homicides; estimates calculated from the Black 15-24 column of Table 6 and the relevant sample means). The "p-value" row gives
the p-value for the test that the "Total Offending" estimate and the "Total Offending Against Black 15-24" estimate are equal.
  Appendix Table A3: Victimization Reductions for Different Age Groups Explained by Reduction in Offending by Black 15-24 year-olds
                                                                       Number of Black Victims
                                              15-24                             25-34                              35-44
                                                  Total Victims                     Total Victims                      Total Victims
                                 Total Victims 15-24 with a         Total Victims 25-34 with a        Total Victims 35-44 with a
                                      15-24        Black 15-24           25-34       Black 15-24           35-44        Black 15-24
                                                    Offender                          Offender                           Offender
years 1 - 5   upper 95%                0.9             -0.9               -0.7           0.6                0.3             0.0
              point estimate           -1.8            -2.1               -2.5           -0.6               -0.8            -0.2
              lower 95%                -4.5            -3.3               -4.3           -1.9               -1.9            -0.5
              p-value                          0.73                              0.01                               0.28

years 6+          upper 95%                     0.5               -1.4                   -1.4               1.0                    0.6                0.1
                  point estimate                -3.0              -3.0                   -3.9               -0.6                   -0.7               -0.3
                  lower 95%                     -6.6              -4.6                   -6.3               -2.1                   -2.0               -0.7
                  p-value                                1.00                                     0.00                                      0.52
The "Total Victims" columns display the point estimate and confidence interval for the total decline in homicide victimization for the victim group given in the
column header (number of homicides; estimates calculated from the VS columns of Table 5, which limit the sample to 1976-1988, and the relevant sample
means). The "Total Victims with a Black 15-24 Offender" columns display the point estimate and confidence interval for the decline in victimization for the
victim group given in the column header where the offender was a black 15-24 year-old (number of homicides; estimates calculated from the Black 15- 24
row of Table 6 and the relevant sample means). The "p-value" row gives the p-value for the test that the "Total Victims" estimate and the "Total Victims with
a Black 15-24 Offender" estimate are equal.
                                          Appendix Table A4
                    Black and White Homicide Victimization, Weighted by Population
                                                 Black                            White
                                        Proportional        Levels       Proportional                  Levels
                                      QML        OLS                   QML         OLS
                                                             OLS                                         OLS
                                     Count        Log                 Count        Log
                                       (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)                    (6)

                                                                    A. Age 15-19

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5           -0.21        -0.18       -7.82        -0.03       -0.11        -0.40
                                         (0.05)       (0.06)      (2.81)       (0.04)      (0.06)       (0.65)

Post Desegregation Years 6+              -0.16        -0.34       -11.79       -0.16       -0.35        -2.51
                                         (0.11)       (0.10)      (4.02)       (0.10)      (0.15)       (1.14)

                                                                    B. Age 15-24

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5           -0.18        -0.13       -9.61        -0.06       -0.09        -0.64
                                         (0.03)       (0.04)      (3.05)       (0.04)      (0.05)       (0.71)

Post Desegregation Years 6+              -0.21        -0.22       -14.93       -0.17       -0.27        -2.54
                                         (0.05)       (0.07)      (4.13)       (0.07)      (0.08)       (1.13)

                                                                    B. Age 25-34

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5           -0.18        -0.14       -12.92       -0.05       -0.09        -0.54
                                         (0.03)       (0.04)      (3.77)       (0.05)      (0.05)       (0.67)

Post Desegregation Years 6
                         6+                0.28
                                          -0.28        0.28
                                                      -0.28        25.02
                                                                  -25.02        0.09
                                                                               -0.09        0.15
                                                                                           -0.15         1.04
                                                                                                        -1.04
                                         (0.04)       (0.07)      (4.65)       (0.07)      (0.07)       (0.89)

                                                                    B. Age 35-44

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5           -0.06        -0.10       -7.78        -0.08       -0.04        -0.48
                                         (0.05)       (0.06)      (3.63)       (0.05)      (0.04)

                                          0.06        -0.16       -11.28       -0.19       -0.12        -1.14
                                         (0.14)       (0.10)      (6.43)       (0.06)      (0.07)       (0.71)

Number of observations                    3039        3039         3039        3039         3039        3039

Region * Year Effects                       X           X            X           X            X           X
Note. Standard errors clustered by county in parentheses. The unit of observation is county-year. The
dependent variable is the homicide count in columns (1) and (4), the log of the transformed homicide rate per
100,000 in columns (2) and (5), and the homicide rate per 100,000 in columns (3) and (6). All specifications are
weighted by the relevant total age-race population count for the panel.
                                                                  Appendix Table A5
                                            Homicide Victimization, Sample Restricted to Decennial Census
                                                              Proportional Response                                                    Levels
                                                 QML Count                          OLS Log Dummy                                       OLS
                                                       3-Years Around                        3-Years Around                               3-Years Around
                                        Census Years                        Census Years                                    Census Years
                                                           Census                               Census                                        Census
                                             (1)              (2)                 (3)              (4)                          (5)             (6)
                                                                                           A. Black 15 - 19
Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5               0.03                -0.13                -0.18               -0.18                 -17.57              -11.83
                                            (0.15)              (0.09)                (0.11)              (0.07)                (8.63)              (4.96)
Post Desegregation Years 6+                 -0.38               -0.41                 -0.30               -0.32                -25.11               -18.16
                                            (0.20)              (0.13)                (0.16)              (0.11)               (11.57)              (7.22)
                                                                                           B. Black 15 - 24
Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5               0.10                -0.11                -0.25               -0.25                 -15.93              -15.58
                                            (0.10)              (0.07)                (0.13)              (0.08)                (9.48)              (5.14)
Post Desegregation Years 6+                 -0.13               -0.33                 -0.17               -0.30                -20.23               -20.85
                                            (0.14)              (0.12)                (0.16)              (0.11)               (12.53)              (7.33)
                                                                                          C. White 15 - 19
Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5                0.12               -0.10                 -0.03              -0.10                   0.63              -0.88
                                            ((0.16))            (0.10)
                                                                (     )               (0.10)
                                                                                      (     )             (0.07)
                                                                                                          (    )                (1.17)
                                                                                                                                (      )            (0.91)
                                                                                                                                                    (    )
Post Desegregation Years 6+                 -0.01               -0.08                 -0.28               -0.24                  -3.36               -3.16
                                            (0.14)              (0.11)                (0.14)              (0.09)                (1.67)              (1.52)
                                                                                          D. White 15 - 24
Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5               0.02               -0.13                 -0.06                -0.07                 0.73                -0.99
                                            (0.12)              (0.07)                (0.13)              (0.08)                (1.22)              (0.82)
Post Desegregation Years 6+                 -0.12               -0.15                 -0.35               -0.27                  -2.49               -3.17
                                            (0.11)              (0.08)                (0.15)              (0.10)                (1.75)              (1.41)
Number of observations                                          1258                   420                1258                   420                1258
Region * Year Effects                          X                 X                      X                  X                      X                  X
Note. Standard errors clustered by county in parentheses. The unit of observation is county-year. The dependent variable is the homicide count in columns (1)-
(2), the log of the transformed homicide rate in columns (3)-(4), and the homicide rate in columns (5)-(6). The sample is restricted to 1960, 1970, 1980 and 1990
in columns (1), (3) and (5). The sample is restricted to 1959, 1960, 1961, 1969, 1970, 1971, 1979, 1980, 1981, 1989, 1990, and 1991 in columns (2), (4) and (6).
                                                            Appendix Table A6
                                            Effect of Desegregation Plan on County Population
                                                   (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)                  (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)
                                                           Log(White Age 15 - 24)                             Log(Black Age 15 - 24)
                                                                                    A. Base Specifications

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5                    -0.035      -0.044                                 0.053       0.035
                                                 (0.034)     (0.030)                                (0.033)     (0.031)

Post Desegregation Years +6                       -0.011      -0.022                                 0.074       0.051
                                                 (0.045)     (0.040)                                (0.050)     (0.046)

Post Desegregation                                                        -0.033      -0.043                                 0.054       0.036
                                                                         (0.034)     (0.030)                                (0.033)     (0.031)

                                                                              B. South Interaction Specifications

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5                    0.021       -0.007                                 0.016       0.017
                                                 (0.039)     (0.040)                                (0.053)     (0.043)

Post Desegregation Years +6                       0.041       -0.006                                 0.068       0.051
                                                 (0.055)     (0.056)                                (0.083)     (0.067)

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5 * South            -0.088      -0.063                                 0.061       0.032
                                                 (0.062)
                                                 (0 062)     (0.062)
                                                             (0 062)                                (0.068)
                                                                                                    (0 068)     (0.062)
                                                                                                                (0 062)

Post Desegregation Years +6 * South               -0.077      -0.004                                 -0.029      -0.019
                                                 (0.088)     (0.085)                                (0.102)     (0.089)

Post Desegregation                                                        0.022       -0.008                                 0.018       0.018
                                                                         (0.039)     (0.040)                                (0.053)     (0.043)

Post Desegregation * South                                                -0.087      -0.057                                 0.056       0.029
                                                                         (0.062)     (0.062)                                (0.067)     (0.061)

                                                   420         420         420         420            420         420         420         420
Region *Year Effect                                 X           X           X           X              X           X           X           X
1960 County characteristics *Year Effect                        X                       X                          X                       X
Note. Standard errors clustered by county in parentheses. The dependent variable is given in the column heading. The unit of observation is
county-year. The estimation sample includes the years 1960, 1970, 1980, and 1990.
                                                               Appendix Table A7
                                     Effect of Desegregation Plan on Demographic Characteristics of County
                                                                  Log(Median Family           Percent Age 25+ w/ High           Percent Age 25+ w/
                                                                       Income)                    School Degree*                 College Degree
                                                                   (1)         (2)                (3)         (4)                (5)          (6)
                                                                                                   A. Non-Whites
Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5                                   -0.011         -0.012          -0.016      -0.007              -0.005        -0.003
                                                                 (0.017)        (0.018)         (0.009)    (0.009)              (0.005)       (0.004)

Post Desegregation Years 6+                                      -0.015         -0.011           0.010          0.017            -0.007       -0.006
                                                                 (0.028)        (0.029)         (0.012)        (0.014)          (0.007)       (0.007)

                                                                                                     B. Whites
Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5                                    0.001          0.001           0.006        0.006              0.005         0.005
                                                                 (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.004)      (0.005)            (0.005)       (0.004)

Post Desegregation Years 6+                                      -0.017         -0.011           0.009          0.009            0.004          0.004
                                                                 (0.016)        (0.017)         (0.006)        (0.006)          (0.007)        (0.006)

Number of Observations                                             420           420              419            419              420           420
Region *Year Effect                                                 X             X                X              X                X             X
1960 County characteristics *Year Effect                                          X                               X                              X
Note. Standard errors clustered by county in parentheses. The dependent variable is given in the column headings. The unit of observation is the county-
year. * "Percent age 25+ w/ high school degree" refers to the percent with a high school degree, but without a college degree. The estimation sample
includes the years 1960, 1970, 1980 and 1990.
                     Appendix Table A8
             Homicide Victimization: MSA Sample
                                    Proportional
                                                       Levels:
                                    Response:
                                                        OLS
                                    QML Count
                                         (1)              (2)

                                        A. Black Age 15 - 24

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5         -0.11            -6.30
                                       (0.05)           (2.75)

Post Desegregation Years 6+            -0.20            -8.08
                                       (0.07)           (3.67)

                                       B. White Age 15 - 24

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5         -0.05            -0.47
                                       (0.05)           (0.36)

Post Desegregation Years 6+            -0.14            -1.45
                                       (0.08)           (0.58)

Number of observations                  2779            2779
Region * Year Effects                    X               X
Note. The unit of observation is MSA-year. Standard errors
clustered by MSA in parentheses. The dependent variable is the
homicide count in column (1) and the homicide rate per 100,000 in
column (2).
                                                          Appendix Table A9
                                           Homicide Victimization: Bordering County Sample
                                          Proportional Response: QML Count                                    Levels: OLS

                                       Bordering        Adjusted       Actual County          Bordering        Adjusted       Actual County
                                        County          Bordering         Sample               County          Bordering         Sample
                                        Sample           County          Estimate              Sample           County          Estimate
                                       Estimate         Estimate       (Tables 3 & 4)         Estimate         Estimate       (Tables 3 & 4)


                                           BCG             BCG                                BCG              BCG            
                                                                                                                   
                                           (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)              (6)

                                                                              A. Black Age 15 - 24

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5           -0.05             -0.09            -0.14               -4.53             -8.19            -8.91
                                         (0.04)                                                 (2.27)

Post Desegregation Years 6+              -0.11             -0.21            -0.23               -5.64            -10.21           -10.55
                                         (0.05)                                                 (3.30)

                                                                                        g 15 - 24
                                                                              B. White Age

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5            0.01             0.01             -0.05               -0.02             -0.04            -0.49
                                         (0.04)                                                 (0.31)

Post Desegregation Years 6+              -0.07             -0.12            -0.18               -0.69             -1.25             -2.2
                                         (0.06)                                                 (0.56)

Number of observations                   3040              3040             3040                3040              3040             3040
Region * Year Effects                     X                 X                X                   X                 X                X
Note. Standard errors clustered by county in parentheses. The unit of observation is county group-year, where a county group is a county
listed on Appendix Table A1 plus all counties which border it. The dependent variable is the homicide count in column (1) and the homicide
rate per 100,000 in column (4). δ equals the percent of the bordering county group population which resides in the treated (i.e.
desegregated) counties - see Appendix E for details.
                                  Appendix Table A10
                   Black Homicide Age 15 - 24 Victimization Interactions
                                  QML Count                            OLS Level
                             (1)       (2)       (3)            (4)        (5)                   (6)
Post Deseg. Years 1 - 5    -0.07     -0.04      -0.07         -3.42       -2.28                -3.01
                           (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.06)         (3.13)     (3.61)                (3.54)

Post Deseg. Years 6+             -0.13      -0.08       -0.11         -4.07        -3.54       -3.76
                                 (0.08)     (0.10)     (0.12)         (4.18)      (4.43)       (4.39)

Post Deseg. Years 1 - 5 *        -0.54                 -0.53         -28.02                   -24.01
Δ Exposure Index                 (0.20)                (0.35)        (15.52)                  (19.47)

Post Deseg. Years 6+ *           -0.88                 -0.71         -27.29                   -23.65
Δ Exposure Index                 (0.29)                (0.50)        (14.61)                  (19.31)

Post Deseg. Years 1 - 5 *                    0.29       0.00                       19.54        3.82
Δ Dissimilarity Index                       (0.11)     (0.22)                     (11.47)     (13.14)

Post Deseg. Years 6+      *                  0.56       0.14                       18.95        3.50
Δ Dissimilarity Index                       (0.22)     (0.43)                     (10.54)     (12.37)

Region * Year Effects             X           X          X             X            X           X
Number of observations           2693        2693       2693          2693         2693        2693
Note. Standard errors clustered by county in parentheses. The unit of observation is county-year. The
dependent variable is the count of homicides in columns (1) - (3) and the homicide rate per 100,000 in
columns (4)-(6). Δ refers to the change in the variable from one year prior to the implementation of
desegregation to the fourth year after desegregation implementation.
                                  Appendix Table A11
                   White Homicide Age 15 - 24 Victimization Interactions
                                  QML Count                            OLS Level
                             (1)      (2)        (3)           (4)         (5)                   (6)
Post Deseg. Years 1 - 5     -0.05    -0.05      -0.01         -0.63       -0.51                 -0.39
                           (0.06)   (0.06)     (0.07)        (0.54)      (0.62)                (0.54)

Post Deseg. Years 6+              -0.09      -0.05      -0.12          -1.76       -1.30        -2.17
                                 (0.08)     (0.09)     (0.08)         (0.96)      (1.07)       (0.79)

Post Deseg. Years 1 - 5 *         0.20                                 1.57
Δ Exposure Index                 (0.31)                               (2.45)

Post Deseg. Years 6+ *            -0.26                                -2.24
Δ Exposure Index                 (0.36)                               (3.28)

Post Deseg. Years 1 - 5 *                    -0.09                                -0.52
Δ Dissimilarity Index                       (0.18)                                (1.85)

Post Deseg. Years 6+      *                  0.31                                  2.89
Δ Dissimilarity Index                       (0.25)                                (2.45)

Post Deseg. Years 1 - 5 *                               0.16                                   -0.75
Δ % white in deseg school                              (0.73)                                  (3.85)

Post Deseg. Years 6+ *                                 -0.24                                   -2.73
Δ % white in deseg school                              (0.77)                                  (4.30)

Region * Year Effects             X           X          X             X            X           X
Number of observations           2694        2694       2694          2694         2694        2694
Note. Standard errors clustered by county in parentheses. The unit of observation is county-year. The
dependent variable is the count of homicides in columns (1) - (3) and the homicide rate per 100,000 in
columns (4)-(6). Δ refers to the change in the variable from one year prior to the implementation of
desegregation to the fourth year after desegregation implementation.
                                     Appendix Table A12
 Effect of Desegregation Plan on Percent of Children Attending the Desegregated School District
                                                     White                      Black
                                                (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)

                                                            Ratio of Enrollment in Desegregated
                                                           School District to Children in the Country

Post Desegregation Years 1 - 5                      -0.054          -0.032           -0.005         -0.000
                                                    (0.012)         (0.012)          (0.015)        (0.013)

Post Desegregation Years 6+                         -0.064          -0.039            0.011          0.014
                                                    (0.015)         (0.016)          (0.019)        (0.019)

Number of Observations                                306             306              306            306

Region * Year Effect                                   X               X                X               X
1970 School characteristics * Year Effect                              X                                X
1960 County characteristics * Year Effect                              X                                X
Note. Standard errors clustered by county in parentheses. The unit of observation is county-year. The
dependent variable is the ratio of enrollment in the desegregated school district(s) identified in Welch and
Light (1987) to the population of children age 5 to 19 in the county. The sample includes 1970, 1980 and
1990.
        APPENDIX A: A BRIEF HISTORY OF SCHOOL DESEGREGATION DECISIONS

         The NAACP’s initial legal strategy was to attack the principle of “separate but equal” established

by Plessy v. Ferguson (1896) by challenging discrimination in graduate and professional schools (see

NAACP, 2004). The primary motivation for focusing first on post-graduate education, rather than K-12

schooling, was the perceived increased probability of winning – even if the number of students affected

by desegregating post-graduate schools would be orders of magnitude smaller. 1 This strategy led to

several key victories, which laid the groundwork for the Brown challenge.

         The NAACP’s focus on litigating with an eye towards strategic legal considerations, rather than

maximizing short-term social welfare gains, is evident in the Brown case itself. The NAACP focused on

Kansas in part because race differences in school quality there were not as pronounced as in other states,

which meant that the gains in school quality for blacks from desegregation in Kansas would be smaller

than in other states. But focusing on Kansas had the strategic advantage of focusing the court on the issue

of segregation itself, rather than on whether facilities in segregated schools were equal (NAACP, 2004).

         This section provides a brief overview of some of the key subsequent Supreme Court decisions

relevant to school desegregation. A very large share of these key decisions resulted from litigation filed

by the NAACP, given the limited involvement of the U.S. Department of Justice in litigating in this area.

Following Brown, President Eisenhower refused to authorize his Attorney General to file lawsuits on

behalf of black parents to require districts to desegregate (Klarman, 2007, p. 112-3). This changed in

1964, but federal enthusiasm for litigation in this area waned again with the election of President Nixon in

1968 (Greenberg, 2004, p. 413-4).

         One of the first relevant Supreme Court decisions was McLaurin v. Oklahoma (1950), in which

the court ruled that the University of Oklahoma’s decision to force a 68 year old African-American law

student to sit apart from other students, separated by a rope, and eat lunch at a different time from whites,

1
  Many states that refused to admit blacks to post-graduate programs in public universities did not have separate segregated
options. The NAACP sought to force states to either develop separate and equal options, which they doubted states could
afford, or else to integrate graduate programs [Williams, 1998, p. 76, 94, 174]. Another benefit of focusing on graduate
schools was to “bypass the inflammatory issue of ‘race-mixing’ among young children” [NAACP, 2004, p. 9].
did not constitute an equal educational experience to that of white students. In Sweatt v. Painter (1950)

the Supreme Court decided that the three-room law school for blacks that Texas developed in the

basement of a petroleum company building was not equal to the University of Texas Law School. After

the Sweatt decision was announced, Thurgood Marshall declared that he had plans to “wipe out … all

phases of segregation in education from professional school to kindergarten.” But as Marshall’s

biographer notes: “The militant attitude in public statements from Marshall and the lawyers, however, was

quite different from their private discussions. Marshall was still deeply concerned that a direct attack on

all school segregation could be time-consuming and, even worse, ultimately lead to defeat. Integrating

law schools, professional schools, and even colleges with adult students might not have been hard. But

racial integration of boys and girls in grade schools, Marshall suspected, was going to provoke the

strongest possible backlash” (Williams, 1998, p. 195).

        Following Brown II in 1955, pupil placement laws were adopted by all of the Southern states and

allowed schools to place students on the basis of a wide range of ostensibly racially neutral factors, which

as Klarman (2004, p. 119) notes “helped insulate the system from legal challenge because of the difficulty

of proving that a multifactor decision was racially motivated.” The fact that these plans claimed to treat

students as individuals helped rule out class action litigation, since plaintiffs would then have difficulty

showing “sufficient commonality of circumstance” (Klarman, 2004). These placement plans were

prohibited by the Supreme Court in 1968 in Green vs. New Kent County, Virginia (391 U.S. 430), which

in turn led to a surge of litigation activity in the Federal courts.

        Prior to 1973, court-ordered desegregation could only occur in school districts proved to have

engaged in de jure segregation. The 1973 Keyes v. Denver School District decision (413 U.S. 189) ruled

that court-ordered desegregation could proceed in areas that had not practiced du jure segregation, but in

which segregation existed by virtue of past state action. As a result, desegregation became more viable in

school districts outside of the south in which de facto segregation was present.
           Some other important desegregation cases include Milliken v. Bradley in 1974 (418 US 717),

which struck down an inter-district desegregation plan in Detroit but specified the conditions under which

this approach would be allowed. Newburg Area Council, Inc. v. Board of Education of Jefferson County

in 1975 (521 F.2d 578, 6th Circuit) ordered the first inter-district remedy that met the Milliken

requirements. The “Milliken II” case, Milliken v. Bradley 1977 (433 US 267) approved remedies that

involved increased educational resources in predominantly black schools. Swann v. Charlotte-

Mecklenburg Board of Education in 1972 (402 US 1) allowed for busing to be used to remedy racial

imbalance in the schools, even if this imbalance was due only to the geographic distribution of students of

different races across areas.

           Over time, the process generating local Federal lawsuits to desegregate schools seems to have

become increasingly decentralized and idiosyncratic. As described by Jack Greenberg, director of the

NAACP’s Legal Defense and Educational Fund from 1961 to 1984: “Ours was not a regimented or even

somewhat controlled operation as to sequence and, indeed, other matters. Local groups, usually although

not always NAACP, and local lawyers just filed cases … To the extent to which we had influence it was

because during early days the number of civil rights lawyers in the south was limited (black lawyers only

took such cases and there weren’t many black lawyers during early days) and there were more or less

close personal relationships. … Also cases needed funding and we exercised some control when groups

came to us for money, if not expertise, but cases cropped up on their own, particularly in the North where

civil rights lawyers were more abundant during early years.” 2 See also Greenberg (1994) and Klarman

(2004).

           Most recently in June 2007, the U.S. Supreme Court issued two 5-4 decisions striking down

school desegregation plans in Seattle and Louisville. Justice Kennedy’s controlling opinion leaves open

the possibility for more narrowly-targeted desegregation policies such as strategic site selection for new

schools or re-drawing school attendance zones. Race-conscious policies are subject to “strict scrutiny” by


2
    Personal communication, Jens Ludwig with Jack Greenberg, July 5, 2007.
the courts, which requires that they be “narrowly tailored” but also that there be a “strong basis in

evidence” that the relevant policy serves a “compelling government interest.”

           The Civil Rights Project has a useful summary of how the courts have interpreted these terms of

art in previous cases. The courts generally find that policies to remedy the effects of past discrimination,

or “remedial interests,” meet the test for a compelling government interest, but have been more divided

over “non-remedial” interests such as promotion of educational diversity (the focus by Justice Powell in

Regents of the University of California v. Bakke) or reducing racial isolation, and have rejected the use of

race-conscious policies to remedy general societal discrimination or to provide role models for racial

minorities. The “narrow tailoring” test examines the “fit” between the policy and the objective, where

courts often strike race-conscious policies that achieve ends where race-neutral policies would also be an

option. 3 As the Civil Rights Project notes, “[school] choice plans that consider multiple factors could be

upheld with appropriate educational justification. … Permissible options may [also] include race-

conscious efforts that do not single out any one student on the basis of his or her race such as siting

schools in areas that would naturally draw students from a mixture of racial / ethnic backgrounds or

magnet schools that have special programs that draw students from different backgrounds.” It is also

important to note that the Louisville and Seattle decisions do not affect districts that are under court order

to desegregate, only those that initiated desegregation efforts on their own. 4




3
    www.civilrightsproject.ucla.edu/policy/legal_docs/cover.pdf.
4
    www.civilrightsproject.ucla.edu/policy/court/voltint_joint_full_statement.php
                                          APPENDIX B: DATA

       Our study focuses on the set of large school districts subject to court orders that were included in a

dataset compiled by Welch and Light (1987) for the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. These data cover

all districts that in 1968 were 20 to 90 percent minority with enrollments of 50,000+, and a random

sample of districts that were 10-90 percent minority with enrollments of between 15,000- 50,000.

       Our main data sources are the Vital Statistics (VS) system of the United States, which enables us

to measure homicide victimization rates by county and year to separate age-race groups, and the FBI’s

Supplemental Homicide Reports (SHR), which we use to construct homicide offending rates to age-race

groups by county and year.

       The VS is administered by the CDC and provides a census of all death certificates in the U.S.

These death certificates are completed by physicians, medical examiners and coroners across the country

and include information about the decedent’s year and cause of death (coded using a standardized system,

either the International Classification of Diseases version 8 or 9 system depending on the year), as well as

their state and county of residence, age, race / ethnicity, gender, and in some cases educational attainment

and marital status as well. We have assembled an annual Vital Statistics dataset that captures death rates

from homicide and other causes by different age groups for the period 1959 through 1988.

       Data for 1968 through 1988 come from the Compressed Mortality Files (CMF), which provide VS

death counts by cells defined at the county level for different combinations of cause-of-death and

decedent characteristics. While the data for most years comes from a census of death certificates, for

1972 the data are a 50 percent sample and so are weighted up by a factor of 2. For years before 1968, we

use micro-mortality records and aggregate up to the level of the county, cause-of-death and decedent

category ourselves. The sample ends in 1988 for most of our analyses because at least 3 districts were

dismissed from their orders in 1989-1990 and then in 1991 the legal environment for court-ordered

desegregation changed radically with the first of three Supreme Court decisions (see Clotfelter, Ladd, and
Vigdor (2006), Lutz (2005), Orfield and Eaton (1996) and references therein). However, for the runs in

which we only have decennial census data, we include 1990 in order to increase sample sizes.

       The SHR is compiled by the FBI from homicide data that is voluntarily provided by local and state

police agencies. Because the VS provides a more reliable measure of homicide victimization rates than

does the SHR, we use the SHR primarily to learn something about homicide offenders, about whom the

VS is entirely silent. Of course the SHR will only provide information on offender characteristics in cases

where there is an arrest. We use the SHR data to construct annual homicide offending rates for age-race

groups at the county level for the period 1976 to 2003.

       One potential complicating factor in the SHR analysis is how to code homicide counts that link

together offender and victim age-race characteristics. Take the hypothetical example of a robbery attempt

resulting in homicide, with two black victims age 15 and 17 murdered by three white offenders age 18,

19, and 30. Separately coding the offender and victim age-race counts in the SHR is relatively

straightforward: since there are two white offenders age 15-24 in this homicide event, the white offender

age 15-24 count is coded as two. All separate SHR offender and victim age-race group counts in this

paper are constructed using this methodology (e.g. as used on Table 5). Less obvious is the best approach

to code for counts that link together offender and victim age-race characteristics (e.g. as used on Table 6).

For these variables we have identified two possible coding methods. First, we can code these groups at

the individual level. This method treats each homicide victim uniquely, meaning in the example above

this method would identify two white offenders age 15-24 for the first victim and two white offenders age

15-24 for the second victim, added together for a total of four assigned to the white offender 15-24/black

victim 15-24 group count. Second, we can code these groups at the homicide event level. Under this

variation, if there are one or more offenders or victims from a particular age-race group in a given

homicide event, that group count would be coded as one. In the above example, the white offender 15-

24/black victim 15-24 group count would be assigned as one because at least one offender and one victim

in the homicide event fit these criteria. One concern with this methodology is in the instance of a
homicide event with either multiple offenders or multiple victims of the same age-race group, these

homicide counts would be undercounted. In this paper we use the “individual” level coding methodology

for the estimation of offender/victim linked-group results. Given the importance of offender

characteristics to our study we are inclined to error on the side of inclusion. These estimates were re-

calculated using the “homicide event” level methodology and results remained largely unchanged.

       The key explanatory variable for our analysis is the date that school districts were subject to local

court orders to desegregate, which we take from Welch and Light (1987). One complication for our study

is that the Welch and Light dataset has the school district as the unit of analysis, while the VS and SHR

data are available only at the level of the county. Some of the school districts in the Welch and Light

sample include the entire county, while others are in counties with multiple school districts. There are

four counties in our sample that contain more than one desegregated school district. We handle this issue

by estimating our results classifying these counties initially as “desegregators” when the first district

within the county is subject to a desegregation order and then re-calculating our estimates defining the

county’s desegregation date as the last date that any district in the county is subject to a desegregation

order. The results are not substantially different in either case. For instance, Jefferson County in

Alabama contains two school districts: Birmingham district, with a desegregation year of 1970, and

Jefferson County district with a desegregation year of 1971. We first estimate our results counting

Jefferson County as if it desegregates in 1970, and then redo our analysis Jefferson County as a 1971

desegregator. This approach gets complicated for Los Angeles County, which contains five school

districts, although a single district – Los Angeles School District – enrolls around 611,228 of the total

760,690 students in the county as a whole (figures are as of 1973, the mean year a district in LA County

was subject to a desegregation order). In this case we always assign LA County to have the LA School

District’s year of desegregation orders.

       To construct homicide victimization and offending rates we also require some data on annual

county population counts by age and race. For our VS analysis, population data for 1960, 1970, 1980 and
1990 come from the decennial census. For the inter-censal years for the 1968-88 period the CMF provides

population figures that are calculated by the Census Bureau that begin by linearly interpolating population

from the decennial censuses, and adjusting for data on births and deaths in each county. The CMF reports

data for the 1968-88 period that was released before the 1990 Census data were available. The Census

Bureau in this case estimated across-county population migration and growth using data on changes and

trends in changes for the 1970s. For the period 1961-7 we conduct our own linear interpolation between

the 1960 census data and the 1968 county population figures reported by the CMF, and for 1959 we

estimate values using the linear trends in population changes observed for each county from 1960-68. For

the period before 1968 we are forced to use the 1960 census information on “non-whites” as our measure

of the black population within our counties.

       The primary source of information about other types of crime besides homicide is the FBI’s

Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) system, through which local and state police departments voluntarily

report to the FBI citizen complaints of crime. These UCR data will miss crimes that are not reported to the

police, which is of some concern in part because some of the major policy “treatments” of interest in

crime research may affect the propensity of victims to report crimes as well as the volume of actual

criminal activity. Of particular concern for this study, desegregation may have altered the reporting

behavior of both victims and authorities, potentially making any resulting measurement error non-

classical in nature. Homicide is less subject to this problem because of the common view within

criminology that most homicides eventually become known to the authorities.

       The propensity of police agencies to report, or report accurately, also varies across areas and over

time; see for instance Maltz (1999) for a detailed discussion, with a focus on how measurement error with

the UCR is particularly severe at the unit of observation for our study – the county. UCR data are noisy

particularly at the county level because of inconsistent reporting practices by local police agencies that are

not well documented in the UCR (Maltz, 1999). Police may also classify events into different crime

categories differently over time. For example police practices for determining what counts as an
aggravated versus simple assault seem to have changed sharply over time, as evidenced in part by the fact

that UCR data show a substantial increase over our study period in aggravated assault rates, while victim

reports to the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) show flat trends (Blumstein, 2000). The

other limitation of the UCR is that to identify offenses committed by population sub-groups we must rely

on arrest data, and the fraction of offenses (aside from homicide) that result in arrest is quite low. Even

the “clearance rate” for homicide itself is surprisingly low. Given these UCR data problems, it is not

surprising that most of our results from analyzing the UCR are very imprecisely estimated. 5

         The NCVS is unfortunately not a useful data source for our study because the sampling frame is

intended to yield nationally but not locally representative samples, and because in any case geographic

identifiers are not made available for NCVS data.

         The data on government spending are obtained from the Census of Government (COG) for the

years 1962, 1967, 1972, 1977, 1982, 1987, and 1992. We use the version of the COG contained in the

County Area Finances Since 1957 Historical Database – a longitudinally consistent version of the COG

produced by the Census Bureau. The COG data capture all direct expenditures of sub-state level

governments, such as municipality and county governments, within the county. We examine school,

police and fire spending.We do not examine other types of social program spending because so much of

that is accounted for by higher levels of government not captured by our COG data.

         The demographic data on counties are obtained from the 1960, 1970, 1980 and 1990 decennial

censuses. We use versions of the census data summarized at the geographic level of the county. The 1960

data were obtained from hardcopy versions of Census of Population: 1960, Vol. 1, Characteristics of the

Population. The 1970, 1980 and 1990 data were obtained in electronic format from the National Historic



5
 Among the numerous UCR outcomes we examined the only statistically significant pattern we see (other than for a drop in
UCR murder rates, consistent with our Vital Statistics and SHR results) is an increase in aggravated assault, which we find
difficult to interpret given the classification concern mentioned above. Our view is that this is likely to be an artifact of law
enforcement practices rather than a real behavioral response by potential offenders, given the fact that aggravated assault and
murder rates usually move together, since the latter is often a byproduct of the former, and yet we do not see an increase in
murder rates following desegregation orders using the Vital Statistics victimization data, which are widely regarded as quite
accurate.
Geographic Information System (NHGIS) maintained by the Minnesota Population Center, University of

Minnesota.
                                APPENDIX C: ADDITIONAL ESTIMATION DETAILS

I. QML Count Model

        In order to estimate a proportional response model that does not suffer from the bias inherent to

the log linear dummy model, we also estimate a fixed-effect Poisson Count model as in equation (A1):

(A1)                E ( yit | Dit , γ i , δ t , r , pop it ) = exp(α + ∑ β p D p ,it + γ i + δ t , r + ψ popit )
                                                                          p∈Ψ



where yit is the count of homicides for a given age/race cohort in county i at time t, Dit = ∑ Dp ,it and popit is
                                                                                                                                 p∈Ψ



the size of the age/race cohort. Equation (A1) is transformed to remove the county fixed-effect terms, γi ,

because the nonlinearity of the equation precludes their consistent estimation (Hausman, Hall and

Griliches, 1984).

                                                             exp(α + ∑ β p D p ,it + δ t , r + ψ popit )
(A2)    E ( yit | Dit , γ i , δ t , r , pop it , yit ) =   T
                                                                       p∈Ψ
                                                                                                                    yit
                                                           ∑ exp(α + ∑ β
                                                           t =1          p∈Ψ
                                                                                p   D p ,it + δ t , r + ψ popit )


                                                                                                                          T
where yit is the count of homicides in county i over the entire sample period ( y i = ∑ y it ). Equation (A2) is
                                                                                                                          t =1



estimated by quasi-maximum likelihood (QML). We refer to this as the QML count model, which has

good consistency properties relative to other count models; the conditional mean assumption, equation

(A1), is sufficient to ensure consistency. The parameter estimates remain consistent even in the case of

distributional misspecification (i.e. the assumption that the distribution of y given x is Poisson fails to

hold) and there is no need to make assumptions about over or under-dispersion or, more generally, to

specify the conditional variance, as must be done for many count models (Wooldridge 1999).

        By imposing the constraint that ψ=1, the popit variable controls for “exposure”. The parameters of

interest, βp , can therefore be interpreted as semi-elasticities of the homicide rate with respect to the year of

school desegregation — i.e. they estimate the percent change in homicides rates associated with a county
being in its pth year of school desegregation. 6 We calculate standard errors using the robust variance

estimator proposed by Wooldridge (1999). These standard errors account for arbitrary forms of serial

correlation in the model’s error term. The computer code for generating these estimates is available from

the authors upon request.




6
    The βp coefficients can also be interpreted as semi-elasticities in the linear log dummy variable model.
             APPENDIX D: DISCUSSION OF CROSS-AGE OFFENDING RESULTS

       Our main results suggest that court-ordered school desegregation reduces homicide victimizations

and offending among blacks who are already adults at the time the court orders are enacted, at least in the

short term. As discussed in the text, we hypothesize that one mechanism for these changes among black

adults comes from changes in the rate at which young blacks (15-19 or 15-24) commit homicides against

black adults, and in the rate at which adults commit homicides against younger people. Appendix Tables

A2 and A3 present the results of cross-equation hypothesis testing which determines how much of the

change in the homicide victimization and offending of black adults can be explained by changes in

homicide events that involve youth and adults on different sides of the offender / victim divide.

       To illustrate our approach consider the middle panel of Appendix Table A2. The first column

labeled “Total 25-34 Offending” presents the mean change in the annual homicide offender count for

blacks age 25-34 implied by the QML estimates in Panel A, column (6) of Table 5 and the relevant

population and homicide rate means. We use homicide counts, as opposed to the homicide rates used

elsewhere in the paper, for these comparisons to avoid complications that arise from using county

populations for different age groups as the denominators in the homicide rates. The estimates show that

after a desegregation order is enacted, homicides by 25-34 year old blacks decline by -2.6 per county

(with a 95 percent confidence interval from 0.2 to -5.4 deaths per county), while 6+ years after such a

court order homicides to blacks 25-34 years old decline by -2.9 per county (with a confidence interval that

ranges from 0.2 to -5.9). The estimates in the next column show that after 1-5 years of desegregation,

homicides by 25-34 year old blacks against black age 15-24 victims decline by -0.5 (confidence interval

0.2 to -1.1) and for 6+ years equal to -0.4 (confidence interval 0.4 to -1.2). We use the seemingly

unrelated estimation methodology discussed in Weesie (1999) to test the cross-equation null hypothesis

that the decline in the total number of black 25-34 year old homicide offenders (first column) is the same

as the decline in the number of black 25-34 year old homicide offenders with black age 15-24 victims

(second column).
       For the middle panel of Table A2, we can reject the null hypothesis for 1-5 years of desegregation,

but only at the 10% significance level (p=0.06). We can just barely reject the hypothesis for 6+ years

after desegregation at the 5% significance level (p=0.03). The fact that our test statistics hover right at the

threshold for rejecting the null hypothesis is at least compatible with the idea that a large fraction, but not

all, of the decline in offending by blacks age 25-34 was driven by declines in offending against blacks age

15-24. Turing to the right panel, we are unable to reject the null hypothesis for black age 35-44 offenders:

Our data are consistent with the possibility that the entire decline in black age 35-44 offending was driven

by a reduction in offending against black youth.

       Table A3 considers victimization. In the right panel, we are unable to reject the hypothesis that

the decline in homicide victimization to blacks age 35-44 was equal to the decline in homicide offending

by blacks age 15-24 against black 35-44 age victims. We are able, though, in the middle panel to reject

the hypothesis for black 25-34 age victims. Overall, we view these results as failing to rule out the

possibility that a sizeable share of the change in black adult homicide offending and victimization was

driven by a reduction in homicide events involving black youth.
             APPENDIX E: RESULTS OF TESTS FOR ENDOGENOUS MIGRATION

       One potential concern with our results is that population migration could lead us to confound

behavioral responses by county residents with compositional changes in the county population over time.

To explore this issue, in Panel A of Appendix Table A6 we estimate the parsimonious version of equation

(3) using as the dependent variables the log of the county population of 15 to 24 year old whites or 15 to

24 year old blacks. The sample is restricted to the decennial Census years of 1960, 1970, 1980 and 1990

to avoid issues with measurement error. There is no evidence that desegregation induced migration across

county boundaries for either whites or blacks. At first brush these results might seem inconsistent with

those in Baum-Snow and Lutz (2010), henceforth BSL, who find evidence of black migration into

desegregated central city schools, but only outside of the south. Panel B therefore allows the

desegregation effect to vary by region, and shows that there is no evidence of cross county migration in or

outside of the South. Our results are easily reconciled with those of BSL by noting that BSL find in-

migration into desegregated school districts – as opposed to the counties used in this paper. This

migration was likely intra-county because non-southern school districts tend to be smaller than the

counties in which they are located. This hypothesis is supported by the results in Panel B. County-wide

school districts would perhaps have been more likely to have experienced cross county migration as the

result of desegregation. However, estimates which allow the desegregation effect to vary by the presence

of a county-wide school district provide no evidence of migration (unreported). The same thought process

applies for whites as well: Although there is strong evidence that whites exited desegregated school

districts (e.g. Reber 2005), our evidence suggests that they did not leave the county, but instead moved to

nearby alternative public districts or went to private schools. Presumably much of the in-migration by

blacks into urban school districts in BSL must be coming from inner suburbs within the same counties.

(Boustan (2009) finds that in areas close to school district boundaries, desegregation caused both whites

and blacks to migrate). These results also provide further assurance against the possible concern that

measurement error in the denominator of the homicide rate is responsible for our results.
         We can also check whether our findings are driven by compositional changes in county population

by using decennial Census data from 1960, 1970, 1980 and 1990 to estimate the impact of desegregation

on county demographic characteristics (Appendix Table A7). For blacks, the point estimates for median

family income and the probability that an adult had finished high school or college are small, statistically

insignificant, and generally negative, suggesting that if anything the county black population is becoming

more, not less, crime prone (see Jacob and Ludwig, 2009). 7 While there is some evidence that the percent

of whites finishing high school increased, the estimate is only marginally significant and is small in

magnitude, suggesting around a 1 percentage point increase.

         As another check on the possibility that our findings are driven by cross county migration, we re-

calculate our estimates using MSA-year as the unit of observation (Appendix Table A8). 8 If our results

were simply due to population migration across nearby county lines in response to desegregation orders,

we would not expect any impact on homicide when the analysis is conducted at the level of the MSA. But

the MSA-level estimates are quite similar to our main findings, suggesting endogenous migration does not

explain our results.

         In principle people could be migrating out of the MSA entirely, but when we replicate our results

using larger geographic areas still (bordering county groups), our results, shown in Appendix Table A9,

again do not seem to support an endogenous migration story. Unlike the MSAs, where a substantial

majority of the population lives within a desegregated county, within the “bordering county groups,” a

substantial fraction of the population resides in non-desegregated counties. Specifically, 55 percent of

blacks age 15 to 24 reside in desegregated counties and the remainder reside in counties which border a

desegregated county. For whites age 15 to 19, the comparable figure is 44 percent. If our main findings

represent a true causal relationship, then the bordering county group treatment effect, βˆBCG , divided by the

7
  Our choice of demographic variables and use of the non-white category (vs. black) are dictated by data availability for 1960.
8
  We use 1990 MSA definitions. Raleigh County, WV is omitted from the MSA sample because it is not located within an
MSA. There are 96 MSAs in the sample, as compared to 105 counties in the county sample. Eight of the MSAs contain two
desegregated counties. In these cases, the year of desegregation is defined as the earlier of the two desegregation dates. Within
the MSA sample, an average of approximately 85 percent of blacks age 15 to 24 reside in a desegregated county and the
remainder reside in other counties within the MSA. For whites age 15 to 19, the comparable figure is 75 percent.
average percent of the population residing in desegregated counties (as opposed to bordering counties), δ ,

should equal the standard, county-based treatment effect, β̂ : βˆ BCG                        = βˆ   (this equality is derived below).
                                                                                        δ

We therefore expect the adjusted bordering county group estimate,                             βˆ B C G   , to range between β̂ and 0, with
                                                                                                 δ

β̂ in the case of no endogenous migration and 0 in the case where our results solely reflect endogenous

migration. The bordering county group estimates, βˆBCG , are presented in columns (1) and (4) of Table

A9, the adjusted estimates,           βˆ B C G   , in columns (2) and (5) and, for comparison, the standard county-based
                                         δ

estimates, β̂ , in columns (3) and (6). The adjusted bordering county group estimates are similar to the

standard estimates, particularly for the black results, suggesting endogenous migration does not explain

our results.

II. Simple Derivation of the Relationship between the Bordering County Group DD Estimator and the

County DD Estimator under Assumption of No Migration

County DD estimator

i = 0 : never desegregated

i = 1 : county desegregated at time t = 1, segregated at time t = 0

βˆ = E [ y | i = 1, t = 1] − E [ y | i = 1, t = 0] − [ E [ y | i = 0, t = 1] − E [ y | i = 0, t = 0]]

Bordering County Group DD Estimator assuming no migration

The treatment group can be seen as being composed of two sub-groups – the desegregated counties (same

as above; i=1) and the counties not subject to court-ordered desegregation, but located in the same

bordering county group as a desegregated county (i=2).

i = 2 : not desegregated

The conditional expectation for the treatment group is a weighted average of the conditional expectations

of the two sub-groups. The weights for each of the sub-groups are equal to their percentage of the

treatment group population. The DD estimator becomes
βˆ BCG = δ *[ E [ y | i = 1, t = 1] − E [ y | i = 1, t = 0]] + (1 − δ ) *[ E [ y | i = 2, t = 1] − E [ y | i = 2, t = 0]] −
[ E [ y | i = 0, t = 1] − E [ y | i = 0, t = 0]]

where δ =percent of treatment group that resides in the desegregated counties (i.e. that is part of sub-

group i=1)

Assume there is no migration. Type i = 2 is untreated – these counties have not been desegregated – and

therefore have means in all periods equal to the control group, i = 0

E [ y | i = 2,t = a ] = E [ y | i = 0,t = a ]                       ∀ a


then

βˆ BCG =
δ *[ E [ y | i = 1, t = 1] − E [ y | i = 1, t = 0]] + (1 − δ ) *[ E [ y | i = 0, t = 1] − E[ y | i = 0, t = 0]] −
[ E [ y | i = 0, t = 1] − E [ y | i = 0, t = 0]] =
δ *[ E [ y | i = 1, t = 1] − E [ y | i = 1, t = 0] − [ E [ y | i = 0, t = 1] − E[ y | i = 0, t = 0]]] =
δ * βˆ

                                                                   And βˆ BCG     = βˆ
                                                                             δ
                       APPENDIX F: ADDITIONAL RESULTS ON MECHANISMS

         We can provide some indirect evidence on what behavioral mechanisms might matter most by

interacting changes in our measures of school segregation and other measures with our indicators for

implementation of court orders. 9 We note that these findings are at best suggestive, since those counties

that experience particularly large changes in any one of our candidate mediators may also experience

large changes in other potential mediating mechanisms not captured by our data. The fact that there is no

evidence of pre-existing trends in homicides before the court orders are enacted means unmeasured

mediators are probably not biasing our outcome estimates, but our ability to determine the specific

mediators that are driving our observed homicide impacts is somewhat limited.

         With these caveats in mind, Appendix Table A10 shows that homicide victimization rates declined

the most for blacks in districts where exposure of blacks to whites in the public schools increased the

most. These results come from estimating our preferred QML model (OLS results are usually

qualitatively similar but less precise). When we include interactions of our “treatment” indicators (years

post court desegregation order) with changes in the exposure and dissimilarity indices at the same time

(column (3)), the former seems to be driving the result. 10 The fact that we observe the largest impacts on

black homicide in places with the largest “treatment dose” from court orders provides additional support

for the credibility of our research design. For whites (Appendix Tables A11), these interaction estimates

are quite imprecise.

         Finally, there is another potential mechanism that would be relevant only for whites – migration

out of the desegregated school district. While there is no evidence of “white flight” out of the counties,

there is evidence that whites move from school districts subject to desegregation orders to other districts

within the same county that are not subject to court-ordered school desegregation. Appendix Table A12


9
  The changes in the segregation indices are defined as the changes from one year prior to desegregation to four years after
desegregation.
10
   Recall that the dissimilarity index is coded the reverse of the exposure index, and so the signs of the interactions for the
exposure and dissimilarity indices shown in Table 13 point in the same direction although the exposure index interactions are
much larger absolutely and compared to the standard errors.
shows that the ratio of white enrollment in districts subject to court orders to the total number of white

school-age children in the county declines by between 4 and 6 percentage points after five or more years

of desegregation – around a 15 percent decrease relative to the sample average of 0.39 (see also Reber

2005, and Baum-Snow and Lutz 2010). These results, together with our finding of no decline in the

overall number of school-age white children in our counties, imply that some white families must be

moving to other public school districts (and, according to BSL, private schools for whites outside of the

South) within the same county to avoid court-ordered desegregation. If these new districts or private

schools are less criminogenic than the districts subject to desegregation orders, this could provide another

mechanism driving our result. One suggestive data point against this hypothesized mechanism comes

from Appendix Table A11, columns (3) and (6), which shows that the impact of desegregation orders on

white homicide victimizations do not appear to be larger in desegregating districts with the largest change

(i.e. decline) in the percent of white children in the county enrolled in the desegregated school district (i.e.

the measure explored on Appendix Table A12).
Figure A1 School Desegregation & Black Homicide Victimizations
Panel A: Age Cohort 15-19 QML Count
                        0.6

                        0.4
Proportional Change




                        0.2

                          0
                                -5      -4       -3      -2       -1       0       1        2       3        4       5        6       7
                        -0.2

                        -0.4

                        -0.6
                                                                  Years Relative to Start of Desegregation
Panel B: Age Cohort 15-19 OLS Level
                         30
                         25
Homicides per 100,000




                         20
                         15
                         10
                          5
                          0
                         -5     -5      -4       -3      -2       -1       0       1        2       3        4       5        6       7
                        -10
                        -15
                        -20
                        -25
                                                                  Years Relative to Start of Desegregation
Panel C: Age Cohort 35-44 QML Count
                        0.3

                        0.2
Proportional Change




                        0.1

                          0

                        -0.1    -5      -4       -3      -2       -1       0       1        2       3        4       5        6       7

                        -0.2

                        -0.3

                        -0.4
                                                                  Years Relative to Start of Desegregation
Panel D: Age Cohort 35-44 OLS Level
                         60
Homicides per 100,000




                         40

                         20

                          0
                                -5      -4       -3      -2       -1       0       1        2       3        4       5        6       7
                        -20

                        -40

                        -60
                                                                  Years Relative to Start of Desegregation

                          The solid points display coefficient estimates and the dashed lines display the 95% confidence intervals around
                          these estimates. Year “0” is the year immediately prior to the start of desegregation.
Figure A2 School Desegregation & White Homicide Victimizations
Panel A: Age Cohort 15-19 QML Count
                         0.3
                         0.2
Proportional Change




                         0.1
                           0
                        -0.1       -5       -4       -3       -2       -1       0        1        2        3        4       5        6        7
                        -0.2
                        -0.3
                        -0.4
                        -0.5
                        -0.6
                        -0.7
                                                                       Years Relative to Start of Desegregation
Panel B: Age Cohort 15-19 OLS Level
                          3
                          2
Homicides per 100,000




                          1
                          0
                         -1        -5       -4       -3       -2       -1       0        1        2        3        4       5        6        7
                         -2
                         -3
                         -4
                         -5
                         -6
                         -7
                         -8
                                                                       Years Relative to Start of Desegregation
Panel C: Age Cohort 35-44 QML Count
                        0.3
                        0.2
Proportional Change




                        0.1
                          0
                        -0.1       -5       -4       -3       -2       -1       0        1        2        3        4       5        6        7
                        -0.2
                        -0.3
                        -0.4
                        -0.5
                                                                       Years Relative to Start of Desegregation
Panel D: Age Cohort 35-44 OLS Level
                          5
                          4
Homicides per 100,000




                          3
                          2
                          1
                          0
                         -1        -5       -4       -3       -2       -1       0        1        2        3        4       5        6        7
                         -2
                         -3
                         -4
                         -5
                                                                       Years Relative to Start of Desegregation


                               The solid points display coefficient estimates and the dashed lines display the 95% confidence intervals around
                               The
                               thesesolid points display
                                     estimates.  Year “0”coefficient
                                                           is the yearestimates and the
                                                                       immediately      dashed
                                                                                     prior to thelines
                                                                                                  start display the 95% confidence intervals around
                                                                                                        of desegregation.
                               these estimates. Year “0” is the
