                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE FORMATION OF INFLATION EXPECTATIONS:
                       AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS FOR THE UK

                                     David G. Blanchflower
                                       Conall MacCoille

                                      Working Paper 15388
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w15388


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2009




We thank Tim Besley, Roger Kelly, Annamaria Lusardi and Richard Windram for helpful discussions
and Helen Lawton for invaluable research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by David G. Blanchflower and Conall MacCoille. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The formation of inflation expectations: an empirical analysis for the UK
David G. Blanchflower and Conall MacCoille
NBER Working Paper No. 15388
September 2009
JEL No. E4,E5

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper uses micro-data from three surveys for the UK to consider how individuals form inflation
expectations. Generally, we find significant non-response bias in all surveys, with non-respondents
especially likely to be young, female, less educated and with lower incomes. A number of demographic
generalizations can be made based on the surveys. Inflation expectations rise with age, but the more
highly educated and home owners tend to have lower inflation expectations. These groups are also
more likely to be accurate in their estimates of official inflation twelve months ahead, and have less
backward-looking expectations.


David G. Blanchflower
Bruce V. Rauner Professor of Economics
309B Silsby Hall
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
david.g.blanchflower@dartmouth.edu

Conall MacCoille
Bank of England
conall.maccoille@bankofengland.co.uk
1. Introduction

       The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) at the Bank of England has an explicit mandate

to maintain CPI inflation at a target of 2%. In such an inflation targeting regime, the

effectiveness of monetary policy is likely to be greater if inflation expectations remain anchored

to the target. People have to believe that there will be low inflation before they stop building

expectations of high inflation into their decision-making process. A sustained rise in inflation

expectations in the short-term runs the risk of heightened inflationary pressures in the medium

term. Hence, central banks have an incentive to understand how inflation expectations are

formed.

       In this paper we review the empirical literature concerning how inflation expectations are

formed. We then examine empirically how individuals form inflation expectations in the UK by

examining micro-data at the level of the individual drawn from a number of UK surveys of

inflation expectations. It extends, and updates, earlier work in Blanchflower and Kelly (2008).

We find strong empirical support for heterogeneity in the formation of inflation expectations. We

make use of data from three main sources: the Bank of England’s Inflation Attitudes Surveys

from 2001-2009; the GfK/NOP Consumer Confidence Barometer Surveys from 1996-2008 and a

2007 Eurobarometer Survey. There are high non-response rates in the surveys. That is, many

respondents have ‘no idea’ what the inflation rate will be in the future. Also, expectations are

backward-looking. Individual’s perceptions of current inflation are a highly significant

determinant of their inflation expectations. However, despite this backward-looking behavior we

still find consistent differences in the formation of inflation expectations according to

characteristics such as education, age, income, employment and housing status.




                                                1
       The formation of inflation expectations is likely to be related to the credibility of the

monetary authority in controlling inflation. We therefore also consider micro data on individuals’

satisfaction with the Bank of England in its job to control inflation. We also consider the

characteristics of those individuals more likely to accurately report current rates of inflation and

predict future inflation. We find the credibility of the monetary authority differs across

individuals according to similar characteristics as those that form their inflation expectations and

in their ability to report and predict inflation. This provides complementary empirical evidence

for heterogeneity in the formation of agent’s inflation expectations.

       In section 2 we discuss how inflation expectations may be measured and recent

movements in, inflation and measures of inflation expectations. In section 3 we discuss the

empirical literature concerning the formation of inflation expectations. In particular, we discuss a

recent literature that attempts to test empirically models of inflation expectations formation from

survey data on inflation expectations. Section 4 describes our empirical evidence for the UK

drawn from a number of surveys of UK households’ inflation expectations. Section 5 concludes.

2. Measuring Inflation Expectations

       What matters most for inflation, are the expectations of those directly involved in setting

prices and wages. Wages are set on an infrequent basis, thus wage setters have to form a view

on future inflation. If inflation is expected to be persistently higher in the future, employees may

seek higher nominal wages in order to maintain their purchasing power. This in turn could lead

to upward pressure on companies’ output prices, and hence higher consumer prices.

Additionally, if companies expect general inflation to be higher in the future, they may be more

inclined to raise prices, believing that they can do so without suffering a drop in demand for their

output. A third path by which inflation expectations could potentially impact inflation is through




                                                 2
their influence on consumption and investment decisions. For a given path of nominal market

interest rates, if households and companies expect higher inflation, this implies lower expected

real interest rates, making spending more attractive relative to saving. But if nominal market

interest rates rise in response to expectations that the MPC will raise Bank Rate to curtail any

inflationary pressure, real rates might not actually decline.

       How can we measure inflation expectations? Mankiw, Reis and Wolfers (2003) provide

a comprehensive study. We identify three main groups, namely survey-based measures, market-

based measures and economic indicators. In the UK there are a range of surveys of inflation

expectations, both of the general public and professional economic forecasters and academics.

There is a dearth of surveys for firms’ inflation expectations although business surveys include

questions concerning firms’ pricing intentions. In this paper we examine in detail those surveys

of the general public for which we can obtain micro data.

       Market-based measures of inflation expectations include estimations of nominal and real

forward interest rate curves, from which a forward inflation curve is inferred, and inflation swap

rates. In both these cases, the indicators may not only reflect markets’ inflation expectations but

also inflation risk premia and numerous other market factors. Movements in inflation

expectations could also be apparent in economic indicators such as wage settlements, where

wage bargainers must make some judgment regarding the course of inflation over the period of

the settlement. Of course, wage settlement data does not simply reflect inflation expectations but

also factors such as ability to pay and employee productivity.

       How have the survey measures of inflation expectations we study in this paper behaved

over the recent past. Chart 1 illustrates that a range of survey measures of household’s inflation

expectations have picked up sharply over the recent past, before falling back in the most recent




                                                  3
surveys. Charts 2 and 3 illustrate the median inflation expectation from the Bank of

England/NOP Inflation Attitudes Survey, together with consumer price inflation (CPI) and retail

price inflation (RPIX).1 The difference between these two measures is twofold. First, the CPI

measure is calculated using a geometric rather than an arithmetic average. Second, the RPIX

measure includes a measure of housing costs, whereas the CPI does not. Finally, up until the

beginning of 2004 the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) set monetary

policy relative to a target of 2.5% for the RPIX measure. Since 2004 the MPC has set monetary

policy relative to a target of 2.0% for the CPI measure. Hence, this change in target means it is

difficult to judge how inflation expectations have behaved relative to the Bank of England’s

inflation targeting regime. It appears that up to 2004 at least that the median inflation expectation

in the Bank of England Inflation Attitudes survey was closer to the RPIX inflation measure

(Chart 3) than it was to CPI (Chart 2).

           Over the recent past RPIX inflation has fallen below CPI inflation, and a third measure of

retail price inflation which includes mortgage interest payments, the RPI, has fallen below zero

following large cuts in the Bank of England’s policy rate (Chart 4). This could suggest that

some agents in the economy may perceive different rates of inflation; in particular, mortgage

holders who will have seen their mortgage interest payments fall sharply in the recent past. Our

survey measures of inflation expectations and perceptions do not specify a particular measure of

inflation. So we must be careful in assessing the behavior of inflation expectations and

perceptions relative to the Bank of England’s target.

           Despite these caveats there are a number of key points with respect to the behavior of

inflation expectations we should highlight. First, median inflation expectations remained broadly


1
    For details of the surveys, plus the latest data see http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/nop/index.htm



                                                            4
stable, in the range of 2%-3%, through the period 1999-2006 as the Bank of England maintained

inflation close to target. Second, during this period inflation expectations moved closely with

inflation perceptions (Chart 5). This could be consistent with backward-looking behavior by

agents in forming their inflation expectations, but also with forward-looking behavior in the

sense that agents expected the Bank of England to maintain inflation close to target.

       Third, as rising oil, energy and food prices pushed CPI inflation above the inflation target

to a peak of 5.2% in September 2008, this coincided with a rise in median inflation expectations.

Median inflation expectations picked up sharply, though not as much as actual inflation on all

three measures, through 2007-2008 before falling back very sharply to their lowest level since

2005 in February 2009. Fourth, the survey responses have become more volatile in the last two

years. Charts 6 and 7 illustrate a swathe of distributions of the survey responses to the Bank of

England Inflation Attitudes survey in the periods 2001-2006 and 2007-2009 respectively. Table

1 illustrates the entire distribution of responses. In the May and August 2008 surveys 37% and

36% of respondents expected inflation to be greater than 5% in twelve months time, but this

proportion fell to 21% and 16% in the November 2008 and February 2009 surveys. Between

August and November 2008 the proportion of respondents expecting prices to not change or go

down rose from 6% to 27%.

       Hence, in our analysis of the Bank/NOP micro data we consider the behavior of

respondents in two distinct periods. First, in the period when inflation remained close to Bank of

England’s target in 2001-2006 and second, in the period 2007-2009 when inflation has exceeded

the target by more than 1.0pp and the volatility of both inflation and surveyed inflation

expectations has increased. Our evidence could suggest that agent may have used different

models to form inflation expectations during these periods.




                                                5
           It is worth considering how wages may have responded to inflation expectations. Chart 8

illustrates that wage settlements showed little response to both the rise in CPI inflation or median

inflation expectations over the course of 2008. Rather, wage growth began to fall back as firms

cut back on hiring. And over the recent past sharp cuts in bonuses have pushed down on the AEI

measure of average earnings. In summary, it has been difficult to detect any strong link between

wage settlements, earnings or survey measures of inflation expectations.

3. How are inflation expectations formed?

           In the neo-Keynesian model (see, for example, Clarida et al. 2000), sticky prices result in

forward looking behaviour; inflation today is a function of expected future inflation as well as

the pressure of demand, captured in an output gap term. Thus, expectations are deemed to be an

important link in the monetary transmission mechanism. Monetary policy can be more successful

when long-term inflation expectations are well anchored.

           Hence, many studies have focused on the question of how to assess the response of

inflation expectations to macroeconomic shocks, and whether this is likely to be lower in

inflation targeting regimes.2 Bernanke (2007) provides an intuitive definition for anchored

inflation expectations, namely that if the public experiences a spell of inflation higher than their

long run expectation, but their long run expectation of inflation changes little as a result, inflation

expectations can be considered to be well anchored. However, if the public reacts to a short

period of higher than expected inflation by increasing their long run expectations, expectations

are poorly anchored.

           Levin, Natalucci and Piger (2004) show that some survey measures of inflation

expectations in the US respond to recent changes in the actual rate of inflation, which would not


2
    See for example Stock and Watson (2007).



                                                    6
be the case if expectations were perfectly anchored.                      They examine whether inflation

expectations are relatively more anchored in inflation targeting economies by estimating a

pooled regression (across inflation targeting and non-inflation targeting countries) in order to

evaluate the sensitivity of inflation expectations to realised inflation. They find that longer-run

inflation expectations have been far less sensitive in inflation targeting countries, suggesting that

inflation targeting central banks have been quite successful in de-linking expectations from

realised inflation. The authors find some evidence that inflation persistence (for core CPI) is

higher amongst non-inflation targeting countries.

        In two empirical studies using expectations based on market data Gurnayak et al (2002,

2003) provide evidence that US nominal forward rates at long horizons react significantly to

surprises in macroeconomic data releases and monetary policy announcements, while forward

rates derived from inflation-indexed Treasury debt show little sensitivity to these shocks. This

suggests the response of nominal forward rates is mostly driven by changes in inflation

expectations. However, they note that in the UK long-term forward rates have not demonstrated

excess sensitivity since the Bank of England achieved independence. Mishkin (2007) notes that

in the US inflation persistence rose during the 1970s and has subsequently fallen back consistent

with a re-anchoring of inflation expectations. This hypothesis is consistent with various

indicators of inflation expectations, for example estimates of inflation compensation derived

from indexed Treasury yields.3

        However, although there may be some consensus that inflation expectations have become

more anchored, and perhaps more so in inflation targeting countries, these studies do not


3
  Similar evidence concerning inflation persistence is found for other countries. Levin and Piger (2004) find that
there has been a significant decline in inflation persistence since the 1980s for major European economies as well as
for Japan, Canada, Australia and New Zealand. However, O’Reilly and Whelan (2005) find little evidence of a
recent decline in persistence for the Euro area as a whole.


                                                         7
explicitly consider how inflation expectations are themselves formed. Rational expectations has

been the traditional framework used for modeling inflation targeting. Agents are assumed to

share a common information set and form expectations conditional on that information. Thus,

we assume that everyone has the same expectations. However, this implies the public has firm

knowledge of the long-run equilibrium inflation rate. This gives rise to a conflict between policy

practice and policy modeling, which is well described by Orphanides and Williams (2003).

Generally, models assume a fixed and perfectly known structure of the economy and specify that

expectations are model consistent. In linear fixed parameter models, for example, once the

monetary policy rule is specified, inflation expectations can be represented as a fixed linear

function of economic outcomes.      Economic agents are then assumed to form expectations

mechanically based on these simple linear functions of economic outcomes that are assumed to

be perfectly known. In such a world, expectations are perfectly anchored, and as such there is no

need for central banks to monitor and analyse information regarding inflation expectations, and

no need for central bank communications.

       However, once imperfect knowledge is acknowledged, the mechanical link from

economic outcomes to the expectations formation process breaks down. There have been a large

number of papers documenting the general failure of the rational expectations hypothesis to

account for the survey data on inflation expectations (for example Pacquet, 1992, Batchelor and

Dua, 1987). A widely cited explanation for the failure is that agents lack the sophistication to

form expectations rationally. The presence of information costs is a major factor. To form

rational expectations, agents must know the time structure and probability distribution of the

economy, and the costs of information may exceed the benefits, making it rational for agents to

form their expectations some other way.        Most empirical tests of rationality of surveyed




                                                8
expectations have focused on the inflationary expectations of economists (e.g. Keane and

Runkle, 1990), although a few studies have examined inflationary expectations of consumers in

general, mainly using aggregated Michigan survey data (Maddala, Fishe and Lahiri (1981),

Gramlich (1983), Batchelor (1986)).        However, these studies suffer from aggregation bias,

meaning that the implications of tests for individual rationality are difficult to derive.

       More recently, a few studies have attempted to empirically test rationality of expectation

formation on an individual basis (Bakhshi and Yates (1988) provide a review of tests of

rationality commonly used in the literature).         Souleles (2004), for example, seeks to test

rationality of consumer expectations (including inflation expectations) by looking at the

relationship between answers to the US Michigan survey over a number of years, in order to

capture an individual’s expectational error. They find that expectations appear to have been

biased, but that the bias is inconsistent, and related to inflation regime and business cycle.

       In a similar approach to Souleles (2004), Mitchell and Weale (2007) use the British

Household Panel Survey (BHPS) to test the rationality of individual-level expectational data in

Britain. They statistically identify the characteristics of individuals for whom the costs of

forming rational expectations exceed the benefits. They find that the British are more optimistic

about the future when they have recently seen their household income rise, and vice versa.

Using a regime switching model, they find that 40% of individuals form expectations consistent

with rationality, and that the propensity to form rational expectations increases with age rather

than education. However, they do not investigate the alternative model used by the other 60% to

form their expectations.

       Another class of study has investigated empirically the increasing consensus that

expectation formation is heterogeneous across agents. Three main possible reasons for this




                                                  9
heterogeneity have been proposed. First, reliance of agents on different models; second, the use

of different information sets by agents; and third, agents have different capacities for processing

information.   Using US Michigan data, Branch (2004) finds evidence that agents rely on

different models and use different information sets.       He looks at rationally heterogeneous

expectations, stemming from the notion of Adaptively Rational Equilibrium Dynamics (ARED)

proposed by Brock and Hommes (1997). Under this framework, agents forecast inflation rates

using a predictor function chosen from an increasingly sophisticated set of alternative predictors;

the probability of any predictor being chosen depends on its relative net benefit. His results

show that agents do dynamically select predictor functions.            This suggests that rational

expectations are not rejected because agents blindly follow an ad-hoc rule; rather because it is

not worthwhile for them to invest the effort to use more complex predictor functions. Agents are

rationally heterogeneous in the sense that each predictor choice is individually optimal.

       Carroll (2003) focuses on the idea that agents use different data sets to form expectations.

He proposes an epidemiology framework to study how households model inflation expectations.

In the framework, household expectations are updated probabilistically towards the views of

professional forecasters – i.e. people obtain macroeconomic news from the media, but that it

takes time to dissipate. He finds differences between household expectations and the views of

professional forecasters narrow when inflation is more significant, probably because of increased

media coverage and household interest. His model is successful in capturing much of the

variation in the Michigan survey measures of inflation expectations.

       Models of learning allow us to abstract from the idea that agents have full information

about the economy and the objectives of the central bank; instead individuals make statistical

inferences about the unknown parameters governing the evolution of the economy. Pfajfar and




                                                10
Santoro (2006) focus on learning and information stickiness as the roots of the heterogeneity in

expectation formation between agents. Using data from the Michigan survey, they identify three

regions of a distribution corresponding to different expectation formation processes, which

display a heterogeneous response to the main macroeconomic indicators. On the left hand side

of the distribution, a static or lightly autoregressive group, in the middle a nearly rational group,

and on the right hand side a group of agents behaving according to adaptive learning and sticky

information. The latter respond in too pessimistic a manner, overacting to macroeconomic

fluctuations.   Similar to Carroll (2003), they find that agents are more likely to update

information sets regularly when inflation matters. Pfajfar and Santoro (2008) extend this

approach to different demographic groups. They find that income, education and gender are

important characteristics when forecasting inflation. Those with higher income, education and

male agents tend to make smaller errors in their inflation forecasts.

        Orphanides and Williams (2003) also look at the implications of learning. They find that

the presence of learning increases the sensitivity of inflation expectations and the term structure

of interest rates to economic shocks, in line with empirical evidence. They find that inflation

expectations under learning are much less sensitive to inflation when the inflation target is

assumed to be known by the public, indicating that the benefit of better anchored inflation

expectations that is associated with successful communication of the central bank’s inflation

target can be significant. This is consistent with the experience of the UK following the adoption

of inflation targeting.

4. Empirical evidence

        We now turn to empirical evidence on the formation of inflation expectations among the

UK population. Survey responses may be highly influenced by the structure and precise nature of




                                                 11
the questions asked. So we consider evidence from a range of surveys conducted in the UK

where respondents provide quantitative, qualitative and point estimates for their inflation

expectations. We find consistent characteristics such as age, education and relative income

influence the formation of inflation expectations. Of course, inflation expectations should be

highly influenced by monetary policy. We find that similar characteristics, as those that lead to

lower inflation expectations, are also associated with confidence in the Bank of England to

control inflation.

4.1. The Bank of England/NOP Inflation Attitudes Survey: Inflation Expectations

        Since 1999 the Bank of England has conducted a regular survey of attitudes to inflation

expectations. Each survey covers around 2000 individuals, with an additional 2000 taking part in

an extended survey every February. The sample is designed and weighted to ensure that it is

representative of the known population data on age, gender, social class and region. Aggregated

data are available quarterly from November 19994. We have obtained the micro data at the level

of the individual from twenty seven of these quarterly surveys, beginning in February 2001

through to February 2009. These are not panels; the same people are not interviewed repeatedly,

rather they are repeat cross-sections. We have pooled these surveys together. In total there are

64,334 responses. In each survey the following question is asked "How much would you expect

prices in the shops generally to change over the next 12 months?” The full distribution of

responses is presented in Table 1.

         The median response has risen from a low of 1.7% in November 2001 to a high of 4.4%

in August 2008, but has fallen back very sharply to 2.1% in the February 2009 survey. Chart 5


4
 Summaries of the aggregate responses in each survey are available on the Bank of England's website. On a yearly
basis since 2001 the Bank of England has published an article in its Quarterly Bulletin discussing the results of the
survey - the latest available is Benford and Driver (2008).



                                                        12
suggests that up to 2007 median inflation expectations had been largely backward-looking.

Indeed, up to 2007 on average 49.9% of respondents indicated that their expectations for

inflation were in the same range as their perceptions of current inflation. This may not be too

surprising in a period when the Bank of England succeeded in maintaining inflation close to

target. Given the costs of predicting inflation, imperfect information sets and capacity to form

such projections a backward-looking rule of thumb may not have been irrational when consumer

price inflation was relatively stable.

         Since the beginning of 2007 median inflation expectations have diverged from

perceptions (Chart 5) at the same time that consumer price inflation has become more volatile.

Similarly, the distribution of survey responses has become more volatile since 2007 (Charts 6

and 7). We therefore consider which groups may be more or less backward-looking in forming

their inflation expectations? This is clearly related to a second question in the Bank of England

Inflation Attitudes survey which we also consider: “Overall, how satisfied or dissatisfied are you

with the way the Bank of England is doing its job to set interest rates in order to control

inflation?”

         It is important to examine the distribution of non-responses because if it is non-random it

may bias any results. Table 2 illustrates the non-responses to the inflation expectations question.

The equation estimated is a dprobit to calculate the probability that respondents will reply that

they have ‘no idea’.5 If the respondent reported they had 'no idea' the dependent variable was set

to one, zero otherwise. Worryingly the probability of a non-response is higher for females, the

young, the less educated, those on lowest incomes, not in employment and those renting

5
  Dprobit in STATA fits maximum-likelihood probit models and is an alternative to probit. Rather than reporting
the coefficients, dprobit reports the marginal effect, that is the change in the probability for an infinitesimal change
in each independent, continuous variable and, by default, reports the discrete change in the probability for dummy
variables.



                                                          13
accommodation6. The concern is that any results may be biased because of the relative exclusion

of these groups. So we proceed with caution.

        Table 3 moves on to model inflation expectations econometrically, using the micro data

from the Inflation Attitudes survey from February 2001 through to February 20097. The

dependent variable is expected inflation twelve months ahead. All respondents reporting they

had 'no idea' are dropped. Because there are open ends and intervals within the survey responses

the procedure used here is interval regression. A positive coefficient means the individual

expects higher prices and vice versa. The model is consistently estimated by a maximum

likelihood procedure. We have micro data available on around 60,000 individuals from twenty

seven sweeps of the survey extending from February 2001. There are approximately 2,500 left-

censored observations, 10,000 right-censored observations and 47,000 interval observations.

        In the first column of Table 3 we simply include survey month dummies. A number of

facts stand out: first, there is relatively little movement in the size of the coefficients on the

month dummies up to the period 2007-2009. Second, there was a dramatic increase in the size of

the coefficients as the impact of the oil shock hit from November 2007 to August 2008. Third,

the rapid deterioration in the size of the coefficients in the last two surveys. February 2009 is

insignificantly different from February 2001. Column 2 adds controls for age, gender, education,

employment and housing status. It is striking that the time series patterns of the survey date

dummies change little. Inflation expectations tend to rise with age up to 65. The least educated

and those in rented accommodation also report higher expected inflation rates. There is no



6
  Unfortunately we do not have responses according to income for all of the surveys. In alternative specifications of
the dprobit those on lower incomes have higher non-response rates. The tables for these exercises are available upon
request.
7
  The February surveys are twice as large as the surveys in a particular year: the February surveys have
approximately 4,000 respondents compared with approximately 2,000 in other months.



                                                        14
significant difference in the inflation expectations of workers and non-workers. Males tend to

have higher inflation expectations, but we take this result with caution as it is not robust across

different specifications of the equation, and subject to the caveat regarding the non-responses of

females.

           What can we say about the recent divergence in perceptions and expectations of

inflation? Column 3 re-estimates the equation in column 2 but restricts itself to data taken from

the most recent survey in February 2009.8 The main difference between the coefficients on the

control variables is the big increase in the absolute size of the coefficient for those individuals

who have a mortgage who may have seen big declines in their mortgage interest payments

following cuts in the Bank of England’s policy rate.

           The coefficients on education dummies are more negative in February 2009 than in the

earlier period. This could suggest that those with higher education are less likely to base their

inflation expectations on their perceptions of current inflation, especially at a time when inflation

has fallen back sharply from a peak of 5.2% in late 2008. We discuss this in more detail below.

           Column 4 tests for whether the differences observed between the coefficients in columns

2 and 3 are significant by including a set of interaction terms between the control variables and

the February 2009 dummy. Experiments were done with interactions with other variables that

were always insignificant and hence were omitted. The evidence is that mortgage holders, men

and the more educated have significantly lower expectations in February 2009 than previously.

Column 5 now adds the perceptions of inflation over the preceding twelve month period.

Interestingly 49% of individuals gave exactly the same response to the question on perceptions

as they did on their expectations on average over 2001-2009. This fell to 32% in February 2009.


8
    These data were unavailable to Blanchflower and Kelly (2008).



                                                         15
It is not surprising then that perceptions of past inflation are a major determinant of perceptions.

However, even when controlling for inflation perceptions the impact of gender, age, education

and employment and housing status identified in previous regressions are robust.

       Furthermore, the interaction terms for the February 2009 survey remain significant. This

suggests that these groups lowered their expectations more quickly than other groups, perhaps

because their expectations are less backward-looking. We investigate this hypothesis further by

conducting similar regressions, where we restrict the observations to each category of

educational attainment. Table 4 illustrates that perceptions of current inflation have less of an

influence on inflation expectations than for those with higher education. The coefficients in

column 1 for inflation perceptions are significantly smaller than those in column 3 when the

same regression is conducted on those with the highest educational attainment. Of course, using

inflation perceptions as a rule of thumb in forming inflation expectations may be more rational

when inflation is close to target, and there is confidence in the monetary authority to maintain

inflation close to that target. However, over the recent past inflation has been volatile. So when

inflation exceeds the target such a rule of thumb may be less successful in accurately forming

inflation expectations. Columns 4-6 illustrate that over the recent past inflation expectations have

had a much smaller influence on the inflation expectations of the most educated. Indeed, for this

group inflation perceptions are not significant, or have only a marginal significance. This could

suggest that those with higher educational attainment are less likely to be backward-looking in

the formation of their inflation expectations. Chart 9 helps illustrate this behavior by plotting

median inflation expectations by educational attainment. In the very latest survey, February

2009, median inflation expectations for those with the highest educational attainment were 1.3pp




                                                16
lower than those with the lowest educational attainment. Over the period 2001-2009 this gap had

averaged just 0.4pp.

4.2 The GfK/NOP Consumer Confidence Barometer

        Micro data on inflation expectations in the UK are also available from a further data

source. The GfK/NOP Consumer Confidence Barometer (CCB) survey collects nationally

representative data for those aged 16+ from a random sample of telephone owning households.

Sample sizes are approximately 2000 per month. These data are collected monthly across each

member state of the European Union, and for the UK are available since 1985.9 We have only

obtained access to the micro-data since 1996.

        The main aim of the GfK CCB survey is to monitor the general public's confidence in the

British economy; measuring consumer confidence in the present economic climate in the UK,

and consumer expectations for the year ahead. We have obtained access to the micro data from

the CCB survey taken monthly from January 1996 through October 2008, making 154 monthly

surveys in all and a total of 312,599 observations. In the CCB survey respondents are asked a

slightly different, qualitative, question on price expectations to the one used in the Bank of

England’s Inflation Attitudes survey: "Q6. In comparison with the past 12 months, how do you

expect consumer prices will develop in the next 12 months? They will…increase more rapidly;

increase at the same rate: increase at a slower rate; stay about the same; fall or don’t know."

        The distribution of the responses is reported in Table 5. It is evident that non-responses

are much lower than in the Bank of England Inflation Attitudes survey, on average 5% report



9
 GfK has been conducting a monthly consumer survey called the Consumer Confidence Barometer (CCB) in the
UK since June 1995. GfK carries out this survey on behalf of the European Commission, who sponsors the same
consumer survey in all EU and EU candidate countries, as part of the Joint Harmonised EU Programme of Business
and Consumer programme (known as the BCS programme). The BCS program was first launched by the European
Commission in 1961 (although the programme did not extend to the consumer sector until 1972).



                                                     17
that they don’t know. This is consistent with the well known problem in social science research -

non-responses tend to be higher when quantitative responses are asked for – more accuracy is

obtained at the price of lower response rates. As in the Inflation Attitudes Survey the CCB

survey indicates inflation expectations rose sharply through 2007 up to August 2008 but then fell

sharply. Columns 1 and 2 of Table 6 describe the estimates from an ordered logit where 1 is set

to equal a fall while 5 means 'increase more rapidly', so a positive coefficient implies a higher

increase and vice versa for a negative coefficient. An ordered logit fits the responses to an

ordinal or qualitative variable.      The actual values taken on by the dependent variable are

irrelevant, except that larger values are assumed to correspond to 'higher' outcomes.10 The 'no

ideas' respondents are excluded. The controls available from the survey are region, age, gender

and work status. We include eleven year dummies and month dummies for 2008. In column 2

we also include controls for the respondents views on what had happened to prices over the

preceding twelve months, including the 'no ideas'.11

        Males believe that prices will rise more slowly than females as do the more highly

educated compared to the less highly educated. This contrasts with the evidence from the Bank

of England Inflation Attitudes Survey where males expect higher rates of increase. Consistent

with the findings from the Inflation Attitudes survey, expectations are higher among older age

groups, females and the least educated. We also find that expectations are higher among non-

workers and in London. As in the Inflation Attitudes Survey individuals’ perceptions of inflation

are a highly significant determinant of their expectations (column 2).



10
  Use of ordered logits is commonplace in the analysis of happiness data which is similarly ordered - see
Blanchflower and Oswald (2004).
11
  We also experimented with replacing the year and month dummies with the monthly CPI. In this case there are
154 separate monthly observations, but when the standard errors were clustered this variable was always
insignificant whether or not there were year or month dummies included. Hence the variable was dropped.


                                                     18
       Since 2003 the CCB has asked two additional questions where respondents provide point

estimates of inflation expectations and perceptions: “Estimate by how much consumer prices will

rise by over next 12 months. Estimate up to 1dp?” and “estimate of how much consumer prices

have risen by over past 12 months. Estimate up to 1dp". Interestingly, 44.7% of respondents

reported zero as their answer to the inflation expectations question, while 5.7% reported

estimates between 20% and 100%. For the second question on inflation perceptions 42.2% of

respondents reported zero as their answer. The concern here is that people believed they were

reporting on changes in inflation rather than in prices.   Column 3 estimates an Ordinary Least

Squares (OLS) regression with the dependent variable the exact inflation rate expected. Column

4 includes the perception of the rate over the last twelve months. Column 5 excludes anyone who

reported a zero to either question. Hence sample size is approximately halved. This exercise

provides further evidence that inflation expectations are backward-looking and that the least

educated, non-workers and males tend to have lower inflation expectations.

4.3: The Bank of England Inflation Attitudes Survey: Satisfaction with the Monetary

Authority

       The success of an inflation targeting regime is grounded in the credibility of the central

bank, and the ability of the central bank to educate those whose expectations in turn impact

monetary policy. The Bank of England Inflation Attitudes survey includes a question intended

to capture confidence amongst the general public in the monetary authority to control inflation:

“how satisfied are you with how the Bank of England is doing its job to set interest rates to

control inflation?” Responses ranged from very dissatisfied; dissatisfied; neither; satisfied and

very satisfied plus ‘no idea’. Of course, the risk of analyzing survey responses to this question is

that they may be confused by other factors such as the impact of monetary policy on changes on




                                                19
mortgage interest payments, or the broader macroeconomic factors such as the unemployment

rate.

        Table 7 reports the views of respondents in the Bank of England's Inflation Attitudes

Surveys to this question. Overall, a far greater proportion of respondents have been consistently

satisfied, or very satisfied with the job the Bank of England has been doing than those saying

they were not satisfied. But since the end of 2006 the proportion of respondents reporting

dissatisfaction with the Bank of England has been rising sharply. This period coincides both with

rising inflation but also with the adverse impact on the broader economy from the credit crunch.

        As with the inflation expectations question, it is important to consider the non-response

rates in case they may be biased. On average, thirteen percent of respondents said they had 'no

idea' how well the Bank was doing in controlling inflation. Interestingly, this total fell to a low of

just 9% in the most recent February 2009 survey. A comparison with Table 2 illustrates that

similar groups did not respond to the satisfaction question, as in the inflation expectations

question: females, the young, the least educated and those in rented accommodation. Table 8

uses the micro data pooled across the eight years 2001-2009 to estimate an ordered logit and

includes controls for age, gender, schooling, housing tenure; working or not working, year

dummies and region of residence. A positive coefficient thus implies an individual is more

satisfied and a negative one implies less satisfied. Individuals who reported they had 'no idea' are

excluded and hence sample size is now just over fifty-six thousand in column 1.

        Column 1 of Table 8 suggests that satisfaction with the Bank of England is lower among

women, those in rented accommodation, the least educated and the young. Satisfaction rises with

age. These results are stable across the various specifications. Interestingly, satisfaction with how

the Bank is doing its job rises linearly with age, being highest with those aged 65 and over.




                                                 20
Satisfaction is higher among home owners and lower among renters. The time dummies suggest

growing dissatisfaction with the Bank's performance over time, particularly in 2009 in the

aftermath of the credit crisis. With the exception of age, it appears that those groups who expect

lower inflation, even after taking account of their inflation perceptions, such as home owners and

the more educated are also those groups that are more likely to believe the Bank of England is

able to control inflation.

        How do we interpret the recent deterioration in satisfaction with the Bank of England?

The interaction terms indicate that satisfaction has fallen across all age groups, education is not

significant and that mortgage holders are less dissatisfied with the Bank. This could be because

the recent responses reflect broader macroeconomic developments such as the credit crisis and

falling mortgage interest payments rather than a lack of confidence in the Bank to meet the

inflation target.

4.4 Accuracy in reporting current inflation and predicting inflation

        In this section we examine the degree of individuals’ knowledge of the 'official' inflation

rate using retrospective data from the Eurobarometer Survey #67.2: European Union

Enlargement, Personal Data Privacy, the National Economy, and Scientific Research, April-May

2007. This survey was conducted across all EU countries but we restrict ourselves to the

approximately 1300 observations on UK residents. Given that inflation perceptions play a large

role in the formation of inflation expectations, to the extent those perceptions capture the true

inflation rate will be important. We then use data from the February 2005, 2006 and 2007 Bank

of England Inflation Attitude Surveys to determine the accuracy of respondent's predictions of

what will happen to prices over the following twelve months compared to the actual observed

outcomes.




                                                21
a) Inflation in 2006

In the Eurobarometer survey respondents were asked the following question - "What was the

official inflation rate, the rate of which consumer prices increased or decreased, in 2006? I can

tell you that the exact figure is between -1% and 20%?". It is possible to compare the responses

to this question with the actual inflation rates, although it is uncertain precisely which rate is

being referred to. In 2006 the CPI averaged 2.3% while the RPI averaged 3.2%. To allow some

margin of error we assume a response was 'correct' and set to zero if the response was in the

interval of 1.3% to 4.2%, zero otherwise. Individuals who did not know were also set to zero.

According to this criterion 25.9% of respondents reported correctly. In column 1 of Table 9 we

report a dprobit modeling the probability of an individual reporting the correct answer. The

probability of doing so is higher the higher the level of education, among men, and is higher

among workers especially among employed professionals and managers. The probability rises in

an inverted U-shape in age maximizing at age 59 and declining thereafter.

b) Inflation in 2006 compared with inflation in 2005.

Respondents were also asked a further question on inflation – "Do you think that the inflation

rate in 2006 was higher, lower or equal to the one in 2005?" Given that both the CPI and the RPI

were lower in 2005 (2.1% and 2.8% respectively), in column 2 of Table 9 we model the

probability of an individual reporting that inflation in 2006 was higher than it had been in 2005

using the Eurobarometer data once again. Analogously to the reports on the level of inflation,

males, the more highly educated workers and especially managers were more likely to be

'correct'.

c) Predicting inflation twelve months ahead




                                               22
In Table 10 we examine the probability that an individual in the Bank of England survey

‘correctly’ forecasts what inflation will be twelve months ahead. We do this using the February

surveys of 2005, 2006, 2007 and 2008 and then compare these responses with the percentage

change in prices that occurred over the next twelve months. A 'correct' response is taken to be

within a 1% interval of the CPI on the low side (CPI was 2.0% in February 2006, 2.8% in

February 2007 and 2.5% in February 2008) and a 1% interval on the high side for the RPI (2.4%;

4.6% and 4.1% respectively).       Columns 1 through 3 are for February 2005 through 2007

respectively while column 4 pools the three years and adds two year dummies. As was found

above, the probability of being 'correct' is higher among males, home owners, workers, the more

educated, richer individuals, those aged 55-64 and residents of the South East.

5. Conclusions

        What are the conclusions from our findings? First, there is evidence that significant

numbers of individuals do not know what the inflation rate is, how it has changed and are unable

to predict how it might change in the future. This is consistent with recent evidence from the

United States suggesting very low levels of financial literacy. Second, there are high non-

response rates to those surveys on how satisfied respondents are with the Bank of England in its

role in controlling inflation. Non-responses are especially high among the least educated,

females, the poorest individuals and the young. So at least for some groups their inflation

expectations, either implicit or explicit, are unlikely to be anchored to the inflation target in the

sense that they might expect the central bank to manipulate monetary policy to keep inflation

close to the target.




                                                 23
         We find that age, gender, income, housing status and education are important

characteristics in forming inflation expectations12. The more highly educated and those with

higher incomes are more optimistic about the path of prices, believing they will rise at a slower

pace than younger, less educated and less affluent individuals.

         We find that price expectations are backward-looking. Perceptions of current inflation are

highly significant determinant of inflation expectations. However, perceptions of inflation are a

less important consideration for the more highly educated. Similarly, the most educated are more

likely to be satisfied that the Bank of England in its role in controlling inflation. This could help

explain both their lower inflation expectations and why perceptions of inflation are less

important in determining their inflation expectations.

         These results are similar to those of Pfajfar and Santoro (2008) with respect to

demographic factors that influence inflation expectations as measured by the University of

Michigan survey for the U.S who found that males, the more highly educated and those with

higher incomes are more likely to accurately report the current level of, and predict inflation.

         Furthermore, our results indicate that the formation of inflation expectations may vary

over time. For example, inflation perceptions appear to have been relatively less important,

particularly for some groups such as the most educated, during the recent period in which CPI

inflation exceeded the target than over the entire sample period. This could be consistent with the

evidence from Carroll (2003) that the inflation expectations depends upon whether inflation

matters, which he proxies by coverage in the media.

         The main explanations for heterogeneity in the formation of inflation expectations that

have been proposed in the literature are that agents rely on different models, may have different

12
  Unfortunately we do not have responses according to income for all of the surveys. In alternative specifications of
the interval regressions those on lower incomes tend to have higher inflation expectations, and those on higher
incomes lower inflation expectations. The tables for these exercises are available upon request.


                                                         24
information sets, or have different capacities for processing information. The results presented in

this paper provide some justification for this approach. First, perceptions of current inflation for

the most highly educated are less important for in their forecasts for inflatio. Second, intuitively

we would expect this group can employ more sophisticated models in forming their expectations,

and may have a greater capacity to process information. Hence, this paper provides empirical

support for models of heterogeneity in inflation expectations formation.




                                                25
Table 1: Responses to Bank of England Inflation Attitudes Survey, 1999-2009.


Q. 2: How much would you expect prices in the shops generally to change over the next 12 months?


                     Nov-99 Feb-00 May-00 Aug-00 Nov-00 Feb-01 May-01 Aug-01 Nov-01 Feb-02 May-02 Aug-02 Nov-02
Go down                10     7      4      6      4      5      5       4      5      3      2      4      4
Not change             14     8       9     9      9      11    11       9     13      9      9      9     10
Up by 1% or less       10     7      7     10      8      9      9      10     10     10     10     10     8
Up by 1% but < 2%      16    15      14    15     16      16    17      16     18     17     16     20     17
Up by 2% but < 3%      17    21      21    19     21      20    20      21     20     22     22     22     20
Up by 3% but < 4%       6    12      10    12     12      11     9      11      9     11     11     11     10
Up by 4% but < 5%       3     7      7      6      6       5     7       6      5      6      8      6      5
Up by 5% or more        8    10      11     9     11       10    9       9      7      9      9      9     10
No idea                16    13      16    13     12       13   13      13     13     12     13     10     16

Median                  1.5    2.2       2.4      2.2      2.3       2.1       2.1    2.2          1.9   2.2   2.3    2.1   2.1


                     Feb-03 May-03 Aug-03 Nov-03 Feb-04 May-04 Aug-04 Nov-04 Feb-05 May-05 Aug-05 Nov-05 Feb-06
Go down                 3     3       4      2      2     2       2      2     3       3      5     4       2
Not change              7     10     11      5      7      6      8      8      8      9       8     9      7
Up by 1% or less       7      8       9      8      8     9       9      9     9      12      9     9       6
Up by 1% but < 2%      15     18     15     16     17     17     18     18     17     20      18    18     13
Up by 2% but < 3%      20     21     20     20     22     21     23     22     20     20      20    21     21
Up by 3% but < 4%      12     11     11     15     11     12     12     10     12      9      12    10     14
Up by 4% but < 5%       8     6       6      7      7     6        7     7     6       6      6     7       8
Up by 5% or more       13      8      9     11     11     12       8    11      8      7       8    10     16
No idea                15     15     14     17     14     14     12     14     16     13      15    12     13

Median                 2.5      2.2       2.2       2.6     2.4      2.4        2.3    2.4         2.2    2     2.2   2.2   2.7




                                                                           26
                     May-06 Aug-06 Nov-06          Feb-07 May-07 Aug-07 Nov-07 Feb-08 May-08 Aug-08 Nov-08 Feb-09 May-09
Go down                2       2      2               2      2      1      2      2      1      3     17     14    10
Not change              7      6      6                6     6      5      3      4      3      3      9     13    15
Up by 1% or less       8       9      8               6      8      6      5      4      2      2      3     5      5
Up by 1% but < 2%      15     15     14               14    14      14    13      9      7      4      7      9    10
Up by 2% but < 3%      22     21     21               20    19      22    22     17     16     12     11     12    15
Up by 3% but < 4%      13     13     13               16    17      15    16     14     13     14     11      9    11
Up by 4% but < 5%      7       8      9               9      9       9    10     10     11     15     11      8    11
Up by 5% or more       14     14     16               14    13      14    19     21     37     36     21     16    13
No idea                13     12     11               12    12      13    11     20     11     11     10     14     9

Median                  2.5       2.5      2.7         2.7   2.7    2.7        3   3.3   4.3    4.4    2.8   2.1   2.4

Source: Bank of England Inflation Attitudes Surveys.




                                                                          27
Table 2. The probability of non-response (dprobits), Bank/NOP February 2001-May 2009

                            Satisfaction with                   Price changes
                            Bank of England                     next 12 months

Male                        -0.067 (28.904)                   -0.040 (15.824)
May 2009                    -0.041 (5.161)                    -0.036 (4.588)
February 2009               -0.009 (1.289)                     0.017 (2.095)
November 2008                0.015 (1.685)                    -0.024 (2.858)
August 2008                  0.017 (1.983)                    -0.023 (2.855)
May 2008                     0.023 (2.62)                     -0.021 (2.47)
February 2008                0.05 (6.471)                      0.066 (7.048)
November 2007                0.018 (2.047)                    -0.018 (2.125)
August 2007                  0.031 (3.368)                    -0.005 (0.571)
May 2007                     0.015 (1.699)                    -0.001 (0.152)
February 2007                0.018 (2.444)                    -0.007 (0.88)
November 2006                0.003 (0.382)                    -0.012 (1.313)
August 2006                  0.013 (1.453)                    -0.009 (0.987)
May 2006                     0.033 (3.58)                      0.001 (0.08)
February 2006                0.012 (1.68)                      0.002 (0.203)
November 2005                0.015 (1.648)                    -0.007 (0.752)
August 2005                  0.044 (4.784)                     0.024 (2.379)
May 2005                     0.021 (2.31)                      0.009 (0.894)
February 2005                0.013 (1.693)                     0.03 (3.461)
November 2004                0.061 (6.379)                     0.007 (0.756)
August 2004                  0.011 (1.29)                     -0.011 (1.264)
May 2004                     0.031 (3.311)                     0.011 (1.139)
February 2004                0.005 (0.632)                     0.001 (0.175)
November 2003                0.03 (3.253)                      0.034 (3.211)
August 2003                  0.05 (5.308)                      0.002 (0.205)
May 2003                     0.031 (3.318)                     0.018 (1.77)
February 2003               -0.007 (0.988)                     0.012 (1.477)
February 2002               -0.003 (0.48)                     -0.01 (1.416)
Age 25-34                   -0.039 (10.662)                   -0.029 (6.676)
Age 35-44                   -0.058 (16.244)                   -0.045 (11.153)
Age 45-54                   -0.066 (18.179)                   -0.056 (14.194)
Age 55-64                   -0.082 (22.328)                   -0.056 (13.371)
Age >=65                    -0.076 (19.135)                   -0.02 (3.897)
Not Working                  0.032 (11.315)                    0.026 (8.225)
A-Level                     -0.041 (13.897)                   -0.029 (8.874)
Degree+                     -0.058 (17.589)                   -0.041 (11.882)
Mortgage                    -0.015 (4.375)                    -0.013 (3.509)
Council Rent                 0.077 (18.433)                    0.037 (8.181)
Private Rent                 0.061 (14.528)                    0.032 (6.89)


N                               71068                           71068
Pseudo R2                      .0778                             .0334
Source: Bank of England Inflation Attitudes Surveys: Notes: excluded categories; 16-24; own home outright; February
2001. T-statistics.




                                                         28
Table 3: Interval regressions of Inflation Expectations from Bank of England Inflation Attitudes Survey, 2001-2009

                         (1)                  (2)                (3)                   (4)                (5)
                      2001-2009          2001-2009              2009              2001-2009           2001-2009
Age 25-34                              -0.125 (3.61)       -0.065 (0.42)        -0.124 (3.59)       -0.108 (3.86)
Age 35-44                               0.029 (0.85)       -0.07 (0.46)          0.031 (0.9)        -0.06 (2.17)
Age 45-54                               0.307 (8.69)        0.173 (1.11)         0.31 (8.79)         0.065 (2.26)
Age 55-64                               0.353 (9.31)        0.286 (1.68)         0.357 (9.43)        0.09 (2.9)
Age >=65                                0.266 (6.66)        0.255 (1.43)         0.272 (6.82)        0.038 (1.17)
Worker                                  0.011 (0.52)        0.03 (0.3)           0.012 (0.58)       -0.002 (0.12)
Male                                    0.08 (4.73)        -0.192 (2.37)         0.103 (5.81)        0.036 (2.48)
A-Level                                -0.062 (2.76)       -0.229 (2.06)        -0.05 (2.16)        -0.022 (1.15)
Degree +                               -0.272 (10.16)      -0.734 (5.65)        -0.236 (8.52)       -0.125 (5.54)
Mortgage holder                        -0.107 (4.28)       -0.362 (2.99)        -0.084 (3.3)        -0.053 (2.53)
Council Rent                            0.266 (9.12)        0.62 (4.19)          0.245 (8.18)        0.136 (5.57)
Private Rent                            0.066 (2.27)        0.12 (0.9)           0.065 (2.24)        0.072 (3.05)
A-Level*2009                                                                    -0.13 (1.67)        -0.14 (2.22)
Degree +*2009                                                                   -0.391 (4.29)       -0.314 (4.25)
Mortgage holder*2009                                                            -0.273 (4.11)       -0.329 (6.11)
Council renter*2009                                                              0.309 (3.24)        0.281 (3.63)
Male*2009                                                                       -0.271 (4.49)       -0.04 (0.81)
May 2009            0.169 (2.83)        0.199 (3.32)                             0.56 (6.1)         -0.471 (6.3)
February 2009       0.046 (0.9)         0.064 (1.25)                             0.42 (4.9)         -0.62 (8.88)
November 2008       0.339 (5.6)         0.366 (5.98)                             0.363 (5.95)       -0.965 (19.25)
August 2008         2.133 (34.73)       2.164 (34.94)                            2.161 (34.92)       0.524 (10.25)
May 2008            2.11 (33.72)        2.144 (33.95)                            2.141 (33.93)       0.787 (15.09)
February 2008       1.357 (26.32)       1.367 (26.19)                            1.365 (26.18)       0.395 (9.21)
November 2007       1.125 (18.59)       1.161 (18.67)                            1.159 (18.65)       0.505 (9.94)
August 2007         0.794 (13.11)       0.835 (13.46)                            0.831 (13.4)        0.412 (8.14)
May 2007            0.632 (10.36)       0.648 (10.38)                            0.645 (10.34)       0.109 (2.14)
February 2007       0.736 (14.7)        0.772 (15.03)                            0.77 (15.01)        0.264 (6.31)
November 2006       0.829 (13.82)       0.872 (14.18)                            0.87 (14.15)        0.39 (7.77)
August 2006         0.588 (9.82)        0.617 (10.06)                            0.614 (10.02)       0.212 (4.24)
May 2006            0.594 (9.66)        0.625 (9.92)                             0.622 (9.88)        0.253 (4.93)
February 2006       0.772 (15.33)       0.795 (15.41)                            0.793 (15.39)       0.385 (9.15)
November 2005       0.157 (2.63)        0.182 (2.99)                             0.179 (2.95)        0.139 (2.81)
August 2005         0.052 (0.85)        0.063 (1.01)                             0.06 (0.97)         0.002 (0.04)
May 2005           -0.006 (0.09)        0.034 (0.54)                             0.033 (0.52)        0.087 (1.71)
February 2005       0.16 (3.15)         0.152 (2.94)                             0.151 (2.91)        0.121 (2.88)
November 2004       0.307 (5.04)        0.321 (5.16)                             0.321 (5.15)        0.217 (4.29)
August 2004         0.268 (4.55)        0.285 (4.71)                             0.283 (4.68)        0.187 (3.8)
May 2004            0.458 (7.43)        0.476 (7.49)                             0.475 (7.48)        0.366 (7.08)
February 2004       0.412 (8.23)        0.437 (8.5)                              0.435 (8.46)        0.299 (7.15)
November 2003       0.562 (8.99)        0.579 (9.05)                             0.579 (9.06)        0.413 (7.94)
August 2003         0.124 (2.05)        0.137 (2.21)                             0.136 (2.19)        0.114 (2.25)
May 2003            0.141 (2.28)        0.141 (2.22)                             0.142 (2.24)        0.129 (2.51)
February 2003       0.568 (11.31)       0.599 (11.59)                            0.598 (11.58)       0.469 (11.14)
February 2002       0.132 (2.65)        0.147 (2.88)                             0.146 (2.86)        0.237 (5.7)
Gone down                                                                                           -1.769 (38.63)
No change                                                                                           -1.155 (30.83)
>0% & ≤1%                                                                                           -1.083 (25.83)
>1% & ≤2%                                                                                           -0.548 (15.08)
>2% & ≤3%                                                                                            0.167 (4.88)
>3% & ≤4%                                                                                            0.974 (27.53)
>4% & ≤5%                                                                                            1.583 (41.96)
≥5%                                                                                                  2.311 (65.45)
Constant            2.183 (61.44)       2.069 (37.23)         2.037 (36.52)                          2.109 (39.27)


                                                         29
lnsigma               0.7051 (210.30)   0.7016 (204.25)     1.0287 (78.91)      0.7007 (204.00)       0.4830 (140.64)
sigma                 2.0241            2.0169              2.7974              2.0152                1..6209
LR chi2                3883.88          4794.60             158.23             4891.97               29486.21
N                       64,374         61,605            5,243            61,605                      61,605
Notes: excluded categories; age <25; own outright: GCSE, Feb01 and 'no idea'. T-statistics in parentheses.
Source: Bank of England Inflation Attitudes Survey, February 2001-May 2009. Notes: excluded categories February
2001; private renter and ALS <16. Q2 "How much would you expect prices in the shops generally to change over the
next 12 months?".




                                                         30
Table 4: Bank NOP Inflation Attitudes Survey: Inflation Expectations by Educational Attainment

                                      2001-2009                                                        2007-2009

                     GCSE                   A-Level              Degree+              GCSE             A-Level          Degree+
Age 25-34            -0.036 (0.36)          -0.101 (2.87)        -0.122 (2.24)        -0.178 (0.91)    -0.171 (2.24)    -0.079 (0.66)
Age 35-44            -0.118 (1.24)          -0.064 (1.9)         -0.02 (0.36)         -0.282 (1.54)    -0.061 (0.84)     0.042 (0.34)
Age 45-54             0.110 (1.28)           0.036 (0.98)         0.119 (2.02)         0.042 (0.24)     0.011 (0.14)     0.017 (0.13)
Age 55-64             0.112 (1.33)           0.078 (1.84)         0.127 (1.96)         0.131 (0.79)     0.093 (1.04)     0.19 (1.32)
Age >=65              0.062 (0.74)           0.001 (0.03)         0.178 (2.41)         0.182 (1.1)     -0.012 (0.12)     0.149 (0.91)
Worker                0.020 (0.53)          -0.032 (1.33)         0.07 (1.95)          0.017 (0.2)     -0.035 (0.68)     0.059 (0.77)
Male                  0.003 (0.09)           0.043 (2.14)         0.057 (2.12)        -0.003 (0.05)    -0.024 (0.54)     0.036 (0.61)
Mortgage holder      -0.092 (2.22)          -0.099 (3.22)        -0.052 (1.32)        -0.043 (0.45)    -0.212 (3.15)    -0.077 (0.9)
Council Rent          0.148 (3.99)           0.161 (4.4)          0.085 (1.25)         0.394 (4.6)      0.281 (3.41)     0.289 (1.85)
Private Rent          0.131 (2.97)           0.068 (1.9)          0.022 (0.46)         0.235 (2.55)     0.133 (1.75)     0.131 (1.3)
Gone down            -1.86 (20.45)          -1.783 (27.61)       -1.642 (17.77)       -2.187 (9.16)    -1.986 (11.66)   -2.247 (9.59)
No change            -1.204 (16.08)         -1.112 (20.83)       -1.192 (16.23)       -1.28 (6.46)     -1.015 (7)       -1.343 (6.99)
>0% & ≤1%            -1.132 (13.09)         -1.054 (17.59)       -1.099 (13.85)       -1.149 (5.22)    -0.934 (5.98)    -1.231 (5.98)
>1% & ≤2%            -0.599 (8.15)          -0.526 (10.2)        -0.539 (7.61)        -0.648 (3.58)    -0.543 (4.24)    -0.712 (4.07)
>2% & ≤3%             0.093 (1.36)           0.2 (4.11)           0.166 (2.48)        -0.077 (0.47)     0.205 (1.73)     0.023 (0.15)
>3% & ≤4%             0.951 (13.55)          1.021 (20.26)        0.89 (12.71)         0.803 (4.9)      0.884 (7.5)      0.653 (4.02)
>4% & ≤5%             1.601 (21.8)           1.637 (30.36)        1.433 (18.86)        1.334 (8.1)      1.476 (12.19)    1.081 (6.47)
≥5%                   2.582 (37.13)          2.359 (46.91)        1.833 (25.94)        2.303 (14.85)    2.107 (18.67)    1.588 (10.15)
May 2009             -0.715 (6.99)          -0.721 (10.33)       -0.723 (7.68)
February 2009        -0.689 (8.12)          -0.886 (14.7)        -0.973 (11.6)
November 2008        -0.768 (7.51)          -0.973 (13.7)        -1.042 (10.56)
August 2008           0.471 (4.48)           0.431 (5.92)         0.868 (8.76)
May 2008              0.653 (6.22)           0.827 (10.98)        0.89 (8.93)
February 2008         0.355 (4.16)           0.39 (6.41)          0.486 (5.62)
November 2007         0.508 (5.05)           0.498 (6.74)         0.542 (5.56)
August 2007           0.369 (3.73)           0.463 (6.28)         0.406 (4.16)
May 2007             -0.022 (0.22)           0.091 (1.24)         0.304 (3.1)
February 2007         0.184 (2.33)           0.273 (4.44)         0.377 (4.55)
November 2006         0.331 (3.35)           0.346 (4.82)         0.566 (5.65)
August 2006           0.305 (3.1)            0.173 (2.4)          0.217 (2.24)
May 2006              0.248 (2.47)           0.267 (3.59)         0.254 (2.53)
February 2006         0.402 (4.98)           0.373 (6.13)         0.405 (4.82)
November 2005         0.077 (0.8)            0.148 (2.07)         0.195 (2)

                                                                             31
August 2005           -0.123 (1.24)           0.067 (0.9)            0.021 (0.21)
May 2005              -0.035 (0.36)           0.11 (1.5)             0.226 (2.12)
February 2005         0.014 (0.17)           0.187 (3.05)           0.121 (1.43)
November 2004         0.2 (2.12)             0.21 (2.83)            0.257 (2.53)
August 2004           0.181 (1.96)           0.162 (2.24)           0.267 (2.75)
May 2004              0.29 (3.01)            0.366 (4.85)           0.483 (4.62)
February 2004         0.184 (2.3)            0.354 (5.84)           0.336 (4)
November 2003         0.309 (3.09)           0.405 (5.46)           0.571 (5.3)
August 2003           0.089 (0.89)           0.091 (1.27)           0.195 (1.89)
May 2003              0.074 (0.77)           0.146 (1.97)           0.149 (1.36)
February 2003         0.425 (5.33)           0.541 (8.89)           0.383 (4.49)
February 2002         0.181 (2.33)           0.225 (3.74)           0.345 (4.05)
Constant              2.131 (18.27)          2.09 (29.09)           1.921 (18.33)           2.338 (10.72)          2.341 (17.7)           2.238 (11.11)

lnsigma                0.5115 (75.66)         0.4996 (103.4)         0.4055 (57.93)         0.7596 (59.89)         0.7866 (91.12)         0.7006 (58.19)
sigma                 1.6679                  1.6481                 1.5000                 2.1375                 2.1959                 2.0150
LR chi2               8525.36                 14503.22               6263.50                1637.73                2673.04.94                    1196.74
N                     16,644                  31,113                 13,848                 5514                   11,465                 5329


Notes: excluded categories; age <25; own outright,Feb01 and 'no idea'. T-statistics in parentheses.
Source: Bank of England Inflation Attitudes Survey, February 2001-February 2009. Notes: excluded categories February 2001; private renter; and ALS <16. Q2 "How much
would you expect prices in the shops generally to change over the next 12 months?".




                                                                                32
Table 5: GfK Consumer Confidence Barometer (CCB): Distribution of Responses to Q6:

In comparison with the past 12 months, how do you expect consumer prices will change? Will they:
(weighted % of respondents)

                        1996           1997             1998         1999         2000              2001
Risen a lot              8              6                6            8           11                 7
Risen moderately        25             21               18           22           27                21
Risen slightly          44             48               50           39           34                33
Stayed about the same   20             23               23           26           22                31
Fallen                   2              1                1            4            4                 6
Don't know               1              2                1            2            2                 3

                        2003           2004             2005         2006         2007              2008*   A
Risen a lot              8             11               11           17           18                45
Risen moderately        21             24               23           23           24                24
Risen slightly          34             30               28           28           29                18
Stayed about the same   28             25               24           23           21                10
Fallen                   7              9               12            7            4                 3
Don't know               2              2                2            3            3               N/A

*Jan-Oct inclusive




                                                   33
Table 6. Ordered logits of GFK/CCB expectations 12 months ahead on prices.

                                 (1)                  (2)                (3)                 (4)              (5)
                             1996-2008            1996-2008           2003-2008           2003-2008        2003-2008
30-49                      -.1181 (13.09)       -.0424 (4.65)       -1.0768 (13.66)    -.7520 (11.89)    -.7572 (8.23)
50-64                       .0566 (5.60)         .0982 (9.63)       -1.1190 (13.10)    -.6877 (10.04)    -.8151 (8.29)
65+                         .0586 (5.17)         .0523 (4.57)       -1.7093 (18.00)   -1.0461 (13.73)   -1.0463 (9.30)
Male                       -.193 (28.29)        -.1167 (16.93)      -1.2563 (22.14)    -.4064 (8.91)     -.9383 (14.05)
ALS = 16                   -.0787 (8.00)        -.0505 (5.10)        -.4935 (5.47)     -.2147 (2.97)     -.6188 (5.61)
ALS >16                    -.1103 (10.92)       -.0339 (3.32)       -1.3914 (15.47)    -.5310 (7.35)    -1.2355 (11.29)
North West                  .0024 (0.14)         .0081 (0.45)         .1171 (0.79)      .0329 (0.28)      .1636 (0.94)
Yorks/Humber                .0361 (1.99)         .0317 (1.73)        -.0899 (0.58)     -.0997 (0.81)      .0638 (0.35)
East Midlands               .0211 (1.11)         .0124 (0.65)         .1494 (0.93)      .1098 (0.86)      .1053 (0.56)
West Midlands               .0824 (4.54)         .0391 (2.14)         .3962 (2.59)      .1493 (1.22)      .2239 (1.25)
East Anglia                 .0419 (1.91)         .0236 (1.07)        -.1744 (0.95)     -.1588 (1.08)      .0848 (0.39)
South East                  .0501 (3.06)         .0217 (1.32)        -.0870 (0.63)      .0227 (0.21)      .0538 (0.33)
London                      .1199 (6.92)         .0758 (4.34)         .5193 (3.56)      .3250 (2.78)      .2875 (1.69)
South West                  .0304 (1.66)         .0031 (0.17)         .0651 (0.42)      .0282 (0.23)     -.0477 (0.26)
Scotland                    .0460 (2.54)         .0447 (2.44)        -.1922 (1.26)     -.0315 (0.26)      .0637 (0.35)
Wales                       .0491 (2.39)         .0035 (0.17)         .3372 (1.96)      .0717 (0.52)      .2793 (1.37)
Northern Ireland            .2698 (11.24)        .1519 (6.27)         .6555 (3.25)      .3921 (2.42)      .2024 (0.87)
Self-employed              -.0424 (4.20)         .0029 (0.29)        -.8858 (10.53)    -.3720 (5.51)     -.5747 (5.92)
Self – farmer              -.0742 (1.54)        -.1165 (2.39)         .1085 (0.30)      .0751 (0.26)     -.2626 (0.66)
Clerical & sales           -.0768 (7.32)        -.0404 (3.82)        -.8907 (10.08)    -.3968 (5.60)     -.6242 (6.15)
Skilled manual             -.0576 (4.89)        -.0534 (4.49)        -.1664 (1.67)     -.1663 (2.08)     -.3640 (3.16)
Other manual               -.0237 (1.93)        -.0355 (2.87)         .3130 (2.95)      .1816 (2.13)      .2397 (1.90)
1997                        .1611 (9.66)         .2152 (12.70)
1998                        .1289 (7.76)         .1954 (11.59)
1999                       -.1778 (10.62)       -.0880 (5.20)
2000                        .0294 (1.78)         .0449 (2.69)
2001                       -.0493 (2.97)         .1246 (7.41)
2002                       -.1571 (9.38)         .0766 (4.50)
2003                       -.2322 (13.82)       -.0910 (5.35)
2004                       -.3227 (19.14)       -.2175 (12.75)       1.7595 (18.54)    .6679 (8.76)       .1610 (1.29)
2005                       -.5081 (30.04)       -.3659 (21.34)       1.6605 (17.51)    .5336 (7.01)       .1507 (1.19)
2006                       -.2755 (16.30)       -.2686 (15.68)       3.4911 (36.81)   1.1885 (15.54)      .3938 (3.15)
                                                                          34
2007                         -.1542 (9.14)      -.2258 (13.21)      2.9997 (31.61)       1.3091 (17.15)        .4813 (3.88)
Jan 2008                      .0205 (0.47)      -.1808 (4.12)       6.6793 (26.07)       3.4916 (16.76)        .6788 (2.66)
Feb 2008                      .1275 (2.92)      -.1279 (2.91)       4.0147 (16.63)       1.5597 (8.05)         .6120 (2.39)
Mar 2008                      .3182 (7.30)      -.0433 (0.99)       4.9212 (20.41)       1.7085 (8.82)         .2187 (0.88)
Apr 2008                      .3856 (8.83)       .0043 (0.10)       5.5820 (23.14)       1.8208 (9.39)         .1971 (0.80)
May 2008                      .3384 (7.74)      -.1608 (3.60)       5.9646 (24.73)       1.5036 (7.75)         .3629 (1.49)
Jun 2008                      .5181 (11.58)      .0084 (0.19)       7.8047 (32.33)       2.3323 (11.99)       1.1115 (4.50)
Jul 2008                      .5739 (13.10)      .0255 (0.57)       9.2402 (38.28)       3.1099 (15.97)       1.3845 (5.89)
Aug 2008                      .1501 (3.45)      -.4212 (9.39)       8.4436 (34.98)       1.7658 (9.05)         .0360 (0.15)
Sep 2008                      .2164 (5.07)      -.3685 (8.39)       8.5359 (35.41)       2.1520 (11.06)        .2008 (0.86)
Oct 2008                     -.3275 (7.52)      -.8747 (19.44)      7.4822 (31.01)        .8293 (4.25)       -1.0948 (4.51)
Inflation perceptions rate                                                                .5215 (277.86)       .6832 (289.59)
Stayed about the same*                          .9947 (56.73)
Risen slightly*                                1.8603 (107.13)
Risen moderately*                              2.2753 (126.61)
Risen a lot*                                   2.8600 (143.78)
Don't know*                                    1.5692 (42.46)
Cut1                         3.5792           -1.9059               5.5527               2.3539               4.2969
Cut2                         1.4291             .3942
Cut3                         -.4548            1.4738
Cut4                         1.3350            3.3978
N                             293,378             293,378              139,451               139,405            61,588
Pseudo R2                     .0072             .0509                .0491                .3880                .6073

Source: GFK survey. Notes: excluded categories 1996 (columns 1 & 2) and 2003 (columns 3 & 4); North; <30; ALS<16; prices fall. * refers to how prices
changed over preceding 12 months. Columns 1 & 2 ordered logits and columns 3 & 4 OLS. Column 5 is where exact perceptions and expectations>0




                                                                         35
Table 7: Distribution of Responses to Q. 14 “Overall, how satisfied or dissatisfied are you
with the way the Bank of England is doing its job to set interest rates in order to control
inflation?”:
                      Very        Fairly     Neither     Fairly     Very       No Idea
                  Dissatisfied Dissatisfied             Satisfied Satisfied
November 1999           4           7          26          41          7         16
February 2000           5          12          28          37          4         14
May 2000                4           9          27          38          5         17
August 2000             4           9          25          45          6         12
November 2000           3           8          26          48          7          9
February 2001           3           7          25          47          8         11
May 2001                2           6          23          49          9         12
August 2001             2           6          23          45         10         14
November 2001           2           6          19          51         11         11
February 2002           2           6          20          50         11         11
May 2002                2           6          23          49         10         11
August 2002             3           7          22          46         11         11
November 2002           3           7          23          42         11         14
February 2003           3           7          24          47          8         11
May 2003                2           7          22          46          9         14
August 2003             2           6          22          40         12         17
November 2003           2           6          22          45         10         15
February 2004           3           7          24          46          8         12
May 2004                2           9          23          43          9         14
August 2004             3          10          24          43          8         12
November 2004           3           7          21          44          8         17
February 2005           2           7          23          45         11         12
May 2005                2           6          21          46         13         12
August 2005             2           6          22          45         11         15
November 2005           2           5          21          49         11         12
February 2006            2          6          23          47         10         12
May 2006                3           7          23          44         10         13
August 2006             3           8          25          44          9         11
November 2006           3           8          25          45          9         11
February 2007           4           9          25          41          9         12
May 2007                4          10          26          43          7         11
August 2007             4          12          23          40          8         13
November 2007           5          12          23          41          7         12
February 2008           4          10          26          37          7         15
May 2008                6          14          26          36          6         13
August 2008             7          15          25          36          4         12
November 2008           8          15          23          37          5         12
February 2009          12          16          25          33          5          9
May 2009                11         16          24          37          7          6

Source: Bank of England Inflation Attitudes Survey.



                                            36
Table 8. Ordered logits modeling satisfaction with the performance of the Bank of England,
2001-2009
                           (1)                 (2)                   (3)              (4)
                        2001-2009           2001-2009              2009         2001-2009

Age 25-34                                 0.140 (4.59)         0.039 (-0.42)     0.160 (4.96)
Age 35-44                                 0.398 (13.15)        0.225 (-2.43)     0.421 (13.20)
Age 45-54                                 0.514 (16.23)        0.184 (-1.94)     0.553 (16.53)
Age 55-64                                 0.696 (20.42)        0.166 (-1.61)     0.756 (21.03)
Age >=65                                  0.870 (24.23)        0.362 (-3.34)     0.925 (24.42)
Worker                                    0.011 (0.592)       -0.005 (-0.08)     0.016 (0.78)
Male                                      0.541 (34.95)        0.386 (-7.78)     0.551 (33.96)
A-Level                                   0.190 (9.30)         0.200 (-2.94)     0.196 (9.2)
Degree+                                   0.516 (21.16)        0.503 (-6.28)     0.519 (20.37)
Mortgage holder                           0.095 (4.19)         0.495 (-6.62)     0.052 (2.21)
Council Rent                             -0.420 (16.06)        0.076 (-0.84)    -0.446 (16.38)
Private Rent                             -0.261 (9.95)         0.175 (-2.17)    -0.311 (11.29)
Age 25-34*2009                                                                  -0.122 (1.19)
Age 35-44*2009                                                                  -0.156 (1.53)
Age 45-54*2009                                                                  -0.332 (3.19)
Age 55-64*2009                                                                  -0.562 (4.94)
Age >=65*2009                                                                   -0.492 (4.10)
Worker*2009                                                                     -0.027 (0.41)
A-Level*2009                                                                     0.038 (0.50)
Degree+*2009                                                                     0.068 (0.77)
Mortgage holder*2009                                                             0.534 (6.54)
Council Rent*2009                                                                0.353 (3.58)
Private Rent*2009                                                                0.527 (5.91)
Male*2009                                                                       -0.102 (1.88)
May 2009               -0.713 (13.4)     -0.761 (14.05)                         -0.824 (5.89)
February 2009          -0.952 (21.34)    -1.013 (22.17)                         -1.067 (7.80)
November 2008          -0.674 (12.50)    -0.737 (13.40)                         -0.736 (13.36)
August 2008            -0.711 (13.36)    -0.743 (13.74)                         -0.739 (13.67)
May 2008               -0.592 (10.94)    -0.637 (11.55)                         -0.634 (11.49)
February 2008          -0.332 (7.42)     -0.382 (8.37)                          -0.381 (8.33)
November 2007          -0.266 (4.92)     -0.318 (5.66)                          -0.316 (5.63)
August 2007            -0.277 (5.11)     -0.341 (6.09)                          -0.339 (6.05)
May 2007               -0.211 (3.91)     -0.268 (4.81)                          -0.268 (4.80)
February 2007          -0.141 (3.15)     -0.168 (3.64)                          -0.168 (3.63)
November 2006          -0.045 (0.84)     -0.063 (1.15)                          -0.060 (1.01)
August 2006             0.036 (0.66)     -0.030 (0.55)                          -0.031 (0.55)
May 2006                0.067 (1.21)      0.033 (0.57)                           0.034 (0.59)
February 2006           0.157 (3.51)      0.100 (2.18)                           0.100 (2.16)
November 2005           0.309 (5.75)      0.266 (4.82)                           0.267 (4.84)
August 2005             0.230 (4.18)      0.179 (3.17)                           0.148 (3.19)
May 2005                0.333 (5.97)      0.277 (4.83)                           0.051 (0.87)
February 2005           0.192 (4.25)      0.149 (3.22)                          -0.087 (1.60)
November 2004           0.093 (1.68)      0.052 (0.92)                          -0.026 (0.45)
August 2004            -0.042 (0.79)     -0.086 (1.58)                          -0.004 (0.10)
May 2004                0.003 (0.06)     -0.026 (0.45)                           0.146 (2.55)
February 2004           0.021 (0.47)     -0.005 (0.11)                           0.182 (3.19)


                                              37
November 2003           0.141 (2.54)       0.145 (2.54)                            0.142 (2.47)
August 2003             0.173 (3.14)       0.18 (3.14)                             0.064 (1.40)
May 2003                0.119 (2.15)       0.141 (2.45)                            0.325 (7.07)
February 2003           0.041 (0.93)       0.061 (1.34)                           -0.122 (1.19)
February 2002           0.297 (6.69)       0.321 (6.99)                           -0.156 (1.53)
cut1                  -3.176              -2.402                -1.1241           -2.389
cut2                  -1.884              -1.100                -0.0466           -1.090
cut3                  -0.449               0.368                1.0808             0.386
cut4                   2.162               3.094                3.6107             3.118
Pseudo R2              0.0128              0.0366               0.0137             0.0378
N                      65,359              62,699                5498              62699
Notes: excluded categories; age <25; own outright: GCSE and Feb01. T-statistics in parentheses.
Source: Bank of England Inflation Attitudes Surveys, February 2001-May 2009.
Notes: excluded categories February 2001; private renter and ALS <16. T-statistics in
parentheses.




                                              38
Table 9. Probability of correctly reporting the level/changes in the official inflation rate,
2005/2006 (dprobits).

                                     Level                    Change 2006 over 2005

Age                               .0199 (4.82)                .0110 (2.47)
Age2                             -.00017 (4.27)              -.00013 (2.97)
Male                              .2196 (8.29)                .1039 (3.45)
ALS 16-19                         .1058 (3.17)               -.0548 (1.47)
ALS ≥20                           .2124 (4.63)                .0856 (1.75)
Still studying                    .2862 (2.54)                .0752 (0.82)
Home worker                       .0862 (1.06)                .1371 (1.88)
Unemployed                        .0466 (0.56)                .0078 (0.10)
Retired                           .1928 (2.79)                .1155 (1.71)
Professional lawyer               .3318 (2.69)                .0465 (0.39)
Shop owner                        .0651 (0.54)               -.1374 (1.07)
Business proprietor               .3755 (2.44)                .0992 (0.65)
Employed professional             .4668 (4.71)                .2491 (2.73)
General management                .5564 (3.76)                .2791 (2.00)
Middle management                 .2411 (2.84)                .0814 (1.03)
Employed at desk                  .2455 (2.83)                .2168 (2.80)
Employed traveling                .2950 (1.95)               -.0842 (0.54)
Employed in a service             .1352 (1.48)                .2394 (2.91)
Supervisor                        .2871 (1.99)                .1286 (0.91)
Skilled manual                    .0926 (1.18)                .1126 (1.47)
N                                    1303                       1300
Pseudo R2                         .1633                       .0612                    .
Source: Eurobarometer #67.2: European Union Enlargement, Personal Data Privacy, the National
Economy, and Scientific Research, April-May 2007. Notes: Excluded categories: unskilled manual: ALS
<16. Inflation rates were as follows 2005 CPI 2.1% RPI 2.8% 2006 CPI 2.3% RPI 3.2%. We take a
'correct' answer in the interval of 1.3% to 4.2%. Non answers were taken as an incorrect answer. Column 1
relates to whether the respondent reported the 2006 rate correctly (±1%) while columns 2 relates to whether
the respondent was able to report correctly that inflation was higher in 2006 than in 2005. T-statistics in
parentheses.




                                                   39
Table 10. Probability of correctly reporting the inflation rate 12 months ahead, February,
2005-2008 (dprobits)
                                 CPI                      RPI               CPI & RPI
25-34                        .0254 (1.49)            -.0350 (2.17)         .0153 (0.95)
35-44                        .0604 (3.61)             .0015 (0.09)         .0528 (3.36)
45-54                        .0772 (4.43)             .0221 (1.31)         .0671 (4.12)
55-64                        .1071 (5.82)             .0377 (2.10)         .0918 (5.38)
≥65                          .0718 (3.77)            -.0032 (0.18)         .0516 (2.89)
Male                         .0300 (3.63)             .0417 (5.26)         .0404 (5.02)
Not working                 -.0275 (2.65)            -.0058 (0.59)        -.0318 (3.14)
Mortgage                     .0088 (0.72)             .0032 (0.28)         .0196 (1.63)
Council renting             -.0501 (3.64)             .0038 (0.29)        -.0229 (1.70)
Private renters             -.0452 (3.30)            -.0157 (1.19)        -.0267 (1.99)
A-level                      .0628 (5.86)             .0130 (1.27)         .0489 (4.72)
Degree+                      .1158 (8.92)             .0065 (0.53)         .0842 (6.83)
Feb 2008 dummy              -.0786 (6.89)            -.3688 (37.68)        .0923 (8.70)
Feb 2007 dummy              -.0483 (4.18)            -.0829 (8.26)         .2225 (21.25)
Feb 2006 dummy              -.0242 (2.10)            -.0940 (9.41)         .2077 (19.82)

N                             15,125                  15,125                 15,125
Pseudo R2                     .0145                 .0969                 .0415

Source: Bank of England Inflation Attitudes Surveys, February, 2005-8
Notes: excluded age <25; own outright: GCSE, Feb05. CPI in February 2006 2.0%;
February 2007 2.8%, February 2008 2.5% and February 2009 3.2%. RPI in February
2006 2.4%; February 2007 4.6%, February 2008 4.1% and February 2009 0%.
Responses are assumed 'correct' if they are with 1 percentage point of the outturn. Hence
in the final column a correct answer is within 1 percentage point either side of the CPI
and the RPI. Hence scored as correct in 2005 if inflation in range >=1% and <5%.
Scored as correct in 2006 as 1% to between 3% and 4%. Scored as correct in 2007 if
inflation in range 1% to over 5%. Scored as correct in February 2009 if inflation
expectations in range >=-1% and <5%. T-statistics in parentheses.




                                            40
Chart 1: Surveys of Household Inflation                                                 Chart 2: Bank/NOP Median Inflation
Expectations                                                                            Expectations and CPI Inflation
                                                                                                    Inflation Expectations                                                        % oya
                         Basix (rhs)
 Balance                 Citigroup YouGov (rhs)                             %                                                                                                                6
                         Bank of England / NOP (rhs)                                                CPI
 100                     GfK CCB Survey (lhs)                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                             5
   90                                                                           4.5
   80                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                                                             4
   70                                                                           3.5

   60                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                             3
   50                                                                           2.5
   40                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                             2
   30                                                                           1.5

   20                                                                           1                                                                                                            1
   10                                                                           0.5

    0                                                                           0                                                                                                        0
    2000      2001   2002     2003   2004 2005    2006    2007    2008   2009           1999        2001        2002          2004          2005          2006          2008          2009


Chart 3: Bank/NOP Median Inflation                                                      Chart 4: RPI, RPIX and CPI Inflatio
Expectations and RPIX Inflation
              Inflation Expectations                                       % oya                                                                                                  % oya
                                                                                    6          RPIX             RPI              CPI
                                                                                                                                                                                             6
              RPIX

                                                                                    5                                                                                                        5

                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                             3

                                                                                    3                                                                                                        2

                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                    2

                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                             -1

                                                                                    0                                                                                                        -2
1999       2000   2001     2002   2003   2004    2005    2006    2007    2008           1999        2001        2002          2003           2005          2006         2008


Chart 5: Bank/NOP Median Inflation                                                      Chart 6: Swathe of Survey Reponses to
Perceptions and Expectations                                                            Bank/NOP Survey 2001-2006
              Inflation Perceptions                                                                                                                                               %      40
                                                                                %
              Inflation Expectations
                                                                                5.5                                                                                                      35

                                                                                5                                                                                                        30

                                                                                4.5                                                                                                      25

                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                3.5
                                                                                                                                                                                         15

                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                         Go do wn       No      Up by 1%      Up by 1%     Up by 2%     Up by 3%     Up by 4%     Up by 5%
                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                     c ha nge    o r le s s   but le s s   but le s s   but le s s   but le s s   o r m o re
1999       2000   2001     2002   2003   2004    2005    2006    2007    2008                                                 tha n 2%     tha n 3%     tha n 4%     tha n 5%




                                                                                         41
Chart 7: Swathe of Survey Reponses to                                           Chart 8: Average Earnings Growth, AEI
Bank/NOP Survey 2007-2009                                                       Measure
                                                                           %                                                            %
                                                                                                                                               8
                                                                       40

                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                       35


                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                               4


                                                                       25                                                                      2

                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                               0

                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                               -2
                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                               -4
                                                                       5
                                                                                       Regular pay drift   Bonus contribution
                                                                                       Wage settlmenets    Overall AEI growth                  -6
                                                                        0
 Go dow n     Not    Up by 1% Up by 1% Up by 2% Up by 3% Up by 4% Up by 5%
            change    or less  but less but less but less but less or more                                                                     -8
                               than 2% than 3% than 4% than 5%                   1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009


Chart 9: CPI Inflation and Median Inflation
Expectations by Educational Attainment
        CPI
        Low Education                                                       6
        Middle Education
        High Education                                                      5


                                                                            4


                                                                            3


                                                                            2


                                                                            1


                                                                          0
 2001         2002         2003     2005        2006       2007       2009




                                                                                 42
                                       References

Bahkshi, H., Yates, A. (1998), 'Are UK inflation expectations rational?', Bank of England
Working Paper 81.

Bank of England (2008), Inflation Report Q1, Volume 48 Issue 1.

Batchelor, R. (1986), 'Quantitative v. qualitative measures of inflation expectations',
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 48, pp.99-120.

Batchelor, R., Dua, P. (1987), 'The accuracy and rationality of UK inflation expectations:
some quantitative evidence', Applied Economics, 19, pp. 819-28.

Bernanke, B. (2007), 'Inflation expectations and inflation forecasting. Remarks given at
the Monetary Economics Workshop of the NBER Summer Institute, Cambridge Mass.,
July 10.

Blanchflower, D.G. and R. Kelly (2008), ‘Macroeconomic literacy, numeracy and the
implications for monetary policy’, working paper Bank of England, April 29th.

Blanchflower, D. and Oswald, A.J. (2004), 'Well-being over time in Britain and the
United States. Journal of Public Economics 88, pp. 1359-86.

Branch, W. (2004), 'The theory of rationally heterogeneous expectations: evidence from
survey data on inflation expectations. Economic Journal, 114(497), pp. 592-621.

Brock, W., Hommes, C. (1997), 'A rational route to randomness', Econometrica, 65(5),
pp. 1059-95.

Carroll, C. (2003), 'Macroeconomic expectations of households and professional
forecasters', Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1), pp. 269-98.

Clarida, R., Gali, J., Gertler, M. (2000), 'Monetary policy rules and macroeconomic
stability: evidence and some theory', Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(1), pp. pp.
147-80.

Benford, B., Driver, R., (2007). Public attitudes to inflation and interest rates. Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin Q2, pp. 208-23.

Gramlich, E. (1983), 'Models of inflation expectations formation', Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking,15(2), pp. 155-73.

Gurkaynak, R., Sack, B., Swanson, E. (2003), The excess sensitivity of long term interest
rates: evidence and implications for macroeconomic models. Federal Reserve Board
Finance and Economics Working Paper 50.




                                           43
Gurkaynak, R., Sack, B., Swanson, E. (2002), 'Market based measures of monetary
policy expectations', Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Working Paper 40.

Keane, M., Runkle, D. (1990), 'Testing the rationality of price forecasts: new evidence
from panel data', American Economic Review, 80(4), pp. 714-35.

Kelly, R., (2008), 'The causal relationship between inflation and inflation expectations in
the UK. Mimeo, Bank of England.

Levin, A., Natalucci, F., Piger, J. (2004) The macroeconomic effects of inflation
targeting. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 86(4), pp. 51-80.

O’Reilly, G., Whelan, K. (2004), 'Has euro-area inflation persistence changed over time?
European Central Bank Working Paper #335.

Maddala, G., Fishe, R., Lahiri, K. (1983), 'A time series analysis of popular expectations
data;, In: Zellner, A. (Ed.), Applied Time Series Analysis of Economic Data, U.S. Bureau
of Census, Washington D.C., 278-290.

Mankiw, G., Reis, R., Wolfers, J. (2003), 'Disagreement about inflation expectations.
NBER Working Paper #9796.

Mishkin, F. (2007), 'Inflation dynamics', NBER Working Paper 13147.

Mitchell, J., Weale, M. (2007), 'The rationality and reliability of expectations reported by
British Households: Micro evidence from the British Household Panel Survey. Paper
presented at the joint Deutsche Bundesbank/FRB of Cleveland Conference, Frankfurt am
Main, 6-7 June 2007.

Orphanides, A., Williams, J. (2003), 'Inflation scares and forecast-based monetary
policy.', Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 11.

Pacquet, A. (1992), 'Inflationary expectations and rationality. Economics Letters 40, pp.
303-8.

Pfajfar, D., Santoro, E., (2006), 'Heterogeneity and learning in inflation expectation
formation: an empirical assessment', Universita degli studi di Trento, Discussion Paper 7.

Pfajfar, D., Santoro, E., (2008), ‘Asymmetries in Inflation Expectation Formation Across
Demographic Groups’, Cambridge Working Papers in Economics, No. 0824.

Souleles, N. (2004), 'Expectations, heterogeneous forecast errors, and consumption:
micro evidence from the Michigan Consumer Sentiment Surveys', Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking, 36(1), pp. 39-72.




                                            44
Stock, J., Watson, M. (2007), 'Why has US inflation become harder to forecast? Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking, 39(1), pp. 3-33.




                                         45
