                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      CREDIT CRISES, MONEY AND CONTRACTIONS:
                                AN HISTORICAL VIEW

                                          Michael D. Bordo
                                         Joseph G. Haubrich

                                        Working Paper 15389
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15389


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2009




The views expressed here are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland or the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. We thank Kent Cherny
and Sagar Shah for excellent research assistance, and David Wheelock for sharing data. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Michael D. Bordo and Joseph G. Haubrich. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Credit Crises, Money and Contractions: an historical view
Michael D. Bordo and Joseph G. Haubrich
NBER Working Paper No. 15389
September 2009
JEL No. E32,E50,G21

                                             ABSTRACT

The relatively infrequent nature of major credit distress events makes an historical approach particularly
useful. Using a combination of historical narrative and econometric techniques, we identify major
periods of credit distress from 1875 to 2007, examine the extent to which credit distress arises as part
of the transmission of monetary policy, and document the subsequent effect on output. Using turning
points defined by the HardingPagan algorithm, we identify and compare the timing, duration, amplitude
and comovement of cycles in money, credit and output. Regressions show that financial distress events
exacerbate business cycle downturns both in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries and that a confluence
of such events makes recessions even worse.


Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

Joseph G. Haubrich
Federal Reserve Bank ofCleveland
1455 East 6th Street
Cleveland, Ohio 44114
jhaubrich@clev.frb.org
           1. Introduction

Credit market distress arises in its more virulent form only in certain monetary
environments, and has its most extreme effects when it exacerbates a business
cycle downturn. Policy questions about a central bank’s role as lender of last
resort or regulator must be seen in the context of monetary policy.
       The relatively infrequent nature of major credit distress events makes an
historical approach to these issues particularly useful. Using a combination of
historical narrative and econometric techniques, we identify major periods of
credit distress from 1875 to 2007, examine the extent to which credit distress
arises as part of the transmission of monetary policy, and document the
subsequent effect on output.
       These issues involve relationships between policy rates (monetary
aggregates), credit spreads, and GDP growth. Using turning points defined by
the Harding‐Pagan algorithm, we compare the timing, duration, amplitude and
co‐movement of cycles in money, credit and output. For the period since the
1920s, this is most easily done with a risk spread between corporate and
Treasury bonds, the discount rate, and real GDP. This allows us to pick out and
compare periods of tight credit that result from tight monetary policy and those
that have a more exogenous cause. For the period from 1875 to 1920, credit
spreads are measured by differences between yields on different rail road bonds,
and the conditions in the money market are measured by commercial paper
yields. We also examine the patterns for real stock prices since stock market
crashes also can act as an exacerbating factor in credit turmoil.


1.1 Literature review


The effect of credit on the broader economy has been of concern to economists
since the early days of the profession. Nineteenth century authors often spoke of
“discredit,” a term Kindleberger (2000) adopts for the later phase of a financial
crisis. Mitchell (1913) was an early expositor of the credit channel as was Hansen
(1921), and J. Laurence Laughlin (1913) testified that “the organization of credit
is more important than the question of bank notes.” Disentangling the impact of
credit supply from changes in demand as well as from the myriad channels of
monetary policy remains a challenging empirical (and theoretical!) exercise even

                                         2
today. The importance of expectations in forward‐looking financial markets—
indeed for economic behavior in general—further compounds the problem.
       Much work has focused on isolating the “credit channel” of monetary
policy from other transmission mechanisms. Bernanke and Gertler (1995) review
the ways monetary policy can affect the “external finance premium” and the cost
and amount of credit obtained by firms. The balance sheet (or broad lending)
channel affects firm (and individual) credit worthiness by changing the value of
available collateral (Bernanke and Gertler, 1989, Mishkin, 1978) The bank
lending (or narrow lending) channel works by restricting banks’ ability to
borrow and subsequently lend to smaller firms (Bernanke and Blinder, 1988).
Earlier, of course, Brunner and Meltzer (1972) emphasized the importance of
distinguishing between money and bank credit.
   Though agency problems, credit rationing, and other deviations from the
Modigliani‐Miller paradigm provide a basis for financial accelerator models that
transmit the effects of monetary policy, such frictions also mean that credit
markets can produce as well as transmit shocks. Rajan (1994) shows how banks
can transmit business cycle shocks independently of monetary policy, as
reputational concerns induce herding in credit availability. Gorton and He
(2008) view credit tightening as an increase in monitoring by banks resulting
from the need to enforce collusive behavior over time.
   Empirically there have been several approaches to identifying credit effects.
One looks at particular historical episodes for evidence, and our historical
narrative takes a closer look at this section of the literature. A second strand uses
microeconomic data of particular industries, often looking at regulatory or other
changes that shift bank portfolios (Haubrich and Wachtel, 1993, Beatty and Gron,
2001) or demonstrate that financial constraints affect firm investment (Fazzari,
Hubbard and Petersen, 1988, Lamont, 1997). A third strand examines the
relationship between bank lending standards as a measure of the credit cycle. See
eg. Asea and Blomberg (1998), Lown and Morgan (2006) and Dell’Arricia and
Marquez (2006). And a fourth strand has worked to calibrate general equilibrium
models with explicit financial frictions, looking to obtain tighter bounds of credit
effects (Carlstrom and Fuerst 1997, Christiano, Motto and Rostogno 2008),
building on the earlier work of Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1996). This
fourth strand builds upon the real business cycle work that emphasizes the


                                          3
importance of technology shocks as a driver of business cycles (Kydland and
Prescott, 1982, Long and Plosser, 1983). This literature also suggests that the
historical record of money and credit shocks may be endogenous responses to
more fundamental technology shocks(Cole and Ohanian, 1999). We attempt to
address these concerns by examining historical values of total factor productivity
in our examination of cycles.
   More recently, there has been renewed interest in observing correlations
between macro variables across broad ranges of countries and time periods, as in
Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Claessens, Kose, and Terrones (2008). Our work
is closer to these latter papers and the related work of Mishkin (1990). Relative to
Mishkin and Reinhart and Rogoff, we give greater attention to all business
cycles, not just those associated with crises, giving a broader picture of the
relations between money, credit and output. Relative to Claessens, Kose and
Terrones and Reinhart and Rogoff, we look at one country, and are able to give
greater detail on the institutional and historical factors at work in the economy.
For example, we can compare how contemporary accounts of credit conditions
compare with empirical measures of credit tightness.
   Section 2 presents an historical narrative, providing descriptive evidence on
the incidence of policy tightening, banking and stock market crashes, and credit
market turmoil across 27 U.S. business cycles. This narrative is designed to
complement the empirical evidence in the rest of the paper where we use
empirical methods to discern significant patterns in the data. We focus on the
relationship between monetary policy, credit cycles, asset busts and real GDP.
Section 3 discusses our methodology. We use the Harding and Pagan ( 2002)
algorithm to identify cycles in money credit, stock prices and real GDP and then
examine the concordance of these cycles.
   Section 4 presents the empirical results, first comparing the duration, timing,
and amplitude of cycles in money, credit, and output. Several sets of regressions
then compare the depth of recessions to the cyclical movements in other
variables. Section 5 concludes.


          2. Historical Narrative

Table 1 presents some salient qualitative features of the 29 U.S. business cycle
recessions from 1875 to the present. We show evidence on the incidence of banking

                                          4
crises, stock market crashes, real estate busts, tight monetary policy, credit crunches.
We also provide brief comments on the underlying events. Figure 1 shows related
data on real GDP, the price level, money supply (M2), bank lending, short‐term
interest rates, the quality spread, the Standard and Poor’s stock price index, and
Shiller’s (2005) index of real house prices.


                2.1.Classical Gold Standard Period 1875‐1914


From 1875‐1914 1 the U.S. was an open economy on the gold standard and had
significant capital inflows from Europe, especially the U.K.. There was no central
bank but the Treasury on occasion performed central banking functions. The
country had frequent business recessions and also frequent banking panics which
greatly worsened the contractions. Banking panics were endemic in a banking
system characterized by unit banking (with prohibitions against branching or
interstate banking) and the absence of an effective lender of last resort. Foreign
interest rate shocks as the Bank of England periodically raised its discount rate led
to sudden stops in capital inflows, gold outflows, declines in the money supply,
bank lending and declines in real output and prices (Bordo, 2006).
        These events were associated with stock market crashes and banking panics.
The stock market was closely linked to the national banking system through the
inverted pyramid of credit whereby national bank reserves in the country and
reserve city national banks were concentrated in the New York banks. These
reserves were held as call loans and were invested in the New York Stock exchange.
Consequently shocks to the stock market would spread to the banking system and
vice versa (Bordo, Rappoport and Schwartz 1992).
        Contemporaries such as Sprague (1910) discussed the tightening of bank
credit during these events. Calomiris and Hubbard (1989) present evidence of
equilibrium credit rationing reflecting asymmetric information in the context of the
Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) model. 2


1
  From 1875 to January 1, 1879 the U.S. was still on the floating Greenback Standard. However the
Resumption Act of 1875 anchored expectations on the announced return to gold parity and the dollar pound
exchange rate was very close to parity (Bordo, Erceg and Levin, 2007).
2
  Bordo, Rappoport and Schwartz ( 992) provide evidence doubting the presence of credit rationing in the
National Banking era. They argue that it is difficult to distinguish credit shocks from shocks to the money
supply. They explain most of the variation in national bank lending by the movement of stock prices held
as collateral.

                                                    5
        Of the ten business cycles for this period covered in Table 1, three had serious
banking panics, with mild or incipient panics in another four. Deep recessions were
associated with the banking panics. Seven downturns were associated with stock
market crashes. There is no evidence of national real estate busts in this period
although there were some famous regional busts, eg. California in the 1890s. In three
of the recessions associated with panics, Bank of England tightening leading to a
sudden stop of capital inflows was likely the source of the shock. In addition
monetary tightening contingent on the fear that legislation associated with the Free
Silver movement (Bland Allison Act of 1878 and the Sherman Silver Purchase Act of
1893) likely led to the panic of 1893 and the currency (and minor banking) crisis of
1896 (Friedman and Schwartz,1963, Gorton, 1987). According to Calomiris and
Hubbard (1989) citing Sprague and others, credit crunches occurred in the major
recessions.


              2.2.Important Episodes


1873.
A serious international crisis with origins in a real estate bust in Vienna and Berlin
was in the U.S. associated with corporate malfeasance in the dominant railroad
sector (Benmelech and Bordo 2008), a stock market crash and a banking panic with
widespread banking failures. The panic ended with the suspension of of
convertibility of bank liabilities into currency. The evidence of fraud in railroads
precipitated a sudden stop in capital inflows from England. The resultant recession
lasted until 1879. Mishkin (1990) provides evidence that a quality spread between
Moody’s Baa corporate bond rate and the long‐term Treasury bond rate spiked after
the banking panic and stock market crash. This is cited as evidence for the presence
of declining net worth and asymmetric information, which in turn increased agency
costs and reduced bank lending.


1893.
A serious banking and stock market crash in the summer of 1893 was triggered by
the passage of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act, which led to fears the U.S. would be
forced off the gold standard and to capital flight. In the crisis hundreds of banks
failed. Attempts by the New York Clearing House to issue clearing house loan


                                          6
certificates did not stop the panic. It ended with the suspension of convertibility. As
in the crisis of 1873, Calomiris and Hubbard cite evidence of equilibrium credit
rationing, eg. Stevens (1894) “…wholesale transactions [are] usually done on credit.
[New] general business was …being done almost on a cash basis” (page 141), and
Mishkin (1990) shows the quality spread peaks with the crisis. “The contraction of
lending by the banking system as a result of its trouble reduced its role in solving
adverse selection and agency problems and clearly made these problems worse in
the financial markets” (page 19).


1907.
This serious recession was also accompanied by a banking panic and stock market
crash. It may have been triggered by Bank of England tightening in 1906 in reaction
to a gold outflow to the U.S. to cover insurance claims from the San Francisco
earthquake (Odell and Weidenmeir, 2004). In the U.S. the collapse of a corner of the
copper market in October led to the failure of 8 banks, followed by the failure of the
Knickerbocker Trust Company. This led to a run on the other trust companies and
then a general panic. The issue of clearing house loan certificates, the transfer of
funds from the Treasury to key New York banks and a rescue by a syndicate
organized by J.P. Morgan alleviated the pressure, but the panic only ended with the
suspension of convertibility. The panic was associated with hundreds of bank
failures, a significant drop in money supply and a deep recession. As in other panic
episodes, Calomiris and Hubbard cite contemporary evidence for a credit crunch.
Persons (1920) discusses “a halt in further credit expansion” (page 147); Sprague
(1910): “It would seem, then, past business distress from lack of credit facilities was
due at least to three influences: the restriction of cash payments by the banks
increased the requirements of borrowers; the supply of loans was reduced by a
moderate amount of contraction; and the shifting of loans involved considerable
uncertainty and inconveniences” (page 303). Mishkin (1990), as in the previous crisis
shows a spike in the quality spread. According to him “the decline in the valuation
of firms [in the stock market crash] raises adverse selection and agency problems for
borrowing firms because it has in effect lowered their net worth. … The resulting
increases in asymmetric information problems even before the October banking
panic, should raise the spread between interest rates for high and low quality
borrowers….The process of severe asymmetric problems even before the banking


                                          7
panic suggests that they were … potentially important factors in creating a severe
business cycle contraction.” (pp 21‐27).


1914.
The outbreak of World War I led to a massive capital outflow from U.S. financial
markets to the belligerents. This massive sudden stop threatened the New York
stock market, the banking system and U.S. gold reserves. Treasury Secretary
McAdoo invoked the Aldrich Vreeland Act to issue emergency currency to allay the
banking panic, closed the NYSE and pooled U.S. gold reserves. The crisis was
largely averted. There is no narrative evidence of a credit crunch.


2.3 The Interwar years: 1918‐1945


The Federal Reserve was established in 1914 in part to solve the absence of a lender
of last resort in the crises of the pre‐1914 National Banking era. In its first 25 years
there were three very severe business cycle downturns: 1920‐21, 1929‐33 and 1937‐
38. All three were associated with very tight money. The 1929‐33 recession had four
banking panics producing the Great Contraction. The stock market crashed in 1920,
1929, 1930‐32 and 1937. According to White (2008) there was a real estate boom and
bust in the 1920s and another in 1929‐33. There is considerable evidence for collapse
of bank lending (a credit crunch) in 1930‐33 and 1937‐38. According to Bernanke
(1983) both the numerous bank failures that occurred and the collapse in net worth
brought about by bankruptcies, falling asset prices and deflation, increased the cost
of credit intermediation and reduced real output over and above the efforts of a
decline in money supply posited by Friedman and Schwartz (1963).


1920‐21
The Fed tightened dramatically raising its discount rate in late 1919 to roll back the
inflation that had built up during World War I and to restore effective adherence to
the gold standard. This followed a severe but brief recession (industrial production
fell 23%, wholesale prices fell 37% and unemployment increased from 4% to 12%)
possibly because Fed actions were not anticipated (Bordo, Erceg and Levin, 2007).
No banking crises occurred but there was a stock market crash, according to
Mishkin and White (2002). Also there is no narrative evidence for a credit crunch;


                                           8
the transmission of tight money occurred through a rise in real interest rates
(Meltzer 2005 p.118).


1929‐33
The Fed tightened beginning in early 1928 to stem the stock market boom which
began in 1926. This tightening led to a recession in August 1929 and a stock market
crash in October. The New York Fed initially followed expansionary policy to
prevent a money market panic in October. It then stopped easing by the end of the
year. Despite demands from New York, the Federal Reserve Board in Washington,
following the real bills doctrine, was concerned about rekindling stock market
speculation. A series of banking panics beginning in October 1930 ensued. The Fed
did little to offset them, hence allowing the recession to become a depression.
According to Friedman and Schwartz(1963), the banking panics reduced the money
stock by a third and led to similar declines in real output and prices. The process
was aggravated by debt and asset price deflation. According to Bernanke (1983) the
bank failures and the collapse of net worth (Mishkin, 1978) raised the cost of credit
intermediation seen in an increase in quality spreads. In addition, Calomiris and
Mason (2003) and Calomiris and Wilson (2004) identify the shocks to bank lending
(credit crunch) using, respectively, a panel of bank data by states and by New York
City national banks.


1937‐38
Recovery from the Great Contraction began with Roosevelt’s Banking Holiday in
early March 1933 and Treasury gold purchases (Romer, 1992). It was slowed
somewhat by the supply shocks of the NIRA (Cole and Ohanian, 2004). A second
severe recession in 1937‐38 was produced by a major Fed policy error. It doubled
reserve requirements in 1936 to sop up banks’ excess reserves. This led to another
collapse in money supply and a return to severe recession. Both Bernanke (1983) and
Calomiris and Wilson (2004) see evidence for a decline in the supply of bank loans (a
crunch) in response to deflation and declining net worth.


2.4 The Post‐War Period: 1945‐1980




                                         9
The Fed emerged from World War II still pegging Treasury bond prices. This policy
led to high inflation which ended with tightening in October 1947 (Romer and
Romer, 1989) that led to a recession in 1948. The famous Federal Reserve Treasury
accord of 1951 restored Fed independence. The next 15 years was characterized by
relatively stable monetary policy (Meltzer, 2004). The Fed under William
McChesney Martin in the 1950s viewed price stability as its primary objective. On
several occasions, when facing incipient inflation, the Fed tightened, precipitating a
recession.
       In the postwar period there were no banking panics and no serious stock
market crashes. However, according to Wojinlower (1980, 1982, 1992), credit
crunches occurred when the Fed tightened, raising short term interest rates. As rates
increased above the Regulation Q ceiling on time deposits (and later on CDs) this led
to disintermediation of funds from the banking system and a decline in bank
lending. Such disintermediation crunches were said to have occurred in 1953, 1957
and 1960.
       The term “credit crunch” was coined in 1966. The Fed tightened in December
1965 at the beginning of the Great Inflation by raising the discount rate by 50 basis
points to 4 ½ %. Disintermediation, as rates rose above the Regulation Q ceiling,
was prevented by the Fed raising the ceiling rate to 5 ½%. Continued concern by the
FOMC over inflationary pressure coming from higher rates led the Fed’s bank
regulating agencies to issue a statement in March urging lending restraint by the
banks (Owens and Schreft, 1993, page 8.)
       Further statements urging non price credit rationing came from the House
Banking and Currency Committee. This was echoed in a report by the American
Banking Association. Then in July 1966 in the face of rising prime rates, the FOMC
allowed Regulation Q to bind and banks experienced an outflow of funds. On
September 1, the Fed sent a letter to all member banks urging them to slow the
growth of their business loan portfolios (Owens and Schreft, 1993, page 15.) The
credit crunch led to a slowdown in bank lending and economic growth and on
September 21 the Congress passed a law (which the Fed endorsed) urging it to “
reduce interest rates as much as possible given prevailing economic conditions
(Owens and Schreft 1993 page 16). The crunch ended.
       A similar sequence of events occurred in 1969. In early 1969, the Fed began
tightening to stem inflationary pressure. Disintermediation occurred as market rates


                                        10
exceeded the Regulation Q ceilings . To discourage banks from raising their rates
(which was deemed to be inflationary) the Fed and the Administration urged the
banks in the spring to restrict their lending. Jawboning accelerated as the summer
began. “Bowing to political pressure the major banks refrained from raising their
prime rates further in the latter half of 1969 despite strong loan demand and rising
loan rates . [The banks] instead relied more heavily on non price credit allocation
methods” (Owens and Schreft, 1993, page 22). Loan demand slowed by the end of
1969 as the economy slipped into recession, ending the credit crunch.
        In 1973, the Fed again tightened to fight inflation. To insure against a credit
crunch the Fed in May suspended Regulation Q ceilings on large CDs and raised
ceilings on other deposit categories. At the same time it raised marginal reserve
requirements: apparently it had shifted to a policy based on the price mechanism
rather than credit availability. 3 (Owens and Schreft 1993 page 26). Yet on May 22,
Chairman Burns wrote a letter to bankers asking them to allocate credit through non
price rationing instead of raising rates further (ibid). The Fed continued to tighten
through 1974 by repeated hikes in the discount rate but ceased pressuring the banks
with non price allocation techniques (ibid page 28).


2.5 Disinflation and Beyond: 1980‐2007
Inflation continued unabated through the 1970s. Debate swirls over the causes of the
Great Inflation, 1965‐1982. Some observers attribute it to the accommodation of
expansionary fiscal policy, others to the Phillips Curve tradeoff and an unwilling‐
ness driven by political pressure to raise unemployment at the expense of inflation,
and others to measurement errors in estimating potential output (Bordo and
Orphanides, 2009). Finally, in the face of an exchange rate crisis and growing
popular discontent, President Carter in October 1979 appointed Paul Volcker as
Chairman of the Federal Reserve. Monetary policy tightened significantly as Volcker
effectively targeted monetary aggregates instead of interest rates, and produced a
series of sizeable hikes in the federal funds rate. However the tight monetary stance
was temporarily abandoned in mid‐1980 as economic activity decelerated sharply.
        In March 1980 at the request of the Carter Administration, as a signal to the
public in an election year of its willingness to fight inflation, the Fed imposed


3
 According to Owens and Schreft (1993) the 1973-74 episode was not a true credit crunch which they
define as non price credit rationing because bank lending rates were permitted to rise.

                                                  11
selective consumer credit controls. The controls involved direct restrictions on bank
loan growth. The Fed provided broad guidelines for credit allocation suggesting for
example that banks avoid making unsecured consumer loans (Owens and Schreft
1993 page 30). The program led to a marked decline in consumer credit as lending
rates hit binding usury law ceilings. This reduced personal consumption,
contributing to a very sharp decline in economic activity. The controls were lifted in
July 1980.
       The Federal Reserve embarked on a new round of monetary tightening in late
1980. The federal funds rate rose to 20 percent in late December, implying an ex post
real rate of about 10 percent (Bordo, Erceg and Levin, 2007). Newly elected President
Reagan’s support of Volcker’s policy was significant in giving the Federal Reserve
the mandate it needed to keep interest rates elevated for a prolonged period, and
provided some shield from growing opposition in Congress (Feldstein, 1993). This
second and more durable round of tightening succeeded in reducing the inflation
rate from about 10 percent in early 1981 to about 4 percent in 1983, but at the cost of
a very sharp and very prolonged recession. In this episode there is no narrative
evidence of a credit crunch.
       The recession of 1990‐91 was preceded by Fed tightening beginning in
December 1988(Romer and Romer, 1994). It coincided with the first Gulf War. There
was no banking crisis but there was a stock market crash in August 1990. There also
was not a real estate bust, although real house prices declined 13% 1989‐1993.
According to Bernanke and Lown (1991) there was a credit crunch which they define
as “a significant leftward shift in the supply of bank loans holding constant the safe
real interest rate and the quality of potential borrowers”. According to them a
collapse in New England real estate reduced their equity capital and forced banks to
scale back their lending. This reduced aggregate demand via the lending channel
(Bernanke and Blinder, 1988) and contributed to the recession.
       Owens and Schreft (1993), who define a credit crunch as “non price credit
rationing,” also posit that there was a credit crunch in the commercial real estate
market, a “sector specific credit crunch that prevented commercial real estate
developers and business borrowers using real estate as collateral from getting credit
at any price” (page 50).
       The recession of 2001 was preceded by a mild tightening of monetary policy
(the funds rate was raised from 4 1/2% in November 1998 to 6% in May), and the


                                         12
collapse of the tech boom in the stock market in the spring of 2001. There is no
narrative evidence of a real estate bust or a credit crunch.
       Finally the recession which began in December 2007 was preceded by Fed
tightening beginning in June 2004 following 3 years of excessively low rates. The
low policy rates as well as a global savings glut helped fund a housing boom which
began deflating at the end of 2006. The ensuing housing bust initially centered on
the U.S. subprime mortgage market in the spring of 2007. Factors behind the boom
in addition to low interest rates include U.S. government initiatives to extend home
ownership, changes in financial regulation, lax oversight and the relaxing of prudent
standards (Bordo, 2008).
   The default on subprime mortgages produced spillover effects around the world
via the securitized mortgage derivatives into which these mortgages were bundled,
to the balance sheets of investment banks, hedge funds and conduits which
intermediate between mortgage and other asset‐backed commercial paper and long‐
term securities. The uncertainty about the value of the securities collateralized by
these mortgages led to the freezing of the interbank lending market in August 2007
and subsequently to a massive credit crunch. The collapse in credit reflected a severe
drop in asset prices which eroded net worth and collateral, greatly increasing
agency costs and quality spreads. In addition the weakening of major banks’
balance sheets has impaired their lending. This has been greatly aggravated by a
more than 50% drop in stock prices. Despite extensive central bank liquidity
injections and the creation of a number of facilities at the Fed to rejuvenate the credit
markets, the crunch still prevails. The credit crunch has produced a serious recession
in the U.S. which has spread to the rest of the world.


          3. Empirical Methodology
With an aim of examining cycles in money, credit and output since 1875, data
availability and consistency become key issues. For business cycles, we use the
NBER chronology (at a quarterly frequency). For Real Gross National Product (note
it is GNP, not GDP) we use the numbers from Balke and Gordon (1986), extended
via the NIPA accounts. Likewise for the money supply, we use the M2 numbers
from Balke and Gordon, spliced and update with the M2 numbers from the Board of
Governors. For many other series, 1919 becomes a natural break point. For the
interest rate (risk) spread in 1919 and after, we use Moodyʹs Seasoned Baa Corporate


                                         13
Bond Yield (% p.a.) less Long‐Term Treasury Composite, Over 10 Years (% p.a.). For
the earlier period, we construct a difference between averages of the high yielding
and low yielding rail road bond yields taken from MaCaulay (1938) 4 . MaCaulay is
also the source for early values of commercial paper. The discount rate since 1945 is
the rate from the Board of Governors and prior to that is the rate at the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, from Banking and Monetary Statistics (1943). The stock
price index for 1875‐1917 is the Cowles Commission index, its level adjusted to
match the Standard and Poor’s index, which begins in 1917. Real estate prices are
from Shiller (2005). Before 1954, our measure of total factor productivity is taken
from Kendrick (1961) and since then calculated from standard BLS series. 5


3.1 Methods


A focus on recessions and contractions, credit crunches, and monetary policy
makes it natural that the empirical techniques should be consistent with such a
cyclical focus. Fortunately, the suite of techniques developed by Harding and
Pagan (2002, 2006) provides a ready fit with the classical NBER discussion of
business cycles. In this paper we will use the methods of Harding and Pagan to
extract turning points in the series for money, credit spreads, and stock prices
and compare the characteristics of those cycles to the NBER cycle, concentrating
on contractions.
        The first step must be to identify cycles via their turning points. The
NBER does this via the business cycle dating committee, but Bry and Boschan
(1971) develop an algorithm that closely mimics the committee’s decisions at a
monthly frequency. Harding and Pagan (2002) extend the algorithm to a
quarterly frequency, which matches the frequency of our data.
        Any such algorithm needs three components. First, a way to identify
turning points, essentially choosing local maximums and minimums. For a
quarterly frequency, Harding and Pagan looks for a data point that is a local max

4
  For 1914 quarter 3, the markets were closed, and we entered a judgmental value of 1% for the spread. As
this was a time of turmoil in the markets, it is not an innocuous assumption.
5
  Quarterly data is a linear interpolation from the annual data in Table A-XIX in Kendrick (1961), re-
indexed. TFP since then is calculated using log(TFP)=log(Y)-0.3log(K)-0.7log(L), with Y the BLS
measure of “Nonfarm Business Sector: Output,” L is “Nonfarm Business Sector: Hours of All Persons,”
and K is “Net Capital Stock of Private Fixed Nonresidential Assets” from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis, linearly interpolated to obtain a quarterly series. See Levy and Chen (1994) or Cooley and
Prescott (1995) for comparisons of construction techniques.

                                                   14
or min for two quarters on either side, that is,         is a cyclical peak if
     max        ,    ,   ,       ,   .
Secondly, the procedure must make sure peaks and troughs alternate. Finally, it
should impose censoring rules to obtain cycles of the appropriate length (for
example, without these an algorithm may pick out seasonal cycles, though this is
less likely in quarterly data.) We use the RATS quarterly implementation
(bryboschan.src).
         Once defined, it becomes possible to measure cycle characteristics.
Primarily, these are
         i)     Duration: the length of the cycle and its phases (along with noting
                the asymmetry between phases)
         ii)    Amplitude: change in value between turning points
         iii)   Shape, sometimes called cumulative movement, to distinguish how
                steeply the economy contracts or recovers.
To measure co‐movement in what are often non‐stationary series, Harding and
Pagan propose a measure of synchronization between cycles which they term
concordance, essentially a measure of how often two series are in the same phase
of the cycle. Denote the periods that series         spends in an expansion as        1
and the time spent in contraction as              0. Then the concordance        between
series x and series y is defined as
                         1
                           #        1,        1      #         0,       0 .
Two perfectly procyclical series would have a concordance of 1, with perfect
countercylcality having a concordance of 0. Such perfect alignment is never seen
in economic time series, so it is more useful to compare the series to the standard
of independence, or what Harding and Pagan term strong non‐synchronization.
The concordance associated with non‐synchronization depends strongly on the
asymmetry of the phases; if both series were in contractions 99 percent of the
time, they would show a high concordance even if they were independent. The
most useful comparison is then with the expected concordance
                             1           1
where of course                          1 . A higher concordance indicates
procyclicality and a lower concordance indicates countercyclicality. Harding and
Pagan (2006) also provide a regression‐based test of independence that we report
below.

                                             15
       Two cycles may be strongly non‐synchonized and still influence each
other; for example, an overlapping contraction might influence the depth of the
recession.
       Looking at the cycle overlaps provides more information about the
empirical linkages between money, credit, and the business cycle over the years
from 1875 to 2007. We explore how money, credit, and asset prices behave in
recessions and look at how recessions differ according to the whether or not they
are associated with credit crunches, tight money, and asset price drops. In this
we are broadly following the methods of Reinhardt and Rogoff (2008) and
Claessens, Kose, and Terrones (2008). By also incorporating total factor
productivity, our regressions attempt to separate out the effects of technology
shocks (Long and Plosser, 1983, Cole and Ohanian, 1999) from financial
turbulence in business cycles.
We present two sets of regressions.
       The first set regresses the amplitude of the percentage peak‐to‐trough
change in Real GNP against the changes in credit spreads, measures of money,
and the stock index between the same NBER turning points.
       The second set of regressions looks at how monetary, credit, and asset
cycles affect the business cycle. For example, do recessions that start during a
credit crunch look different than those that do not? Each NBER contraction is
associated with the money, credit, or asset cycle phase that it starts in. The
amplitude of the contraction is then regressed against the amplitude of the other
cycle phases. For example, a recession that starts in a period of tightening credit
and tightening monetary policy is associated with the amplitudes of those two
“contraction” phases.


             4. Empirical Results
Cycles can be described both by their individual characteristics and by their
relation to each other. In our sample, from 1875:I to 2007:III, we have 27 (NBER)
recessions, counted as complete peak to trough episodes.


4.1 Cycle characteristics




                                         16
    Tables 2 and 3 report the mean amplitude and duration of cycles for the
1875:I‐1918:IV period, and tables 4 and 5 report the amplitude and durations for
1919:I‐2007:IV, calculated for the peak‐to‐trough and trough‐to‐peak.                             If the
beginning quarters belong to a contraction that started before our sample, those
are not counted. Likewise for an expansion that continues beyond our sample.
    The average duration of a recession (peak to trough) is 15.4 months, that of an
expansion 39 months. Because of data limitations, we separately look at two sub‐
samples, from 1875:I to 1918:IV and from 1919:I to 2007:IV, the period for which
we have Federal Reserve discount rate data. For the later period, recessions have
shortened and expansions lengthened.                     For the early period, the average
duration of a recession is 6 quarters (8.3 for expansions). For the later period, the
durations are 4.5 for contractions, 17.7 quarters for expansions. 6
        Credit shows a longer cycle. For the earlier sample, our measure of credit
is the spread between different rail road bonds. These show a mean peak‐to‐
trough duration of 8.25 quarters, and a trough‐to‐peak duration of nearly 10
quarters, as well as showing noticeably longer maximum cycles. Also note the
greater symmetry between expansions and contractions in the credit spread
series. For consistency, the P‐T of rates and spreads should be compared to the T‐
P of RGNP. For the later sample, using the spread between Moody’s seasoned
Baa corporate bond yield less the long‐term treasury composite, “contractions,”
or periods of generally falling spreads, last an average of 11.1 quarters, longer
than the NBER contractions, but the periods of “expansion” or rising spreads,
lasts only 8.4 quarters, significantly shorter than the 17.7 of NBER expansions.
        What about monetary policy?                     For the earlier period, we use two
measures. The first is Balke and Gordon’s measure of M2, taken as the year‐
over‐year log difference. Mean peak‐to‐trough duration is 7.5 quarters,
measuring 9.9 quarters for the trough‐to‐peak expansions. This indicates a cycle
length similar to the NBER cycle and a bit shorter than the credit cycle. We also
use the commercial paper rate as a measure of monetary tightness. This seems to
exhibit a shorter and less variable cycle, with expansions and contractions of 6.75
and 5.5 quarters. For the later period, we continue with the Balke and Gordon
M2 series, splicing in the Board of Governors M2 when it becomes available.

6
 Total Factor Productivity also shows an asymmetric cycle, with mean peak-to-trough time for two periods
of 5.1 and 5.2 quarters, with a trough-to-peak means of 8 and 16 quarters. It shows a concordance with the
NBER cycle of only 45% in the early period, but 82% for the later.

                                                   17
Like the NBER cycle, it is rather asymmetric, and perhaps not surprisingly, with
contractions nearly twice as long as expansions. The discount rate, our other
measure of policy, exhibits even more asymmetry, with mean peak‐to‐trough
duration of nine quarters and mean trough‐to‐peak duration of over twenty.
(again note that a “contraction” in the money supply probably corresponds to an
“expansion” in the discount rate.).     Overall it is noticeably longer than the
business cycle.
       In the later period, recessions tend to occur in an environment of
monetary tightening and tighter credit. Of the 17 NBER business cycle peaks in
the subsample, 4 occurred in the same quarter as the peak in the monetary policy
(discount rate) cycle, another 9 occurred during the tightening phase of policy,
and 2 occurred in the quarter immediately after a peak in the discount rate cycle.
Fourteen of the 17 occurred in periods of credit tightening.
       In the earlier period, the pattern repeats. Recessions tended to occur in
time of monetary tightening, with all eleven NBER recessions occurring in a
contractionary phase of M2 growth, and ten of the eleven occurring in an
environment of rising commercial paper rates. These were also generally periods
of tightening credit, though the pattern is not quite so obvious: in seven of the
eleven cases rail road spreads were increasing.
       Tables 6 reports the concordances and tests of synchronicity for the 20th
century. Recall that an actual concordance above expected concordance indicates
series that move procyclically. Most interesting for our purposes is concordance
with the NBER cycle, though we find it gratifying that the discount rate moves
countercyclically with M2.     For the 19th century, we find evidence for the
importance of credit in that the Baa spread moves countercylically to the
business cycle: increasing risk spreads are associated with recessions.        The
evidence for money is mixed, with the discount rate showing procyclical
concordance, but we cannot reject independence for the log difference of M2.
       Table 7 reports on concordance and synchronicity tests for the 19th
century. The risk spread (on rail road bonds) is again procyclical, but significant
only at the 10 percent level. Money is again mixed, with short rates showing
procyclicality but quantity showing independence.


4.2 Regressions


                                        18
       The questions of whether larger changes in money, credit or asset prices
are somehow associated with different amplitudes of contractions can be
addressed in several ways. Following Claessens, Kose and Terrones, Tables 8
and 9 report regressions of recession amplitude against changes in the risk
spread, money measures, and stock prices over the same dates as the NBER
peak‐to‐trough phase. Such a regression of course does not determine causality,
but to attempt to partially control for other factors, we also include the change in
total factor productivity over the cycle. For both time periods, the coefficient on
the risk spread is generally negative, though not always significant indicating
that larger changes in risk spreads are associated with larger amplitudes. (To be
clear, a rise in the spread from the business cycle peak to trough comes in as
negative, while for RGNP, measured as peak minus trough, is positive.) The
positive (and often significant) coefficient on the change in the stock index
indicates larger stock price drops are associated with larger contraction
amplitudes, that is, deeper recessions. Of further interest are the two interaction
terms, one for the risk spread and the money growth, and the second for risk and
the short‐term interest rate. Both are significant only for the later period. The
coefficient on Interaction1 indicates that times of rising risk spreads and tight
money are particularly associated with high amplitudes. Interaction2 confirms
that, when tight money is measured by high discount rates.
       Another approach is to relate the amplitude not to changes over the NBER
contraction, but over the cycle phases for money, credit and stock prices that the
Harding‐Pagan algorithm identifies. Claessens, Kose and Terrones compare the
depth of recessions with large and small credit crunches. With fewer recessions,
we take a more multivariate approach, and regress recession amplitude against
cycle amplitude for the risk spread, the money measure (either quantity or short‐
term interest rate) and the stock price. For example, if a recession begins (e.g. a
peak occurs) when the money supply is in a contraction phase, we associate the
amplitude of the NBER recession with the amplitude of that monetary
contraction (which will rarely have the same turning points or duration). Tables
10 and 11 report the results for the 19th and 20th centuries. The results are broadly
similar to those in the NBER focused regression of Tables 9 and 10, but there are
some differences. The coefficient on the risk spread shows up as positive in the


                                         19
20th century. Few coefficients are significant in the 20th century, except when the
risk‐spread‐money‐growth interaction is included.       TFP growth tends to be
negatively associated with recessions.
       Both the historical narrative and the empirical results suggest that a
confluence of financial shocks—in risk spreads, assets prices and money
supply—will exacerbate a contraction, or at least be associated with deeper
contractions. A closer look that the deeper recessions in our sample bears this
out, even though the correspondence between financial shocks and depth of
recession is not one‐to‐one. Figures 2 and 3 provide scatterplots of recession
amplitude against the risk spread, short‐term rates, money supply, and stock
movements.
       Since the First World War, four recession are particularly deep (measured
as percent change in real GNP from peak to trough): those of 1929, 1945, 1920,
and 1937. These were at least triple the size of any other contraction (with a
possible exception of the combined 1980‐1981 drop).        1945 stands out as an
anomaly, but the other three stand out as having the three largest drops
percentage drops in the money supply and stock prices, and two of the three
largest increases in the risk spread.         Contemporary accounts of the 1920
contraction do not mention a credit crunch in line with the only moderate
increase in the risk spread in that contraction. While the 1929 contraction also
shows the largest drop in total factor productivity, TFP actually grew in the
contractions of ‘45, ‘20, and ‘37.
       Prior to the First World War, three contractions stand out, all over twice as
deep as the others: 1907, 1893, and 1913. The connections with financial shocks
are perhaps not as striking as for the later period, but still strong. The three
contractions have two of the top three declines in stock prices, and the top two
changes in money and bond spread. These contractions also show three of the
top four declines in TFP. Contemporary accounts noted a credit crunch in 1893
despite only a small movement in the risk spread.
       An alternative approach is to sort on the size of movements in risk
spreads, money and stock prices, looking to see if larger movements in these
variables leads to larger recessions. Since World War I, four contractions had
particularly large increase in the Baa spread, four had particularly large drops in
M2 (in fact only four saw actual drops) and four had particularly large drops in


                                         20
stock prices. Table 12 compares the mean recession amplitude for these extreme
events with recession amplitudes without those events. If you will, it picks out
the credit crunches and the stock crashes from the mere corrections. It makes a
similar comparison between the three largest events in each category for the pre‐
WWI cycles. In every case, the contractions associated with a large crunch or
crash are noticeably larger than those without, though this difference is
statistically significant only for the pre‐WWI years.


           5. Conclusions


 The evidence, though not conclusive, indicates both that more severe financial
events are associated with more severe recessions, and that a confluence of such
events also indicates increased severity.
     The empirical results complement the cross country evidence of Claessens
Kose and Terrones, and Reinhart and Rogoff. Causality is of course always hard
to determine, but the narrative evidence strongly suggests, and the empirical
work is at least consistent with, the claim that credit turmoil worsens recessions.
The timing of cycles is likewise consistent with the work of Gilchrist, Yankov and
Zakrajsek (2008) and others on the ability of corporate bond spreads to predict
recession in more recent periods.
     The results are consistent with work, such as Barro and Ursua (2009), who
find a high association between stock market crashes and large contractions, and
Claessens Kose, and Terrones, who find an interaction between stock market
crashes and tight money and credit.
     Somewhat paradoxically, the cycles in the quantity of money appear not to
be synchronized with business cycles, but when the cycles do coincide, monetary
tightening has a significant effect, and seems implicated in major recessions.
Money market measures, such as the discount rate, show greater synchronicity,
but not more significant correlations. The historical evidence of banking panics
associated with credit turmoil makes a case for the central bank acting as a lender
of last resort.
     The current episode combines elements of a credit crunch, asset price bust
and banking crisis. It is consistent with the patterns we find using 140 years of
US data. How does the current crisis measure up? Between August, 2007, and


                                         21
April, 2009, the difference between the yield on Baa bonds and long‐term
Treasuries has moved up 342 basis points, a larger increase than seen in the 1929
contraction, and approaching the combined increase of 436 bp over both the
Depression contractions. The percentage drop in S and P index of 42% is second
only to the 78% of the Great Contraction. Money supply, however, is a different
matter, with an increase of 13% in the current period, the largest increase of M2
seen in any contraction. This should not be particularly surprising, however. As
Friedman and Schwartz point out, prior to deposit insurance banking panics
would cause a collapse in the money multiplier, driving M2 down. Zarnowitz
(1992) shows that business cycles downturns with panics are much more severe
than others. Today because of deposit insurance, financial turmoil does not lead
to panics and collapses in the money multiplier, and credit turmoil is less likely
to feed into the money supply. The credit disturbance thus becomes relatively
more important, given that disturbances on the asset side of the balance sheet no
longer have as strong an influence on the money supply.




                                       22
References
Asea, P.K., Blomberg, S.B., 1998. “Lending Cycles,” Journal of Econometrics vol. 83
pp. 89‐128.

Balke, N.S., Gordon, R.J., 1986. “Appendix B: Historical Data,” The American
Business Cycle: continuity and change, NBER Studies in Business Cycles, University
of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Barro, R.J., Ursúa, J.F., 2009. “Stock‐Market Crashes and Depressions,” NBER
working paper 14769.

Beatty, A.L., Gron, A., 2001. “Capital, Portfolio, and Growth: Bank Behavior
under Risk‐Based Capital Guidelines” Journal of Financial Services Research, vol. 20
pp. 5‐31.

Benmelech, E., Bordo, M., 2008. “The Financial Crisis of 1873 and 19th Century
American Corporate Governance” Harvard University (mimeo)

Bernanke, B., 1983. “Non Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the
Propagation of the Great Depression.” American Economic Review LXXIII. pp 217‐
76

Bernanke, B., Blinder, A., 1988. “Credit, Money, and Aggregate Demand”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 78: 435‐39

Bernanke, B., Gertler, M., 1989. “Agency Costs, Net Worth and Business
Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, vol. 79, pp. 14‐31.

Bernanke, B., Gertler, M., Gilchrist, S., 1996. “The Financial Accelerator and the
Flight to Quality,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 78 pp. 1‐15.

Bernanke, B., Lown, C., 1991. “The Credit Crunch.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity. 2:1991. pp 205‐239

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,(1943) Banking and Monetary
Statistics, 1914‐1941, Washington, DC.

Bordo, M.D., 1986. “Financial Crises, Banking Crises, Stock Market Crashes and
the Money Supply: Some International Evidence, 1870‐1933” in Forrest Capie


                                         23
and Geoffrey E. Wood. Financial Crises and the World Banking System. London
MacMillan pp 190‐248

Bordo, M.D., 2006. “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Original Sin in
Emerging Countries: Déjà vu?” NBER Working Paper No. 12397 July.

Bordo, M.D., 2008. “An Historical Perspective on the Crisis of 2007‐2008” NBER
Working Paper No 14569. December

Bordo, M.D., Dueker, M., Wheelock, D.C., 2008. “Inflation Monetary Policy and
Stock Market Conditions.” NBER Working Paper No 14019. May

Bordo, M.D., Erceg, C., Levin, A., Michaels, R., 2007. “Three Great American
Disinflations.” NBER Working Paper No. 12982. March.

Bordo, M.D., Orphanides, A., 2009. NBER Conference on the Great Inflation.
NBER Conference website.

Bordo, M.D., Rappoport, P., Schwartz, A., 1992. “Money vs Credit Rationing:
Evidence for the National Banking Era, 1880‐1914.” In Claudia Goldin and Hugh
Rockoff (eds.) Strategic Factors in Nineteenth Century American History. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Brunner, K., Meltzer, A.H., 1972. “Money, Debt, and Economic Activity” The
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 80, No. 5 (Sep. ‐ Oct., 1972), pp. 951‐977

Bry, G., Boschan, C., 1971. Cyclical Analysis of Time Series: Selected Procedures and
Computer Programs, New York, NBER.

Calomiris, C., Hubbard, R.G., 1989. “Price Flexibility, Credit Availability and
Economic Fluctuation: Evidence from the United States, 1894‐1919” Quarterly
Journal of Economics. Vol 104. No 3 (August) pp. 429‐453.

Calomiris, C., Mason, J.R., 2003. “ Fundamentals,panics and bank distress during
the depression.” American Economic Review 93 ( December): 1615‐47.

Calomiris, C., Wilson, B., 2004. “Bank Capital and Portfolio Management: The
1930s “Capital Crunch” and the Scramble to Shed Risk.” Journal of Business. Vol
77.No.3. pp421‐455.


                                          24
Carlstrom, C.T., Fuerst, T.S., 1997. “Agency Costs, net Work and Business
Fluctuations: a computable general equilibrium analysis” American Economic
Review, vol. 87, pp. 893‐910.

Claessens, S., Kose, M.A., Terrones, M.E., 2008. “What Happens during
Recessions, Crunches and Busts?” IMF working paper, WP/08/274.

Cooley, T.F., Prescott, E.C., 1995. “Economic Growth and Business Cycles”
chapter 1 in Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, Thomas F. Cooley, ed, Princeton
Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ

Eckstein, O., Sinai, A., 1986. “The Mechanisms of the Business Cycle in the
Postwar Era.” In Robert J. Gordon ed. The American Business Cycle: Continuity and
Change. National Bureau of Economic Research Studies in Business Cycles, vol
25. Chicago: University of Chicago Press

Fazzari, M., Hubbard, R.G., Petersen, B.C., 1988. “Financing Constraints and
Corporate Investment” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 1988, No. 1 pp.
141‐206

Friedman, M., Schwartz, A.J., 1963. A Monetary History of the United States 1867‐
1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Gilchrist, S., Yankov, V., Zakrajˇsek, E., 2008. “Credit Market Shocks and
Economic Fluctuations: Evidence from Corporate Bond and Stock Markets”
working paper.

Gorton, G.B., 1998. “Banking Panics and Business Cycles?” Oxford Economic
Papers New Series 40. pp 751‐781.

Gorton, G.B., Ping, H., 2008. “Bank Credit Cycles.”

Pagan, Harding, D., Pagan, A., 2006. “Synchronization of Cycles,” Journal of
Econometrics, vol. 132, pp. 59‐79.

_________ and ______, “Dissecting the Cycle: a methodological investigation”
Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 49, (2002) pp.365‐381.




                                        25
Haubrich, J.G., Wachtel, P., 1993. “Capital Requirements and Shifts in
Commercial Bank Portfolios” Economic Review, (Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland) vol. 29, pp. 2‐15.

Hansen, A.H., 1927. Business Cycle Theory, Boston, Ginn.

Kendrick, J.W., 1961. Productivity Trends in the United States, Princeton University
Press for the NBER.

Kydland, F. and E. Prescott (1982), “Time to build and aggregate fluctuations”,
Econometrica,
50, 1345‐1371.

Lamont, O., 1997. “Cash Flow and Investment: Evidence from Internal Capital
Markets” The Journal of Finance, Vol. 52, pp. 83‐109

Levy, D., Chen, H., 1994. “Estimates of the Aggregate Quarterly Capital Stock for
the Post‐War U.S. Economy” Review of Income and Wealth, vol. 40, no 3, pp.
317‐349.

Long, J. B. and C. Plosser (1983), “Real business cycles”, Journal of Political
Economy, 91,
39‐69.

Lown, C., Morgan, D.P., 2005. “The Credit Cycle and the Business Cycle: new
findings using the survey of senior loan officers,” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking vol.

Macaulay, F.R., 1938. Some Theoretical Problems Suggested by The Movements of
Interest Rates, bond Yields and Stock Prices in the United States since 1856, NBER.

Meltzer, A.H., 2003. A history of the Federal Reserve Volume 1, 1913‐1951. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Mishkin, F.S., 1978. “The Household Balance Sheet and the Great Depression”
Journal of Economic History 38 (December):918‐37.

Mishkin, F.S., 1990. “Asymmetric Information and Financial Crises: A Historical
Perspective” NBER Working Paper No. 3400. July


                                          26
Mishkin, F.S., White, E.N., 2002. “U.S. Stock Market Crashes and Their
Aftermath; Implications for Monetary Policy.” NBER Working paper no.8992
June.

Mitchell, W.C., 1913. Business Cycles, Univ. of California Press, Berkeley.

Odell, K., Weidenmeir, M., 2004. “Real Shock, Monetary Aftershock: the 1906 San
Francisco Earthquake and the Panic of 1907” Journal of Economic History 52
(December):757‐784.

Owens, R.E., Schreft, S.L., 1993. “Identifying Credit Crunches.” Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond Working Paper 93‐2.

Persons, W.M., 1920. “A Nontechnical Explanation of the Index of General
Business Conditions “Review of Economics and Statistics. 3; pp 39‐55.

Rajan, R.G., 1994. “Why Bank Credit Policies fluctuate: a theory and some
evidence” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.109, pp. 399‐441.

Reinhart, C.M., Rogoff, K.S., 2009. “The Aftermath of Financial Crises.”

Romer, C.S., 1992. “What Ended the Great Depression?” Journal of Economic
History 52 (December):757‐784.

Romer, C.S., Romer, D.H., 1989. “Does Monetary Policy Matter? A Test in the
Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989. eds
Olivier Blanchard and Stanley Fischer. Cambridge: MIT.

Romer, C.S., Romer, D.H., 1994. “Monetary Policy Matters” Journal of Monetary
Economics 34 (August): 75‐88.

Shiller, R.J., 2005. Irrational Exuberance, Second Edition. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Sprague, O.M.W., 1910. History of Crises Under the National Banking System.
National Monetary Commission. Senate Document No.538, 61st Congress, 2nd
Session.

Stevens, A.C., 1894. “Analysis of the Phenomenon of the Panic in the U.S. in
1893” Quarterly Journal of Economics IX, pp 117‐45.
                                          27
Stiglitz, J.E., Weiss, A., 1981. “Credit Rationing in Markets with Perfect
Information.” American Economic Review. 71: 393‐410.

White, E.N., 2008. “The Great American Real Estate Bubble of the 1920s : Causes
and Consequencs” Rutgers University ( mimeo).

Wojnilower, A.M., 1980. “The Central Role of Credit Crunches in Recent
Financial History.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Vol 2. pp 277‐326.

Wojnilower, A.M., 1985. “Private Credit Demand , Supply and Crunches, How
Different are the 1980s.” American Economic Review . Vol 75 No.2 May, pp 351‐
356.

Wojnilower, A.M., 1992. “ Credit Crunches” in the New Palgrave Dictionary of
Money and Finance. London: MacMillan.




                                         28
                             TABLE 1:Descriptive Data 1873-2008


      NBER       Banking       Stock         Real      Tight         Credit          Comments
     Business     Crises       Market       Estate    Monetary       Crunch
    Cycle Peak                 Crash         Bust      Policy

1    October     September   September        no       Bank of         ?        International Financial
      1873         1873        1873                    England                  Crisis; real estate bust
                                                       tightens                  in Germany, Austria;
                                                                                Railroad scandal stock
                                                                                   market crisis and
                                                                                   serious recession
                                                                                 focused on railroads.
                                                                                    Panic ends with
                                                                                     suspension of
                                                                                     convertibility.
                                                                            1
2   March 1882   June 1884    February        no           no         yes             Minor panic
                                1884                                              consequent upon
                                                                                 failure of Grant and
                                                                                 Ward, attenuated by
                                                                                 NY clearing house.
3   March 1887      no           no           no           no          no          Minor recession
4   July 1890    November     November        no       Bank of         no           Baring crisis in
                   1890         1890                   England                   London caused by
                                                       tightens                  Argentine defaults.
                                                                                   Bank of England
                                                                                 tightening leads to
                                                                                 sudden stop, minor
                                                                                    banking panic
                                                                                  attenuated by NY
                                                                                   clearing house.
                                                                            1
5    January     May 1893     May 1893        no       Silver risk    yes        Major U.S. banking
      1893                                                                      panic related to fears
                                                                                 U.S. would be found
                                                                                off gold standard after
                                                                                passage of Sherman
                                                                                 Silver Purchase Act.
                                                                                    Panic ends with
                                                                                     suspension of
                                                                                     convertibility.
6   December      October        no           no       Silver risk     no            Gorton(1987)
                        2
      1895         1896                                                           identifies a banking
                                                                                panic but Sprague and
                                                                                     Friedman and
                                                                                  Schwartz (1963) do
                                                                                not. Silver risk induced
                                                                                 run on U.S. Treasury
                                                                                     gold reserves
                                                                                 stemmed by Belmont
                                                                                         Morgan
                                                                                 Syndicate(Friedman
                                                                                     and Schwartz)
7   June 1899       no           no           no           no          no          Minor recession
8   September       no         October        no           no          no       Minor recession. Rich
      1902                      1903                                                man's panic
                                                                                   (Friedman and
                                                                                  Schwartz p.151)




                                            29
       NBER        Banking        Stock         Real       Tight     Credit          Comments
      Business      Crises        Market       Estate     Monetary   Crunch
     Cycle Peak                   Crash         Bust       Policy

                                                                            1
9     May 1907      October       October       no        Bank of     yes        Major recession and
                     1907          1907                   England               banking panic, rescue
                                                          tightens                 by JPMorgan,
                                                                                   suspension of
                                                                                    convertibility.
                                                                                  Contemporaries
                                                                                   discuss credit
                                                                                      squeeze.
10     January         no            no         no          no         no          Minor recession
        1910
11     January       August        August       no          no         no        Outbreak of World
        1913          1914          1914                                               War I
                   (incipient)   (incipient)
12   August 1918       no        Fall 1917      no           no        no           Mild recession,
                                                                                     Mishkin and
                                                                                White(2002) attribute
                                                                                stock market crisis to
                                                                                 rising interest rates
                                                                                and controls on new
                                                                                        issues.
13     January         no        Fall 1920      no          yes        no         Major recession
        1920                                                                    induced by Fed tight
                                                                                 money to roll back
                                                                                  wartime inflation.
14    May 1923         no            no         no          yes        no       Minor recession. Fed
                                                                                  followed policy of
                                                                                       moderate
                                                                                 restraint(Friedman
                                                                                and Schwartz 1963.
                                                                                    p.287) to offset
                                                                                  incipient inflation.
15     October         no            no         no3         yes        no       Minor recession. Fed
        1926                                                                      takes "moderate
                                                                                     restraining
                                                                                measures"(Friedman
                                                                                and Schwartz 1963.
                                                                                       p.288)
                                                      4                     5
16   August 1929    October       October       yes         yes       yes         Great contraction.
                   1930 April      1929                                         Tight Fed policy 1928-
                     1931                                                          29 to stem stock
                    Sept/Oct                                                    market speculation for
                     1931                                                          Banking crises.
                    Jan/Feb                                                       Contraction in net
                     1933                                                       worth, debt deflation,
                                                                                 bank capital crunch.
                                                                            6
17    May 1937         no        February       no          yes       yes       Major recession. Fed
                                 1937 May                                          doubles reserve
                                   1940                                         requirements in 1936,
                                                                                  Contraction in net
                                                                                  worth, bank capital
                                                                                       crunch.
18    February         no        September      no          no         no       End of World War II.
       1945                        1946                                         Sharp decreases in
                                                                                    government
                                                                                   expenditures.
                                                                                Adjustment from war
                                                                                     to peace.




                                               30
       NBER        Banking     Stock      Real     Tight      Credit            Comments
      Business      Crises     Market    Estate   Monetary    Crunch
     Cycle Peak                Crash      Bust     Policy

                                                          7
19   November        no          no       no        yes         no        Fed tightens to offset
       1948                                                                post war inflation.

                                                                     8
20    July 1953      no          no       no        yes        yes             Mild recession.
                                                                           Moderate tightening
                                                                          reflecting Fed concern
                                                                          of inflation. Bond crisis
                                                                                raises rates.

                                                          9          10
21   August 1957     no          no       no        yes        yes         Significant recession
                                                                              induced by Fed
                                                                           tightening. Evidence
                                                                             of credit rationing.

                                                                     12
22    April 1960     no        Spring     no        yes        yes            Mild recession
                                    11
                               1902                                          induced by Fed
                                                                                tightening.
                                                                           Disintermediation as
                                                                           market rates pierced
                                                                          Regulation Q. ceilings
                                                                          leads to reduced bank
                                                                                  lending.


                                                              August        "Credit crunch" of
                                                              - Sept       1966 background of
                                                                   13
                                                              1966            Fed tightening
                                                                          monetary policy end of
                                                                             1965. Fed bank
                                                                             regulators urged
                                                                            restraint on bank
                                                                                 lending.
                                                                            Disintermediation
                                                                          Regulation Q. ceilings
                                                                                  bound.

                         14                              15          16
23   December       no        May 1970    no       yes         yes          Mild recession. Fed
       1969                                                                    tightening and
                                                                          jawboning by Fed and
                                                                          government to restrain
                                                                                   lending.
                                                                           Disintermediation as
                                                                           market rates exceed
                                                                          Regulation Q. ceilings.

                         17                                          19
24   November       no        November    no        yes        yes        Fed tightening. OPEC
                                    18
       1973                    1973                                         shock. Significant
                                                                            recession. Arthur
                                                                          Burns May 1974 urges
                                                                             banks to allocate
                                                                            credit through non
                                                                              price rationing.




                                         31
        NBER         Banking       Stock            Real       Tight      Credit           Comments
       Business       Crises       Market          Estate     Monetary    Crunch
      Cycle Peak                   Crash            Bust       Policy

                                         20              21                      22
25     January         no           no              no          yes        yes             Significant Fed
        1980                                                                             tightening begins
                                                                                      October 1979 (Volcker
                                                                                       shock). March 1980
                                                                                           Fed at Carter's
                                                                                      administration request
                                                                                        imposes selective
                                                                                          consumer credit
                                                                                        controls. Controls
                                                                                          lifted July 1980.

                            23                                               24
26     July 1981       no            no             no          yes        no            Tight Fed policy
                                                                                         induces serious
                                                                                            recession.

                                                         25          26          27
27     July 1990       no          August           no         yes         yes         Fed tightening. Gulf
                                    1990                                               war. Mild recession.
                                                                                      Evidence of non price
                                                                                      credit rationing and a
                                                                                         capital crunch.


28    March 2001       no          Spring           no          yes         no        Fed restraint leads to
                                   2001                                               mild recession, tech
                                                                                              bust

                                              28         29          30
29    December      September     October          yes         yes         yes            Fed tightening
        2007                                                                            beginning in June
                                                                                         2004 may have
                                                                                       helped trigger a real
                                                                                       estate bust, Lehman
                                                                                      Brothers failure, credit
                                                                                      crunch, stock market
                                                                                        slide, and severe
                                                                                            recession.




Endnotes
1
  Calomiris and Hubbard(1989) Citing Sprague and others.
2
  Gorton(1987).
3
  Florida land bust, White(2008).
4
  White(2008).
5
  Bernanke(1983), Calomiris and Mason(2003), Calomiris and Wilson(2004).
6
  Bernanke(1983), Calomiris and Wilson(2004).
7
  Romer and Romer(1989) pick October 1947 as the start of Fed tightening.
8
  Wojnilower(1992) states that bank lending was impaired by the collapse in Treasury bond
prices.
9
  Romer and Romer(1989) date tightening as beginning September 1955.
10
   Wojnilower(1980, 1982, 1992), Eckstein and Sinai(1985) discuss credit rationing as leading to
the 1957-58 recession.


                                                   32
11
   Real stock prices decline by 29% January 1966 to October 1966(Bordo, Dueker and Wheelock
2008).
12
   According to Wojnilower(1980, 1992), Fed tightening pushed T-bill rates above the Regulation
   Q ceiling leading to disintermediation.
13
   Wojnilower(1980), Owens and Schreft(1993).
14
   Penn Central collapse in July 1970. The Fed averted a crisis by backstopping the money center
   banks' support of the commercial paper market.
15
   Romer and Romer(1989) date Fed tightening as beginning in December 1968.
16
   Owens and Schreft(1993).
17
   Failures of Franklin National Bank October 1974 and Germany's Herstatt Bank June 1974.
18
   Romer and Romer(1989) date monetary tightening as beginning in April 1974.
19
   Owens and Schreft(1993).
20
   Real stock prices decline by 20%, November 1980 to July 1982(Bordo, Dueker and Wheelock
2008).
21
   Shiller(2005) figure 2.1 shows a 13% decline in real house prices 1979-1993.
22
   Owens and Schreft(1993).
23
   Failures of Continental Illinois and Penn Square banks in 1984. Also Savings and Loan crisis in
1984.
24
   Owens and Schreft(1993).
25
   Shiller(2005) figure 2.1 shows a 13% decline in real house prices 1989-1993.
26
   Romer and Romer(1989) give December 1988 as the beginning of tight policy.
27
   Bernanke and Lown(1991) provide evidence of a capital crunch in New England. Bonds
   reduced lending to replenish their capital to meet regulatory standard. Owens and
   Schreft(1993) document non price credit rationing in the real estate sector.

28
   The Standard and Poor stock price index declined 55%. July 2007 to March 2009.
29
   The Case and Shiller real home price index declined 33% from December 2006 to October
2008.
30
   The Federal Funds rate increased from a trough in May 2004 at 1.00% to a peak of 5.26% in
July 2007.

Sources

Banking Crises: Bordo(1986), Friedman and Schwartz(1963), Gorton(1987).

Stock Market Crashes: Bordo(1985), Bordo, Dueker and Wheelock(2008), Friedman and
Schwartz(1963), Mishkin and White(2002), Sprague(1910)

Real Estate Busts: Shiller(2005), White(2008).

Tight Monetary Policy: Friedman and Schwartz(1963), Meltzer(2004), Romer and Romer(1989).

Credit Crunch: Bernanke(1985), Bernanke and Lown(1991), Calomiris and Hubbard(1987),
Calomiris and Mason(2003), Calomiris and Wilson(2004), Eckstein and Sinai(1985), Owens and
Schreft(1993), Wojnilower(1980, 1985, 1992).




                                                 33
Amplitude            Peak-           P-T %            Trough-peak      T-P %
                     Trough
RGNP (NBER           -11.13        -7.8%              36.37            34.1%
cycles)
Rail Road Spread -0.28                                0.27
CP                  -2.63                             2.51
M2 growth           10.4%                             12.1%
Table 2: Cycle Amplitudes, 1875:1-1918:4, quarterly




Duration (Quarters) 19th    Peak-Trough                  Trough-peak
RGNP (NBER cycles)            mean              6         8.3
                              max              13         12
                              min               3         5
Rail Road Spread              mean           8.25         9.89
                              max              18         36
                              min               2         2
CP                            mean            5.54        6.75
                              max               11        14
                              min                3        3
M2 growth                     mean            7.45        6.91
                              max               18        12
                              min                4        3
Table 3 Cycle durations, 1875:1-1918:4, quarterly




                                          34
Amplitude        Peak-Trough       P-T %                  Trough-peak   T-P %
RGNP (NBER -28.69                  -5.9%                  238.52        29.0%
cycles)
Baa Spread       -1.18                                    1.14
Discount Rate -2.18                                       2.18
M2 growth        -2.9%                                    3.1%
Table 4: Cycle Amplitudes, 1920:1 to 2007:4


Duration      Peak-Trough                    Trough-peak
20th

RGNP           mean           4.5                  17.7
(NBER          max            14                    40
                                                    4
cycles)        min             2
Baa Spread     mean           11.1                 8.4
               max             30                   21
               min               4                   2
Discount       mean        8.8125                 20.8
Rate           max             18                   66
               min               2                   9

M2 growth         mean         11                   6
                   max         65                   15
                                                    2
                   min          3
Table 5: Cycle Durations, 1920:1 to 2007:4




                                             35
                        Baa         Discount           M2 (log dif)      NBER
Baa Spread
concordance             1           54.0%              40.3                34.4%
Expected concordance                48.8%              50.5                45.5%
Prob. Of independence
                                    26%                0.5%                0.005%
Discount Rate                       1                  38.1                61.6
                                                       49.5                54.6
                                                        0.4%                0.9%
M2 (log difference)                                    1                   50.3
                                                                           48.0
                                                                           35.4%
NBER cycle                                                                 1
Table 6: Concordances, expected concordances, and probability of independence
(regression method) for 20th century series: 1920:1 to 2007:4, quarterly, M2 is annual log
difference, using data from 1919:1 calculated from Balke-Gordon, spliced with Board of
Governors M2 data.
Moody's Seasoned Baa Corporate Bond Yield (% p.a.) less Long-Term Treasury
Composite, Over 10 Years (% p.a.)
Discount Rate: Pre 1945, FRB NY rate, then BOG rate.



                        NBER         Rail spread       CP rate           M2 (log dif)
NBER Cycle
concordance             1            59.7%             63.6             50.6%
Expected concordance                 50.1%             51.0             49.8%
Prob. Of independence
                                     8.1%              1.3%             80.9%
Railroad Spread                      1                 54.0             50.0
                                                       50.1             50.0
                                                        37.9%           84.3 %
Commercial Paper                                       1                39.2
rate                                                                    49.7
                                                                        6.4%
M2 (log difference)                                                     1
Real GNP                                                                67.0
                                                                        54.1%
                                                                        0.000%
                              th
Table 7: same as above, for 19 century data, 1875:1 to 1918:4 (quarterly).




                                            36
Table 8 NBER 19 Recession Amplitude, 19th Century.
Recession amplitude (Peak-trough Real GNP as a fraction of Peak RGNP) for NBER
contractions, regressed against the Peak-Trough change in other variables. Money supply and
Stock index are also measured as fractional changes.
Dependent Variable: RNGP
Data is for the NBER recessions starting in 1893,1895,1899,1902,1907,1910, and 1913.
With Heteroscedasticity-Consistent (Eicker-White) Standard Errors
(t-statistics in parentheses)

   Independent
                               1              2                   3                  4
     Variables

                            0.518***        -0.032             -0.038             0.041
     Constant
                             (3.89)         (1.19)             (-1.18)            (1.43)

                            -0.145        -0.884***            -.1.43*           -0.340*
    RR Spread
                            (-1.18)        (-7.65)             (-1.67)           (-0.611)
                            0.624***                                             0.616***
Commercial Paper
                             (5.65)                                               (5.69)
                             0.083         0.412**             0.352*             0.178
   Stock Index
                            (0.563)         (2.49)             (1.73)             (0.58)
                                            0.044             0.053***
    M2 growth
                                            (5.43)             (3.01)
                            0.558**
                                            0.088                                  0.349
   TFP growth                (2.46)
                                            (0.47)                                (0.516)

                                                                0.317
   Interaction 1
                                                               (0.632)
                                                                                   -1.61
   Interaction 2
                                                                                  (-0.41)

  Observations                 8              8                   8                  8
            2
        R                    0.887          0.791              0.800              0.888
                2
      R-bar                  0.736          0.513              0.301              0.609
* 10% significance level
** 5% significance level
*** 1% significance level




                                             37
TABLE 9 NBER 20 Recession Amplitude, 20th century.
Recession amplitude (Peak-trough Real GNP as a fraction of Peak RGNP) for NBER
contractions, regressed against the Peak-Trough change in other variables. Money supply and
Stock index are also measured as fractional changes.
Dependent Variable: RNGP
Data is for the NBER recessions starting in 1920, 1923,1926,1929, 1937, 1945, 1948, 1953,
1957, 1960, 1969, 1973, 1980, 1981, 1990, 2001.
Dependent Variable: RNGP
With Heteroscedasticity-Consistent (Eicker-White) Standard Errors
(t-statistics in parentheses)

   Independent
                               1              2                   3                  4
     Variables

                            0.077***       0.064***            0.025             0.081***
     Constant
                             (2.54)         (4.35)             (1.58)             (3.74)

                            0.045**         -0.003             -0.051*            0.048**
   Baa Spread
                             (2.39)        (-0.156)            (-1.84)             (2.21)
                            -0.011                                               -0.033**
  Discount Rate
                            (-1.36)                                               (-2.56)
                            0.209***        0.014              -0.074            0.178***
   Stock Index
                             (3.78)         (0.28)             (-0.81)            (3.26)
                                           0.590***            -0.001
    M2 growth
                                            (4.34)            (-0.001)
                            1.57***         0.487              -0.918              0.841
   TFP growth
                            (4.59)          (1.43)             (-1.39)            (2.40)**
                                                              -0.4738**
   Interaction 1
                                                               (-2.01)
                                                                                 -0.029**
   Interaction 2
                                                                                  (-2.41)

  Observations                16             16                  16                 16
            2
        R                    0.719          0.752              0.8534              0.803
                2
      R-bar                  0.616          0.662              0.779               0.705
* 10% significance level
** 5% significance level
*** 1% significance level




                                             38
TABLE 10: PAGAN 19 Recession Amplitude associated with cycles in other variables.
This shows the results of regression of RGNP percent amplitude in an NBER contraction (P-T)
against the change other variables over their individual Harding-Pagan cycle.
Dependent Variable: RNGP
For the recessions of the 19th century.
With Heteroscedasticity-Consistent (Eicker-White) Standard Errors
(t-statistics in parentheses)

   Independent
                              1               2                   3                  4
     Variables

                            -0.175          -0.004              0.007              1.88**
     Constant
                            (-1.32)         (-0.04)            (0.087)             (1.99)

                            0.038           -0.209              -0.045            -2.62***
    RR Spread
                            (0.16)          (-1.23)            (-0.155)            (-6.63)
                            0.029*                                               -0.202***
Commercial Paper
                            (1.78)                                                 (5.95)
                            0.553**         0.400               0.210             0.539***
   Stock Index
                             (2.42)         (1.32)             (0.663)             (5.43)
                                            -0.137              -1.28
    M2 growth
                                           (-0.516)            (-0.95)
                            -0.097          0.217                0.17            -0.567***
   TFP growth
                            (-0.27)         (0.98)              (0.71)             (3.05)
                                                                 3.74
   Interaction 1
                                                                (0.86)
                                                                                  1.44***
   Interaction 2
                                                                                  (7.39)

  Observations                7               7                   7                  7
            2
        R                   0.701           0.648               0.663              0.941
                2
      R-bar                 0.104            -0.05               -1.0              0.649
* 10% significance level
** 5% significance level
*** 1% significance level




                                             39
Table 11: PAGAN 20 Recession Amplitude associated with cycles in other variables.
This shows the results of regression of RGNP percent amplitude in an NBER contraction (P-T)
against the change other variables over their individual Harding-Pagan cycle.

Dependent Variable: RNGP
With Heteroscedasticity-Consistent (Eicker-White) Standard Errors
(t-statistics in parentheses)

   Independent
                              1                2                      3              4
     Variables

                            0.070*          0.056***            0.021*             0.029
     Constant
                            (1.84)           (2.64)             (1.77)             (0.68)

                            0.019            0.013              0.029***           0.040
   Baa Spread
                            (0.88)           (0.82)              (6.56)            (1.40)
                            -0.011*                                                0.021
  Discount Rate
                            (-1.74)                                                (1.19)
                            0.013*           0.005                  0.001          -0.003
   Stock Index
                            (1.88)           (1.55)                 (0.61)         (-0.28)
                                             0.096              0.094*
    M2 growth
                                             (0.45)             (1.77)
                            -0.039          -0.096             -0.186***           -0.032
   TFP growth
                            (-0.53)         (-1.56)             (-8.46)            (-0.52)
                                                                0.146***
   Interaction 1
                                                                (22.41)
                                                                                   -0.015
   Interaction 2
                                                                                   (-1.58)

  Observations                15              15                     15              15
            2
        R                   0.297            0.192                  0.952          0.403
                2
      R-bar                 0.015           -0.131                  0.924          0.071
* 10% significance level
** 5% significance level
*** 1% significance level




                                              40
Table 12 Recession Amplitudes with and without large financial events.
P-T RGNP            credit               M2                    Stock
Amplitude, 20th
With crunch         10.4%                14.8%                 15.2%
Without crunch      3.8%                 2.9%                  2.8%
t-statistic         0.98                 1.57                  1.34

P-T RGNP               credit                  M2              Stock
                th
Amplitude, 19
With crunch            7.1%                    6.9%            5.4%
Without crunch         0.1%                    -0.7%           0.8%
 t-statistic           1.83**                  3.12**          0.94
t-tests for equal mean with unequal variances.
*significant at 10% level
**significant at 5% level
***significant at 1% level




                                           41
                                                                                                                                    Figure 1

   25 Log change                                                                                                                          45 Log change
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Commercial banks loans
   20                                                                                                                                     35
                                                                                   Commercial banks loans
                                                                  M2                                                                                                                                         M2
   15                                                                                                                                     25

   10                                                                                                                                     15

     5                                                                                                                                      5

     0                                                                                                                                    -5                                                                Real GNP

   -5                  Real GNP                                                                                                          -15

  -10                                                                                                                                    -25

  -15                                                                                                                                    -35
                                                                                                                                                                                                              5 70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05
        75        80         85             90              95              00              05             10           15                     20        25        30        35        40        45 50 55 60 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                9 19 19 19 19 19 20 20
   18        18         18             18              18              19              19             19           19                     19        19        19        19        19        19     19 19 19 19 1
Source: Balke & Gordon, NBER, Federal Reserve Board, FDIC, Friedman & Schwartz, Author’s                                               Source: Balke & Gordon, NBER, Federal Reserve Board, FDIC, Friedman & Schwartz, Author’s
calculations                                                                                                                           calculations




                                                                                                                 Percent                            Percent
   10 Percent                                                                                                                1.50
                                                                                                                                          14
     9                                                     Commercial paper rate (left scale)                                                                                                               Discount rate
                                                                                                                             1.25
     8                                                                                                                                    12

     7
                                                                                                                             1.00         10
     6
                                                                                                                                            8
     5                                                                                                                       0.75
                                                                                                                                                                                        Baa bond spread
     4                                                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                             0.50
     3
                                                                                                                                            4
     2                                           Railroad bond spread (right scale)
                                                                                                                             0.25
                                                                                                                                            2
     1

     0                                                                                                                       0.00           0
                                                                                                                                                                   0 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05
        75        80        85         90             95          00              05             10         15          20                     20 25 30 35 40 45 5
                                                                                                                                                  9  9  9  9 19 19  19 19 19 19 19 1
                                                                                                                                                                                    9 19 19 19 20 20
   18        18        18         18             18          19              19             19         19          19                     19     1  1  1  1

Source: Macaulay, Federal Reserve Board of Governors                                                                                   Source: Federal Reserve Board of Governors
                                                                                                                                      Figure 1 continued

             Index, Logarithmic scale                                                                                                                     Index, Logarithmic scale
   12                                                                                                                                          10000
   11
   10                                                   S&P 500 index                                                                                                                   S&P 500 index

     9                                                                                                                                           1000
     8
     7
     6                                                                                                                                            100
     5
     4
     3                                                                                                                                              10
     2
     1
     0                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                5 0 5 0 05
        75          80              85             90         95             00              05         10             15              20              20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 8 9 9 0
   18          18              18             18         18             19              19         19             19              19                 9
                                                                                                                                                    1 1  9   9 9  9
                                                                                                                                                            1 1 1 1  9   9 9  9
                                                                                                                                                                        1 1 1 1  9   9 9
                                                                                                                                                                                    1 1 1 9   9
                                                                                                                                                                                             1 19 19 20 20

Source: Standard and Poor’s                                                                                                                   Source: Standard & Poor’s




             Index
  220
  200
  180
                                                              Real HPI
  160
  140
  120
  100
   80
   60
   40
   20
     0

        91         01         11         21        31        41         51         61         71        81        91             01
   18         19         19         19        19        19         19         19         19        19        19             20

Source: Shiller
                                                                                      Figure 2

                          RGNP vs. RR Spread (1800s)                                                                       RGNP vs. CP (1800s)
                   0.15                                                                                      0.15
                                07                                                                                  07
                                         93                                                                                                                          93
                   0.10                                                                                      0.10
                              13                                                                                                                                                  13


                   0.05                                                                                      0.05




RGNP contraction
                                                                                         RGNP contraction
                   0.00                                                                                      0.00


               -0.05                                                                                    -0.05


               -0.10                                                                                    -0.10
                   -0.10     -0.05    0.00        0.05        0.10   0.15        0.20                       -0.20         -0.12      -0.04        0.04        0.12         0.20   0.28
BLS Data                                 RR spread contraction                           BLS Data                                            CP contraction

                             RGNP vs. M2 (1800s)                                                                         RGNP vs. Stocks (1800s)
                   0.15                                                                                      0.15
                                                                                 07                                                          07
                                                                            93                                                                                            93
                   0.10                                                                                      0.10
                                             13                                                                                                                       13


                   0.05                                                                                      0.05
                                                                                          RGNP contraction




                                                                                                             0.00




RGNP contraction
                   0.00


               -0.05                                                                                        -0.05


               -0.10                                                                                        -0.10
                   -0.14 -0.12 -0.10 -0.08 -0.06 -0.04 -0.02 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06                                -0.04             0.04             0.12               0.20             0.28
BLS Data                                     M2 contraction                               BLS Data                                       Stock index contraction
                                                                                                    Figure 3

                          RGNP vs. Baa Spread (1900s)                                                                             RGNP vs. Discount (1900s)
                   0.40                                                                                                    0.40
                           29                                                                                                                                                   29
                   0.35                                                                                                    0.35

                   0.30                                                                                                    0.30

                   0.25                                                                                                    0.25

                   0.20                                                                                                    0.20

                   0.15                                                     45                                             0.15            45




RGNP contraction
                                                                                                       RGNP contraction
                                                                   20                                                                            20
                   0.10                       37                                                                           0.10
                                                                                                                                                37
                   0.05                                                                                                    0.05

                   0.00                                                                                                    0.00

               -0.05                                                                                                  -0.05
                   -3.00 -2.50 -2.00 -1.50 -1.00 -0.50 0.00 0.50 1.00 1.50 2.00                                           -1.00          0.00        1.00        2.00           3.00   4.00   5.00
BLS Data                                           Baa spread contraction                              BLS Data                                       Discount rate contraction

                                     RGNP vs. M2 (1900s)                                                                            RGNP vs. Stocks (1900s)
                   0.40                                                                                                    0.40
                                                                                               29                                                                                             29
                   0.35                                                                                                    0.35

                   0.30                                                                                                    0.30

                   0.25                                                                                                    0.25

                   0.20                                                                                                    0.20

                   0.15         45                                                                                         0.15     45
                                                                                                        RGNP contraction




RGNP contraction
                                                           20                                                                                                       20
                                                    37                                                                                                                          37
                   0.10                                                                                                    0.10

                   0.05                                                                                                    0.05

                   0.00                                                                                                    0.00

               -0.05                                                                                                      -0.05
                   -0.14    -0.08     -0.02        0.04     0.10        0.16     0.22   0.28    0.34                          -0.32 -0.21 -0.10 0.01 0.12 0.23 0.34 0.45 0.56 0.67 0.78
BLS Data                                             M2 contraction                                     BLS Data                                      Stock index contraction
