NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTO COLLEGE, OUT OF POVERTY? POLICIES TO INCREASE THE POSTSECONDARY
ATTAINMENT OF THE POOR
David Deming
Susan Dynarski
Working Paper 15387
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15387

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2009

We thank the Robin Hood Foundation for supporting this research. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by David Deming and Susan Dynarski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Into College, Out of Poverty? Policies to Increase the Postsecondary Attainment of the Poor
David Deming and Susan Dynarski
NBER Working Paper No. 15387
September 2009
JEL No. H52,I22,I28,J24,J38
ABSTRACT
We review the experimental and quasi-experimental research evidence on the causal relationship between
college costs and educational attainment, with a particular focus on low-income populations. The weight
of the evidence indicates that reducing college costs can increase college entry and persistence. Simple
and transparent programs appear to be most effective. Programs that link money to incentives and/or
the takeup of academic support services appear to be particularly effective.

David Deming
Harvard University
Kennedy School of Government
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
demingd@nber.org
Susan Dynarski
University of Michigan
Weill Hall
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091
and NBER
dynarski@umich.edu

I. Introduction
College-going has risen substantially over the past forty years. In 1968, 36 percent of 23year-olds had gone to college, while by 2005, that figure had grown to 58 percent.1 But these
gains have been uneven. African-Americans are about half as likely as non-Hispanic whites
to earn a bachelor’s degree (19 percent vs. 37 percent) and Hispanics less than one-third
as likely (11 percent).2 Females are about twelve percentage points more likely to have attended
college by age 23 (64 versus 52 percent), and about seven percentage points more likely to have
completed a BA (32 versus 25 percent.)
Some of these differences trace back to performance gaps in elementary school
and high school. But even among those who do well on achievement tests,
socioeconomic inequalities remain: 74 percent of high-scorers who grew up in upperincome families complete college, compared to only 29 percent of those who grew up in
low-income families (College Board, 2005).
While thirty years ago a high school degree was sufficient for financial security, it is now
a college degree that is the key to a middle-class lifestyle. Since the 1970s, high school dropouts
and graduates have lost ground, with their real earnings dropping substantially (Figure 1, from
College Board, 2005). Typical earnings for a full-time, male high school graduate in 1972 were
$45,000 (in constant 2003 dollars). That figure had dropped by a third ($30,000) by 2005.3 By
contrast, real earnings for the college-educated have held steady; among women, they have risen.
These two sets of trends - steady earnings for those with a college education, plunging
earnings for those without - mean that college is increasingly important to financial well-being.
1

Authors’ calculations from the October Current Population Survey.
Authors’ calculation of BA completion rates for 25-26 year olds in the 2005 CPS.
3
Over the same period, earnings among male, high school dropouts plunged from $40,000 to $22,000.
2

1

In 1972, men with a bachelor’s degree typically earned 22 percent more than those with a high
school degree. By 2003, this return had nearly tripled, to 60 percent.
In light of the rising importance of a college degree, policymakers have focused on
increasing college enrollment as an important tool for mitigating poverty. This chapter reviews
the evidence on a key tool available to policymakers – reducing college costs. Section II briefly
outlines the policy context; Section III reviews the evidence from experimental and high-quality
quasi-experimental studies of college cost reduction; Section IV discusses the broad lessons
derived from these studies and concludes.

II. Policy context
Colleges, state and federal government and private organizations spend billions to
subsidize college costs. In this section, we briefly describe the major programs.
Two federal programs provide the bulk of aid to college students: the Pell Grant and the
Stafford Loan. Pell Grants flow almost exclusively to families with incomes below $40,000
(Stedman, 2003). During the 2004-05 academic year, $13.6 billion in Pell Grants was delivered
to over five million students (College Board, 2005). During the same year, $55 billion in loans
was delivered to undergraduates through the Stafford Loan program.
States hold down college costs by subsidizing public universities, which in turn charge
lower tuition prices than their private counterparts. The vast majority of students attend public
colleges, so this is an important channel through which government subsidizes college costs. In
addition to charging artificially low prices to all students, states also offer scholarships to
individual students. Most of these are small-scale programs, but beginning in the early 1990s,
more than a dozen states established broad-based merit aid programs. These programs typically

2

award full tuition and fees at state public universities (or in some cases, an equivalent voucher to
attend a private school) to residents who maintain a minimum high school grade point average.
Many require a grade point average of 3.0, not a particularly high threshold – Dynarski (2004)
calculates that in 1999, 40 percent of high school seniors met this standard.
In recent years, the federal and state tax codes have also been used as a vehicle for
subsidizing college costs. The Hope and Lifetime Learning tax credits and the deduction for
college tuition and fees help families pay for current college costs. Parents can also claim
children under 24 as dependents if they are enrolled in college. The federal Coverdell Education
Savings Account and the state 529 savings plans help families pay for college in the future by
increasing their after-tax returns on savings. With a total cost of $10.5 billion, these education
tax incentives approach spending on the Pell Grant, historically the cornerstone of federal aid for
college students (College Board, 2005). But, as they are currently configured, these programs
almost exclusively benefit upper income families (Dynarski, 2004; Dynarski and Scott-Clayton,
2006a) and so are not candidate instruments for reducing poverty.
Foundations and colleges are additional sources of student aid. Programs such as the
Gates Millenium Scholars, the I Have a Dream foundation, and Kalamazoo Promise fully
sponsor college attendance (or “top up” the difference between government grants and estimated
need) for low-income and/or minority students. Although these programs are small in scale
compared to the federal and state aid programs discussed above, they are highly visible and
intended to increase college attendance, and so we will discuss them in the chapter.
We will not examine the new and widely-discussed scholarship programs of elite colleges
(such as Harvard and Princeton) which offer a free ride for low-income students (Pallais and
Turner, 2007, Avery et al, 2006; Linsenmeier et al 2006; Rothstein and Rouse 2007, van der

3

Klaauw 2002). Helping low-income students make the leap from high school into any college is
the critical task if the goal is poverty reduction, and these programs do not serve this function.
The low-income student who takes up Princeton’s offer of a free ride would likely have gone to
Harvard (or Berkeley) had Princeton not been so generous. Convincing more nonwhite and lowincome students to attend Princeton instead of Berkeley may serve important social goals, such
as diversifying our political leadership (Bok and Bowen, 2000), but poverty reduction is not
among them.
Most evaluations of the programs we have mentioned focus on the enrollment margin.
However, while enrollment has risen substantially over the past forty years, degree receipt has
barely budged (Turner, 2006). Thus retention and graduation of college enrollees has also
become an important policy issue. We review evidence from several recent experimental
evaluations that provide scholarships and services to existing college enrollees. These programs
are of particular interest since they focus on marginal students, for whom retention rates are
lowest.

III. Evidence
Economic theory (and common sense) predicts that lowering the price of college will
increase attendance. While the theoretical prediction is clear, students’ marginal responsiveness
to additional dollars of aid is an empirical question. Answering this question is a challenge, since
eligibility for subsidies is certainly not random and is likely correlated with unobserved
determinants of schooling. As a result, estimates based on the cross-sectional correlation of aid
with schooling are subject to multiple sources of bias.

4

A long empirical literature examines the effect of college costs on schooling decisions.
Leslie and Brinkman (1988) review more than seventy of these studies.4 With few exceptions,
discussed below, this long literature suffers from a key limitation: the response of schooling to
price is poorly identified. That is, the variation in schooling prices used to estimate the parameter
of interest is likely to be correlated with the unobserved determinants of schooling.
More formally, the relationship between financial aid and schooling decisions can be
expressed with the following equation:
(1)

Si = α + β Aidi + ε i

Here, Si is some measure of an individual’s schooling, such as college attendance or completed
years of college, Aidi is the amount of student aid (expressed in dollars) for which an individual
is eligible, and the error term ε i represents the unobserved determinants of schooling. If aid is
uncorrelated with ε i , then β can be interpreted as the effect of an additional dollar of aid on
college attendance or completed education.
If financial aid is randomly assigned in an experimental setting, Aidi is uncorrelated with

ε i . In nearly all nonexperimental studies, however, aid is offered to students on the basis of
characteristics that independently affect the probability of college attendance. For example, the
federal government uses the Pell Grant to increase the college attendance of low-income youth.
If such students are relatively unlikely to attend college, perhaps because of low levels of
parental education or poor secondary schooling, then estimates of β based on this source of
variation in aid will be biased downward. Conversely, since many colleges use merit
4

Heller (1997) updates this review with studies done after Leslie and Brinkman (1988.)

5

scholarships to attract high-achieving students, β could be biased upward if such scholarships
are included in the analysis.
One can attempt to correct for this bias by controlling for observed determinants of
schooling (such as parental income or academic achievement) in a vector of regressors X i :
Si = α + β Aidi + δ X i + ε i

(2)

If X i is sufficiently rich that it captures all other sources of variation in individual schooling
decisions and schooling costs, then β will be unbiased. However, under plausible conditions this
approach will fail, for two reasons:
•

Complete data on relevant characteristics is rarely available. For example, parental
wealth affects schooling decisions, both directly and through eligibility for aid, but
comprehensive measures of parental (and extended family) wealth are rarely present in
survey data, especially among adults who have completed their education.

•

Even if all relevant variables are available, their role in the schooling decision may not be
properly modeled. Theory provides little guidance as to which attributes should be held
constant in estimating Equation (2). This is particularly problematic because point
estimates in this literature are often quite fragile, even changing sign with small changes
in specification. As a practical example, the effect of income on Pell Grant eligibility is
highly nonlinear, and unless the functional form of the underlying relationship between
income and schooling is perfectly specified, the resulting estimate will be biased.

6

B. Quasi-experimental studies
We now discuss analyses of natural (or quasi-) experiments, in which a discrete shift in aid
policy affects one group of individuals but not others. Beginning with Hansen (1983), who
examined the introduction of the Pell Grant in the early 1970s, a small but growing number of
studies has used this approach to estimate the effect of schooling costs on college-going. We
summarize the main results of these studies in Table I.
Federal Programs
Most of these studies examine the effect of grant aid. Studies which examine the Pell
Grant, currently the largest source of federal grant aid, produce mixed results: Hansen (1983) and
Kane (1995) found no effect of the introduction of the Pell on the college enrollment rate of lowincome recent high school graduates. Seftor and Turner (2002) use a differences-in-differences
framework to examine the effect of changing Pell Grant eligibility rules, and find that “nontraditional” students are about 4 percentage points more likely to attend college once they are
considered eligible. Bettinger (2004) uses a regression-discontinuity approach to look at the
effect of the Pell Grant on persistence using a sample of college students; his estimates are
extremely sensitive to specification.
Veterans’ educational benefits have historically been one of the largest sources of grant
aid for college in the US. Since children from poor families are more likely than others to enroll
in the military, programs that increase veterans’ education have the potential to reduce poverty.
Multiple studies of the post-World-War-II GI Bills (Angrist, 1993; Stanley, 2003; Turner and
Bound, 2003; Bound and Turner, 2003) have found these benefits to have raised schooling levels
substantially.

7

Evaluating another federal program, Dynarski (2003) concludes that an additional $1000
in aid increases college attendance by about four percentage points. She examines the
elimination of the Social Security student benefit program, which paid the college costs of the
children of deceased, disabled or retired Social Security beneficiaries. Eligible students were
disproportionately poor, nonwhite and from single-parent families, so these estimates are quite
relevant. Dynarski uses the death of a parent during a person’s childhood as a proxy for Social
Security beneficiary status, and finds that college attendance of the affected group dropped by
more than a third, and schooling by two-thirds of a year.
While loans are the dominant form of federal aid today, we unfortunately know little
about how they affect behavior. Reyes (1995) examines the effect of relative changes in loan
eligibility across income groups in the early eighties, and concludes that loan access increases
attendance and completed schooling. Dynarski (2005) addresses this question using variation in
loan eligibility induced by the Higher Education Amendments of 1992, which removed home
equity from the set of assets “taxed” by the federal aid formula. She finds a small effect of loan
eligibility on college attendance and a larger effect on the choice of college.
State Programs
Subsidized public tuitions, which vary considerably by state, are one of the largest
sources of education subsidies. Estimates based on cross-sectional variation in tuition may be
biased, since states with a preference for education may have both low tuition prices and high
college attendance rates. The solution of Kane (1995) is to use state fixed effects; his identifying
assumption is that within-state changes in tuition prices are uncorrelated with changes in a state’s

8

taste for college. He concludes that a $1,000 drop in public tuition produces about a four
percentage point increase in college attendance rates of recent high school graduates.
Several studies have used the introduction of state merit scholarship programs as a source
of variation in schooling costs. Dynarski (2000) and Cornwell, Mustard and Sridhar (2006)
conclude that the Georgia HOPE scholarship increase college attendance by 4-6 percentage
points per $1000 in grant aid. Dynarski (2004) finds that a dozen states' scholarship programs
have had similar, but slightly smaller effects, and that their positive effects on college attendance
are greater for nonwhites. Kane (2003) uses a regression discontinuity approach to examine the
CalGrant, and finds substantial impacts on college entry for students who had already applied for
financial aid. Abraham and Clark (2006) and Kane (2007) evaluate the DC Tuition Assistance
Grant program, which allowed DC residents to pay in-state tuition at public schools across the
country. They find that the fraction of DC residents that attended Maryland and Virginia schools
more than doubled, and estimate an impact on overall enrollment of 3-4 percentage points per
$1000 of effective tuition reduction. Goodman (2008) examines a program in Massachusetts that
assigns aid on the basis of a standardized test score, and finds that the scholarship induced 6
percent of winners to switch from private to public 4-year colleges. He also finds that lowincome (and low test-score) students are more price sensitive. However, there was no impact on
overall enrollment.
Dynarski (2008) finds that the Georgia and Arkansas merit scholarship programs have
also increased degree completion, by around 3-4 percentage points. She estimates that the
scholarships increases persistence by 5-11 percent for those who would have entered college
anyway. This suggests that the positive effect of lower cost on retention outweighs any negative
effect of enrolling marginally weaker students who are less likely to persist.
9

Finally, a recent paper by Scott-Clayton (2009) examines the impact of the PROMISE
scholarship, a merit aid program in West Virginia. The PROMISE scholarship was similar to
other state merit programs in its initial eligibility requirements and the amount of aid it offered.
But it was unique in requiring students to complete at least thirty credits per year in order to keep
their scholarships, a rate which would put them on track to graduate in four years. She finds that
PROMISE increased eventual graduation rates by almost 4 percentage points, while the
percentage of students graduating on time increased by about 7 percentage points from a baseline
of just 27 percent. The impacts on year-by-year credit completion were concentrated around the
annual renewal threshold in the freshman through junior years, but disappeared in the senior year
when students were still receiving their scholarships but no longer faced any renewal
requirements (scholarships could not be renewed for a fifth year in any case). Scott-Clayton'
concludes that incentives are a powerful play are at least as important as cost reduction suggests
that a combination of cost reduction and performance incentives may have a greater impact than
financial aid alone.

Other Programs
DesJardins and McCall (2007) study the impact of the Gates Millenium Scholarship
(GMS) using a regression discontinuity design. GMS “tops up” the difference between needbased grants and unmet financial need for eligible minority applicants. Scholars are selected on
the basis of high school record and a scored application process, which generates discontinuous
changes in the probability of receiving an award. Although the evaluation is still ongoing, they

10

find weak impacts on overall retention but strong evidence of decreased loan debt and work
hours.
Table 1 summarizes the findings from the quasi-experimental studies discussed above.
The studies in this table are those which we consider as estimating causal impacts of the effect of
schooling costs on schooling decisions. Subsidies to post-secondary schooling do appear to
affect schooling decisions. The best estimates suggest that eligibility for $1,000 of subsidy
increases college attendance rates by roughly four percentage points. Aid eligibility also appears
to increase completed schooling and shift students from community colleges toward four-year
schools.
C. Experimental Evaluations
One straightforward way to assess the causal impact of financial aid on college
enrollment and persistence is to randomly allocate scarce scholarship funds to an eligible
population. Several experimental studies have examined the effect of scholarships when they are
combined with mentoring or other services. A key, unresolved question in these studies is the
extent to which services, and the cost of providing them, are more effective than the
scholarships.
Most randomized trials in higher education examine the effect of aid or services on
grades, credit accumulation and/or persistence past the first year, conditional on enrollment. The
reasons for this are largely practical – school-based interventions are more administratively
feasible than tracking high school students to their chosen colleges around the country. To our
knowledge, only one randomized trial looks directly at the enrollment margin.

11

Upward Bound
Upward Bound is a federal and nationwide program that provides comprehensive
precollege services to participants, including supplemental college-preparatory coursework in
math, science, English; tutoring; counseling; and activities such as attendance at museums and
plays. Mathematica Policy Research conducted a randomized trial of Upward Bound from 1992
to 1994, following participants for several years. They found weak impacts of Upward Bound on
performance in high school courses (Myers and Schirm, 1999.) A more recent evaluation finds
no statistically insignificant impact on college enrollment (Myers et al, 2004) though there is
some evidence of substitution from 2 to 4-year colleges.5 There is no impact on total college
credits earned.6 See the paper by Long (2008) in this volume for more detail on the
administration and evaluation of Upward Bound.

Experimental Effects of College Persistence Programs
About twenty percent of students who enroll at a 4-year college leave within one year.
About forty percent fail to obtain a degree within six years (College Board, 2005.) Attrition is
even higher at non-selective schools, where the majority of students commute from home and
work part- or full-time. Since these students are more weakly attached to their institutions,
policies have focused on creating a stronger connection with the college experience via more
extensive mentoring, counseling, and collaborative “learning communities” (Bloom and Sommo,

5

The treatment group was 5 to 6 percentage points more likely to have attended a 4-year college and 3 to 5
percentage points less likely to have attended a 2-year college than the control group.
6
The evaluation does report much larger results for students with low (versus high) “educational expectations.”
Among students who did not expect to earn a bachelor’s degree, the treatment group was about 20 percentage points
more likely to attend a 4-year college than the control group, although the overall enrollment effect was still not
significant. However, since this evaluation does not actually measure degree receipt, this result is difficult to
interpret. Other results by subgroup are available in Myers et al (2004.)

12

2005). Two randomized trials have evaluated the effect of such programs; we discuss them
below.

Student Achievement and Retention Project
The Student Achievement and Retention Project was a large-scale randomized trial
launched in 2005 at the urban campus of a major Canadian public university (Angrist, Lang and
Oreopoulos 2009). Participants in the STAR experiment are similar to students at non-selective
universities in the U.S. About eighty percent of the sample lived with their parents and
commuted to school, and the majority planned to work part-time while enrolled. Many of the
students were first- or second-generation immigrants.
Incoming freshman were randomly assigned to one of four groups. The first was offered
enhanced services, in the form of peer advising and organized study groups. The second was
offered a financial incentive of $5,000 to complete a full course load with a grade point average
of 3.0 or higher (the payment was $1,000 for a GPA of at least 2.3). A third group was offered
both services and a financial incentive, while a fourth group formed a control group and was
offered the college’s typical services.
Overall, the effect of STAR was moderate. The largest impacts were found for the group
offered both services and a financial incentive. First-year grade point average increased between
0.1 and 0.2 standard deviations, and the combined group was about five percentage points less
likely to be placed on academic probation. Significant effects of STAR were driven entirely by
female participants – there was no effect of the program on males in any group. There was also
no effect of the program for the services or scholarship-only groups.

13

Opening Doors
Opening Doors is a large-scale randomized trial at six community colleges in four states
run by Manpower Research Development Corporation (MDRC). Preliminary results are
currently available for five of the six sites. The intervention at each site consists of “learning
communities” (in which entering students take blocks of classes together and are offered extra
tutoring); supplementary financial aid; and enhanced student services (extra counseling and
monitoring).
The first Opening Doors evaluation occurred at Kingsborough Community College in
Brooklyn, NY in the fall of 2003 (Bloom and Sommo, 2005.) The intervention targeted
approximately 750 entering freshman, who were ethnically and racially diverse; many were
recent immigrants that needed training in remedial English. Treatment group members were
place in learning communities of about 25 students each and received textbook vouchers.
Three semesters after the program at Kingsborough Community College, the treatment
group was 5.6 percentage points more likely to be enrolled in any college (Scrivener et al,
2008.). Treatment group members earned an average of 2.4 more credits and were in school
about 0.1 more semesters. They were more likely to attempt and pass standardized reading and
writing assessments. The effect sizes for these various assessments were around 0.1 standard
deviations, but were closer to 0.2 SDs for students whose initial English skills were worse at
baseline.7
A second set of Opening Doors demonstrations took place in northern Ohio (Scrivener
and Au, 2007; Scrivener and Pih, 2007.) Students were given regular appointments with an
Opening Doors counselor and given a $150 per semester scholarship that if they attended these
meetings. Results were weak. There was no increase in credits attempted or earned in the initial
7

For more detail on the assessments and subgroup effect sizes, see Scrivener et al (2008.)

14

semester, nor any impact on pass rate or grade point average. However, there was an effect on
retention of 5 to 10 percentage points and a small effect on earned credits.
Two Opening Doors demonstrations also took place at community colleges in New
Orleans in 2004 (Brock and Ritchburg-Hayes, 2006.) In addition to the learning communities,
the treatment group was offered $1000 per semester for half-time enrollment and a C average.
First year impacts were substantial. Opening Doors participants were about nine percentage
points more likely to be enrolled full-time, and earned on average 1.1 additional credits in the
first semester. They were about twelve percentage points more likely to pass and about seven
percentage points less likely to withdraw from an attempted course. These effects persisted into
the second and third semesters. The treatment group was about eighteen percentage points more
likely to remain enrolled into the second semester and about eleven percentage points more
likely to enroll for a third semester. The pass rate for enrolled courses also remained significantly
higher, and there was some evidence of small grade point average increases as well. The
cumulative effect of the program was a large and statistically significant increase of 3.3 credits
earned, and an average gain of 0.3 semesters worth of enrollment.
Overall, the results from Opening Doors are very encouraging. While cost estimates were
unavailable in the paper, the financial incentives offered were modest and the cost of providing
services was likely to be relatively low as well (especially to the extent that they were integrated
into the colleges’ existing programs). Opening Doors had effects that were at least as large as the
state merit aid programs reviewed earlier. Still, sample sizes in the evaluations were relatively
small, and caution is warranted until the results can be scaled up and replicated. Further research
is needed on these promising programs.

15

Several themes emerge from these experimental evaluations. First, the effect of aid
appears to be greater than that of services. Interventions that offered services alone generally had
weak impacts, whereas aid typically generated positive effects on enrollment and persistence.
Second, aid has a larger impact when combined with services. In the STAR experiment, the only
sustained gains were found in the treatment group that combined aid and services. The impact of
Opening Doors (which combined aid and services) was proportionally larger than quasiexperimental estimates of aid alone from the studies reviewed in Section III.B.

IV. Discussion
The effects of the financial aid programs we have discussed appear to depend critically on
form taken by the intervention. Program design matters. In particular, there appears to be an
important tradeoff between targeting and program effectiveness. Highly-targeted programs such
as the Pell focus their dollars on poorer students, but impose substantial paperwork burdens in
order to identify the neediest. If targeted students are deterred by administrative hurdles, these
programs will not work as well as intended. This is consistent with the pattern in Table 1, in
which the Pell and Stafford have small to zero effects while simpler, less-targeted programs have
substantial effects.
The paperwork requirements of the federal, need-based aid programs are high. For the
typical household, the aid application (the Free Application for Federal Student Aid, or FAFSA)
is longer and more complicated than the federal tax return. The aid process is also highly
uncertain, with definitive information about freshman-year aid not revealed until the spring of
the senior year in high school. (Dynarski and Scott-Clayton, 2006). This process may be
particularly daunting for low-income families. Parents in these families have typically not gone
16

to college themselves, so cannot draw from their own experiences to help their children. Lowincome high school students have few guidance counselors to guide them through the process.
They are unlikely to have Internet access at home and frequently speak English as a second
language. As a result, need-based aid -- which requires gathering extensive information about
income and expenses -- may have a smaller effect on this population than less-targeted forms of
subsidy with fewer application requirements and lower transaction costs.
By contrast, Georgia’s HOPE scholarship requires only that high school students
maintain a 3.0 GPA in order to have their tuition and fees paid at any public college in Georgia.
High schools proactively send transcript data to the state in order to identify scholarship winners.
For most students, the HOPE application consists of a half- page of basic biographical
information. High school students are knowledgeable about HOPE. More than seventy percent
of Georgia high-school freshmen surveyed were able to name the program without prompting.
Fifty-nine percent, when asked to list some requirements of HOPE, volunteered that a high
school GPA of 3.0 is necessary (Bugler and Henry, 1998). The compliance costs of the Social
Security student benefit program were also minimal.
Promising recent evidence on the benefits of simplification comes from a randomized
trial of assisted FAFSA completion conducted in partnership with H&R Block, an accounting
firm that provides tax preparation assistance (Bettinger, Long, Oreopoulos and Sanbonmatsu,
2009). Tax professionals pre-populated the FAFSA with income and asset information and
assisted families with completion and filing of the form. The treatment group was also provided
with an immediate estimate of aid eligibility and information about local postsecondary options
and costs. Early results from the program suggest that assistance increased college enrollment
substantially, both for recent high school graduates and for older, independent students with no
17

college experience (Bettinger, Long, Oreopoulos and Sanbonmatsu 2009). The results suggest
that simplification may be a highly cost-effective way to improve college access. In contrast,
there was no effect for a second treatment group that received only information, with no
assistance. This implies that compliance costs, rather than lack of information, may be the more
important barrier. The results suggest that increases in educational attainment could be achieved
at virtually no cost by making existing aid programs simpler and more transparent
In sum, the best evidence for effective financial aid on educational attainment comes
from simple, broad-based programs. Given that most students in these programs are
inframarginal, the benefits of simplicity versus targeting are an empirical question. The empirical
evidence suggests that even broad-based programs may pass a social cost-benefit test. Dynarski
(2008) estimates that state merit aid programs in Georgia and Arkansas pass a cost-benefit test if
the return to schooling is between 5 and 9 percent. This is on the low end of instrumental
variable rates of return to schooling, and is well below the rate of return estimated for recent
cohorts (Angrist and Krueger 1991; Kane and Rouse 1995; Oreopoulos 2007.) Thus it appears
that even with a low “effective” increase in enrollment due to subsidization of inframarginal
students, a simple, broad-based aid program can increase social welfare.
Students who enter college but drop out without a degree are an important target for those
who wish to increase educational attainment. Dropout rates are especially high at community
colleges, where poor students are concentrated. Interventions that increase persistence in
community colleges are therefore a sensible focus if the goal is to increase the educational
attainment of the poor. The Opening Doors demonstration projects provide strong evidence that
pairing financial incentives with support services can increase college persistence among low-

18

income students attending community colleges. Testing the efficacy of these programs at scale is
an important next step for researchers and policymakers.

19

References
Abraham, Katharine and Melissa Clark (2006). “Financial Aid and Students’ College Decisions:
Evidence from the District of Columbia Tuition Assistance Grant Program.” Journal of
Human Resources, Summer 2006, pp. 578-610.
Angrist, Joshua D. (1993). “The Effect of Veterans Benefits on Education and Earnings.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 46:4, 637-52.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger (1991). “Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect
Schooling and Earnings?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(4): 979-1014.
Angrist, Joshua D., Daniel Lang and Philip Oreopoulos (2009). “Incentives and Services for
College Achievement: Evidence from a Randomized Trial.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 1(1): 136-163.
Avery, Christopher, Caroline Hoxby, Clement Jackson, Kaitlin Burek, Glenn Poppe and Mridula
Raman (2006). “Cost Should Be No Barrier: An Evaluation of the First Year of
Harvard’s Financial Aid Initiative.” NBER Working Paper 12029.
Avery, Christopher and Thomas J. Kane (2004). “Student Perceptions of College Opportunities:
The Boston COACH Program,” in Caroline Hoxby, ed., College Choices: The Economics
of Where to Go, When to Go, and How To Pay for It. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Bettinger, Eric (2004). “How Financial Aid Affects Persistence,” in Caroline Hoxby, ed.,
College Choices: The Economics of Where to Go, When to Go, and How To Pay for It.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bettinger, Eric, Bridget Terry Long, Philip Oreopoulos and Lisa Sanbonmatsu (2009). “The Role
of Information and Simplification in College Decisions: Results from the H&R Block
FAFSA Experiment.” Working Paper.
Bloom, Dan and Colleen Sommo (2005). “Building Learning Communities: Early Results from
the Opening Doors Demonstration at Kingsborough Community College.” MDRC, New
York, NY.
Bok, Derek and William G. Bowen (2000). The Shape of the River: Long-Term Consequences of
Considering Race in College and University Admissions. Princeton University Press,
Princeton NJ.
Bound, John and Sarah Turner (2002). “Going to War and Going to College: Did World War II
and the G.I. Bill Increase Educational Attainment for Returning Veterans?” Journal of
Labor Economics 20 (4): 784-815.

20

Brock, Thomas and Lashawn Richburg-Hayes (2006). “Paying for Persistence: Early Results of a
Louisiana Scholarship Program for Low-Income Parents Attending Community College.”
Manpower Development Research Corp., New York NY.
Bugler, Daniel T. and Gary T. Henry (1998). “An Evaluation of Georgia’s HOPE Scholarship
Program: Impact on College Attendance and Performance.” Council for School
Performance, Georgia State University.
College Board (2005). Education Pays 2005. The College Board, New York, NY.
Cornwell, Christopher, David Mustard and Deepa Sridhar (2006). “The Enrollment Effects of
Merit-Based Financial Aid: Evidence from Georgia’s HOPE Scholarship.” Journal of
Labor Economics 24, 761-786.
DesJardins, Stephen L. and Brian P. McCall (2007). “The Impact of the Gates Millenium
Scholars Program on Selected Outcomes of Low-Income Minority Students: A
Regression Discontinuity Analysis.” Working Paper.
Dynarski, Susan (2000). “Hope for Whom? Financial Aid for the Middle Class and Its Impact on
College Attendance.” National Tax Journal 53:3 (September), pp. 629-661.
Dynarski, Susan (2002). “The Behavioral and Distributional Implications of Aid for College.”
American Economic Review (May).
Dynarski, Susan (2003). “Does Aid Matter? Measuring the Effect of Student Aid on College
Attendance and Completion.” American Economic Review (March).
Dynarski, Susan (2004)“Who Benefits from the College Saving Incentives? Income, Educational
Expectations and the Value of the 529 and Coverdell.” National Tax Journal
(September).
Dynarski, Susan (2005). “Loans, Liquidity and Schooling Decisions.” Mimeo, Harvard
University.
Dynarski, Susan (2008). “Building the Stock of College-Educated Labor.” Journal of Human
Resources (Summer).
Dynarski, Susan and Judith Scott-Clayton (2006a). “Simplify and Focus the Education Tax
Incentives.” Tax Notes.
Dynarski, Susan and Judith Scott-Clayton (2006b). “The Cost of Complexity in Federal Student
Aid: Lessons from Optimal Tax Theory and Behavioral Economics.” National Tax
Journal (June).
Goodman, Joshua (2008). “Who merits financial aid?: Massachusetts’ Adams Scholarship”,
Journal of Public Economics 92(10-11): 2121-2131.
Hansen, W. Lee (1983). “The Impact of Student Financial Aid on Access.” In Joseph Froomkin,
ed., The Crisis in Higher Education. New York: Academy of Political Science.
21

Heller, Donald E. (1997), “Student Price Response in Higher Education: An Update to Leslie
and Brinkman.” Journal of Higher Education 68(6).
Kane, Thomas J. (1995). “Rising Public College Tuition and College Entry: How Well Do
Public Subsidies Promote Access to College?” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper 5164.
Kane, Thomas J. (2003). “A Quasi-Experimental Estimate of the Impact of Financial Aid on
College-Going.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 9703.
Kane, Thomas J. (2004). “Evaluating the Impact of the D.C. Tuition Assistance Grant Program.”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 10658.
Kane, Thomas J. (2007). “Evaluating the Impact of the D.C. Tuition Assistance Grant Program.”
Journal of Human Resources 42(3): 555-582.
Kane, Thomas J. and Cecilia E. Rouse (1995). “Labor Market Returns to Two- and Four-Year
College.” American Economic Review 85(3): 600-614.
Leslie, Larry and Paul Brinkman (1988). The Economic Value of Higher Education. New York:
Macmillan.
Linsenmeier, David M., Harvey S. Rosen, and Cecilia Elena Rouse (2006). “Financial Aid
Packages and College Enrollment Decisions: An Econometric Case Study.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 88:1, pp. 126-145.
Myers, David and Allen Schirm (1999). The Impacts of Upward Bound: Final Report for Phase I
of the National Evaluation. Mathematica Policy Research, Washington DC.
Myers, David, Rob Olsen, Neil Seftor, Julie Young and Christina Tuttle (2004). The Impacts of
Regular Upward Bound: Results from the Third Follow-Up Data Collection.
Mathematica Policy Research, Washington DC.
Oreopoulos, Philip (2007). “Do dropouts drop out too soon? Wealth, health and happiness from
compulsory schooling.” Journal of Public Economics, 91(11-12): 2213-2229.
Pallais, Amanda and Sarah E. Turner (2007). “Access to Elites,” in Economic Inequality and
Higher Education: Access, Persistence and Success, eds. Stacy Dickert-Conlin and Ross
H. Rubenstein, Russell Sage Foundation, New York NY.
Rothstein, Jesse and Cecilia E. Rouse (2007). “Constrained After College: Student Loans and
Early Career Occupational Choices.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 13117.
Scott-Clayton, Judith (2009). “On Money and Motivation: A Quasi-Experimental Analysis of
Financial Incentives for College Achievement.” Working Paper.

22

Scrivener, Susan et al (2008). “A Good Start: Two-Year Effects of a Freshman Learning
Community Program at Kingsborough Community College.” Manpower Development
Research Corp., New York NY.
Scrivener, Susan and Jenny Au (2007). “Enhancing Student Services at Lorain County
Community College: Early Results from the Opening Doors Demonstration in Ohio.”
Manpower Development Research Corp., New York NY.
Scrivener, Susan and Michael Pih (2007). “Enhancing Student Services at Owens Community
College: Early Results from the Opening Doors Demonstration in Ohio.” Manpower
Development Research Corp., New York NY.
Seftor, Neil and Sarah Turner (2002). “Back to School: Federal Student Aid Policy and Adult
College Enrollment.” Journal of Human Resources.
Stanley, Marcus (2003). “College Education and the Mid- Century G.I. Bills.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 118(2): 671-708.
Stedman, James B. (2003). Federal Pell Grant Program of the Higher Education Act:
Background and Reauthorization. Congressional Research Service, Washington DC.
Reyes, Suzanne L. (1995). “Educational Opportunities and Outcomes: The Role of the
Guaranteed Student Loan.” Mimeo, Harvard University.
Turner, Sarah. 2007. “Higher education: Policies Generating the 21st Century Workforce,” in
Harry Holzer and Demetra Nightingale, eds., Workforce Policies for a Changing Economy.
Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute Press.
Turner, Sarah and John Bound (2003). “Closing the Gap or Widening the Divide: The Effects of
the G.I. Bill and World War II on the Educational Outcomes of Black Americans.”
Journal of Economic History 63:1, pp. 145-177.
van der Klaauw, Wilbert (2002). “Estimating the Effect of Financial Aid Offers on College
Enrollment: A Regression-Discontinuity Approach.” International Economic Review
43:4, pp. 1249-1288.

23

Table 1: Summary of Studies
Experimental Studies

Study

Sample

Intervention/Method

Financial
Award

Evaluation
Design

Outcomes

Effects

STAR – Canada
(Angrist et al, 2007)

~1600 entering
freshman at a public
university in Canada,
satellite campus

3 treatment groups - 1) peer
advising and organized study
group; 2) a merit scholarship for
above-avg. grades; 3) both

yes - $5000
for a 3.0 avg.,
$1000 for a
2.3 avg.

randomized
experiment

grades, retention

Largest effect for combined group - 0.1-0.2
SD increase in grades; 4-5 percentage point
decrease in probation. No effect on retention
for any group. Weak/no effects for groups 1
and 2; no effect for males in any group.

Opening Doors - New
York (Bloom and
Sommo, 2005;
Scrivener et al 2008)

~750 Community
College Attendees,
mixed races, mostly
immigrant

Learning Communities organized cohort of entering
students into same classes;
improved counseling and
monitoring; instructors work
together

no - (except
textbook
voucher)

randomized
experiment

Credits taken
and earned; pass
rate and GPA;
retention

8 percentage points less likely to withdraw
and 10 point increase in pass rate; cumulative
impact of 2.4 credits and 0.1 semesters; 5
percentage point increase in enrollment postprogram

Opening Doors Louisiana (Brock and
Richburg-Hayes,
2006)

~500 Community
College Attendees,
mostly female and
African-American

Financial Aid; Improved
counseling and monitoring

yes - $1000
per semester
for 1/2 time
enrollment
and 2.0 GPA

randomized
experiment

Credits taken
and earned; pass
rate and GPA;
retention

7 percentage points less likely to withdraw
and 12 point increase in pass rate; cumulative
increase of 3.3 credits and 0.3 semesters; 11
percentage point increase in post-program
enrollment

Opening Doors - Ohio
(Scrivener and Au
2007; Scrivener and
Pih 2007)

~1000 Community
College Attendees,
mostly female and
mixed race

Multiple mandatory meetings
with counselors; aid award given
for attendance

yes - $150 per
semester

randomized
experiment

Credits taken
and earned; pass
rate and GPA;
retention

no effect on withdrawal or pass rate;
cumulative increase of 0.8/1.0 credits and
0.1/0.2 semesters; 5.6/10.5 percentage point
increase in post-program enrollment

24

Quasi-Experimental Studies

Study

Sample

Intervention/Method

Financial
Award

Evaluation
Design

Outcomes

Effects

Introduction of Pell
Grant Program
(Hansen 1983; Kane
1995)

October Current
Population Survey;
1970-1977

Compare enrollment of eligible
to non-eligible population, before
and after 1973 when the Pell
Grant was established

yes maximum of
$3544 in 1991
dollars

differences-indifferences

College
enrollment and
type

no effect

Change/discontinuity
in Pell Grant eligibility
(Seftor and Turner
2002; Bettinger 2004)

October Current
Population Survey;
1969-1977 and 19841990 - "nontraditional"
older students only

Same as Kane (1995), plus a
before/after comparison when
independent student definition
changed; Student Aid Index that
determines eligibility is estimated
directly from data

yes maximum of
$3544 in 1991
dollars

differences-indifferences

Enrollment

~1.5 percentage point increase for initial Pell
introduction; ~4 percentage points for 2nd
change

Tuition Changes
(Kane 1995)

CPS; NLSY-79; High
School and Beyond

Between and within-state
variation in public subsidization
of college

changes in
tuition sticker
price

State fixed
effects

Enrollment

~4 percentage points per $1000 drop in
tuition

Expansion of Stafford
Loan eligibility (Reyes
1995; Dynarski 2005)

October CPS 19842000 and the Survey of
Income and Program
Participation (SIPP)
1986-1996

Before/after 1992 legal change home equity no longer "taxed" in
the federal student aid formula

yes - reduced
expected
contribution
by $2400 for
family with
median equity

differences-indifferences

Enrollment

5.1 percentage points per $1000 of loan
subsidy in the CPS; imprecise/no effect in
SIPP; Reyes - 1.5 percentage points per
$1000

GI Bill (Angrist 1993;
Stanley 2000; Bound
and Turner 2003;
Turner and Bound
2003)

Survey of
Occupational Change
in a Generation, 1973;
US Census

Compare enrollment of military
enlistees before/during/after
eligibility periods

yes - fully
subsidized
college
attendance
plus living
stipend

between/within
cohorts

total years of
educational
attainment

~0.25 years of education, or a 5-6 percentage
point increase in attendance due to Korean
War and WW II GI Bills

25

Quasi-Experimental Studies (cont’d)

Study

Sample

Intervention/Method

Financial
Award

Evaluation
Design

yes - average
annual
payment was
$6700 in 1980
dollars

differences-indifferences

Enrollment

3.6 percentage points per $1000 of grant aid

Outcomes

Effects

Social Security
Student Benefits
(Dynarski 2003)

National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth-1979

Elimination of the program in
1981 - compared those with
deceased father before and after

State Merit Aid
Programs - Georgia
HOPE scholarship
(Dynarski 2000;
Cornwell et al 2006)

CPS and Integrated
Postsecondary
Education Data System
(IPEDS) 1988-1997

Before/after institution of a
statewide merit (3.0 GPA
minimum) scholarship in 1993

yes - tuition
and required
fees at public
institutions in
GA

differences-indifferences

enrollment;
college choice

4-6 percentage points per $1000 of grant aid;
increase in enrollment in GA schools

regression
discontinuity

Enrollment

3-4 percentage point increase (among those
who applied for financial aid) for those
eligible for Cal Grant A

Regression
discontinuity /
differences-indifferences

Enrollment

6% of winners switched from private to
public 4-year colleges; no impact on overall
enrollment

State Merit Aid
Program - CAL Grant
(Kane 2003)

Administrative Data
from California and
the National Student
Clearinghouse

Discontinuous changes in the
eligibility formula for Cal Grants

yes - tuition
and required
fees at public
institutions or
a private
school grant of
~$9k

State Merit Aid
Program – Adams
Scholarship (Goodman
2008)

Administrative Data
from Massachusetts
Department of
Education

Discontinuous Change in
eligibility based on test score
cutoff; Before/After institution of
merit aid program

Yes – tuition
waiver at MA
public
schools;
~$1575 per
year at 4 yr.

26

Quasi-Experimental Studies (cont’d)

Financial
Award

Evaluation
Design

differences-indifferences

Study

Sample

Intervention/Method

DC Tuition Assistance
Grant (Kane 2004;
Abraham and Clark
2006)

IPEDS; Department of
Ed. FAFSA data;
DCTAG
administrative records;
SAT data

Allowed DC residents to attend
public schools in other states and
pay in-state tuition

yes difference
between out
and in-state
tuition (up to
$10k)

Outcomes

Effects

enrollment;
college location
and type

~3-4 percentage point increase per $1000
effective tuition reduction; fraction of DC
residents at MA and VA colleges more than
doubled

differences-indifferences;
regression
discontinuity

enrollment;
college type;
completion

~5-7 average percentage point increase in
enrollment due to state programs; shift away
from 2 and toward 4-year schools; ~ 3-4
percentage point increase in degree
completion (6 percentage point increase in
on-time graduation in for PROMISE
recipients – linked to credit requirements)

State Merit Aid
Program Multiple/Other
(Dynarski 2004;
Dynarski 2008; ScottClayton 2009)

Current Population
Survey; WV State
Administrative Data

Merit Aid programs in GA and
other states - before/after creation
of each program; West Virginia
PROMISE scholarship

varies usually tuition
and fees at a
state public
school or
equivalent
voucher for
private

Effect of School Aid
on Yield Rate (van der
Klaauw 2002;
Linsenmeier et al
2006)

Administrative Data
from anonymous
colleges, 1989-1993
and 1998

Discontinuous changes in the
formula for aid allocation;
before/after shift from loan/grant
mix to grants only

merit grants
for students of
higher ability
~$2000 on
average; full
tuition

regression
discontinuity;
differences-indifferences

Enrollment

~4 percentage points per $1000 in grant aid;
no impact on enrollment overall, but 8-10
percentage points for minorities

Gates Millenium
Scholars (DesJardins
and McCall 2007)

National Opinion
Research Center
survey of program
participants

Discontinuous change in
eligibility based on an
application "cut score"

"tops up" diff
between needbased aid and
price of
college

regression
discontinuity

retention; loan
debt; hours
worked

no impact on retention; 60% less debt; 35%
fewer hours worked

27

28

