                  WORKERS' COMPENSATION, WAGES,
                      AND THE RISK OF INJURY


                       Ronald G. Ehrenberg



                      Working Paper No. 1538




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1985




Professor of Economics and Labor Economics, Cornell University, and
Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. An
earlier version was presented at the Conference on Workers'
Compensation, NYSSILR, Cornell University October 19814. Without
implicating them for what remains I am grateful to John Burton,
James Chelius, and John Worrall for their comments on that draft.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies and project in Government Budget. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                           NBER Working Paper #1538
                                           January 1985




          Workers' Compensation, Wages, and the Risk of Injury



                                ABSTRACT



     This paper provides an analysis and summary of the effects of the

Workers' Compensation (WC) system on wages and work injury experience.

It stresses how lessons learned from other forms of social insurance can

be applied to research on WC.

     I begin with a brief overview of the characteristics of the WC

system. Next, some simple labor market models are sketched that provide

implications about how the system might affect employee compensation and

the frequency and duration of both work injuries and reported WC claims.

The bilk of the paper critically analyzes the relevant empirical literature,

summarizing what we have learned from it and suggesting future research

directions.




                                              Ronald C. Ehrenberg
                                              Cornell University
                                              Ithaca, NY 14850
                                              (607) 273—3174
I. Introduction

     In many respects the structure of the workers' compensation and

unemployment insurance systems are similar. Each is actually a system of

individual state systems. Both are financed by a payroll tax that is

imperfectly experience rated. Both provide insurance against an adverse

consequence (work injury or unemployment) that leads to time away from

work; the incidence and duration of these events are at least partially

determined by both employer and employee behavior. Both systems provide,

at least for temporary events, a structure of benefits that ties compensa-

tion to a worker's previous earnings.

     Because of these similarities, it is not totally insane for an

individual who has conducted some previous research on the unemployment

insurance (UI) system, but none on the workers' compensation (WC) system,

to provide an analysis and summary of the effects of the latter on work

injury experience. Indeed, one contribution of this paper will be to point

out how lessons learned from research on other forms of social insurance

can be applied tO research on WC. Nonetheless there are important dif-

ferences in, and complexities of, the WC system that analyses of it must

take into account; these are highlighted in the paper as well.

     I begin in the next section with a brief overview of the character-

istics of the WC system. Section III sketches some simple labor market

models that provide implications about how the system might affect employee

compensation and the frequency and duration of work injuries. Succeeding

sections critically analyze the empirical literature on these effects. A

final section provides some concluding remarks.
                                       2


II. Characteristics of the Workers' Compensation System1

     As mentioned above, the WC system is actually a system of state

systems; variations in values of key parameters across states provide the

basis of many of the empirical analyses discussed later. WC benefits are a

form of no fault insurance in which employers agree to pay specified

benefits to workers injured on the job in return for limited liability.

The no—fault aspect of it, however, still leaves employers the right to

challenge claims on such grounds as the injury did not take place on the

job, the injury is not as severe as the employee claims, oran injured

employee is not returning to work as quickly as is possible. The frequency

with which claims are challenged may   well   vary across states.2

     Five types of benefits are paid-under the WC system. First, uncompen—

sated medical expenses are paid to injured workers. Second, temporary

total disability (TTD) benefits are paid to injured workers who temporarily

cannot work at all, but for whom full recovery is expected. There typically

is a waiting period, which varies across states, before benefits commence,

and the benefits are specified as a fraction of pre-injury earnings. This

fraction, the income replacement rate usually is set at two—thirds,

however, each state specifies a minimum and maximum benefit level (the

latter is often tied to average weekly earnings in the state).

     Third, permanent total disability (PTD) benefits are paid when an

individual is permanently prevented from working at all. The structure of

benefits is similar to TTP benefits; in some cases there is also a maximum

duration of time that benefits may be received.

     Fourth, permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits are paid for

injuries that are expected, even after the healing period, to result in

permanent physical injury and limitations and/or limitations on actual

earnings capacity. In many states these benefits are determined exante and
                                     3



are not conditional on expost loss of earnings while in a few states

benefits for certain types of injuries (nonscheduled ones) depend on actual

earnings loss. In these latter states benefits for other types of injuries

(scheduled ones) do not depend on actual earnings loss. In most states,

however, nonscheduled berefits do not depend on actual earnings loss.

Finally, burial and survival benefits paid on death claims are a small

share of claims. PPD and TTD are, in order, the two most important

categories of indemnity claims based on dollar expenditures (together

representing over 80% of WC indemnity Costs), while TTD claims are by far

the most frequent type of claims.

     Most firms purchase insurance against WC claims,depending upon the

state either from a government or a private insurance carrier (some states

offer both options). Premiums are paid by employers as a percentage of

total payroll. Small employers are manual rated or charged a premium based

upon historical experience of the industry class to which they belong. As

a result, their WC payroll tax is imperfectly experience rated in the sense

that, at the margin, they do not bear the full cost of WC benefits paid to

their employees.

     As an employer become larger the manual rate is modified more and more

to reflect the injury experience of the firm. Indeed, very large firms'

rates depend solely on their own historical experience; they are said to be

perfectly experience rated (in principle they bear the full costs of WC

benefits received by their employees). Large firms also have the option of

self—insuring, which also leads to perfect experience rating. In general,

over a wide range of finn sizes WC costs are imperfectly experience rated,

with the extent of experience rating increasing with firm size.3
                                     4


     Two final points warrant mention here. First, WC benefits are not

taxable; thus the net worth of them depends upon a workers' family income

bracket. Second, recipients of WC benefits may receive other forms of

Insurance benefits that are conditioned either on their disability status

(e.g., social security or private disability payments) or their family

income level (e.g., food stamps). Analyses of incentive effects of WC

benefits should (but typically don't) take into account both the tax

treatment of WC benefits and these other forms of benefits.



III. Workers' Compensation Effects: Theory4

     Consider a simplified world in which the labor market is competitive,

workers have perfect information about the risks of injury associated with

each job and there are no barriers to mobility between jobs. Suppose also

that firms differ in their production technology, each technology has

certain Inherent risks of injury associated with It, these risks can be

reduced if firms expend resources to do so, and that the marginal cost (to

the employer) of reducing risks, varies across firms

     Assume also initially, that workers value positively their expected

earnings per period (earnings times the probability of not being injured)

and negatively (due to pain and suffering) the probability of being

Injured. Workers will move to firms whose earnings—risk of injury combina-

tion maximizes their well—being and, if all workers have identical pre-

ferences, higher risk of injury firms would have; to pay higher wages to

attract any workers. The mobility of workers would thus lead to fully

compensating wage differentials or wage differentials that compensate

workers for the disutility they would suffer from risk of injury.5
                                       5


      In such a world, firms would choose the wage rate—risk of injury

combination to offer so that their marginal cost of injury reduction just

equals their marginal benefits from injury reduction. The former includes

the costs of resources devoted to preventing accidents, while the latter

includes the lower wage bill associated with the lower accident rate, less

down time in production, and reduced hiring and training costs of replace-

ments for injured workers. If the marginal cost of preventing accidents

varied across firms, different firms would offer different "wage—injury

rate packages".

     In such a world, the introduction of WC benefits that were perfectly

experience rated (and contained no loading or administrative charges) would

not affect the injury rate at any firm. Rather, since WC benefits would

now compensate workers if they were injured, smaller compensating wage

differentials would be required to attract workers to high injury rate

firms. Thus, higher WC benefits should lead to lower wages at each firm.

WC benefits would not affect the optimal injury rate from each firm's

perspective since the firm's reduction in -wage costs would just be offset

by the new WC costs.

     Suppose instead, WC benefits were not perfectly experience rated. In

this case, the reduction in wage costs due to the payment of WC benefits to

workers would be greater than the employers' liability for the benefits.

The marginal benefits of preventing accidents would therefore fall and

employers would spend fewer resources on injury reduction. Imperfect

experience rating then would lead to a higher injury rate than would exist

either in the absence of the WC system, or in the presence of a WC system

that was perfectly experience rated.
                                     6


     Of course all of the above presupposes a perfectly competitive labor

market; one in which wage differentials arise to fully compensate workers

for risk of injury. In such a world, if workers are risk neutral, there Is

in fact little rationale for a WC system.6 If, however, fully compensating

wage differentials do not arise, the predicted effects of WC benefits are

quite different.

     Consider again the case of a perfectly experience rated WC system

where employers bear the full costs of the WC benefits paid to their

employees. In this situation, where wage differentials do not initially

fully compensate workers for risk of injury, employers' marginal costs of

injuries would rise In the presence of WC benefits (wages would not fall

sufficiently to offset the cost of WC benefits). As such, employers would

have Increased incentives to take actions to reduce injury rates and one

would expect to observe a decline in the injury rate.7

     From the employers' side of the labor market then, the effect of the

WC system, or higher WC benefits on employer resources devoted to reducing

work injuries and hence the Injury rate is ambiguous. If wage differen-

tials do fully compensate workers for the risk of injury and the WC is

imperfectly experience rated, the injury rate may actually increase. If

wage differentials are not fully compensating and the WC system Is per-

fectly experience rated the Injury rate will decrease. Empirical analyses

are required to resolve the ambiguity.

     One should distinguish, however, between employer incentives to

increase resources devoted to injury prevention, and thus decrease the

injury rate, and employer incentives to reduce both the Incidence and

duration of WC claims. As long as WC benef its are at least partially

experience rated, higher WC benefits Increase employers' incentives to both

challenge WC claims and to encourage injured workers to speed their
                                     7



recovery and return to work. Even if increasing WC benefits does not alter

employer resources devoted to injury prevention, it may affect the number

and duration of WC claims.

     The above discussion focuses on the employer side of the labor market.

Increasing temporary total WC benefits may also affect injury rates and

claims by influencing employee behavior in a number of ways. First, higher

WC benefits may reduce the disutility workers feel when they have minor and

temporary illnesses. Thus, higher benefits may reduce the precautions they

take on the job to prevent types of accidents that are unlikely to lead to

serious permanent injuries. Second, higher benefit levels increase

employees' incentives to file claims for minor injuries where the need to

remain temporarily off the job is ambiguous.8 Third, to the extent that

workers at least partially control the speed at which rehabilitation from

temporary disability occurs, higher benefits increase workers' incentives

to prolong their recovery period.

     Higher temporary total disability benefit levels may lead from

workers' perspectives, then, to increased WC claims. Whether this is due to

increased injury rates caused by less worker precaution or to increased

probability of filing a claim, given a marginal injury, is important to

determine. Higher benefits may also lead to longer durations for indi-

vidual claims, however this does not imply average claim duration would

lengthen. If the higher benefits induce a lot of claims based on less

severe injuries, average claim duration might actually fall.

     Permanent partial disability benefits may affect WC claim rates and

the supply of labor by disabled workers to the market as well. One must

distinguish here between scheduled and nonscheduled benefits that are not

contingent on actual earnings loss and nonscheduled benefits that are. In

the former case, benefits are typically not contingent on work effort after
                                    8


the benefit determination date; they are specified as a lump—sum or weekly

amount. These benefits increase the injured individual's wealth (assuming

his medical expenses have also been fully compensated). To the extent that

individuals value leisure time as well as income, higher scheduled benefits

should lead to lower hours of work and reduced fraction of time in the

labor force.

     In some states, however, for example New York and Florida, nonsched-

uled benefits are specified as a fraction of preinjury earnings, or of some

estimate of earnings capacity lost, subject to minimum and maximum benefit

levels. Benefits here are contingent on work effort and like any income

transfer system of this type (e.g., AFDC) higher wage replacement rates

encourage reduced labor force participation and hours of work. Further-

more, the formulae used to compute benefits under such systems do not take

into account that economic conditions may affect Injured workers' earnings

prospects; benefit levels do not depend on local unemployment rates. Since

higher unemployment rates reduce the actual earnings prospects of some

injured workers relative to their nonscheduled permanent partial WC

benefits, one would expect permanent partial claim rates for nonscheduled

benefits in these states to increase when unemployment rates are high.

     In sum, WC benefit levels, operating through both the employer and

employee side of the market should be expected to influence the magnitude

of compensating wage differentials, employer efforts to reduce Injury

rates, injury rates per se, the number and types:of WC claims, the dura-

tions of different types of claims, and the labor force attachment and

hours of work of Injured workers. It is to an analysis of the empirical

evidence on many of these effects that Lnow turn.
                                          9



IV.   Compensating   Wage Differentials

      The first issue is whether markets "work" in the sense that wage

differentials arise to compensate workers for exposure to risk of injury.

Numerous studies have used cross—section data, with either establishments

or individuals as the unIts of observation, and attempted to ascertain if

wage rates are positively associated with various measures of injury risk

(fatal accident rates, nonfatal accident rates, work days lost due to

accident rates, etc.), after other personal characteristics that should

influence wages (e.g., education, experience) are controlled for.9

      These studies uniformly tend to find that there is a positive associ-

ation between fatal accident rates and wages. However, the relationship

between nonfatal accident rates and wages is less well—established; appear-

ing in some studies but not in others. Most studies find that the magni-

tude of compensating wage differentials is larger in the union sector than

the nonunion sector,'° an expected result given that accident rates tend to

be higher in the union sector and that unions may serve the role of winning

wage differentials at the bargaining table to compensate their members for

unfavorable job characteristics, when "the market" fails to produce such

differentials.'' The result that compensating wage differentials are

larger in the union sector is not unique to risk of injury, others have

found similar results for unfavorable job characteristics like mandatory

overtime requirements.'2

      Somewhat surprisingly, most studies fail toconsider the possibility

that interstate, intertemporal, or interindustry variations in the gener-

osity of workers' compensation systems, as measured by income replacement

rates, might affect the magnitude of compensating wage differentials. The

few studies that have, do find that higler income replacement rates reduce
                                     10


the magnitude of the wage differential paid for risk of Injury.'3 One

study has also found that higher risks of injury are associated with

higher fringe benefit levels as well as higher wages.'4

     Unfortunately, I believe that this voluminous literature provides very

little that is of use for public policy. Presumably one wants to know if

1) the market is providing appropriate incentives for employers to take

actions to reduce injury rates, and 2) the market is fully compensating

workers for risk of injury. As I discuss below, I believe answers to

neither of these questions is provided by these studies.

     With respect to the first question, the Issue is really whether the

positive association between wages and risk of injury measures reflects a

compensating wage differential for risk of injury. Jobs may offer a

variety of undesirable working conditions in addition to risk of injury;

these may include having to work in a noisy environment, having to do

repetitive tasks, being required to do heavy lifting, and lacking the

opportunity to make independent judgements. Many of these factors are

probably highly correlated with risk of injury on the job and workers may

demand wage premiums to accept them also. As a result, when one omits

these other job characteristics from the analysis, any effect they have on

wages is captured by the risk of injury variable. Thus, one may well

overstate the true magnitude of the compensating wage differentials for

risk of injury.'5 When a few investigators have included other working

conditions along with risk of injury in wage equations; the risk of injury

variables tends not to be significantly associated with wages.'6 Whether

this is due to the high collinearity of the working conditions variables

(which makes estimates imprecise) or thefailure of a wage—risk of injury

differential to truly exist cannot be determined. In either case, the
                                     11



evidence on the existence of compensating wage differentials for risk of

injury is not as well—established as the various studies would have us

believe.

     Suppose we ignore this problem and assume that wage differentials for

risk of injury do exist. How could one hope to decide that their magni-

tudes are sufficiently large to permit one to conclude that they fully

compensate workers for the disutility associated with risk of injury? Only

if they are is the case for government intervention to improve occupational

safety weakened. Only if they are can one derive "value of life" estimates

from them to use in benefit/cost studies of occupational safety and health

Interventions.'7

     Now If one truly believes that all labor markets are competitive, it

is a tautology that whatever wage differentials are generated by these

markets will be "fully compensating" ones. However, once one allows for

market imperfections the question becomes an empirical one. The mere

existence of some wage differential does not Imply that it is a fully

compensating one.

     Estimates of the compensating wage differentials associated with the

risk of fatal injury at the workplace suggest that individuals are paid a

premium of 1 to 4 percent of their wages to compensate them for existing

risks of fatal injury; this leads (given the magnitude of fatal injury

rates to imputed value of lives in the range of $200,000 to $3,500,000.18

Researchers have no way of evaluating (nor have they even tended to

consider) whether differentials in this range truly fully compensate

workers for risk of fatal injury. Hence, their potential usefulness for

public policy in the occupational safety area is limited. At best, they

provide lower—bound estimates of the value of life.
                                      12


V.   Workers' Compensation Benefit Levels and Work—Injury Experiences:
     State Data

     In theory, the incidence and duration of work injuries depends both

upon employee and employer actions. Given the discussion in section III,

this suggests that both the level of benefits and the extent of experience

rating should affect injury rates. Yet only two empirical studies, to be

discussed in section VII, have attempted to evaluate the effects of exper-

ience rating. The studies that use statewide data, or Industry by state

data, tend to ignore experience rating and stress the effects of WC benefit

levels on the Incidence and duration of injuries and/or WC claims.

     The nine studies summarized in Table 1 fall neatly Into three groups.

First there are three studies by James Chelius ((1973), (1974), (1977))

that use a single year's data and find that, controlling for other factors,

higher WC benefits are associated with a higher frequency of injury but

have no association with duration (severity) of Injury. Second, there are

tw studies by Chelius (1982) (1983) and one by John Ruser (1984) that use

data for a number of years. Chelius (1982) usesdata from 36 states for

the 1972—75 period and finds that higher WC benefits are associated with

more frequent accidents, but fewer days per case, so that on balance they

have no association with the total lost work day rate. His later study

(Chellus (1983)) uses data for fewer 'states (28), but a longer period

(1972—1978) and finds that while the WC benefit—frequency association is

still observed, the benefit—days per case relationship vanishes. As a

result, higher benefits are associated with an increased total lost work

day rate in this study. Whether the differences in results between the two

studies reflect changes in behavior that occurred in 1976—78, or the

dropping of 8 states from the sample is not investigated by Chelius.
                                     13



Fi;nally, Ruser (1984) uses data from 41 states for the 1972—79 period and

finds that higher WC benefits are associated with higher frequencies of

injuries and days lost from work.

     Focusing on Chelius (1982), one might ask how higher benefits could

simultaneously increase frequency but decrease duration? Unfortunately,

there are a number of possible explanations which the data do not permit us

to disentangle. Higher benefits might induce the report—ing of minor

injuries, that otherwise would go unreported, and that tend to be of short

duration. They might induce workers to take more risks on the job, but

only in situations that will not lead to increased risk of serious long—

term injuries. Finally, they might Induce employers to concentrate

accident prevention resources where long—term Injuries are possible, to

more frequently challenge long—term claims, or to "encourage' injured

workers to return to work more rapidly. Presumably data on WC claims

challenges are available, however, to my knowledge, no researcher has

attempted to analyze if employer challenges of WC claims (either at the

outset or while a claim Is in progress) are related to the level of WC

benefits.

     The third group of studies analyze different types of data. Richard

Butler (1983) focused on data from one state, South Carolina, over a long

time period and found that an ihdex of average real annual WC payments for

various types of injuries in the state was positively associated with the

frequency of almost all types of injuries. Butler and John Worrall (1983)

used WC claims data for 35 states over the 1972—78 period and computed

estimates in each state/year of the levels of various types of WC benefits.

They found heneUt levels were associat1 primarily with pe.rmanent partial

claims rates not with temporary total ones. While an increase in the minor

(major) permanent partial benefit level was associated with a higher minor
                                          14



(major) permanent partial injury rate, an increase In the malor permanent

partial benefit level also reduced the incidence of minor permanent partial

claims.'9

     This latter result is intriguing as it suggests that injured workers

have some control over how they attempt to get their claims classified

(major or minor injury). This takes us back to the possibility that at

least part of the observed WC effect on Injury rates may simply be a

reporting effect.2° Evidence to support this view Is presented by Worrall

and Apley (1982) who found that higher income replacement rates for

temporary total injuries have been associated over time in Texas with an

increase in the ratios of temporary total claims and all indemnity claims

to medical only claims.               -




     Similarly,   Chelius (1982) found that frequency rates for injuries that

 involve no lost days appear not to be sensitive to WC benefit levels;

 since the waiting period in most states is at least three days, workers

 have no added incentive to report injuries in this category in the face of

 higher benefits.21 He argues that any positive relationship here would

 Indicate a real association between WC benefits and this short—tern injury

 rate and this is not observed. Two studies (Chelius (1982), Butler and

Worrall (1983)) also found that longer waiting periods are associated with

 decreased injury rates or WC claims; whether this is a reporting or real

affect was not be ascertained.

    Taken together these studies strongly suggest that increases in WC

benefits are asscciated with higher Injury and workers' compensation claim

rates, with at least some fraction of the increase being a pure "reporting'

or "classification" effect. They do not, however, provide any strong

evidence on duration of claims, or injuries, primarily because increased

frequency results in changes in the mix, or types, of injuries reported.
                                     15


To accurately analyze the effects of WC benefit levels on duration of

claims requires data on individual WC claims; two studies which do this are

discussed in the next section.

     The studies described in this section have become methodologically

more sophisticated over time, controlling for more variables, and using

more refined data. Nonetheless, their conclusions should be probably

tempered for at least two reasons. First, conclusions about the effects of

WC benefits on injury or injury claim rates are essentially drawn from

observations on the association between benefit levels ad injury rates

across states, or the association between changes In benefit levels and

changes in injury rates over time. Very little concern has been expressed

that high injury rates in a state induce pressure to have generous WC

benefits, or that increases in injury rates create pressure to increase

benefit levels. Put another way, there have been only limited efforts

(see, for example, Chelius (1974)) to test for the possibility that the

direction of causation runs from injury rates to benefit levels rather than

visa versa.

     Second, the WC system is a complex system which involves much more

than simply specifying the benefit level and waiting period. For example,

presumably the extent of experience rating differs across states (and over

time) as does administrative stringency in processing claims, and the

propensity of employers to challenge claims.22 In contrast to research on

unemployment insurance, where these factors have been considered, WC

research has tended to ignore them.23 If these variables are correlated

with WC benefit levels, their omission will distort the estimated benefit

level—injury rate relationship.
                                     16


VI. Workers' Compensation Benefit Levels and the Duration of Compensation Claims

     In a series of two papers, Richard Butler and John Worrall (1984) and

Worrall and Butler (1985) have used data on individual WC claimants in the

state of Illinois to analyze the effects of WC benefit levels on the

duration of temporary total disability claims.24 The data is confined to

one state to control for other aspects of the WC system and to one type of

indemnity claim, those arising from low—back injuries, to mitigate the

problem of varying mixes of injury types found in more aggregate data. The

data come from a National Council on Compensation Insurance sample of

claimants in 12 states, that began in April 1979 and followed the claimants

for 42 months.

     To analyze these data requires estimation methods that take account of

the fact that some claimants are still receiving benefits at the end of the

42 month period. The two papers use appropriate methods, differing only

in the specific stochastic assumptions and assumptions about unobservable

variables that they make. These methods have previously been applied to

problems of unemployment insurance and unemployment duration so their

papers build directly on research on another social insurance program.25

     Both papers yield the same important result: After controlling for

other factors, the higher an individual's income replacement ratio under

the WC program, the less likely he is to leave claimant status and hence

the longer his expected duration of WC claim. In their preferred specifi-

cation in one paper, a 10 percent increase in benefits is predicted to

increase average claim duration by .23 weeks (or one day), which represents

a 2 percent increase in the lengthening of the average claim.26 Whether

this statistically significant result is large enough to be of "policy

significance" is left to the reader to evaluate.27
                                      17



     These papers represent, by far, the most sophisticated econometric

 treatments found in workers' compensation research and the advantages of

using data for a single state and type of injury are evident. Nonetheless,

they are not without problems. In particular, at a point in time in a

single state, the income 'replacement ratio an Individual is scheduled to

receive Is a negative function of his previous earnings.

     To see why this creates problems, consider how the typical WC schedule

operates. Referring to the top panel of Figure 1, there Is a minimum WC

benefit level, BmIn, in the state. If an individual's pre—injury earnings

fall In the range Emi to Emax, then WC benefits Increase with earnings.

Individuals who previously earned          or more receive the maximum

benefit level In the state, Bmax. The bottom panel of Figure 1 shows the

implied income replacement rate (B/E) for this schedule. It Is constant

(at about 213 in most states) between Emi and Emax, however, outside

this region it obviously is negatively related to previous earnings.

     If the Income replacement rate an individual faces Is an exact inverse

function of his previous earnings, one cannot meaningfully speak, at a

point In time, of varying the rate independently of previous earnings. If

both previous earnings and the income replacement rate appear to influence

duration of WC claims, this may reflect only that previous earnings affects

duration in a nonlinear fashion. Without independent variation in the

Income replacement rate we cannot ascertain if we are really estimating the

effect of WC benefit levels on duration.

     Some independent variation may have In fact existed In the Butler—

Worrall data.28 For example, some individuals received lump—sum benefit

awards rather than weekly benefits. In ,hese cases, Butler and Worral.j.

divided these amounts by the indivIduals' actual number of claim weeks to

obtain a measure of their weekly WC benefits. This approach causes
                                      18


individuals   with randomly long claim durations to have randomly low

reported income replacement rates. Hence, Butler and Worrall would

state the true effect of WC benefits on duration. A further problem is that

one would expect lump—sum awards to have a different effect on claim

durations than a contingent weekly award.     Their approach does not permit

this to occur.

       The conclusion one reaches here is that while the use of data from one

state has its advantages, it also creates obvious problems. One senses

that data from more than one state is required, although this would require

researchers to take other characteristics of the state and state WC systems

into account. Studies of the effect of unemployment insurance benefits on

duration of unemployment have used individual data from more than one

state, exploiting the interstate variation that occurs in replacement

rates.29 The 12 state NCCI sample may prove a very useful data base for a

similar analysis in the workers' compensation area.



Vile    Experience   Rating

       In spite of the important role that experience rating plays in

determining employers' responses (in theory) to an increase in WC benefits,

there has been only two published attempts to empirically analyze if

experience rating affects injury rates. The sole published study, Chelius

and Smith (1983), exploit the fact that small, manually rates, firms are

not experience rated, while very large firms are perfectly experience

rated. Focusing in a state on firms within a single industry, the dif-

ference between injury rates in small and large firms obviously will

reflect many factors besides the differance in experience rating. However,

other things equal, the higher WC benefits in the state the greater they

argue the incentive faced by large firms to reduce their injury rates and
                                     19



thus the smaller the difference should be. They test if experience rating

matters by seeing if, across states, higher WC benefits are associated with

lower values of the difference in injury rates between small and large

firms in each of 15 2—digit manufacturing industries. They conclude that

their data does not permit them to ascertain any effects of experience

rating; if present, the effects are too small to be picked up with the

crude data they use.

     Taken at face value their results suggest that the safety effects of

experience rating are sufficiently small that policymakers need not worry

that many firms face imperfect or no experience rating. One must be

cautious, however,in drawing this conclusion for several reasons in

addition to the ones the authors offer relating to the nature of the data

they use.

     First, within an industry benefit levels vary across states, both

because of differences in the generosity of state WC systems and because of

interstate differences in average wages. The latter may reflect dif-

ferences in the skill mix of workers. Any observed (or lack of observed)

correlation between benefits and injury rate differences between large and

small firms across states may reflect the interaction of skill mix and firm

size on injury rates.

     Second, average wage differences with a 2—digit industry across states

may reflect differences in the 3 or 4—digit industry mix across states and

there is no reason to suppose that the injury rate—firm size relationship

Is constant across 3 or 4—digit industries. This makes it difficult, using

their method, to separate out the effects of WC benefits from the effects

of Industry mix.
                                    20


     Finally, average wage differences across states may reflect dif-

ferences in the large firm/small firm wage rate differential within

states.3° If wage rates differ between firms in a state, injury rates may

also differ for reasons completely independent of experience rating.3'

     One senses from all of this that efforts to estimate the effects of

experience rating using aggregate state by industry data, even when

stratified by firm size, are not likely to prove, fruitful. At first

glance, a more promising strategy appears to be to obtain data at the

individual firm level, to impute a marginal workers' compensation cost

variable per injury for the firm (using algorithms based on knowledge of the

experience rating system rules and characteristics of the firm) and then to

test for the effects of this variable on future injury rates at the firm.32

     Unfortunately, the marginal cost per injury a firm faces, given its

size and wages, will depend upon its prior injury rate experience. To the

extent that injury rates are correlated over time at a firm, this creates

serious statistical problems; it may prove impossible to disentangle the

effect of experience rating on injury rates from the effect of injury rates

on experience rating. While this effort is worth pursuing, it will require

longitudinal data and a careful consideration of statistical issues.33



VIII. Workers' Compensation and Labor Supply

     Several studies have addressed the issue of how permanent partial WC

benefits affect labor supply, highlighting the distinction between

scheduled and nonscheduled benefits.34 William Johnson (1983) focused on

workers injured in New York State in 1970 who were found eligible for

scheduled benefits. These scheduled benefits are specified as weekly

amounts for given durations; they are not related to actual wage loss

during the period received. Johnson found small labor supply effects of
                                     21


benefit levels in 1971, but by 1974 benefit levels appeared to affect

neither labor force participation nor hours of work. He suggested that

switching to nonscheduled benefits, which are contingent on wage loss,

would have the obvious potential to decrease labor supply.

     Some support for this view is found in John Burton (1983). Burton

used time—series data for New York State from 1959 to 1979 and found that

increases in the unemployment rate were associated with a larger number of

nonscheduled cases but not with any change in the number of scheduled

cases. WC payments in the former case are contingent on wage loss and

increases in the unemployment rate make it harder for disabled workers to

find jobs that compensate them at the level of their pre—injury jobs.

     Burton also found, however, that higher benefit levels reduced the

number of nonscheduled permanent partial cases. While it is possible that

this reflects employer efforts to prevent Injuries or injury claims

dominating over any reduced employee actions to promote safety, it must be

stressed that this latter result flies in the face of all of the evidence

summarized in Table 1. Burton's twenty year time—series analysis does not

appear to control for changes in the industry/occupation/age/gender

distribution of the labor force; all factors which should Influence

compensation costs and injury rates.35 To the extent that these variables

are correlated with changes in benefit levels over time, the observed

effect of benefits on nonscheduled claims may actually reflect the effects

of these other variables.



IX. Concluding Remarks

     A long critical summary of the liteature In an area requires no

summary. However, several substantive propositions are worth repeating

that have relevance for policy in the occupational safety and health area.
                                    22


     First, the evidence on compensating wage differentials for risk of

injury is no where near as solid as producers of the evidence believe.

Even if we take estimates of differentials at face value, and assume that

all other nonrisk related conditions of emnloyment have been fully con-

trolled for, the existence of a differential does not imply that workers are

fully compensated for the risk of injury they face. At best, such esti-

mates can be used to provide lower—bound estimates of the "value of life",

which in turn can be used In benefit/cost analyses of various occupational

safety and health policies. They can not be used to draw conclusions about

how well markets are working.

     Second, higher workers' compensation benefits do appear to to increase

the frequency of injury rates and workers' compensation claims, although we

cannot separate out with any precision how much of the increase is "real"

and how much is merely a "reporting" effect. If the system is at least

partially experience rated (which it is) and labor markets are not per-

fectly competitive (which they probably are not) higher workers' compen-

sation benefits should induce employers to try to prevent accidents and/or

challenge more claims. The fact that a positive relationship between

frequency and benefits is observed implies that employees' responses to

higher benefits dominates, on balance, over employers' responses.

     The trick then is to alter•existing policy to increase employers'

Incentives to improve safety without altering employees' incentives. One

possibility is to hold benefit levels at their current real levels but to

increase the extent of experience rating. As discussed above, there is no

real evidence that this would work and, in any case, such a policy would be

strongly opposed by unions. The reason or this is that increased exper-

ience rating Increases employers' incentives to challenge workers' claims
                                     23


for benefits. For this very reason, unions have been vocal opponents of

attempts to increase experience rating in the unemployment insurance

system.

     An alternative is to increase the payroll tax but not the level of

benefits and to use the excess of revenue over benefits to fund other

safety and health programs.36 To the extent that experience rating does

matter, this will provide employers with increased incentives to improve

safety. Similar proposals have previously been suggested in the overtime

pay area——increasing the tax on overtime hours but not the overtime premium

paid to workers——and have been supported by at least some unions.37

     Of course, the fact that increasing workers' compensation benefits

does appear to increase the frequency of injury rates and/or workers'

compensation claims does not imply in itself that further benefit increases

are undesirable (or are desirable). Rather, it only tells us that there is

a trade—off between higher, more adequate, benefits and higher injury rates

and claims. Where along the trade—off we ultimately locate will depend

upon policy makers' judgments about the optimal combination of adequacy and

safety given the trade—off that researchers have found. For example, taken

at face value the results in Chelius (1983) suggest that raising the income

replacement rate in a state by 10 percent relative to the national average

would increase the number of injuries per 100 full—time workers in a state

relative to the national average by 1.6 percent. Whether such an action

would, on balance, be desirable is for policy makers to decide.

     Finally, it is worth restressing that very little is known about the

effects of other characteristics of the WC system, such as administrative

stringency, the frequency of employer challenges, and the frequency of the
                                    24


use of attorneys in claims cases, on the frequency and duration of claims.

Research on the causes of, and effects of, these other characteristics,

would clearly help policy makers improve the design of the WC system.38
                                      25


                                 Footnotes



      1. Much more detailed discussions of the WC system are presented

 elsewhere. For example, see John Burton (1983), John Burton and Monroe

 Berkowitz (1982), Richard Victor (1982), Richard Victor, Linda Cohen, and

 Charles Phelps (1982), and John Worrall (1983b). My discussion, which is

 unabashedly pirated from them, is necessarily brief and nontechnical.

      2. Burton and Berkowitz (1982), P. 80.

      3. A more detailed discussion of experience rating is found in Victor

(1982).

     4. The discussion here draws heavily on previous discussions. See

the sources cited in footnote 1 as well as James' Chelius (1974) (1977)

(1983). I have again abstracted from many details of the program and

ignored a host of issues.

     5. If workers have different degrees of risk aversion, they will sort

themselves across firms so that those with the least aversion to risk will

be in the high risk firms. The market wage differential between low and

high risk firms will understate the wage differential that workers at low

risk firms would demand to move to high risk firms.

     6. If workers were risk averse, they would prefer the certainty of

workers' compensation benefits when an injury occurs to a risk premium with

the same expected value. As a result, in this case the introduction of WC

benefits would improve workers' welfare. One should caution, however, that

in this situation, the resulting decline in the risk premium would exceed

the actuarial value of the WC benefits, which would decrease employers'

incentives to prevent risks. Thus, again the the Injury rate might rise

relative to that which would prevail in the absence of the system.
                                      26


     7. In a world where all WC costs are not shifted on to workers, in

the form of lower wages, or to consumers, in the form of higher prices,

there also would be employment effects.    See Ronald Ehrenberg, Robert

Hutchens and Robert Smith (1978) for a discussion of the evidence on the

shifting of the payroll tax.

     8. For both of these reasons, a decline in the length of the waiting

period before benefits can be received would also increase the number of WC

claims.

     9. The pre—1979 studies are summarized in Robert Smith (1979).

Examples of later studies include Charles Brown (1980), Burton (1983),

Richard Butler and John Worrall (1983), William Dickens (1984), Richard

Freeman and James Medoff (1981), Craig Olsen (1981), Robert Smith and Alan

Dillingham (1984), and W. Kip Viscusi (1978) (1979) (1980). Recent

attempts that use longitudinal data include Greg Duncan and Bertil Homlund

(1984).

     10. See Dickens (1984), Freeman and Medoff (1981), Olsen (1981), and

Viscusi (1979), for example. Smith and Dillingham (1984) find this result

in 1973 data, but not in 1977 or 1979 data.

     11. See John Worrall and Richard Butler (1983) and Greg Duncan and

Frank Stafford (1980).

     12. See Ronald Ehrenberg nd Paul Schumann (1984).

     13. See Richard Arnould and Len Nichols (1983), Richard Butler

(1983), Stuart Dorsey (1983) and Dorsey and Norman Waizer (1983).

     14. Dorsey (1983).

     15. This criticism is really directed at the whole "compensating wage

differential" literature and is not unique to studies of risk of injury.

     16. For example, Brown (1980).

     17. See Ehrenberg and Smith (1982), pp. 221—222 for examples.
                                       27


      18. See Smith (1979).

      19. Major claims are considered more serious than minor ones; the

classification depends upon the magnitude of the indemnity payment for the

injury. This raises the possibility that what is considered a major claim

may vary across states.

     20. As noted above, Butler and Worrall (1983) find WC benefits have a

larger effect on permanent partial than temporary total claims. The effect

on permanent partial claims is unlikely to reflect primarily a reporting

effect.

     21. Chelius (1982), p. 239.

     22. The structure of experience rating is the same across most states

at a point in time. However, the actual extent of experience rating in a

state will vary across states with the size distribution of firms, their

wage rates, and prior injury experiences. Hence, in principle, one can

compute estimates of the extent of experience rating, or of the proportion

of firms who are a) not subject to experience rating or b) perfectly

experience rated, and use these in the analyses. There are, of course,

obvious econometric problems with this approach.

     23, Studies of the effects of administrative stringency in the

unemployment insurance literature include Gary Solon (1984) and Stanley

Horowitz (1977). Studies of the effects of experience rating include

Frank Brechling (1981) and Robert Topel (1983).

     24. Their research builds on related work for Great Britain by N.

Doherty (1979) and Paul Fenn (1981).

     25. See Chris Flinn and James Heckman (1982) and T. Lancaster (1979),

for example.

     26. Worrall. and Butler (1985).
                                     28


     27. •They also find that when a lawyer represents a claimant, the

duration of claim is longer. This returns us to the whole issue of

administrative stringency and legal challenges. Their data permit them to

analyze some of the factors that influence the presence of an attorney.

     28. This paragraph draws on a telephone conversation with Richard

Butler.

     29. See, for example, Ronald Ehrenberg and Ronald Oaxaca (1976).

     30. Consider the extreme case where small firms in every state paid

the same wage. Higher average wage in a state would reflect higher large

firm wages and hence a greater small firm/large firm wage differential.

     31. For example, wage differentials between large and small firms may

reflect skill differences; it is well known that injury rates are

related to workers' skills.

     32. Victor (1982) has developed such an algorithm.

     33. In an unpublished paper, Ruser (1984) also attempts to test for

 the effects of experience rating on injury rates. He argues that large

 firms are more likely to be experience rated and thus that higher WC

 benefit levels should reduce injury rates more in large firms than in

 small. Empirically he tests whether the effect of WC benefit levels on the

 average Injury rate In a state—industry cell Is negatively related to the

 average size of firms in the cell; and finds some support for this

 hypotheses.

     34. A number of related studies estimate the effect of the social

security disability program on labor force participation rates. See, for

example, Robert Haveman and Barbara Wolf (1984) (forthcoming), Jonathan

Leonard (1979), and Donald Parson (l980a) (1980b) (1984). These studies

tend to focus on the labor force participation rates of all older workers,

not the rates for a sample of claimants as Johnson does.
                                    29



     35. See, for example, Alan Dillingham (1983).

     36. Chelius (1982) has previously suggested this.

     37. See Ehrenberg and Schumann (1982), Chapter 8, for a discussion of

these proposals. The United Automobile Workers (UAW) has been a noted

supporter of them.

     38. Some suggestive evidence on how the benefits to litigating WC

claims varies across states is presented in Butler, Kearl, and Worrall

(1984).
                                      30


                                References



Richard Arnould and Len Nichols. "Wage—Risk Premiums and Workers'

     Compensating Wage Differentials," Journal of Political Economy 91

     (April 1983): 332—340.

Frank Brechling. "Layoffs and Unemployment Insurance" in Sherwin Rosen,

     ed., Studies in Labor Markets (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago

     Press, 1981).

Charles Brown. "Equalizing Differences in the Labor Market," Quarterly

     Journal of Economics (February 1980): 113—134.

John Burton. "Compensation for Permanent Partial Disability" in John

     Worrall, ed., Safety and the Workforce (1983).

John Burton and Monroe Berkowitz. "The Role of the Workers' Compensation

     Program in Promoting Occupational Safety and Health" (Report Prepared

     for the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, U.S. Department

     of Labor, October 1982).

Richard Butler. "Wage and Injury Response to Shifting Levels of Workers'

     Compensation" in John Worrall, ed., Safety and the Workforce (1983).

Richard Butler, J.R. Kearl, and John D. Worrall. "Rent Seeking in Workers'

     Compensation" (mimeograph, May 1984).

Richard Butler and John Worrall. "Workers' Compensation: Benefit and

     Injury Claims Rates In the Seventies," Review of Econmics and

     Statistics 60 (November 1983): 580—589.

Richard Butler and John Worrall. "Work Injury Compensation and the

    Duration of Nonwork Spells," Economic Journal (forthcoming).

James Chelius. "An Empirical Analysis of Safety Regulation" in

     Supplemental Studies for the National Commission on State Workmen's

    Compensation Laws, Vol. III (Washington, DC., 1973): 53—66.
                                     31


James Chelius. "The Control of Industrial Accidents: Economic Theory and

     Empirical Evidence," Law and Contemporary Problems (Summer—Autumn

     1974): 700—729.

James Chelius. "Liability for Industrial Accidents: A Comparison of

     Negligence and Strict Liability Systems," Journal of Legal Studies

     (June 1976): 293—309.

James Chelius. Workplace Safety and Health: The Role of Workers'

     Compensation (Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute,

     1977).

James Chelius. "The Influence of Workers' Compensation on Safety

     Incentives," Industrial and Labor Relations Review 35 (January

     1982): 235—242.

James Chelius. "The Incentive to Prevent Injuries" in John Worrall, ed.,

     Safety and the Workforce.

William Dickens. "Difference Between Risk Premiums in Union and Nonunion

     Wages and the Case for Occupational Safety Regulation," American

     Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 96 (May 1984): 320—323.

Alan Dillingham. "Demographic and Economic Changes and the Costs of

     Workers' Compensation" in John Worrall, ed., Safety and the

    Workforce (1983).

N. Doherty. "National Insurance and Absence from Work," Economic Journal

    89 (March 1979): 50—63.

Stuart Dorsey. "Employment Hazards and Fringe Benefits: Further Tests for

    Compensating Differentials" in John Worrall, ed., Safety and the

    Workforce (1983).

Stuart Dorsey and Norman Waizer. "Workers' Compensation, Job Hazards and

    Wages,' Industrial and Labor Relations Review 36 (July 1983):

    642—654.
                                     32


Greg Duncan and Berth Hoimlund. "Was Adam Smith Right After All? Another

     Test of the Theory of Compensating Wage Differentials," Journal of

     Labor Economics 1 (October 1983): 366—379.

Greg Duncan and Frank Stafford. "Do Union Members Receive Compensating

     Wage Differentials," American Economic Review 70 (June 1980):

     355—371.

Ronald Ehrenberg, Robert Hutchens and Robert Smith. "The Distribution of

     Unemployment Insurance Benefits and Costs," Technical Analysis Paper

     No. 58, ASPER, U.S. Department of Labor, October 1978.

Ronald Ehrenberg and Ronald Oaxaca. "Unemployment Insurance, Duration of

     Unemployment and Subsequent Wage Gain," American Economic Review 66

     (December 1976): 754—767.

Ronald Ehrenberg and Paul Schumann. Longer Hours or More Jobs (Ithaca,

     NY: NYSSILR, 1982).

Ronald Ehrenberg and Paul Schumann. "Compensating Wage Differentials for

     Mandatory Overtime," Economic Inquiry (October 1984).

Ronald Ehrenberg and Robert Smith. Modern Labor Economics: Theory and

     Public Policy (Glenwood, Ill.: Scott Foresman, 1982).

Paul Penn. "Sickness Duration, Residual Disability and Income Replacement:

    An Empirical Analysis," Economic Journal 91 (March 1981): 158—173.

Chris Flinn and James Heckman. "Models for the Analysis of Labor Force

    Dynamics" in R. Basmann and C. Rhodes (eds.), Advances in

    Econometrics, Vol. I (1982): 35—95.

Richard Freeman and James Medoff. "The Impact of Percent Organized on the

    Nonunion Wage," Review of Economics and Statistics 63 (November

     1981): 561—572.
                                     33


Robert Haveman and Barbara Wolfe. "The Decline In Male Labor Force Partici-

     pation: Comment," Journal of Political Economy 92 (June 1984):

     532—541.

Robert Haveman and Barbara Wolfe. "Disability Transfers and Early Retire-

     ment: A Causal Relationship," Journal of Public Economics

     (forthcoming).

Stanley Horowitz. "A Model of Unemployment Insurance and the Work Test,"

     Industrial and Labor Relations Review 30 (July 1977): 462—466.

William Johnson. "Work Disincentives of Benefit Payments" in John D.

     Worrall, ed., Safety and the Workforce.

T. Lancaster. "Econometric Methods for the Duration of Unemployment,"

     Econometrica 52 (May 1984): 647—664.

Jonathan Leonard. "The Social Security Disability Program and Labor Force

     Participation," NBER Working Paper No. 392, August 1979.

Craig Olson. "An Analysis of Wage Differentials Received by Workers on

     Dangerous Jobs," Journal of Human Resources 16 (Spring 1981):

     167—185.

Donald Parsons. "The Decline in Male Labor Force Participation," Journal

     of Political Economy 88 (February 1980): 117—134 (1980a).

Donald Parsons. "Racial Trends in Male Labor Force Participation,"

    American Economic Review 70 (December 1980): 911—920 (1980b).

Donald Parsons. "Disability Insurance and Male Labor Force Participation:

    A Response to Haveman and Wolfe," Journal of Political Economy 92

     (June 1984): 542—549.

John W. Ruser. "Workers' Compensation Insurance, Experience Rating and

    Occupational Injuries" (mimeograph,Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Labor

    Statistics, June 1984).
                                       34


Robert Smith. "Compensating Wage Differentials and Public Policy,"

    Industrial and Labor Relations Review (April 1979): 339—352.

Robert Smith and Alan Dillingham. "Union Effects on the Valuation of Fatal

    Risk," Proceedings of the Thirty—Sixth Annual Meeting of the

    Industrial Relations Research Association (Madison, Wisconsin:

    IRRA, 1984.

Gary Solon. "The Effects of Unemployment Insurance Eligibility Rules on

    Job Quitting Behavior," Journal of Human Resources 19 (Winter 1984):

     118—127.

Robert Topel. "On Layoffs and Unemployment Insurance," American Economic

    Review 83 (September 1983): 541—560.

Richard Victor. "Workers' Compensation and Workplace Safety: The Nature

    of Employer Financial Incentives" (Rand Corporation Report WD—1515—ICJ,

    June 1982).

Richard Victor, Linda Cohen and Charles Phelps. "Workers' Compensation and

    Workplace Safety: Employer Response to Financial Incentives" (Rand

    Corporation Report WD—1553—ICJ, April 1982),.

W. Kip Viscusi. Employment Hazards: An Investigation of Market

     Performance (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1979).

W. Kip Viscusi. "Union Labor Market Structure and the Welfare Implications

     of the Quality of Work," Journal of Labor Research 1 (Spring 1980):

     175—192.

W. Kip   Viscusi.   "Wealth Effects and Earnings Premium for Job Hazards,"

    Review of Economics and Statistics 60 (August 1978): 408—416.

Wayne Vroman. "Permanent Disabling Injuries: A General Model and An

    Application to Florida Work Injuries," Advances in Health Economics

     and Health Services Research 3 (1982): 235—281.
                 -                     35


John Worrall, ed. Safety and the Workforce: Incentives and Disincentives

     In Workers' Compensation (Ithaca, NY: ILR Press, 1983a).

John Worrall. "Compensation Costs, Injury Rates, and the Labor Market," in

     John Worrall, ed., Safety and the Workforce (1983b).

John Worrall and David Appel. "The Wage Replacement Rate and Benefit

     Utilization in Workers' Compensation," Journal of Risk and Insurance

     49,3 (September 1983): 361—371.

John Worrall and David Appel. "Some Benefit Issues in Workers' Compensa—

     tlon" in John Worrall and David Appel, eds, Workers' Compensation

     Benefits: Adequacy, Equity and Efficiency (Ithaca, N.Y.: ILR

     Press, 1985).

John Worrall and Richard Butler. "Health Conditions and Job Hazards:

     Union and Nonunion Jobs," Journal of Labor Research (Fall 1983):

     340—346.

John Worrall and Richard Butler. "Workers' Compensation: Benefits and

    Duration of Claims" in John Worrall and David Appel, eds., Workers'

    Compensation Benefits: Adequacy, Equity and Efficiency (Ithaca,

    N.Y.: ILR Press, 1985).
                           Pigure 1



                     A) WC Benefit Levels

 WC Benefits (B)



   B
    ax                          I
                                I
                                S

                                I
                                I
                                I
                                I
                                I
                                I
                                I
                                I              Previous
                            E                  Earnings (E)
                   min


              B) WC Income Replacement Ratio
-Income
Replacement Ratio




                                               Previous
                             E                 Earnings (E)
                    mm        max
                                                                                  Table   1


                             Studies of the Relationship Between Workers' Compensation Benefit Levels and
                                                                                                          Injury
                        Rate or Indemnity Claim Frequency and Duration That Use State Data as the Unit of Observation

                    Data Period                                                                            Effect of Higher         Other WC Variables
 Study              and Coverage          WC Benefit Variable                Outcome Variables             Benefit Levels           Included (Effect of Increase)

 Chelius   (1973)   1967 state by         WC benefit level in                 BLS                                                            ——

Chelius    '1974'   manufacturing         the state and industry              Frequency of injury          Increase
                    industry data          (actuarial estiaatea or            Severity of injury           No Effect
Chelius (1977)                            implied, given average
                                          wages, from laws) —
                                          weighted average of dif-
                                          ferent types of cases


Chelius (1982)      1972—75 data by       WC benefit      level in           OSHA
                    manufacturing         state—industrycell                 Frequency rate                Increase                 Waiting Period (decrease)
                    industries for        for total temporary                Days per case                 Decrease                                  (no effect)
                    36 stateS             injuries divided by            -   Lost workday rate             No Effect                                 (decrease)
                                          average earnings in
                                          cell (benefits implied                                                                              F
                                          by law given average
                                          earnings)                                                                                                   .




Chelius (1983)      1972—78   data   by   (same    as   above)               OSHA
                    manufacturing                                            Frequency rate                Increase                 Waiting Period (no effect)
                    industries for                                           flays per case                No Effect                               (no effect)
                    28 states                                                Lost workday rate             Increase                                  (no effect)


ituser (1984)       1972—79 3—digit       Average weekly WC                  0511k                                                  Waiting Period
                    manufacturing         benefit in the state—              Frequency rate of cases       Increase
                    data for 41           industry cell for                  Frequency of lost
                    states                temporary total                       workdays                   Increase
                                          disability
                                                                                                                                    .                                '
Butler and          1972—78 data          Average weekly WC                  NCCI claim rates                  A B C
Worrall (1983)      for 35 states         benefit in the state               for non—self—insuring         a   0 + +
                                          for                                firms for
                                          a) temporary total                 A) temporary total            b   0 + 0
                                                                                                                                    Waiting Period (A—decrease)
                                          b)   minor pens.partial            B)   minor perm. partial      C   0   —   +                             (B—decrease)
                                          c) eajor parts, partial            C)   major penn. partial                                                (C—no effect)
                                          injuries                           injuries
                                          (computed from         State
                                          laws,average wage and
                                          assumed wage distribu—
                                          tions)


Butler   (1983)     15 industries in      Index of average real              South Carolina Industrial                                       ——
                    South Carolina        annual WC payments for             Commission statistics on
                    for a 32—year         various types of                   Lost workday rate         Increase
                    period                injuries                           Death rate                Increase               ,
                                                                             Penn.   totalrate             Increase
                                                                             Perm. partial rate            Increase
                                                                             Temp. total injury rate       No Effect

Worrall and         1958—77 data for      Income replacement rate            NCCI data                                                      ——
Apley (1982)        the state of          for temporary total                Temp. total claimsf
                    Texas                 injuries in the state               medical only claims          Increase
                                                                             All indemnity claims/
                                                                              medical only claims          Incremse

Source: Author's interpretation of material in the           original articles.           In the Butler and Worrall (1983)   row,a"+" indicates increase,
        a "0" no change, and a "—" a decrease.
