NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE MARKET CRASH AND MASS LAYOFFS:
HOW THE CURRENT ECONOMIC CRISIS MAY AFFECT RETIREMENT
Courtney Coile
Phillip B. Levine
Working Paper 15395
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15395

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2009

The authors thank Wellesley College for financial support and seminar participants at MIT, Wellesley,
and the NBER Summer Institute Aging Workshop for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Courtney Coile and Phillip B. Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Market Crash and Mass Layoffs: How the Current Economic Crisis May Affect Retirement
Courtney Coile and Phillip B. Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 15395
October 2009
JEL No. G01,J26,J64,R23
ABSTRACT
Recent dramatic declines in U.S. stock and housing markets have led to widespread speculation that
shrinking retirement accounts and falling home equity will lead workers to delay retirement. Yet the
weakness in the labor market and its impact on retirement is often overlooked. If older job seekers
have difficulty finding work, they may retire earlier than expected. The net effect of the current economic
crisis on retirement is thus far from clear. In this paper, we use 30 years of data from the March Current
Population Survey to estimate models relating retirement decisions to fluctuations in equity, housing,
and labor markets. We find that workers age 62 to 69 are responsive to the unemployment rate and
to long-run fluctuations in stock market returns. Less-educated workers are more sensitive to labor
market conditions and more-educated workers are more sensitive to stock market conditions. We
find no evidence that workers age 55 to 61 respond to these fluctuations or that workers at any age
respond to fluctuating housing markets. On net, we predict that the increase in retirement attributable
to the rising unemployment rate will be almost 50 percent larger than the decrease in retirement brought
about by the stock market crash.

Courtney Coile
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
ccoile@wellesley.edu
Phillip B. Levine
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
plevine@wellesley.edu

“Those Golden Years Have Lost Their Glow; With Home Values Down, Costs
Up and Their 401(k)s Declining, Some Seniors Have Had To Rethink
Retirement.” (Los Angeles Times, September 21, 2008)
“Will You Retire?; New Economic Realities Keep More Americans In the
Workforce Longer.” (Washington Post, October 15, 2008)
“Economic Crisis Scrambles Retirement Math: The 401(k) Model of Saving is
Under Duress as Stocks Slide. Home Equity Losses Don’t Help.” (Christian
Science Monitor, March 4, 2009)

I. INTRODUCTION
One casualty of the financial and economic crisis that began in the fall of 2008 may be
workers’ carefully laid retirement plans. The popular press recognized this from the start of the
crisis, as the headlines listed above make clear. Front page stories of lost retirement savings and
plunging home values are commonplace. With diminished retirement savings and less home
equity to draw on, the story goes, expected retirement income has shrunk, forcing older
individuals to stay in the labor force longer. Workers interviewed for these stories wondered
when or if they would ever be able to retire.
Amidst these concerns, another news story appeared briefly in spring 2009 indicating that
Social Security benefit claims have risen sharply since the crisis began, suggesting an increase in
retirements rather than a decrease.1 But why are more workers retiring now if their expected
retirement income is going down? The answer may lie in another aspect of the crisis, the weak
labor market. The unemployment rate has more than doubled and the economy has shed millions
of jobs since the crisis began. Some of those workers struggling to stay employed or find new

1

See, for example, Dorning (2009). The media coverage around May 24, 2009 was based on an interview with
Stephen Goss, the Social Security Administration’s Chief Actuary. A few days later, his office released a memo
detailing these findings. In it, Goss reports that the number of claims for new retirement benefits in 2009 rose 10
percent more than one would expect based on demographics alone (Goss, 2009). Goss indicated that the economic
downturn is the potential cause of this increase.

1

jobs are surely nearing retirement age. For the unfortunate ones who are not able to maintain or
find employment, retirement may be the only solution, despite its involuntary nature.
The net effect of the current financial and economic crisis on retirement is thus far from
clear, as plunging equity and home values would be expected to lead to a decrease in retirements
while a weak labor market would be expected to lead to an increase. The purpose of this paper is
to examine this issue. We use 30 years of data from the March Current Population Survey (CPS)
to estimate models relating retirement decisions to changes in equity, housing, and labor markets
over time and (where possible) across geographic locations.

We also use the Survey of

Consumer Finances (SCF) to provide a descriptive analysis of the impact of falling equity prices
on older household’s expected retirement income. We then use our regression estimates to
predict the net effect of the current crisis on retirement.
Our analysis indicates that the retirement decisions of workers between ages 62 and 69
with more education are affected by long-run fluctuations in stock market returns. We also find
that labor market conditions are an important determinant of retirement decisions. When the
unemployment rate rises, more workers between ages 62 and 69 retire, particularly those with
less education. Workers between ages 55 and 61 are not found to be responsive to either type of
market fluctuation. Individuals do not seem to respond to fluctuations in the housing market
regardless of their age. On net, we predict that the increase in retirement brought about the
recent rise in unemployment will be almost 50 percent larger than the decrease in retirement
brought about by the stock market crash.
Overall, our findings suggest that the plight of those who are forced to retire early as a
result of weak labor market conditions merits greater attention. These results have potentially
important distributional implications as well. It is often those on the bottom of the economic

2

ladder who are being hurt by retiring prematurely due to labor market factors and those at the top
who may not be able to retire as planned due to equity losses. Our results also have implications
beyond the current economic crisis, as they suggest that the past literature on retirement has paid
too little attention to the important role of labor market conditions in the retirement decision.
The remainder of our analysis proceeds as follows.

In the following section, we

document trends in the environment surrounding retirement decisions, including stock returns,
housing prices, and the labor market. Next, we review the relevant literature and discuss the data
and methods we use in the remainder of the analysis. We then present our results regarding the
impact of changes in equity, housing, and labor markets, respectively, on retirement decisions.
Finally, we simulate the net effect of recent market events on retirement and discuss the policy
implications of our findings.

II. BACKGROUND
In this section, we present trends in equity, housing, and labor markets to review recent
activity and summarize earlier events that may be less well remembered. We also discuss the
conditions under which fluctuations in these markets may affect retirement behavior.
A. Trends in the Stock Market
Annual changes in the value of the stock market, as captured by the S&P 500 Index, are
shown in Figure 1A. This figure reports real annual changes (adjusted for inflation) based on
December monthly average values. The figure illustrates the tremendous year-to-year volatility
in aggregate stock prices. The pattern in the 1980s and early 1990s is one of two good years
with 10 to 20 percent annual returns followed by a bad year with zero or negative returns. Since
then, the market has experienced more prolonged booms and busts, including two five-year

3

rallies in the late 1990s and mid 2000s, as well as a multi-year bear market early in this decade.
The market fell by 40 percent in real terms in 2008, the sharpest decline in recent history.
One can see how these dramatic turnarounds in equity markets have captured the public’s
attention. The question at hand, though, is whether they alter retirement decisions. Given that
there has always been substantial year-to-year variability in stock prices, is it sensible to expect a
single year’s market performance to drive behavior?
The market return over a longer period of time could potentially play a more important
role in retirement decisions. In Figure 1B, we display five-year and ten-year market returns
(again calculated using December monthly average values). This figure shows that there is
substantial variability in longer-term returns over time. In the 1980s and early 1990s, the fiveyear real return was consistently about 50 percent. After that real returns rose, hitting almost 200
percent in the year 2000 before collapsing to small or negative values. Ten-year returns are
higher, but the patterns are similar.
These statistics suggest that market returns could have a significant impact on retirement
behavior. One worker approaching retirement age could have tripled the value of his portfolio
over a five year period, while another worker’s portfolio remained constant or even shrank. If
workers have considerable resources invested in the stock market, a boom or a bust in the period
leading up to traditional retirement ages could play a key role in the decision of when to retire.
We later explore the level of stock ownership among the population and various subgroups.
B. Trends in the Housing Market
Although the volatility in the housing market is less dramatic, home values also exhibit
substantial fluctuations over time. Figure 2 displays annual changes in real house prices from
1987 to 2008 based on the Case-Shiller (CS) Index for 10 large cities across the country and

4

from 1976 to 2008 based on data from the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Home
Price Index (OFHEO) for the entire country.2 The figure shows that housing market returns are
considerably more serially correlated than stock returns. In the late 1980s and early-to-mid
1990s, home values did not keep pace with inflation. In the decade that followed, however,
prices rose continuously, with annual growth rates in the Case-Shiller Index of over 10 percent in
some years. House prices have fallen sharply since 2006, dropping almost 20 percent in 2008.
These statistics suggest that home prices could also affect retirement decisions.
Depending on their year of birth, individuals may have doubled their home equity or had it cut in
half as they approach traditional retirement ages. If workers had substantial home equity to
begin with and are willing to draw down this equity during retirement, a substantial increase in
home equity could accelerate retirement while a substantial drop could delay it.
C. Trends in the Labor Market
Figure 3 presents the cyclical variation in the labor market, as measured by the monthly
unemployment rate for workers age 16 and over. As we describe subsequently, older workers
have a lower unemployment rate, but the pattern over time is very similar to that for all workers.
The highest unemployment rate in recent times was 10.8 percent in 1982. Subsequent recessions
in the early 1990s and the early 2000s were less severe, with the unemployment rate reaching
highs of 7.8 percent and 6.3 percent, respectively. In the current crisis, the unemployment rate is
climbing rapidly; as of August of 2009, it had reached 9.7 percent. Aside from these recessions,
the unemployment rate has been at a low level, around 4.5 percent, for much of the period since
the mid-1990s.

2

We discuss these two indices in more detail below. Annual returns in the CS Index are calculated as the change in
the December values. Annual returns in the OFHEO Index are calculated as the change in the fourth quarter values.

5

As with our earlier discussions of equity and housing markets, labor market conditions
around traditional retirement ages may matter. Workers are twice as likely to be unemployed
now as they were a few years ago. In times when obtaining a new job is difficult, older
individuals who are laid off or unemployed for other reasons may be more likely to retire. This
may be especially true for workers age 62 and up, who generally have access to Social Security.
As this discussion has made clear, there are reasons to believe that variations in stock
prices, house prices, and the labor market have the potential to alter retirement behavior. It is
also clear that there are important conditions for these behavioral responses. Lower stock and
housing prices may lead to fewer retirements if individuals nearing retirement hold sufficient
levels of equity and plan to consume that equity during retirement. Higher unemployment rates
may lead to more retirements if older individuals are unable to find work and withdraw from the
labor force instead. Furthermore, for market fluctuations to affect aggregate retirement rates, the
relevant elasticities must be large enough to generate behavioral responses by more than just a
handful of older individuals. In the end, the retirement responses to fluctuations in equity,
housing, and labor markets are empirical questions. In the remainder of this paper, we attempt to
answer these questions.

III. PREVIOUS LITERATURE
Much of the existing retirement literature has focused on Social Security, private
pensions, and health. While these factors may be important in explaining long-run trends, such
as the steep decline in older men’s labor force participation since World War II and the recent
reversal of that trend, they are unlikely to explain dramatic changes in retirement behavior in any

6

given year, such as those that might result from the current crisis. In this section, we focus on
those parts of the retirement literature that are most directly relevant to our analysis.
A. Financial Shocks
Economic theory suggests that individuals should respond to negative stock market
shocks by reducing their consumption of normal goods (including leisure) and delaying
retirement. Articles in the popular press have similarly asserted that this will be the effect of the
current crisis. Nevertheless, there is little empirical research to support this hypothesis.
In an earlier paper (Coile and Levine, 2006), we use methods similar to those described
below to address this issue. We treat the stock market boom and bust of the late 1990s and early
2000s as a quasi-experiment and explore whether groups with more stock assets were more
likely to retire during the boom and less likely to retire during the bust. We find no evidence of
this pattern. We also argue that individuals would have to have been implausibly sensitive to
market fluctuations for the observed rise in retirement in the year 2000 to have been the result of
that year’s market crash. Our findings are consistent with those obtained by Hurd, et al. (2009).
They are unable to find support for the notion that “households which had large (financial) gains
retired earlier than they had anticipated or that they revised their retirement expectations
compared with workers in households that had no large gains.”3
There are two possible explanations for the lack of an effect. The first is that the number
of people who experienced large unexpected wealth gains from market fluctuations is relatively
small, as Coile and Levine (2006) argue. The second is that the effect of unexpected wealth on
labor supply is fairly small. This view is supported by Coronado and Perozek (2003), who find
3

Sevak (2001) reached a different conclusion, finding that men in defined contribution (DC) pension plans increased
their retirement rates by more than men in defined benefit (DB) pensions during the stock market boom of the late
1990s. However, this study is limited by an inability to control for differences in retirement trends between the two
groups, a deficiency that is overcome in Coile and Levine (2006) by the use of the boom and bust as a double
experiment.

7

that being a stockholder during the boom of the late 1990s is associated with retiring 6 months
earlier than expected, but that each additional $100,000 of unexpected gains is associated with
retiring only two weeks earlier than expected. Hurd, et al. (2009) are also sympathetic to this
argument, citing evidence from lotteries.
B. The Role of Housing
As with stock market shocks, economic theory suggests that unanticipated losses in home
equity should lead households to retire later. However, shocks to home equity will only affect
retirement behavior if households routinely consume their housing wealth in retirement. In fact,
studies suggest that this is not the case. For instance, Venti and Wise (2004) find that most
households do not sell their homes until they experience an event such as the death or entry into
a nursing home of a spouse. This finding has led some authors to argue that many households
treat their home equity as a “buffer stock” of wealth against the risk of shocks late in life. If so,
then it seems unlikely that home price fluctuations will affect retirement behavior, although
many recent stories in the popular press have asserted that this is the case. The effect of housing
wealth on retirement has not been directly addressed in the previous literature. We provide an
empirical analysis of this question below.
C. Labor Market Shocks
A small body of literature has established that job loss is relatively common for older
workers (Farber, 2008; Munnell, et. al., 2006). For instance, Farber (2008) reports that 10 to 12
percent of private-sector workers between the ages of 50 and 64 experienced permanent and
involuntary job losses when labor markets were weak during the 1991 to 1993 and 2001 to 2003
periods, while displacement rates of around 8 percent (over a three year period) were observed
during the expansions of the mid-to-late 1990s and the middle 2000s. Previous studies have

8

found that job loss among older workers has long-lasting negative consequences for employment
and wages (Chan and Stevens 1999, 2001, and 2004; von Wachter, 2007). Chan and Stevens
(1999) estimate that the employment rate of displaced older workers two years after a job loss is
25 percentage points lower than that of similar non-displaced workers and that the median
reemployed worker earns 20 percent less than at his old job.
More directly related to the question we seek to address here is our earlier work (Coile and
Levine, 2007). Using similar methods and data to that described subsequently, we find that
retirement transitions are cyclically sensitive, a result supported by Von Wachter (2007) and
Hallberg (2008). We estimate that changes in rates of retirement between the peak and trough of a
business cycle are comparable to those brought about by moderate change in financial incentives to
retire or to the threat of a health shock, factors that have traditionally received far more attention in
the literature. We also find that Social Security interacts with labor market conditions in affecting
retirement transitions, as the effect of the unemployment rate on retirement appears only as
workers become eligible for benefits. We expand upon this discussion later in our analysis.
D. Contribution of this Research
The current analysis builds on the previous literature, including our own past work, in
several ways. First, we update and extend our analyses of the effect of stock market and labor
market fluctuations on retirement. Second, we provide a new analysis of the effect of housing
market fluctuations on retirement, a question not addressed in the previous literature. Third, we
use these various estimates to predict the net effect of the current crisis on retirement. Finally, we
discuss the distributional consequences and policy implications of our findings.

9

IV. DATA SOURCES
The main data requirement for our analysis is a way to measure retirements for large
numbers of workers over time. Beyond data on their labor market activity, we also need
information on workers’ asset holdings, including both financial assets and home equity. This
section of the paper will describe the sources of data we use.
A. Measuring Retirement
Our main source of data for measuring retirements is the Current Population Survey
(CPS). The CPS is the leading survey of labor market activity in the United States. The monthly
CPS survey asks a sequence of questions about the respondent’s involvement in the labor market
around the time of survey and also collects demographic data. In March of each year, the
“Annual Social and Economic Supplement” (previously called the “Annual Demographic
Survey”) is administered as a supplement to the regular monthly CPS.

Each March CPS

provides sample sizes of between 130,000 and 215,000. Although we only are interested in the
data for workers around the age of retirement, the large size of each sample coupled with the
annual nature of the survey provides us with a tremendous amount of information. For instance,
when we pool data from the 1980 through 2008 March surveys for individuals between the ages
of 55 and 69, we obtained a sample of nearly 600,000 individuals.
For our purposes, one key attribute of the March CPS is that it enables us to identify
retirement transitions.4 To do so, we make use of information on the labor market activity of
respondents in the preceding calendar year, including weeks worked, usual hours worked per
4

As we describe subsequently, we define retirement as complete labor force withdrawal. However, we recognize
that retirement could be defined in other ways, for example, as the initial claim of retirement benefits or as departure
from a “career” job. In fact, several studies have found that it is quite common for workers to leave a career job and
work for a period of time at a less demanding “bridge” job before completely withdrawing from the labor force; see
Cahill, et. al. (2006) for a recent contribution. The data available to us leads us to focus on a definition of complete
labor force withdrawal. However, an analysis of these other types of retirement transitions would be a fruitful area
for future research.

10

week, and weeks spent looking for work. Combining this retrospective information along with
that obtained in the regular monthly survey, we can define a retirement to occur when an older
worker reports being in the labor force for 13 or more weeks during the preceding year, but is out
of the labor force on the March survey date.5 When we restrict our sample to those in the labor
force last year in this way, we are left with a final sample size of over 300,000. Of these
workers, we observe that about 9 percent retire in the following year according to our definition.6
State of residence is available in the March CPS, which we can use to merge in state-level data
on unemployment rates and house prices.
B. Measuring Home Prices
We use two sources of home price data. The first is the S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price
Index, which is available monthly for 20 metropolitan areas beginning in 1987. The index uses a
“repeat sales pricing” methodology, where data on sale prices of individual single-family homes
is collected from county records and matched to each home’s previous sales price, then a
weighted aggregate index is created based on the change in sales prices of these homes. We
convert the index to real values using the Consumer Price Index (CPI) to calculate real changes
in house prices. We calculate the percent change in the index from one March to the next, as our
definition of retirement in the CPS is essentially based on changes in labor market activity

5

A second way that we could use CPS data is by taking advantage of the longitudinal structure of the CPS to create
a short panel of information for each respondent. This panel can be created by matching CPS information for some
respondents in one March CPS with that from the CPS in the following March. The procedure for doing so is
reported in Madrian and Lefgren (1999). These data offer about one-third the sample size as the regular CPS. An
advantage of these data, though, is that we can create a definition of retirement for workers who have been more
committed to the labor market and out of the labor force for a longer period of time. We have used these data as
well and obtained findings qualitatively similar to those reported subsequently. We have chosen not to report them
for expediency.
6

Using matched March CPS data, described in the preceding footnote, we can also estimate the likelihood that a
worker who retires according to our definition regains employment in the following year. Our estimates suggest that
16 percent of those 55 to 69 and 13 percent of those 62 to 69 who retired in the preceding year found employment
again in the following year.

11

between one March and the next, and relate retirement decisions in a given year to housing
returns over the previous 12 months.
The second data source is the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO)
Home Price Index. This index is available quarterly at the state level starting in 1975. The
OFHEO index is also based on changes in the value of individual homes over time, but is
calculated using Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac data on mortgages originated by these entities
during home purchase and refinancing transactions. We use first-quarter data and again relate
retirement decisions to home price appreciation in the previous 12 months.
In comparing the two indices, the OFHEO index has the advantage that it is available for
all states and years in our sample, allowing for larger sample sizes in these regressions than those
that use the Case-Shiller index. However, the Case-Shiller index displays more variation over
time, as shown in Figure 2, which can be attributed to several differences in the construction of
the two indices, including the fact that the OFHEO index does not include foreclosures. As we
report below, results using the two indices are very similar.
C. Measuring Asset Values
The primary source of wealth data in the United States is the Survey of Consumer
Finances (SCF). The survey has been conducted every three years since 1983, most recently in
2007, with a sample of roughly 4,500 households per survey. The survey oversamples high net
worth households to obtain a more accurate estimate of aggregate wealth holdings. The survey
collects detailed data on assets and income, including data on asset allocation within retirement
accounts. We use the SCF to generate information on the stock holdings of older households,
using sample weights to obtain statistics that are representative of the population.

12

V. METHODOLOGY
Although the specific methods we use depend on whether we are addressing stock market
wealth, housing wealth, or unemployment, the general approach is similar. To avoid repeating
ourselves, we first present the basic methodological framework and then provide details
regarding the ways in which we modify it for each specific application.7
A. Framework
Our goal is to determine whether different types of market conditions alter retirement
decisions. Underlying our analysis is a regression model where the dependent variable is an
indicator for whether an older worker retired in a particular year as a function of the market
conditions he faces along with other explanatory variables, mainly demographic factors like
race/ethnicity, gender, level of education, etc. We also include a full set of exact age dummies,
which essentially converts our retirement regression into a hazard model with a nonparametric
baseline hazard. We use the same CPS data to provide information on retirement behavior as
well as the explanatory variables (other than the market conditions).
For each analysis we exploit quasi-experimental variation in the data, which we believe is
able to plausibly generate causal conclusions regarding the impact of conditions in each market
on retirement behavior.

Quasi-experimental variation relies on changes over time in the

explanatory variables occurring in some locations or for some groups but not in other places or
for other groups. Those individuals who experienced no change act as a quasi-control group for
those in a quasi-treatment group who experienced a change. Comparing differences in outcomes
over time between the two groups provides a means to identify the effect of the change.

7

In principle, we could use one regression model that would include all three measures of market conditions. As we
describe subsequently, though, each analysis has somewhat different data and sources of identification that requires
separate analyses. Where possible, however, we include other market conditions as control variables. For instance
our analysis of the impact of home prices includes the unemployment rate as an explanatory variable.

13

Statistically, this approach is referred to as a difference-in-difference method as the change, or
difference, within one group is differenced from the change in the other group to estimate the
effect.
In practice, this approach is generally implemented using panel data, estimating
regression models that include specific market conditions (stock market, housing market, and
labor market) along with relevant fixed effects when possible. One set of fixed effects would
represent a vector of state of residence dummy variables that can hold constant any longstanding
differences in behavior between workers who live in different areas of the country.8 A second
set of fixed effects would represent dummy variables for the time periods included in the
analysis. These time fixed effects would hold constant broader social and economic conditions
that may be changing over time and that might alter outcomes for all individuals. What remains
to be estimated once these fixed effects are included is the difference in outcomes that take place
over time between the groups. The coefficient on the market conditions variable, our key
explanatory variable, is this estimate.

We will apply this general approach in all of our

subsequent analyses.
B. Application to Changes in Financial Wealth
Not everyone holds financial wealth. As we document later, some segments of society
have little financial wealth. Because changes in equity market conditions should have little or no
direct bearing on retirement decisions for those who do not own equities, these individuals can
be thought of as a quasi-control group. We can compare the effect of stock market fluctuations
on retirement for those without financial wealth to the effect for those with significant financial
wealth to estimate the impact of the market on retirement.
8

If the quasi-treatment and quasi-control groups were identified by a characteristic other than location, for example
education, then the dummy variables for each education group would serve to hold constant any longstanding
differences in behavior between workers in different education groups, as the state dummies do in this discussion.

14

In practice, the CPS data we use to measure retirement do not include data on financial
wealth. Instead, we first divide individuals by educational attainment. As we report later,
individuals with no more than a high school degree typically have very limited equity holdings
and can act as a quasi-control group for college graduates, whose holdings are more extensive. If
the more educated are estimated to retire at a differentially higher rate in response to higher stock
market prices, this would support the hypothesis that market conditions matter.
In these specifications, we are unable to include a complete vector of year fixed effects
because the stock market variables available to us vary only over time and not across locations.
Instead, we capture broader movements in retirement behavior over time by including quadratic
time trends in our regression model, allowing the trends to differ by group. This model enables
us to identify the impact of stock market changes by estimating whether retirement behavior
deviates from a quadratic trend in years in which market returns are higher. To support a causal
effect, estimates would need to be greater for the more highly educated.
B. Application to Changes in Housing Wealth
Our use of quasi-experimental variation and difference-in-difference methods is
somewhat different when we analyze changes in housing wealth. We first consider the variation
available to us as a result of differences in house price changes by location. In the extreme, we
could think about individuals who live in locations where housing prices have remained flat (in
real terms).9 They would represent a control group to compare to those in locations where prices
rose or fell. Dividing individuals in this way is a bit unrealistic, however, since housing prices
tend to fluctuate everywhere at least some of the time.
9

In reality, since we are interested in unanticipated housing gains or losses, what should matter for retirement is not
so much the total amount of the gain but the amount that was unexpected, so the ideal control group would be one
where housing prices rose no more or less than expected. While it is plausible that expectations about house price
appreciation may vary by location, we have no data to guide us on this point, so we must treat all gains or losses in
all locations as (equally) unanticipated.

15

Nevertheless, we can use the same methods and somewhat modify our interpretation. In
reality, what we have are groups who were more affected than others in the sense that housing
prices change by more in some locations at some points in time than others. Implementing the
difference-in-difference method with location and time fixed effects enables us to estimate
whether there are greater changes in retirement behavior in areas with greater changes in home
prices. This method still holds constant longstanding differences in retirement behavior across
locations and trends in retirement behavior over time that affect the population as a whole. The
experimental analogy does not work quite as well here, but the general approach is the same and
yields results that plausibly can be interpreted as causal.
We can further expand upon this approach by incorporated a “third difference” as well.
As with financial wealth, home equity varies across individuals. While we are not able to
identify the exact amount of home equity held by each individual, we can identify home
ownership status in the CPS, allowing us to use those with no equity as a true quasi-control
group. If we find that homeowners increase retirement by more than renters in response to an
equivalent increase in housing prices, this would be consistent with the hypothesis that home
equity affects retirement and provide further support for a causal interpretation of our findings.
C. Application to Changes in Labor Market Conditions
The methods available to evaluate the impact of changes in labor market conditions, as
measured by the unemployment rate, are similar to those for housing wealth. The unemployment
rate changes in some places at some points in time more than others and we rely on that variation
just like we described with changes in housing prices. We can also estimate difference-indifference models separately for different demographic groups, including by educational
attainment. Less-skilled workers tend to be more sensitive to labor market conditions (Hoynes,

16

2000), so we would expect any impact of an economic downturn on retirements to be larger for
this group. Following the previous literature, we use less-educated as a proxy for less-skilled
workers.

Therefore, we can use the differential responsive in retirement to labor market

conditions across educational attainment categories as a further test of a causal effect.

VI. IMPACT OF LOST STOCK MARKET WEALTH
A. Descriptive analysis
Before proceeding with our econometric analysis, we begin with a descriptive analysis of
individual equity holdings using data from the 2007 SCF, the most recent data available. Our
goals in this analysis are to determine the level of equity holdings and the differences in holdings
across population subgroups and to get a sense of whether the level of equity holdings may be
sufficient to influence individuals’ retirement behavior if the market rises or falls.
Table 1 presents information on equity holdings for households headed by individuals
between the ages of 55 and 64, who are likely to be contemplating retirement in the near future.
The results in Table 1 indicate that the typical household’s equity holdings are very small. In
fact, the median values of directly held stocks, stock-based mutual funds, and retirement
accounts (including DC pension plans and Individual Retirement Accounts, or IRAs) that include
stocks are zero or very close to it. For all stock-based investments combined, the median value
of holdings is just $8,000. The 75th percentile of this distribution is just under $100,000. One
needs to look very high in the distribution in order to find households with very large levels of
stock holdings.
As previewed earlier, stock ownership is strongly correlated with education. The share of
households with any stock-based investments is 46 percent for high school graduates vs. 78

17

percent for college graduates.

Furthermore, those with high levels of wealth are heavily

concentrated among more highly educated individuals. For example, the 75th percentile of the
distribution of all stock-based investments is just $28,500 for high school graduates vs. $271,300
for college graduates.
Despite the relatively low levels of equity holdings for most households in 2007, equity
holdings are even lower at the beginning of our sample period. While estimates for earlier years
are complicated by the fact that some previous SCF surveys did not ask about the asset allocation
in all relevant accounts, we can nonetheless infer that equity holdings have risen dramatically
over time.

Table 1 suggests that the vast majority of stock-based investments for most

households are stocks held in retirement accounts, and participation in these accounts has
increased markedly over time. For example, the Employee Benefit Research Institute (2009)
reports that the share of pension plan participants with a DC plan rose from 34 percent in 1980 to
64 percent in 2005. It seems very likely that stock holdings were much lower when many fewer
households held such accounts and those that did had only recently established the accounts.10
Table 2 presents a descriptive analysis of the impact that the recent stock market crash
will have on future retirement income based on the 2007 equity holdings reported in Table 1.
We begin by listing different levels of equity holdings ranging from none to $500,000 in Column
1. In Column 2, we identify the fraction of households headed by an individual between ages 55
and 64 that have equity holdings at that level or lower. About 42 percent have no holdings at all
and 75 percent have $100,000 or less; 8 percent have $500,000 or more. In Column 3, we
approximate the loss experienced by households at each the equity threshold, assuming that their
portfolios fell by 50 percent.

We then make the simplifying assumption that households

10

Despite the growing importance of DC plans, Gustman, Steinmeier, and Tabatabai (forthcoming) provide
evidence indicating that DB plans still play a more important role for those currently nearing retirement age.

18

consume 5 percent of their wealth per year to approximate the lost retirement income resulting
from the market crash. This is reported in Column 4; Column 5 divides this figure by 12 to get
monthly statistics.
The results of this analysis suggest that if households divide this lost wealth over their
remaining retirement years, the change in income would be modest for most of them. Those
with $100,000 of equity holdings would lose $2,500 per year or $208 per month as a result of the
stock market crash. These are not insignificant values, but the losses are likely to represent a
small percentage of retirement income. The losses are, obviously, even smaller for those with
less invested in equities, a group that includes 75 percent of older households in 2007.
Our conclusion from this analysis is that, based on our assumptions, there are relatively
few older households that lost enough money in the recent stock market crash that their
retirement income will be substantively diminished.11 Alternative assumptions, however, may
lead one to predict a larger retirement response. Individuals could plan to consume a larger share
of their savings just after they retire, for example to generate retirement income until Social
Security benefits are available. If so, the relatively small amounts of stock holdings that most
households have could lead to a substantial shock to retirement income, if just in the short-run.
This could generate a larger retirement response. In the end, this is an empirical question that we
will address using the regression techniques described earlier.
B. Econometric analysis
In our econometric analysis, we estimate regression models using data from the March
CPS, where the dependent variable is an indicator variable for retirement and the key

11

Gustman, Steinmeier, and Tabatabai (2009) come to a similar conclusion using even more detailed wealth data
(including Social Security and DB pension wealth) available in the Health and Retirement Survey. In their analysis,
they conclude that the share of wealth associated with equities tends to be so small that even a dramatic decline in
the stock market is unlikely to have retirement implications for many workers.

19

explanatory variable is the change in the S&P 500 Index. As we discussed earlier, we consider
the one-year change, the five-year change, and the ten-year change because the time frame over
which individuals respond to market fluctuations is not clear.

We implement the quasi-

experimental approach described earlier where we estimate the response to market changes
across groups that differ by their likelihood of holding substantial amounts of stock.

For

instance, more educated respondents would be predicted to respond more strongly to market
fluctuations. We also estimate models separately for those 55 to 61 and those 62 to 69, since 62
is the age at which individuals are first eligible for Social Security benefits and that eligibility
may alter responses.12
The results of this analysis are presented in Table 3. Each cell in this table represents the
results of a separate regression for the demographic groups previously identified. Based on the
results reported here, there is some evidence supporting the notion that stock market fluctuations
alter retirement behavior. This finding is strongest for those with more education who are
between 62 and 69 and in response to long-term market fluctuations. For workers in this age
group, the coefficients on short-run fluctuations are positively signed, though there is no
systematic pattern across educational attainment groups and coefficients are small in magnitude
relative to the mean retirement rate. For example, a one-standard deviation (or 16 percentage
point) increase in the one-year return increases the retirement rate of college graduates by 0.4
points, or 3.2 percent relative to the mean retirement rate of 11.7 percent. For the ten-year
return, however, the pattern across educational groups is consistent with what we would predict

12

We have also estimated regression models in which the effect of stock market fluctuations is allowed to vary over
time, to allow for the possibility that the response has strengthened as the number of workers with stock market
assets and the value of those assets has risen. We fail to find consistent evidence in support of this hypothesis.

20

and the magnitude of the coefficients is greater.13 A one-standard deviation (or 77 percentage
point) increase in the ten-year return increases the retirement rate of college graduates by 1.5
points, or 12.9 percent relative to the mean.
For those workers age 55 to 61, few coefficients are statistically significantly different
from zero and there is no systematic pattern in coefficients across education groups. Point
estimates on short-run fluctuations are mainly wrong-signed.

VII. IMPACT OF LOST HOUSING WEALTH
Next, we turn to our econometric analysis of the effect of housing market fluctuations on
retirement. As discussed above, this analysis is largely similar to the stock market analysis,
except that we now have a true quasi-control group, renters. We thus compare results by home
ownership status rather than education level. As before, we examine the effect of the market
return over different time periods, one and five years. As discussed earlier, we use two price
indices to measure the variation in home prices, the Case-Shiller Index and the OFHEO index,
and identify the effects of home prices on retirement based on geographic differences in home
price changes over time.
The results of this exercise are presented in Table 4. When we group all households
together, we find no evidence that home price fluctuations affect retirement. For both indices,
time horizons, and age groups, the coefficients are generally wrong-signed and statistically
insignificant. Estimating the effect separately by home ownership status does not change the

13

We have also estimated similar regression models distinguishing workers by whether or not they are covered by a
private pension. The type of pension held (DB versus DC) or the dollar amount of their holdings is not reported, but
those with pensions are likely to have greater stock market wealth than those without, forming another type of quasiexperiment. Results by pension status are not shown in the interest of space, but are consistent with the results by
education group, in that they are more in line with our expectations for older workers than for younger workers and
for long-term fluctuations than for short-run fluctuations. These results are available from the authors on request.

21

results substantively, as most coefficients are again wrong-signed and insignificant. Thus we
find no evidence that retirement is responsive to home price fluctuations. This finding is
consistent with the previous literature suggesting that most households do not consume their
home equity in retirement. Given our results, we make no attempt to include any changes in
retirement resulting from home price fluctuations in the simulations of the effect of current
market conditions on retirement presented below.

VIII. IMPACT OF LABOR MARKET CONDITIONS
A. Descriptive Analysis
Before reporting our econometric results, we begin by presenting a descriptive analysis
designed to gauge the magnitude of the potential retirement response brought about by a weak
labor market. Are there enough unemployed older workers and is the likelihood of their labor
force withdrawal sufficiently large that we would be able to identify whether a labor market
shock would generate an aggregate retirement effect?
To begin to address this issue, we first examine the level of unemployment among older
workers and how this varies over the business cycle, using official statistics from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics and our own calculations from the CPS. Older workers are less likely than the
average worker to be unemployed. Unemployment rates for all workers cycle around a value in
the vicinity of 6 percent, while the comparable figure for those 55 to 69 is more like 4 percent.
The actual number of older workers who experience some unemployment over a given period
(like a year), though, is greater than that. The unemployment rate is a point-in-time measure
rather than a longer window available in a retrospective measure. Our calculations indicate that

22

the number of workers 55 to 69 experiencing some unemployment over the past year is a number
more like 8 percent with cyclical swings similar to those in the official unemployment rate.14
Earlier in this paper, we argued that we did not expect much of an aggregate retirement
response to lost stock market wealth since so few individuals hold much wealth. Yet the number
of people affected by labor market shocks is probably not a lot different. We would therefore
only observe a bigger effect of labor market fluctuations on retirement if older workers who
experience unemployment are quite likely to retire. In fact, this is what the evidence shows.
We first provide some descriptive evidence on this point using data from the Displaced
Worker Survey (DWS), another supplement to the CPS. A displaced worker is someone who
lost their job because of a plant closing, slack demand, or because their position was abolished.
We calculate the rate at which workers displaced within the last three to five years withdrew
from the labor force by the survey date. For those workers aged 20 to 54, roughly 10 percent
withdrew. For those aged 55 to 69, roughly 30 percent withdrew. These withdrawals of older
workers would be defined as a retirement, based on the operational definition of the term used in
this analysis. Thus workers are very likely to retire in response to a job displacement.
Using our March CPS data directly, we can also distinguish retirement rates between
unemployed older workers and others. Figures 4 and 5 present the results from such an analysis.
In Figure 4, we present retirement hazard rates by age over the 1980 to 2007 sample period and
in Figure 5 we present retirement hazard rates by year over the 55 to 69 age range.15 In both
figures, solid (dashed) lines represent the retirement rates for workers who experienced no
(some) unemployment in the year preceding the survey. At all ages and in all years it is clear

14

See Levine (1993) for a comparison of retrospective and contemporaneous measures of unemployment.
An older worker who is in the labor force in, say, 2003, and withdraws by the March 2004 survey is said to retire
in the year 2003. We define that worker’s age according to the March 2004 reported age less one to approximate
age in 2003.

15

23

that unemployed older workers have higher retirement rates. These results along with those from
the DWS are not conclusive in showing that unemployment “causes” increased retirement rates
because workers who experience a job displacement or unemployment may be more likely to
withdraw from the labor force for other reasons.

Nonetheless, we view this evidence as

supportive of a relationship between unemployment and retirement among older workers.
Figure 5 provides additional evidence that unemployment may serve as a constraint that
forces workers into retirement. For workers who experience no unemployment, there is a
noticeable trend towards lower retirement rates over time. Annual retirement rates for these
workers are about 10 percent in the beginning of the sample period, but begin to decline in the
early 1990s, reaching a level of 6 percent by 2007. This pattern is consistent with the recent
trend towards greater labor force participation among older workers. Interestingly, no such
pattern exists among workers experiencing some unemployment. For them, retirement rates
remain roughly constant (albeit a bit noisy due to smaller sample sizes) at around 16 percent.
This suggests that whatever factors are driving many workers to choose to remain in the labor
force longer are not influencing the behavior of unemployed older workers.16 This would lead
one to believe that other constraints may be dominating their behavior. Again, this evidence is
merely suggestive that unemployment may play an important role in the retirement process for
some workers. We move on to discuss the results of our econometric analysis next.
B. Econometric Analysis
The results of our econometric analysis are reported in Table 5. In the left part of the
table we show results for the full sample as well as separate estimates for workers ages 55 to 61
and 62 to 69. On the whole, we find evidence that older workers’ retirement behavior is

16

Friedberg and Webb (2003) argue that the shift from DB to DC pensions can explain some of this increase;
Gustman and Steinmeier (2008) make a similar argument with respect to changes in Social Security rules.

24

responsive to changes in labor market conditions. A one percentage point increase in the
unemployment rate increases the annual retirement rate by 0.18 percentage points. The average
retirement rate is 9 percent per year, so this translates into a two percent increase relative to the
mean. In the current crisis, the unemployment rate has risen by around five percentage points so
far. Our estimates suggest this would increase retirements by 0.9 percentage points, or ten
percent relative to the mean retirement rate.
Breaking up our sample by age, we find that the entire effect is driven by those who are
62 to 69. For 55 to 61 year old workers our results indicate a small and statistically insignificant
effect of higher unemployment rates. For workers between the ages of 62 and 69, we find that a
one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate would generate a 0.36 percentage point
increase in the retirement rate. The five percentage point jump in the unemployment rate
experienced recently is predicted to increase the rate of retirement by 1.8 percentage points, or
12 percent relative to the average retirement rate of 15.6 percent.
As in past analyses, we also estimate our models by education group; we report these
results in the right part of Table 5. We find that high school graduates’ retirement decisions are
most responsive to a weak labor market. For them, a five percentage point increase in the
unemployment rate would generate a 1.8 percentage point increase in the retirement rate, a 19
percent increase relative to the mean. More-educated workers do not increase their retirement
significantly (in either a statistical or economic sense) in response to rising unemployment rates.
Based on this evidence, we conclude that changes in labor market conditions have an important
effect on retirement decisions, particularly for less-educated workers.

IX. OVERALL IMPACT ON RETIREMENT

25

The results that we have presented suggest that the stock market may cause some workers
to delay retirement. In particular, in response to long-term declines in the value of stocks, highly
educated workers between the ages of 62 and 69 appear to respond by reducing their likelihood
of retirement. We find no support for the idea that declining housing values will have much
impact in retirement. A likely explanation for this fact, as past research would suggest, is that
few older workers use their housing wealth to finance retirement consumption. The impact of a
sharply contracting labor market appears to be a relevant, and apparently overlooked, factor in
forecasting coming retirement trends.
Taken together, our results suggest that retirements in the near term are likely to fall
because of the long-term decline in equity prices, be largely unaffected by the decline in housing
prices, and rise because of the increase in the unemployment rate. The net effect is uncertain
because the effect of the long-term decline in stock prices and the rapidly rising unemployment
rate tend to offset each other.
To assess the relative magnitudes of the two effects, we conduct a simulation exercise
designed to estimate the number of individuals in a birth cohort likely to be affected by the
recent changes in the stock market and the labor market. The results of this analysis are reported
in Table 6. We begin by using data from the 2005 through 2007 American Community Survey
(ACS) to estimate the size of the labor force by exact age. We find that there are 2.8 million
individuals in the labor force at exact age 55, a figure that declines to 1.4 million at age 62,
800,000 at age 65, and 400,000 at age 69. Then we apply to these data age-specific hazard rates
that we estimate using the March CPS data to arrive at the number of retirements we would
predict over the course of a typical year at each exact age. These statistics represent a baseline of

26

the “typical” number of expected retirements per year. In total, about 2 million workers between
the ages of 55 to 69 would be expected to retire per year, on average.
The remainder of the table simulates the impact of the changes in retirement brought
about by the weak labor market and the plunging stock market. We use the results presented in
Tables 3 and 5 to implement this. In both cases, we use the regression coefficients relating
changes in market conditions to changes in retirement rates that were estimated separately for
workers ages 55 to 61 and 62 to 69. For the stock market, we focus on the ten-year change in the
S&P 500 index and simulate the effect of a 110 point drop in the return, which is equivalent to
moving from the average ten-year return during the past thirty years (62 percent) to the ten-year
return experienced in the period ending in 2008 (-48 percent). For the labor market we estimate
the impact of a five percentage point increase in the unemployment rate, approximating the
actual rise in that rate from the low point of 4.4 percent in March 2007 to 9.4 percent in May
2009.

The product of these changes in market conditions and the age-specific coefficient

estimates from Tables 3 and 5 yields estimates of the change in hazard rates. We apply these
estimates to the baseline hazard rate to obtain “adjusted” hazard rates. The product of the
adjusted hazard rates and the actual number of workers in the labor force at each age provides an
estimate of the adjusted number of individuals retiring. Taking the difference between these new
estimates of the number of annual retirements and the number in the base case provides an
estimate of the impact of the changes in market conditions on retirement.
The results presented in Table 6 suggest that 86,000 workers who otherwise would have
retired will not do so as a result of the declining stock market that year. As that return converges
back to normal rates, the annual number of delayed retirements will decline. As a simple
example, suppose that it took five years for the market to revert to normal long-term rates of

27

return at a linear rate. In this case, our simulations suggest that 258,000 workers would delay
retirement over the course of the market downturn.
On the other hand, our estimates indicate that 126,000 workers will be forced into
retirement this year as a result of the weak labor market. Similarly assuming a linear return to
normal labor market conditions over a five-year period, we project that 378,000 workers will be
forced to retire early as a result of the recession. Importantly, these results indicate that almost
50 percent more workers will be forced to retire because of the weak labor market than will be
forced to work longer because they cannot afford to retire. On net, we predict that almost
120,000 additional retirements will occur as a result of the economic crisis.
We would further argue that the impact of a weak labor market on older workers’ wellbeing may well be more significant than that of a weak stock market even if the number of older
workers affected by each were similar. As we highlighted earlier, those workers forced to stay in
the labor force because the falling stock market reduced their retirement nest egg tend to be from
wealthier households. The plunging stock market cannot hurt those without large stock holdings
in the first place. For these workers, the alternative to retirement may be to work for another two
or three years so that they have fewer years of retirement to finance and may replenish some of
their lost wealth with additional savings. We do not mean to diminish this cost for those
workers. Nevertheless, our results suggest that the weak labor market has its greatest impact on
less educated workers who have fewer resources in the first place. Workers who are unable to
replace labor earnings lost due to a job displacement by extending their working lives are likely
to have lower levels of consumption for the rest of their lives. For instance, they may need to
claim Social Security earlier than planned in order to make ends meet. Although the adjustment
to Social Security benefits for early claiming is designed to be roughly actuarially fair, the

28

worker’s annual flow of income from this source is reduced if he retires earlier, increasing the
household’s risk of poverty in old age. The cost to these individuals appears to us to be greater
than that experienced by workers with substantial stock holdings who are forced to work a few
extra years to make up for equity losses.

X. CONCLUSIONS
Taken as a whole, our results indicate that the public discussion regarding the impact of
the recent economic crisis on retirement is off target. Some relatively wealthier workers will be
forced to delay retirement, but a larger number of workers with fewer economic resources will be
forced into retirement because of their inability to find new jobs. These workers may need to
start collecting retirement benefits now to make ends meet, resulting in lower income in
retirement and an increased risk of poverty in old age. Indeed, the fact that Social Security
claims have risen sharply since the recession began suggests this response has already begun.
Despite a wealth of media attention to the effect of the economic crisis on older workers, the
risks they face as a result of weak labor markets have gone largely unnoticed.
More generally, our findings suggest that the role of labor market conditions in workers’
retirement decisions has not received sufficient attention from economists. For example, while
our earlier work suggests that the impact of unemployment on retirement is comparable in
magnitude to that of poor health, the amount of research exploring the impact of health on
retirement decisions dwarfs that on labor market conditions.
Our finding that labor market conditions are an important determinant of retirement
decisions may also have important implications for public policy. One example of this is the
debate over raising the Social Security normal and early retirement ages. With individuals living

29

longer and drawing more Social Security benefits over their lifetimes than in the past, one
possible reform to help address the financial shortfalls in the Social Security system is to raise
the retirement ages. In the past, a common criticism regarding such proposals is that they will
harm those individuals who are forced to retire involuntarily because of poor health.

A

substantial body of evidence exists supporting the notion that poor health is an important prelude
to retirement for some older workers (Currie and Madrian, 1999). Our findings indicate that
unemployment may be another involuntary mechanism that leads to retirement. The concerns of
of older workers with weak labor market prospects may need additional consideration in the
design of policies for workers nearing retirement age.

30

REFERENCES
Cahill, Kevin.E., Michael D. Giandrea, & Joseph F. Quinn (2006). Retirement patterns from
career employment. The Gerontologist, 46(4), 514-523.
Chan, Sewin and Ann Huff Stevens (1999). “Employment and Retirement Following a LateCareer Job Loss.” American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 2, pp. 211-216.
Chan, Sewin and Ann Huff Stevens (2001). “Job Loss and Employment Patterns of Older
Workers.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 19, No. 2, pp. 484-521.
Chan, Sewin and Ann Huff Stevens (2004). “How Does Job Loss Affect the Timing of
Retirement?” Contributions to Economic Analysis & Policy, Vol. 3, No. 1, article 5.
Coile, Courtney C. and Phillip B. Levine (2006). “Bulls, Bears, and Retirement Behavior.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 59(3): 408-429.
Coile, Courtney C. and Phillip B. Levine (2007). “Labor Market Shocks and Retirement: Do
Government Programs Matter?” Journal of Public Economics. 91(10): 1902-1919.
Coronado, Julie and Maria Perozek (2003). “Wealth Effects and the Consumption of Leisure:
Retirement Decisions During the Stock Market Boom of the 1990s,” Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series #2003-20.
Currie, Janet and Brigitte C. Madrian (1999). “Health, Health Insurance, and the Labor Market,”
in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.). Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3. New
York: Elsevier.
Dickerson, Marla. “Those Golden Years Have Lost Their Glow; With Home Values Down,
Costs Up and Their 401(K)S Declining, Some Seniors Have Had To Rethink Retirement. Los
Angeles Times. September 21, 2008, p. A1.
Dorning, Mike. “Early retirement claims increase dramatically.” Los Angeles Times. May 24,
2009.
Employee Benefit Research Institute. (2009). EBRI Databook on Employee Benefits.
Washington, DC: Employee Benefit Research Institute.
Farber, Henry S. (2008). “Job Loss and the Decline in Job Security in the United States.”
Industrial Relations Section Working Paper 520.
Friedberg, Leora and Anthony Webb. (2003). “Retirement and the Evolution of the Pension
Structure,” NBER Working Paper No. 9999.
Goss, Stephen C. 2009. Applications for Social Security Retired Worker Benefits in Fiscal Year
2009. Washington, DC: Social Security Administration, Office of the Chief Actuary. May 28,
2009.
31

Gustman, Alan and Thoman Steinmeier. (2008). “How Changes in Social Security May Affect
Recent Retirement Trends,” NBER Working Paper No. 14105.
Gustman, Alan L., Thomas L. Steinmeier, and Nahid Tabatabai (2009). “The Retirement Age
Population and the Stock Market Decline.” Dartmouth College. Unpublished manuscript.
Gustman, Alan L., Thomas L. Steinmeier and Nahid Tabatabai (forthcoming), Pensions in the
Health and Retirement Study. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hallberg, Daniel. 2008. “Economic Fluctuations and Retirement of Older Employees,” Institute
for Labour Market Policy Evaluation, number 2008-2.
Hoynes, Hilary (2000). “The Employment, Earnings, and Income of Less Skilled Workers Over
the Business Cycle,” in Rebecca M. Blank and David E. Card (eds.), Finding Jobs: Work and
Welfare Reform. New York: Russell Sage.
Hurd, Michael D., Monika Reti, Susann Rohwedder. 2009. "The Effect of Large Capital Gains
or Losses on Retirement", in David Wise (ed.), Developments in the Economics of Aging.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Levine, Phillip B. (1993). "A Comparison of Contemporaneous and Retrospective Measures of
Unemployment from the Current Population Survey." Monthly Labor Review, 116(5): 33-38.
Madrian, Brigitte, and Lars John Lefgren. “A Note on Longitudinally Matching Current
Population Survey (CPS) Respondents.” National Bureau of Economic Research, technical
working paper t0247, November 1999.
Munnell, Alicia, Steven Sass, Mauricio Soto, and Natalia Zhivan (2006). “Has the Displacement
of Older Workers Increased?” Center for Retirement Research Working Paper 2006-17.
Sevak, Purvi. 2001. "Wealth Shocks and Retirement Timing: Evidence from the Nineties."
Michigan Retirement Research Center, Working Paper WP00D1.
Trejos, Nancy. “Will You Retire?; New Economic Realities Keep More Americans In the
Workforce Longer.” Washington Post, October 15, 2008, p. H1.
Trumbull, Mark. “Economic Crisis Scrambles Retirement Math: The 401(K) Model of Saving
is Under Duress as Stocks Slide. Home Equity Losses Don’t Help.” Christian Science Monitor,
March 4, 2009
Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise (2004). Aging and Housing Equity: Another Look,” in
David A. Wise (ed.), Perspectives on the Economics of Aging. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

32

von Wachter, Till (2007). “The Effect of Economic Conditions on the Employment of Workers
Nearing Retirement Age.” Center for Retirement Research Working Paper 2007-25.

33

Table 1: Equity Holdings of Households Age 55-64 by Education Group, 2007 SCF
Median
Values among All Households at Percentile:
% with Conditional
Holdings on Holding
25th
50th
75th
90th

Category
All
Directly-Held Stocks
0.213
24,000
0
Stock Mutual Funds (Non-Ret.)
0.140
97,000
0
Stocks in Retirement Accounts
0.500
66,500
0
Any Stocks
0.583
78,000
0
Less than High School
Directly-Held Stocks
0.054
270
0
Stock Mutual Funds (Non-Ret.)
0.019
3,000
0
Stocks in Retirement Accounts
0.214
10,000
0
Any Stocks
0.214
10,000
0
High School
Directly-Held Stocks
0.127
9,000
0
Stock Mutual Funds (Non-Ret.)
0.069
50,000
0
Stocks in Retirement Accounts
0.366
33,800
0
Any Stocks
0.460
35,000
0
Some College
Directly-Held Stocks
0.156
3,500
0
Stock Mutual Funds (Non-Ret.)
0.060
45,000
0
Stocks in Retirement Accounts
0.503
60,000
0
Any Stocks
0.558
65,000
0
College Graduate
Directly-Held Stocks
0.342
60,000
0
Stock Mutual Funds (Non-Ret.)
0.260
107,000
0
Stocks in Retirement Accounts
0.668
85,000
0
Any Stocks
0.775
125,000
3,250
Note: data are weighted to be representative of the U.S. population.
34

95th

0
0
20
8,000

0
0
66,500
97,500

25,000
45,000
230,000
357,620

125,000
191,000
447,500
752,000

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
10,000
10,000

50
0
70,000
70,000

0
0
0
0

0
0
15,000
28,500

500
0
88,000
130,000

14,000
38,000
188,800
212,500

0
0
20
4,000

0
0
61,600
73,500

2,000
0
160,000
197,150

15,000
20,000
224,000
319,500

0
0
27,000
65,100

13,000
4,700
159,600
271,300

154,000
200,000
480,000
846,000

500,000
385,000
775,800
1,865,000

Table 2: Equity Losses of SCF Households Age 55-64 in 2008 Market Crash
Stock Assets
% of Sample
Lost Annual
Lost Monthly
in 2007 SCF
w/ assets at/below Asset Loss Retirement Income Retirement Income
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
0
0.417
0
0
0
25,000
0.587
12,500
625
52
50,000
0.654
25,000
1,250
104
100,000
0.751
50,000
2,500
208
250,000
0.869
125,000
6,250
521
500,000
0.920
250,000
12,500
1,042
Notes:
1. Assets are assumed to have dropped by 50% in value since 2007 SCF.
2. Lost retirement income is calculated by assuming that household will consume 5% of wealth each
year.

35

Table 3: Effect of Stock Market Fluctuations on Retirement by Age, March CPS
High School
High School Attended Some
Measures of Stock Market Performance
All
Dropout
Graduate
College
Age 55-61
Mean of Dependent Variable
0.059
0.068
0.058
0.054

College
Graduate
0.054

% change S&P 500 - 12 Mo. (* 100)

-0.0009
(0.0026)

0.0138
(0.0108)

-0.0033
(0.0052)

-0.0067
(0.0084)

-0.0020
(0.0063)

% change S&P 500 - 5 Year (* 100)

0.0041
(0.0018)

-0.0003
(0.0048)

0.0033
(0.0025)

0.0106
(0.0040)

0.0022
(0.0025)

% change S&P 500 - 10 year (* 100)

0.0025
(0.0014)

-0.0017
(0.0039)

-0.0006
(0.0020)

0.0085
(0.0034)

0.0031
(0.0027)

Sample Size

207,139

40,818

71,310

43,110

51,901

0.156

0.188

0.161

0.141

0.117

% change S&P 500 - 12 Mo. (* 100)

0.0196
(0.0078)

0.0042
(0.0174)

0.0184
(0.0155)

0.0338
(0.0144)

0.0234
(0.0139)

% change S&P 500 - 5 year (* 100)

0.0033
(0.0026)

-0.0043
(0.0073)

0.0035
(0.0061)

-0.0004
(0.0069)

0.0115
(0.0065)

% change S&P 500 - 10 year (* 100)

0.0063
(0.0042)

-0.0075
(0.0099)

-0.0008
(0.0063)

0.0137
(0.0068)

0.0196
(0.0082)

95,776

23,769

32,751

17,729

21,527

Age 62-69
Mean of Dependent Variable

Sample Size

Note: Each cell entry represents a separate regression that also includes age dummies, race and ethnicity, gender, marital status, children less than 18, education,
unemployment rate, state fixed effects, and a quadratic year trend. Regressions are weighted by sample weights. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
Reported coefficients show the effect of a one hundred percentage point change in the S&P 500.

36

Table 4: Impact of Real House Price Fluctuations on the Likelihood of “Retiring” in March CPS, by Age
(standard errors in parentheses)
Case-Shiller Data
12-Month Change

OFHEO Data

5-Year Change

12-Month Change

5-Year Change

62 to 69

55 to 61

62 to 69

55 to 61

62 to 69

55 to 61

62 to 69

55 to 61

% Change in Index (* 100)

-0.025
(0.073)

0.004
(0.041)

-0.011
(0.017)

0.026
(0.008)

-0.009
(0.028)

-0.015
(0.018)

-0.023
(0.007)

-0.010
(0.002)

% Change Index * Owner (* 100)

-0.023
(0.078)

0.015
(0.042)

-0.010
(0.017)

0.028
(0.007)

0.007
(0.029)

-0.011
(0.018)

-0.022
(0.009)

-0.010
(0.003)

% Change Index * Renter (* 100)

-0.017
(0.064)

-0.028
(0.059)

-0.015
(0.025)

0.020
(0.011)

-0.077
(0.051)

-0.032
(0.029)

-0.024
(0.012)

-0.010
(0.005)

Homeowner

1.963
(0.988)

-0.563
(0.488)

2.270
(1.092)

-0.841
(0.533)

0.574
(0.397)

-0.417
(0.225)

0.750
(0.394)

-0.371
(0.225)

Sample Size

14,784

33,126

11,709

27,310

97,408

210,807

97,391

210,751

Mean of Dependent Variable

Notes: Every column and each panel represents the results from a different regression in models where the dependent variable is an indicator for retirement and
the key independent variables are those listed. Additional explanatory variables include: age dummies, race and ethnicity, gender, marital status, children less
than 18, education, unemployment rate, state or MSA fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Regressions are weighted by sample weights. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level. Reported coefficients show the effect of a one hundred percentage point change in the house price index.

37

Table 5: Impact of Labor Market Conditions on the Likelihood of “Retiring,” by Age and Educational Attainment
(standard errors in parentheses, sample size in brackets)

Mean of Dependent Variable

Age 55 to 69 Age 62 to 69 Age 55 to 61
0.090
0.156
0.059

HS Dropout

HS Graduate

Some College

College
Graduate

0.118

0.094

0.084

0.067

Coefficient on
Unemployment Rate (*10)

0.018
(0.006)

0.036
(0.014)

0.010
(0.007)

0.006
(0.014)

0.035
(0.011)

0.001
(0.013)

0.008
(0.016)

Sample Size

308,215

97,408

210,807

66,317

105,766

61,847

74,285

Notes: Each cell entry represents the coefficient on the unemployment rate in a separate regression that also includes age dummies, race and ethnicity, gender,
marital status, children less than 18, education, and state and year fixed effects. Regressions are weighted by sample weights. Standard errors are clustered at the
state level. Reported coefficients show the effect of a ten point change in the unemployment rate.

38

Table 6: Simulated Impact of Economic Crisis on Retirements
(all numbers in thousands)
Impact of Decline in LongTerm Stock Market Return

Baseline Statistics

Age
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
total

Number in
Labor Force
2,805
2,600
2,489
2,420
2,172
1,908
1,551
1,391
1,189
1,035
794
641
578
515
433
22,522

Hazard Rate
0.045
0.049
0.054
0.054
0.060
0.079
0.086
0.162
0.138
0.130
0.194
0.163
0.158
0.161
0.154

Number
Retiring
127
126
134
131
131
152
133
225
164
134
154
104
92
83
67
1,957

Adjusted
Hazard Rates
0.043
0.046
0.051
0.052
0.058
0.077
0.083
0.154
0.131
0.123
0.187
0.156
0.151
0.154
0.147

Adjusted
Number
Retiring
120
120
128
125
126
147
129
215
156
127
149
100
88
79
64
1,871

Impact of Increased
Unemployment

Adjusted
Hazard Rates
0.046
0.049
0.054
0.055
0.061
0.08
0.086
0.180
0.156
0.148
0.212
0.181
0.176
0.179
0.172

Adjusted
Number
Retiring
129
127
135
132
132
152
134
250
185
153
169
116
102
92
75
2,083

Impact on Retirement
-86
126
Notes: The baseline number of workers in the labor force comes from the 2005-2007 American Community Survey. The baseline
hazard rates are estimated from the March CPS

39

40

Figure 1A: Annual Real Percentage Change in S&P 500

30

One Year Percentage Change

20

10

0

‐10

‐20

‐30

‐40

‐50

Year

note: annual percentage change is calculated using December to December monthly averages

40

250

Figure 1B: Five and Ten Year Real Percentage Change in S&P 500

200

Percentage Change

150

100

50

0

‐50

‐100

Year
Five Year

Ten Year

note: percentage changes are calculated using December to December monthly averages.

41

20

Figure 2: Annual Percentage Change in Real House Prices

15

10

Percentage Change

5

0

‐5

‐10

‐15

‐20

‐25

Year
Case‐Shiller Index

OFHEO Index

note: annual percentage change is calculated using December values for Case‐Shiller Index and 4th quarter values for OFHEO Index.

42

19
79
19
79
19
80
19
81
19
82
19
83
19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00
20
01
20
01
20
02
20
03
20
04
20
05
20
06
20
07
20
08
20
09

Unemployment Rate
12

Figure 3: U.S. Unemployment Rate

10

8

6

4

2

0

Year

43

0.40

Figure 4: Empirical Retirement Hazard Rates by Age and Unemployment
Status, 1980 to 2007, March CPS Data

0.35

0.30

Hazard Rate

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

Age
no unemployment

some unemployment

source: authors' calculations from March CPS Data.

44

65

66

67

68

69

0.30

Figure 5: Empirical Retirement Hazard Rates over Time, Workers Age
55‐69, March Current Population Survey

0.25

Hazard Rate

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

Year
no unemployment

some unemployment

source: authors' calculations from March CPS Data.

45

