                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 O SISTER, WHERE ART THOU? THE ROLE OF SON PREFERENCE AND SEX CHOICE:
                 EVIDENCE FROM IMMIGRANTS TO CANADA

                                           Douglas Almond
                                             Lena Edlund
                                            Kevin Milligan

                                        Working Paper 15391
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15391


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2009




We thank Donna Feir for excellent research assistance. This paper was previously titled: Son Preference
and the Persistence of Culture: Evidence from Asian Immigrants to Canada. We are grateful for comments
received at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, the NBER Summer Institute, Ohio State, Seoul
National University, Simon Fraser, UBC, and IFAU; and also for comments from Sonia Laszlo. This
paper represents the views of the authors and does not necessarily reflect the views of Statistics Canada
nor or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The data used in his article can be obtained through
application to the Research Data Centre program at http://www.statcan.ca/english/rdc/index.htm.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Douglas Almond, Lena Edlund, and Kevin Milligan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
O Sister, Where Art Thou? The Role of Son Preference and Sex Choice: Evidence from Immigrants
to Canada
Douglas Almond, Lena Edlund, and Kevin Milligan
NBER Working Paper No. 15391
October 2009, Revised October 2010
JEL No. F22,J13,J61,Z12

                                                ABSTRACT

Sex ratios at birth are above the biologically normal level in a number of Asian countries, notably
India and China. Standard explanations include poverty and a cultural emphasis on male offspring.
We study Asian immigrants to Canada using Census data, focussing on sex ratios across generations
and religious groups. We find sex ratios to be normal at first parity, but rising with parity if there were
no previous son. Since these immigrants are neither poor nor live in a society tolerant of sex discrimination/sex
selection, our findings are more consistent with a preference for sons per se (and not for sons as a means
to, e.g., old age support). Additionally, we uncover strong differences by religious affiliation that align
with historical differences in doctrine concerning infanticide. Comparing across generations of Asian
immigrants, we find fertility responds strongly to the sex composition of older children for first generation
families. For the second generation, expression of son preference through the fertility channel is muted
whereas sex selection seems to persist.


Douglas Almond                                          Kevin Milligan
Department of Economics                                 Department of Economics
Columbia University                                     University of British Columbia
International Affairs Building, MC 3308                 #997-1873 East Mall
420 West 118th Street                                   Vancouver, B.C.
New York, NY 10027                                      CANADA V6T1Z1
and NBER                                                and NBER
da2152@columbia.edu                                     kevin.milligan@ubc.ca

Lena Edlund
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1002A IAB, MC 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
le93@columbia.edu
                                Abstract

   What determines the preference for sons evident in abnormal sex ra-

tios at birth in countries such as India and China? Is the son preference

just a reﬂection of the prevailing economic environment, notably poverty,

few economic opportunities for women, and largely rural economies? If

so, we would expect these patterns to vanish with economic development.

In this paper, we study South-East Asian immigrants to Canada, a coun-

try where the economic rationale for son preference is arguably small to

inconsequential. Canada has one of the largest immigrant populations in

the world and universal health care rendering prenatal sex determination

and abortion readily available. Analyzing the 2001 and 2006 Censuses,

20% samples, we ﬁnd strong evidence of sex selection at higher parities if

previous children were girls. Comparing ﬁrst and second generation immi-

grants, we ﬁnd assimilation to be stronger on the fertility margin than the

sex choice margin, in fact, second generation immigrants were more likely

to sex select on second parity than ﬁrst generation immigrants. Lastly, we

uncover stark diﬀerences across religions. While immigrants of Christian

or Muslim profession preferred sons as evidenced by continued fertility

following only daughters, there was little evidence of sex selection. Ab-

sence of sex selection among Christians and Muslims accord with explicit

prohibition against (female) infanticide – traditionally the main way to

manipulate oﬀspring sex ratios – in these religions.




                                    2
Introduction

      Better to have a crippled son than eight healthy daughters.

     Chinese saying


     This [son] preference is not simply an expression of feudalistic men-

     tality. It is very much dictated by highly labor-intensive agricultural

     and related pursuits.

     Tien [1991, page 202].


   The last decades have seen male and rising sex ratios at birth in a number

of Asian countries — notably India and China [Miller, 1981, Das Gupta, 1987,

Banister, 1987, Zeng et al., 1993, Coale and Banister, 1994, Tuljapurkar et al.,

1995, Scharping, 2003, Li, 2007, Chung, 2007]. In China, more than 120 boys

were born per 100 girls in 2005 [Li, 2007]. Initial claims that the sex ratio was

driven by some unknown racial speciﬁcity of Chinese people have given way to

recognition that daughters are being deselected [Scharping, 2003, p.288]. Sex

ratios in India are not quite as stark, but show a steadily increasing trend.

According to the 2001 census, there were 108 boys per 100 girls in the 0-6 age

group, up from 105.8 in the 1991 census.

   High and rising sex ratios begs the question what causes parents to select

sons. One strand of argument emphasizes socio-economic and institutional fac-

tors. Absent ability to save or national pensions, the poor rely heavily on

children for old age support, a task that under patriarchal norms falls on sons

[Chung and Das Gupta, 2007]. In India, high and rising dowry payments are

argued to place families with daughters at a disadvantage, and it has even been

argued that families depend on males for physical protection [Oldenburg, 1992].

   However, in both India and China, the sex ratios are the highest in the



                                       3
richest areas, casting doubt on sex choice being the result of economic necessity

alone. For instance, Punjab, one of the richest Indian States, had 125 boys per

100 girls in the 0-6 age group according to the 2001 census.

   Another strand of explanations stresses the cultural value attached to a male

oﬀspring. According to Hindi tradition, only a son can light a man’s funeral

pyre. Similar beliefs characterize Chinese traditions, where lineage is traced

solely through the male, and failure to produce a son is considered tantamount

to “extinction” of the family line, a grave aﬀront to Confucian values which

emphasize ﬁlial piety and ancestral worship. With Communism, Confucianism

lost its status as State sanctioned doctrine, but its continued relevance is evident

in the current Chinese Law on Population and Birth PRC [2002, Article 22]

which states: “[It is] forbidden to discriminate against or mistreat women who

give birth to female infants and women who do not give birth [i.e., are infertile].

It is forbidden to discriminate against, mistreat, or abandon female infants.”

   For brevity, let us refer to the above two motives as the economic and the

cultural, respectively. If the economic motive is the predominant reason par-

ents sex select, then we would expect this practise to fade as India and China

continue on their path of economic growth. If, on the other hand, the cultural

motive is important, it is less clear why economic development would change

son preference or sex choice. The importance of these two factors are hard to

disentangle, but by studying Asian immigrants to Canada where the economic

motives favoring sons in the host country are arguably not operative, we hope

to shed some light on the issue.

   Before describing our study, let us make a note on the two principal ways

to achieve a son: parents may continue child bearing until a son is born; and

parents may sex select. If the selection is postnatal, it also implies continued



                                         4
child bearing until a son is achieved. Whether pre- or post-natal, the two

methods have obviously diﬀerent implications for number of surviving oﬀspring

and their sex ratio. The ﬁrst method is commonly referred to as a stopping

rule, and as such does not imply abnormal sex ratios. The number of observed

children is however higher, since daughters are not suppressed.1 Lower desired

fertility, e.g., from higher opportunity cost of mother’s time, is one mechanisms

through which economic development could reduce the attractiveness of this

method. Outright sex choice means that sons can be achieved at lower fertility,

and prenatal sex determination combined with elective abortion has drastically

reduced the physiological cost of this choice.

    Whether it also reduces the moral cost may be culture speciﬁc. While the

high sex ratios in China at birth have drawn attention to prenatal deselection

of daughters, the cause is often attributed to the need or desire to bear a son

in Chinese society. The possibility that the moral cost of sex selection may also

vary across cultures has received far less attention. But whereas the abortion of

a female fetus because of her sex may be deemed regrettable but understandable

in some societies, it would be judged much more harshly in others, including by

those otherwise wedded to abortion on demand.

    In this paper we study sex ratios among South-East Asian immigrants to

Canada using the 2001 and 2006 censuses. Canadian immigrants oﬀer an in-

teresting case for several reasons. Many of the socio-economic and institutional

factors advanced to explain high sex ratios in India and China are not “portable”

to Canada, to use the terminology of Fernández and Fogli [2009].2 Canada is
   1 Girls are also more likely to be older sisters, the “birth-order eﬀect” [Basu and de Jong,

2010].
   2 Conversely, Lhila and Simon [2008] pointed to lack of portability in economic and pol-

icy environments as a potential explanation for their ﬁnding of gender-neutral investments
among Asian immigrants to the US following a prenatal ultrasound: “the economic and pol-
icy environment in the United States changes parents decision-making problem such that
gender-biased investments are no longer optimal” [Lhila and Simon, 2008].




                                              5
a rich OECD country with extensive welfare provisions, meaning that poverty

and the need to rely on sons for old age support is less likely to be a factor. Most

family heads are admitted based on a point system or through ‘investor’ or ‘en-

trepreneur’ provisions, further ensuring low rates of poverty among immigrants.

Given the large income diﬀerences between Canada and India, a daughter’s

dowry would not be onerous (should it be required). Moreover, the role of land,

to pass on or to farm, is likely to be limited since recent immigrants have been

decidedly urban, vocationally and locationally. The economic opportunities of

sons and daughters are similar. International comparisons of crime rates are

diﬃcult due to variation in deﬁnitions, but homicide rates are lower than in the

US and the need for physical protection through sons is likely minimal. Another

advantage of the Canadian setting is that there is obviously no one-child policy

to heed.

   What Canada does share with India and China is access to technology for

prenatal sex selection and a liberal abortion policy. In fact, Canadian abortion

law is among the most permissive in the West. Moreover, abortion procedures

are covered by public health insurance with no co-payments, rendering the mon-

etary cost of an abortion negligible.

   We ﬁnd sex ratios to be abnormally large at higher parities if previous chil-

dren have been all girls, conﬁrming patterns recently documented for Asian

immigrants to the US [Almond and Edlund, 2008, Abrevaya, 2009] and the

UK [Dubuc and Coleman, 2007].3 Unlike US Census data, however, we can go

further to study assimilation across generations. And there is information on

religion, giving us an additional handle on the role of culture. We ﬁnd higher sex

ratios among ﬁrst generation immigrants who arrived in adulthood. Moreover,
  3 Dubuc and Coleman [2007] found elevated sex ratios at higher parities among Indian

immigrants to the UK, but did not observe the sex composition of older children.




                                          6
while ﬁrst generation immigrants exhibited higher sex ratios at third parity, they

also seemed more willing to continue to a third birth than second generation

immigrants. Second generation immigrants do not appear to use the family size

channel but we cannot reject that they do sex select to achieve sons.

   Perhaps our most striking ﬁnding concerns (self-declared) religion. Religion

is interesting because while no religion condones infanticide (traditionally, the

main method of sex selection), Christianity and Islam feature strong prohibi-

tions, whereas others are silent on the topic.4 We ﬁnd high sex ratios to be

entirely driven by immigrants who are neither Christian nor Muslim, the high-

est sex ratio being found for Sikhs. For this group, there are more than 2 boys

per girl for the third child if the two elder children were girls, implying a sex

ratio that is 100% above the normal above for this group. By contrast, Asian

immigrants who are Christian or Muslim (mainly from Pakistan, Bangladesh,

the Philippines and Hong Kong) exhibit normal sex ratios, irrespective of parity

and sex mix of previous children. This ﬁnding resonates with the research of

Chung [2007], who ﬁnds that Christian South Koreans are much less likely to

practice sex selective abortions than Confucians or Buddhists.

   The absence of skewed sex ratios could mirror an absence of sex preference

among Christians and Muslims, but that does not appear to be the case. Chris-

tian or Muslim parents were about 5 percentage points more likely to continue

to a third child if the ﬁrst two were girls, suggesting that the explicit bans

on post-natal sex selection (infanticide) in these religions may also protect the

unborn girl against prenatal sex selection.

   Studying immigrants also provides two further insights. First, we contribute

to a growing literature that studies the social, fertility, and labor market as-
   4 Judaism also condemns infanticide, but since we are looking at South-East Asia, we have

few followers of this religion in our sample.




                                             7
similation of immigrants across generations and ages of arrival (for the US, see

Bleakley and Chin [2010], Blau et al. [2008], for a comparison between the US

and Canada; see Aydemir and Sweetman [2007]).

    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The ”Institutions” sec-

tion provides some institutional background on immigration to Canada, prenatal

sex choice options, abortion access in Canada, and religious prohibitions against

sex choice. We then describe the Canadian census microdata and our analysis

sample, and our results. We conclude with a brief discussion.




Institutions

Several features of the environment for Asian immigrants in Canada combine

to make their study uniquely informative. The levels of immigration are high,

sex determination technology is readily available, and abortions are publicly

funded without legal impediment.5 Below we provide a brief background of

Asian immigration to Canada, prenatal sex determination, and religious and

cultural attitudes towards sex selection.



Asian immigration in Canada

Canada’s population is one of the most immigrant-intensive in the industrialized

world.6 The stock of foreign born in Canada in 2006 was 19.8 percent, about
    5 We focus on abortion because we consider it unlikely that explicit infanticide occurs in

Canada. Also, with public health insurance, the concern of diﬀerential access to health post-
birth is somewhat alleviated as there is no cost to the user. Since administrative mortality
data are not available by race or ethnic origin, we can not explicitly test for diﬀerential death
rates post-birth for Asian-Canadians. Abrevaya [2009] ﬁnds explicit evidence in California
that abortion is the likely channel for sex selection for Asian-Americans.
    6 Except   where otherwise noted,          the statistics in this paragraph come
from “Immigration in Canada:                  A Portrait of the Foreign-born Popu-
lation,    2006    Census”     Statistics   Canada,      2007.         Catalogue     97-557-XIE
http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/english/census06/analysis/immcit/pdf/97-557-XIE2006001.pdf
The data on the United States come from this Statistics Canada publication, but are derived
from the 2006 American Community Survey. See Green and Green (1995) for details on the
evolution of Canada’s immigration system and an analysis of the point system.




                                             8
50 percent higher than the United States, and double the rates for Britain,

the Netherlands, and France.7 The top-two destination cities, Toronto and

Vancouver, have foreign-born shares of 45.7 percent and 39.6 percent, which

exceed levels seen in the top US immigration destinations of Miami (36.5), Los

Angeles (34.7), and New York (27.9).

   Annual immigration to Canada is around 0.7 percent of population; about

double the corresponding rate in the United States.8 The top-ﬁve source coun-

tries in 2007 were the People’s Republic of China, India, the Philippines, the

United States, and Pakistan. Asia and the Paciﬁc region have accounted for

around 50 percent of immigrants since the 1980s — a trend that started after

reforms to immigration in the 1960s. A point system governs the entrance of

skilled workers, and 20 to 25 percent of immigrants over the past decade have

entered under this system. The balance enter through other channels such as

family class, spouses and dependants of skilled workers, entrepreneurs, investors,

or refugees. The issue of access to social services by undocumented immigrants

is much less relevant in Canada than the US. Quebec maintains a separate immi-

grant policy, with the result that a much lower proportion of Asian immigrants

arrive in Quebec than other provinces. Of all Asian immigrants in 2007, 24

percent settle in British Columbia (mostly in and around Vancouver) and 51

percent in Ontario (mostly in and around Toronto).



Prenatal Sex Determination

Prenatal sex determination is actively discouraged in the medical community,

but is nonetheless available in Canada. The Society of Obstetricians and Gy-
  7 Source:OECD Factbook 2009.
  8 The  statistics in this paragraph are from “Facts and Figures:       Immigration
Overview Temporary and Permanent Residents 2007” Citizenship and Immigration Canada.
http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/pdf/pub/facts2007.pdf.




                                         9
naecologists of Canada has condemned sex determination that leads to selective

abortion as ‘discriminatory’, and the British Columbia College of Physicians

and Surgeons have categorized fetal gender determination for non-medical pur-

poses as ‘unethical.’ However, in practice, there are ways around this. First,

one could ﬁnd a health care provider willing to overlook the policy. Second, in

British Columbia sex determination clinics across the nearby border in the U.S.

(Washington state) are available and advertised in immigrant communities.

    Sex determination using ultrasound visualization is the dominant form world-

wide. In Canada, ultrasound examinations are part of routine prenatal care and

are available free of charge to the patient. Imaging has improved and today fe-

tuses can be sexed towards the end of the ﬁrst trimester when diﬀerentiation of

the external sex organs occurs (between weeks 10 and 12). Many studies have

shown that accuracy rates after week 12 are quite high. For example, Efrat

et al. [2006] found an accuracy rate between 12 and 14 weeks of 99.6 % for

males and 97.4 % for females; although 7% of pregnancies could not be sexed.

Other methods, such as blood tests, sperm sorting, or in-vitro selection are not

yet reliable, expensive, or both. In 2004, the Assisted Human Reproduction

Act9 made the latter two a crime:


      for the purpose of creating a human being, [to] perform any proce-

      dure or provide, prescribe or administer any thing that would ensure

      or increase the probability that an embryo will be of a particular sex,

      or that would identify the sex of an in vitro embryo, except to pre-

      vent, diagnose or treat a sex-linked disorder or disease.


    In response to mounting concerns that prenatal sex selection is being prac-
   9 English text available at:

http://laws.justice.gc.ca/en/showdoc/cs/A-13.4/bo-ga:s%5C 5/20090911/en             Interest-
ingly, despite making it illegal, the law’s authors did not consider the practice unethical if
geared toward gender-balancing [Dickens et al., 2005].


                                             10
ticed in the US and Canada, Thiele and Leier [2010] advised Canadian health

professionals that “fetal gender need not be [disclosed] in the course of a routine

16 to 20 week ultrasound.”



Abortion in Canada

Abortion law in Canada is among the least restrictive in the world. Prior to

1988, abortions were governed by Section 251 of the Criminal Code, which

required case-by-case certiﬁcation by a hospital’s Therapeutic Abortion Com-

mittee. In 1988, the watershed R. v. Morgentaler decision of the Supreme Court

of Canada determined that Section 251 violated the Canadian Charter of Rights

and Freedoms. A legislative attempt to replace the abortion law failed in 1989,

and no subsequent legislation has been introduced. The result is a society with

no legal barrier to abortion, no matter the gestational age of the fetus.

   Beyond legal barriers, other factors can also potentially limit abortions.

First, doctors might not be available to perform the abortion. This can arise

for women in more rural parts of the country and in some provinces and terri-

tories. For example, for many years there have been no abortions performed in

Prince Edward Island for want of facilities. However, because a large majority

of Asian immigrants lives in large cities, physical access is less of an issue for

the Asian-Canadian population.

   Second, cost can be prohibitive. In Canada, however, abortions in hospitals

are covered by the universal public health plan in every province and territory,

and private clinic abortions almost everywhere as well. The indirect costs of

travel and time are not covered, but for the mostly urban immigrant population

these costs are inconsequential.




                                        11
Cultural Prohibitions Against Sex Selection

While no religion advocates infanticide, Christianity and Islam stand out as

proscriptive. At the times of the early Church and the Quran, infanticide was

the main form of sex selection, and both Christianity and Islam took strong

positions against it. For obvious reasons, neither religion pondered the question

of sex selective abortion, but it is possible that the proscription against post-

natal sex selection has rendered sex selection taboo, thus protecting the unborn

girl. To the best of our knowledge, there are no equivalent proscriptions in

the other main religions (including Confucianism).10 Below follows a very brief

account.

    Abortion and infanticide were permitted under Roman law at the time of

Jesus. Since abortion could not be done according to sex of the child, infanticide

was the main way to sex select and the selection was predominantly against girls,

as this well known excerpt from a letter dated around 1B.C. illustrates (quoted

in Stark [1997]).


        “Know that I am still in Alexandria.... I ask and beg you to take

        good care of our baby son, and as soon as I received payment I shall

        send it up to you. If you are delivered (before I come home), if it is

        a boy keep it, if a girl, discard it.”


The early Church banned both abortion and infanticide [Stark, 1997].

    The Quran does not explicitly ban abortion (nor does the Bible) but does

take a strong position against female infanticide, widely practised in pre-Islamic

Arabia. On the day of reckoning, the Quran (At-Takwir: 8-15) reads:


        “When the female infant, buried alive, is questioned — for what
 10 Judaism   also condemns infanticide, but this religion has very few followers in South-East
Asia.



                                              12
      crime was she killed; when the scrolls are laid open; when the World

      on High is unveiled; when the Blazing Fire is kindled to ﬁerce heat;

      and when the Garden is brought near — Then shall each soul know

      what it has put forward. So verily I call.”




Data

The Canadian Census is conducted every ﬁve years, with slightly more detailed

questions asked in enumeration years ending with a ‘1’. The coverage is universal

and mandatory, with 20 percent of private occupied households selected for the

detailed ‘long form’ and 80 percent for the more cursory ‘short form’. All long

form respondents are included in the master ﬁle, which is available for some

Census years through special arrangement at Research Data Centres. The data

include information on the location, income, education, immigration history,

dwelling, and family structure for each individual. The data are available at

the individual level, with hierarchical identiﬁers permitting the recreation of

families and households.

   We focus on the 2001 and 2006 Census years. The primary diﬀerence between

these two survey instruments for our purposes is the availability of religion in

2001. Our results in the 2001 and 2006 samples typically look very similar, the

main beneﬁt of pooling these two years is sample size.

   We draw a sample of two-parent families with children subject to three

selection criteria. First, we require the youngest three children to be born

in Canada. so that the children in the sample all shared the same societal

environment (e.g., some were not subject to the one child policy).. Second, we

restrict our focus to families where the oldest child is age 12 or younger. We seek

to reconstruct the family structure as it was at the birth of each child. When


                                        13
a family has older children in the household, the possibility of a missing older

sibling (who has already left the home) increases. This motivates our focus on

families with younger children. Third, we exclude families with multiple births

because we are interested in the sequential decision by parity, and multiple births

introduce a more complex parity structure. Compared to the US Census, the

resulting sample sizes for each Census year are much larger because of the larger

share of foreign-born in Canada, a higher fraction of Asians among immigrants

to Canada, and the 20 percent sample.11

    Exact date of birth is reported for each family member. Using this infor-

mation, we code variables for whether a child of each parity was born, and if

so, the sex. These form the dependent variables for the analysis. We also code

variables for the sex mix of existing children at each parity. These variables are

used both to deﬁne our samples and as explanatory variables.12

    The Canadian Census contains information on each individual’s ethnicity

and country of birth.13 We also observe each person’s parents’ country of birth.

Children in the sample can be linked to their parents, for whom we know the

parents’ places of birth. Consequently, for each child we can observe both the

parents’ and the grandparents’ country of birth, meaning we can distinguish

between ﬁrst and second generation immigrant families (not possible using US

Census data after 1970).

    We create a sample of ﬁrst and second generation immigrant families from

South and East Asia, henceforth South-East Asia.14 We do so by selecting
   11 For instance, Almond and Edlund [2008] found 324 families of Chinese, Korean, or Indian

origin who had a third child after two girls in the US Census. The 2001 Canadian census
yields almost three times as many families of this type.
   12 Divorces, remarriages, deaths, and adoptions could compromise our family reconstruction.

We can create an indicator of success for family reconstruction using the public-use 1991
Census, which records the number of children ever born. We select families with mother or
father born in Asia and compare the number of children ever born to the number currently
living at home. For children age 0-5, 94.7 percent of families have the same number ever born
and still at home. For children age 6 to 14, 90.9 percent are the same.
   13 There is no ‘race’ categorization.
   14 For a complete list of countries, see Appendix Table 1




                                             14
all families for which at least one of the grandparents was born in South-East

Asia. Since most Asian immigrants arrived after the 1960s, we capture a large

percentage of the Asian-Canadian population. An alternative is to use self-

reported ethnicity. However, those who are more assimilated may be more likely

to identify with ‘Canadian’ ethnicity, making it more diﬃcult to use ethnicity

to study assimilation. Results using ethnicity to classify families show similar

patterns and magnitudes to those we report here. Some descriptive statistics

for our sample and subsamples are provided in Table 1.15




Son preference among Asian immigrants

In presenting our results, we ﬁrst lay out the basic ﬁndings in graphs of sex

ratios by sex mix and parity of birth. Second, we probe these results in greater

detail in a multivariate regression analysis.



Figure 1

Figure 1 displays sex ratios (males to females) for diﬀerent family characteristic

groups, arranged in four panels. Each set of three bars shows the sex ratio for

ﬁrst children, second children when the ﬁrst was a girl, and third children when

the ﬁrst two were girls. Each sex ratio has the mean reported above the bar, and

a 95 percent conﬁdence interval marked. The underlying sample size is noted

at the bottom of each bar. A line is drawn at the approximate biological norm

of 1.05 for comparison.

    Panel A of Figure 1 considers country of origin. Most of the existing lit-

erature studies one country at a time or country of origin for immigrants, so
  15 Here  and in all of our tables and ﬁgures the sample sizes have been rounded to a ‘0’ or a
‘5’ using a randomized procedure in accordance with Statistics Canada disclosure policy. This
procedure means that, because of rounding, mutually exclusive and exhaustive components
may not exactly add to reported totals.



                                              15
the breakdowns in Panel A allow comparison of our results to the existing lit-

erature. Each country sample is chosen by keeping all families with at least

one grandparent born in that country.16 We show the results for India, ‘China

plus’ together with Korea and Vietnam, and the Philippines. Sex ratios for ﬁrst

births are only slightly higher than biological norms, coming in between 1.08

and 1.09 for all three of our country groups. The 95 percent conﬁdence interval

includes 1.05. The sex ratio for second children when the ﬁrst is a girl is elevated

for India at 1.19, which is statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than 1.05. A much

sharper contrast is evident for third children with two girls ﬁrst. For India, the

sex ratio is 1.90, with a 95 percent conﬁdence interval reaching down to 1.67.

For China plus, Korea, and Vietnam, the sex ratio is 1.39, which is statistically

diﬀerent than 1.05.17

    The Philippines provides a stark counter-example, with sex ratios within

the biological norm for all parities — including third children preceded by two

girls.18 This provides a strong indication that broadly Asian genetic or cultural

factors cannot explain elevated sex ratios. The Philippines does have several

unique cultural features — such as non-patrilinearity and Catholicism — but

this serves to suggest that local and potentially malleable cultural factors deter-

mine attitudes toward sex and abortion. We therefore consider whether, within

immigrant groups with high sex ratios, there are dimensions along which we

observe assimilation toward more balanced sex ratios.

    Panel B of Figure 1 shows sex ratios for families classiﬁed by the origins of
  16 This introduces some complications, since national boundaries have not been stable, with

the partition of India and the impact of the Chinese revolution being pertinent to our study.
For India, about ﬁve percent of observations with the grandparents being reported born in
India have the parents born in Pakistan. For China, we group together the People’s Republic,
Taiwan, Macau, Hong Kong, and Singapore into an aggregation we call ‘China plus.’
  17 In the three countries making up this grouping, the results for the third parity are 1.38

for China plus, 1.62 for Korea, and 1.42 for Vietnam.
  18 The slight decline in sex ratio at higher parities is a standard ﬁnding [Chahnazarian,

1988].




                                             16
the grandparents. The ﬁrst set of bars indicates the sex ratios of families in

which all four grandparents are Canadian-born — these families have parents

who are at least third generation Canadian, the vast majority of whom are of

European ethnicity. Given our interest in assimilation, this set of bars provides

the ultimate “native” comparison group. Sex ratios for these families are 1.05

for ﬁrst births, 1.08 for second births (girl ﬁrst), and 1.06 for third births (two

girls ﬁrst). The large sample size leads to very small conﬁdence intervals. These

sex ratios are within biological norms.

   The second and third set of bars in Panel B show the sex ratios for families

with South or East Asian-born grandparents. In the middle are families with

either one or two South or East Asian-born grandparents and on the right are

those with three or four South or East Asian-born grandparents (i.e. mutually

exclusive sets). Sex ratios for ﬁrst births are slightly higher than 1.05, but only

marginally. For second births, the sex ratios are slightly elevated, to 1.13 for

those with 1 or 2 South or East Asian-born grandparents and 1.11 for those with

3 or 4. The largest sex ratios are for third births, where previous children were

girls. Those families with 3 or 4 South or East Asian-born grandparents have

1.45 boys for every girl, and those with 1 or 2 South or East Asian-born grand-

parents have 1.21 boys for every girl, suggesting that less assimilated families

sex select more – a point we develop in the regression analysis below.

   We next examine the sex ratios of Asian immigrants by generation. Bleakley

and Chin [2010] showed that US immigrants arriving earlier in life are more likely

to be socially assimilated. Also for the US, Blau et al. [2008] found that after

two generations, only 16 to 42 percent of excess immigrant fertility remained,

driven down by increased labor supply and education attainment, as well as

possibly by cultural factors. While social assimilation may lead to sex ratios



                                          17
that approach native levels, the increased labor supply and decreased fertility

may indicate an increase in the cost of using stopping rules to achieve male

oﬀspring. Thus, lower desired fertility may prompt more extensive use of sex

selection, especially at lower parties.

    The ﬁrst set of bars in Panel C of Figure 1 shows the sex ratios for families in

which at least one parent is Canadian-born. The sex ratio for third births after

two girls is 1.32. The middle and right-hand set of bars focus on families with

both parents foreign born (1st generation immigrants), but split the sample into

those in which the parents arrived after turning age 18, and those who arrived at

younger ages.19 Immigrants who arrive during childhood have a sex ratio of 1.23

for third children when the ﬁrst two are girls, which actually falls below that

of second generation immigrants. This does not indicate assimilation eﬀects —

although the diﬀerence is not statistically signiﬁcant. The sex ratio for families

with both parents arriving after age 18 is 1.50 for third children with two girls

ﬁrst. The size of this sample makes for a smaller 95 percent conﬁdence interval,

reaching down only to 1.34. This leaves mixed initial evidence of the impact of

assimilation on sex ratios.

    Finally, we turn in Panel D of Figure 1 to religion, where the sample includes

families with at least one South or East Asian-born grandparent. Religion is

only available in 2001, so sample sizes are smaller than the ﬁrst two panels

which included data from both 2001 and 2006. Strikingly, the sex ratios for

families with Christian or Muslim parents show little indication of heightened

sex ratios, with a ratio of 1.01 for third births after two girls. Approximately half

of this sample originates from the Philippines, which features a non-patrilineal

culture. However, the same pattern occurs for Asian Christians who are not
  19 Those with one parent arriving before and one after age 18 are grouped with those having

both parents arriving before age 18.




                                             18
Filipino. The middle set of bars displays results for immigrants who are neither

Christian nor Muslim. This set of families displays a heightened 1.98 sex ratio

for third births with two girls ﬁrst.20 The right-hand set of bars pulls out Sikh

families who have the highest sex ratio we observe among the religious groups,

at 2.07.



Basic regressions

We proceed with the analysis by running regressions of the form:



                  Yi = β0 + Xi β1 + AllGirlsi β2 + M ixi β3 + ui .                    (1)


   We consider two dependent variables. The ﬁrst is an indicator that the

family had another child. Clearly, the event “had a another child” depends

on the time frame considered, and we settled for a six year window, so that

our dependent variable is eﬀectively “had another child within six years.” That

is, for the ‘second child’ sample, we include all families with a ﬁrst child age

six or higher and form the dependent variable as taking the value one when a

second child is present. Similarly, for the ‘third child’ sample, we include all

families with at least two children and in which the second child is at least 6

years old. The dependent variable in this case takes the value one when a third

child is present. The other dependent variable is an indicator that the child of

the indicated parity is a boy. We impose no age restriction on these regressions

beyond those listed in the data description.

   The key independent variables of interest are AllGirlsi and M ixi . AllGirlsi

takes the value 1 when all the previous children are girls. M ixi takes the value

1 when the previous children are a mix of boys and girls. The excluded category
  20 The religious composition of our 2001 sample is: 40.3 % Christian, 16.6 % Sikh, 14.8%

other, 10.3 % Hindu, 9.0% Muslim, and 8.9% Buddhist.



                                           19
is an indicator for both children being boys. In the second child sample, there

is only one previous child so AllGirlsi = 1 indicates the ﬁrst child was a girl,

and M ixi is omitted. In the third child sample, both variables are included.

    The Xi vector contains a set of demographic covariates for the family. We

include dummies for father and mother age group, father and mother education,

city of residence, and a dummy for records from the 2006 census.21 The results

are very similar in speciﬁcations that omit the entire Xi vector.

    The equations are estimated using a linear probability model with robust

standard errors which account for the heteroskedasticity of the linear probability

model residuals. Table 2 presents the results for four diﬀerent samples. Results

under Had are for the dependent variable indicating the family had the indicated

parity child, while those under Boy are for the dependent variable for the family

having a boy of the indicated parity. We show results for second and third

parities.

    The ﬁrst panel of Table 2 contains the results for the sample of families hav-

ing both parents born in South-East Asia, making these families ﬁrst generation

immigrants. After the birth of a girl, these families are 2.2 percentage points

more likely to have a second child over the next six years than those who had a

boy. This indicates a slight preference for boys. While statistically signiﬁcant,

it is not large compared to the mean of 0.56 for those with a boy ﬁrst. Among

those having a second child, those with a girl ﬁrst were 2.1 percentage points

more likely to have a boy. While seemingly small, translated into sex ratios,

these 2.1 percent correspond to a sex ratio of 1.16. The next two columns show

third births. Here, we see a large 19.3 percentage point diﬀerence in having a
  21 The age groups we use are 24 and under, 25 to 29, and 30 and above. We use the age at

the birth of the ﬁrst child, since age at the birth of the focal child is potentially endogenous.
For education, we code three dummies: high school or less, some post-high school education,
and university degree. For city of residence, we include dummies for Vancouver-Abbottsford
and for Toronto, leaving all other cities and rural areas as the left-out category.




                                               20
third child if the ﬁrst two were girls, relative to the 18.5 percent mean when

the ﬁrst two were boys, i.e. a doubling of the continuation rate. There is also

a relatively small but still signiﬁcant 4.0 percentage point lower probability of

having a third child if the ﬁrst two were of mixed sex, indicating a slight prefer-

ence for a sex mix. The point estimate for having a boy when the ﬁrst two are

girls is 8.4 percent among ﬁrst generation immigrants, which is nearly identical

to the unadjusted estimates.

   To express this parameter in terms of sex ratios, the probability of having a

boy if the ﬁrst two children are boys in our sample happens to be exactly 0.500.

An 8.4 percentage point increase in this probability increases it to 0.584, which

produces a sex ratio adjusted for covariates of 1.404. This is very close to the

unadjusted sex ratio of 1.415 for this same sample, indicating that controlling

for covariates is playing little role in our estimates.

   The second panel of Table 2 runs the same speciﬁcations for second gener-

ation immigrants. This sample of families has at least one grandparent born

in South or East Asia, but has at least one parent born in Canada. Because

so much Asian immigration has taken place over the last 30 years, the sam-

ple sizes for the second generation are about a quarter of those for the ﬁrst

generation sample. For second births, the eﬀects are small and comparable to

the ﬁrst generation estimates. In contrast, the third birth results show strong

diﬀerences. Families having two girls ﬁrst are somewhat less likely to have a

third child within six years than families with two boys ﬁrst, with an estimated

coeﬃcient of -0.053, signiﬁcant at the 10 percent level. There is also a much

stronger preference for mixed sex families evident, with a 12.2 percent increase

in the probability of stopping after two children when the ﬁrst two are mixed

compared to the ﬁrst two being boys. Finally, the probability of having a boy



                                         21
third is 4.6 points higher when the ﬁrst two kids are girls compared to the ﬁrst

two being boys. This coeﬃcient is about half the size of the coeﬃcient in the

ﬁrst generation sample, but the standard error is larger in this smaller sample.

   The bottom two panels of Table 2 disaggregate the sample of families having

South and East Asian-born grandparents into Christian/Muslim and other reli-

gions samples. The eﬀects in both of these samples for second births are small.

But, both religious subsamples display a signiﬁcant preference for having a third

child when the ﬁrst two are girls. However, the magnitude of the coeﬃcient for

non-Christian or non-Muslims is ﬁve times (0.247 compared to 0.050) the co-

eﬃcient for Christians and Muslims. Notably, while Christians and Muslims’

decisions to have a third child show a preference for achieving a sex mix, other

religious groups do not (-0.062 versus -0.016).

   The diﬀerence between the religion subsamples is larger still where the sex

of the third child is concerned. While essentially unaﬀected for Christians and

Muslims, among other religious groups the probability of having a boy third

increases by 12.3 percentage points when the ﬁrst two children are girls relative

to boys. This regression coeﬃcient delivers an adjusted sex ratio of 1.976, very

close to the 1.982 visible in Panel C of Figure 1.

   These ﬁrst regressions bring forward the following three important ﬁndings.

First, following two children, the probability of having a third child and the

third child’s sex depend strongly on the sex mix of previous two children. Next,

second generation immigrants appear to favor smaller families, but within that

constraint, they still prefer sons, resulting in sex selection at second rather than

third parity. Finally, Christians and Muslims manifest sex preference through

stopping behaviors alone, while both sex selection and stopping behaviors are

apparent for other religions.



                                        22
Immigrant Assimilation

Does the duration of time spent in Canada provide additional information about

immigrant son preference, or is it subsumed by other factors? We estimate

multivariate regressions for all families with at least one grandparent born in

South or East Asia, eﬀectively pooling together ﬁrst and second generation

immigrants. Here, we include three region of origin dummies to control for

diﬀerences across source countries. We also include three immigrant cohort

dummies for each of the mother and father to control for diﬀerences across

immigrant arrival cohorts, which will help distinguish between age of arrival

versus cohort of arrival eﬀects.22 The other variables are deﬁned as in the

“Basic regressions” section above. Finally, we restrict attention to families with

two or more children.

   The key right-hand side variables of interest are indicators of the sex mix

of previous children and their interaction with measures of “Canada exposure.”

For immigrant generation, we code a variable indicating that both parents are

foreign-born, i.e. ﬁrst-generation immigrants.23 We also code a variable indi-

cating that both parents arrived after age 18.

   In the Table 3 results, families with two girls ﬁrst are 14.6 percentage points

more likely to have a third child than when the ﬁrst two children were boys

(column 1). The decision to continue childbearing also reveals a preference for

sex mix. First generation parents are 3.2 percentage points less likely to have a

third child (irrespective of sex composition).

   In the right-hand panel, column 3, the results for having a boy third are

quite diﬀerent. Absence of previous son raise the probability of a boy by 7.2
  22 For the mother and the father, we form variables identifying immigrants arriving before

1980, 1980-1989, 1990-94, and 1995 and later.
  23 In our sample, about 77 percent of observations have both parents as ﬁrst generation

immigrants, 8 percent as second generation, and 15 percent as one ﬁrst and one second.




                                            23
percentage points.

   The middle columns of the panels (columns 2 and 5) interact the family

structure variables with the immigrant indicator, allowing ﬁrst generation immi-

grants to react diﬀerently to gender compared to second generation immigrants.

For having a third child, ﬁrst generation immigrant families are 24.9 percentage

points more likely than second generation families to have a third child if the

ﬁrst two are girls. The ﬁrst generation families are also more likely to continue

to a third child if the ﬁrst two are mixed rather than boys. The -0.132 coeﬃcient

on the ﬁrst generation variable indicates that ﬁrst generation families with two

boys ﬁrst are 13.2 percentage points less likely than second generation immi-

grants to have a third child if the ﬁrst two are boys. Putting these together, this

evidence indicates a much stronger preference for boys among ﬁrst generation

immigrant families. This may result from a higher proclivity of newer immi-

grants to have larger families, as more established immigrants have assimilated

either culturally or through the labor force into Canadian family size norms.

   Since stopping rules and sex selection are alternative ways to achieve a child

of the desired sex, there may be some substitution between the two methods.

That is, a higher proclivity for using the family size channel might lead to

lower use of the abortion channel and vice versa. Son preference may be similar

across generations, but asymmetry along other dimensions (which may respond

to assimilation) may change the means by which it is expressed. In contrast,

if assimilation aﬀects the taste for sons, then we should see assimilation eﬀects

on both the abortion channel and the family size channel that go in the same

direction.

   For child sex, the eﬀect of having previous girls is now split between an

eﬀect for second generation and ﬁrst generation immigrants. What was a large



                                        24
and signiﬁcant 7.2 percentage point impact on having a boy (column 4) is split

between a 4.3 percentage point eﬀect for second generation immigrants and an

additional 3.7 percentage point eﬀect for ﬁrst generation immigrants (column

5). However, neither of these eﬀects is in itself statistically signiﬁcant. So,

we do not have clear evidence to distinguish between the hypothesis that son

preference in general went down (manifested through either channel) and that

there was substitution between the channels.

   Columns 3 and 6 of Table 3 further break down the ﬁrst generation eﬀect

into one for those arriving before and after age 18. For having another child,

the coeﬃcients are largely unchanged when heterogeneity in eﬀects for adult

immigrants is introduced (column 3), meaning that there is no distinction be-

tween the behavior of early and late arriving ﬁrst generation immigrants —

although the strong distinction between ﬁrst and second generation immigrants

remains. In contrast, the coeﬃcient of the interaction of being ﬁrst generation

and having two girls ﬁrst now goes close to zero, with the age 18 interaction

term taking the value 0.044 (column 6). Although statistically insigniﬁcant,

the conﬁdence interval includes a substantially higher degree of sex selection for

adult immigrants.

   Our ﬁndings on assimilation indicate that ﬁrst generation immigrant families

from South and East Asia are much more likely to exhibit son preference in their

family size choices than are second generation families. However, the results for

the sex of born children show less diﬀerence across generations. This suggests

that, while cultural assimilation may attenuate son preference somewhat, this

does manifest diﬀerently across channels. Thus, in a relative sense there are

signs of substitution toward the abortion channel from the family size channel.




                                       25
Religion

The 2001 Census allows us to examine the relationship between religion and son

preference, as reﬂected by fertility decisions.24 Since religion is a fairly tenacious

aspect of culture, exploring how religion aﬀects assimilation is particularly in-

teresting. We form a sample of families with at least one parent being Christian

or Muslim, and the complement sample containing no Christians or Muslims.25

Again, we restrict attention to families with two or more children.

    In Table 4 we report the results of regressions similar to Table 3, but on

the two religious subsamples. The top panel contains the regressions with the

dependent variable indicating the birth of a third child, among those with two

children (and with the 2nd child of age at least 6). The bottom panel has the

results for families with at least three children, using as a dependent variable

an indicator that the third child was a boy.

    The top left set of results compares the propensity to have a third child of

Christians and Muslims and those of other religions. Among Christians and

Muslims, there is a 5.2 percentage point eﬀect for having a third child if the

ﬁrst two were girls compared to the ﬁrst two being boys. There is also an

indication of a preference for sex mix, as these families are 6.2 percent less

likely to continue to a third child if the ﬁrst two children were of mixed sex. In

contrast, Asian-Canadian families that are neither Christian nor Muslim show

a strong indication of a continuation preference if the ﬁrst two children are girls,

with a 25.6 percentage point increase in the probability of having a third child.

    The third and fourth columns allow these eﬀects to vary between the ﬁrst
  24 The results in Table 4 use only the 2001 Census. In comparable regressions, however, the

results in the two years are extremely similar. Using the same speciﬁcation as Table 2 for
having a boy for a third child, the coeﬃcient (standard error) on having two girls ﬁrst is 0.076
(0.017) in the pooled dataset, and 0.072 (0.025) in the 2001 dataset. For having another child,
the coeﬃcient in the pooled dataset is 0.144 (0.013) and 0.154 (0.020) in the 2001 dataset.
  25 We have checked the results in a speciﬁcation that allows for six diﬀerent religious groups,

but found that the results led naturally to the Muslim/Christian vs. other groupings.



                                               26
and second generation of immigrants. Now, the ﬁrst two rows show the results

for the second generation while the last two rows of the top panel show the

diﬀerential eﬀect for ﬁrst generation immigrants. Strikingly, the eﬀect on fer-

tility of son preference is driven almost entirely by the ﬁrst generation for both

sets of religious groups. The continuation probability for the second generation

immigrants if the ﬁrst two children were girls is now insigniﬁcant (with a neg-

ative point estimate) for both religious groups, while for those with mixed sex

among the ﬁrst two children the estimated coeﬃcients are very close across the

two religious groupings. For the ﬁrst generation immigrants, however, the eﬀect

of having two girls is positive and signiﬁcant. For non-Christian and Muslim

ﬁrst generation families, the probability of continuing to a third child if the

ﬁrst two were girls is 42.0 percentage points higher than for second generation

immigrants of the same religion.

   The bottom panel of Table 4 looks at the sex of the third child. In the ﬁrst

two columns son preference is only evident in the sample of non-Christians and

Muslims, as seen earlier in Table 2. When this eﬀect is broken down into a ﬁrst

and a second generation immigrant eﬀect in the right-hand side of the bottom

panel, the estimates become imprecise. Breaking the results down further into

early and late arriving immigrants yields similarly uninformative estimates.




Discussion

We have documented evidence of a clear son preference among South-East Asian

immigrants to Canada. We uncover a strong tendency to continue having chil-

dren in the absence of sons among ﬁrst generation immigrants that entirely

disappears among second generation immigrants. In contrast, we do not ob-

serve such a sharp decline in the tendency to select sons over daughters (likely


                                       27
through abortion) across generations. It is interesting that between the two

methods of achieving a son – fertility and sex choice – we see more assimilation

along the dimension with less of a cultural divide: fertility. High fertility may be

inopportune in a Western society, but does not draw social opprobrium, unlike

sex selection which is generally condemned on moral grounds. It could argued

that unlike a preference for high fertility, a preference for sons and a (relative)

lack of aversion to sex selective abortion is not costly to maintain in the West.

The opposite might even be true since assimilation of values would raise the

psychic cost of sex selection. This is not to say that the preference for sons is

impermeable to cultural inﬂuence, including better social and economic status

of women. In fact, while we ﬁnd second generation immigrants to be more likely

to sex select already on the second child than ﬁrst generation immigrants, sec-

ond generation immigrants were overall less likely to sex select, and within ﬁrst

generation immigrants, son preference appeared stronger among those arriving

as adults.

   However, our results suggest that assimilation is multidimensional. In fact,

assimilation to lower fertility levels may prompt higher sex ratios among im-

migrants, just as the once-child policy may have raised sex ratios in China.

Conceivably, this argument can be made more forcefully in the case of Asians

in Canada, since by virtue of being an aﬄuent minority in an aﬄuent part of

the world, their surplus sons will hardly want for brides.

   We also uncover an important exception — Asian immigrants professing to

be Christian or Muslim do not appear to use abortion to select sons. Christian

and Muslim families do, however, show a tendency to continue having children

in the absence of male oﬀspring, suggesting that the lack of sex selection is not

because these groups have gender neutral preferences. Interestingly, reluctance



                                        28
to use the sex choice channel to achieve sons corresponds with religious pro-

scriptions against infanticide in Christianity and Islam, and by extension sex

selection, since this was its main employ in Roman Antiquity and pre-Islamic

Arabia. While no main religion advocate infanticide, Christianity and Islam

stand out by their explicit condemnation. Our ﬁnding of course also square

with the observation that sex selection is not known to be practised in West

Asia, a region dominated by Islam, despite its otherwise male oriented culture.

   In the West, sex selection for non-health reasons remains controversial [Dick-

ens, 1986], and there has been little in the aggregate data to suggest that the sex

preferences for oﬀspring, expressed in, for instance, Gallup polls,26 impact sex

ratios. Instead, other margins, such as labor supply, marital status and family

size, appear to be aﬀected [Angrist and Evans, 1998, Lundberg and Rose, 2002,

2003, Dahl and Moretti, 2008]).27 Whether the taboo against sex selection us-

ing abortion will extend to protect girls once sex selection at pre-implantation

becomes available and aﬀordable remains an open question.




  26 http://www.gallup.com/poll/28045/Americans-Continue-Express-Slight-Preference-Boys.

aspx
  27 Male biased sex ratios are commonly believed to be more likely and, possibly, a more

problematic, outcome of parental choice. Primarily because of the destabilizing eﬀect of
surplus males, and the implications for population growth of an all male society. Although
the disadvantage befalling the least wanted sex when parents have the right to choose might
not be manifest in the sex ratio but in who has sons and who has daughters, Edlund [2000]
has argued.


                                         29
Appendix

                   Table 1: South-East Asian Countries
East Asia      South Asia
China, PRC     Bangladesh
Hong Kong      Bhutan
Japan          India
Korea, South   Maldives
Korea, North   Nepal
Macau          Pakistan
Mongolia       Sri Lanka
Taiwan
Brunei
Cambodia
Indonesia
Laos
Malaysia
Myanmar
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand
Vietnam




                                   30
References
Jason Abrevaya. Are there missing girls in the United States? Evidence from
  birth data. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(2):1–34, April
  2009.
Douglas Almond and Lena Edlund. Son biased sex ratios in the U.S. 2000
 census. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(15):5681–5682,
 April 15 2008.

Joshua D. Angrist and William Evans. Children and their parents labor sup-
  ply: Evidence from exogenous variation in family size. American Economic
  Review, June 1998.
Abdurrahman Aydemir and Arthur Sweetman. First and second generation
 immigrant educational attainment and labor market outcomes: A comparison
 of the United States and Canada. Research in Labor Economics, 27:215–270,
 2007.
Judith Banister. China’s changing population. Stanford University Press, 1987.

Deepankar Basu and Robert de Jong. Son targeting fertility behavior: Some con-
  sequences and determinants. Demography, 47(2):521–536, September 2010.
Francine D. Blau, Lawrence M. Kahn, Albert Yung-Hsu Liu, and Kerry L.
  Papps. The transmission of women’s fertility, human capital, and work ori-
  entation across immigrant generations. Cornell University, 2008.

Hoyt Bleakley and Aimee Chin. Age of arrival, English proﬁciency, and social
  assimilation among US immigrants. American Economic Journals: Applied
  Economics, 2(1):165–192, 2010.
A. Chahnazarian. Determinants of the sex ratio at birth: review of recent
  literature. Social Biology, 35:214–235, 1988.
Woojin Chung. The relation of son preference and religion to induced abortion:
 The case of South Korea. Journal of Biosocial Science, 39:707–719, 2007.
Woojin Chung and Monica Das Gupta. The decline of son preference in South
 Korea: The roles of development and public policy. Population and Develop-
 ment Review, 33(4):757–783, December 2007.

AJ Coale and J Banister. Five decades of missing females in China. Demography,
 31(3):459–479, 1994.

Gordon Dahl and Enrico Moretti. The demand for sons. Review of Economic
 Studies, 75(4):1085–1120, October 2008.

Monica Das Gupta. Selective discrimination against female children in rural
 Punjab, India. Population and Development Review, 13:77–100, March 1987.

Bernard M. Dickens. Prenatal diagnosis and female abortion: a case study
  in medical law and ethics. Journal of Medical Ethics, 12(3):143–144,150,
  September 1986.




                                     31
B.M. Dickens, G.I. Serour, R.J. Cook, and R.-Z. Qiu. Sex selection: Treat-
  ing diﬀerent cases diﬀerently. International Journal of Gynecology & Ob-
  stetrics, 90(2):171 – 177, 2005. ISSN 0020-7292. doi: DOI:10.1016/j.
  ijgo.2005.05.001. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
  B6T7M-4GFCR1W-2/2/d6dd8a0adce15c1722926f793d278f87.
Sylvie Dubuc and David Coleman. An increase in the sex ratio of births to India-
  born mothers in England and Wales: Evidence for sex-selective abortion.
  Population and Development Review, 33(2):383–400, June 2007.

Lena Edlund. The marriage squeeze interpretation of dowry inﬂation: A com-
  ment. Journal of Political Economy, 108(6):1327–1333, December 2000.

Z. Efrat, T. Perri, E. Ramati, D. Tugenreich, and I. Meizner. Fetal gender as-
  signment by ﬁrst-trimester ultrasound. Ultrasound Obstetrics and Gynecology,
  27:619–621, 2006.
Raquel Fernández and Alessandra Fogli. Culture: An empirical investigation
  of beliefs, work, and fertility. The American Economic Journal: Marcoeco-
  nomics, 1(1):146–177, 2009.

Aparna Lhila and Kosali I. Simon. Prenatal health investment decisions: Does
 the child?s sex matter? Demography, 45(4):885–905, September 2008.

Shuzhuo Li. Imbalanced sex ratio at birth and comprehensive intervention
  in China. Paper presented at the 4th Asia Paciﬁc Conference on Repro-
  ductive and Sexual Health and Rights, October 29-31 Hyderabad, India.
  http://www.unfpa.org/gender/docs/studies/china.pdf, 2007.
Shelly Lundberg and Elaina Rose. The eﬀects of sons and daughters on men’s
  labor supply and wages. Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(2):251–268,
  2002.

Shelly Lundberg and Elaina Rose. Child gender and the transition to marriage.
  Demography, 40(2):333–349, September 2003.

Barbara D. Miller. The Endangered Sex: Neglect of Female Children in Rural
  North India. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 1981.

Philip Oldenburg. Sex ratio, son preference and violence in India: A research
  note. Economic and Political Weekly, (December 5-12):2657–2662, 1992.

PRC. People’s Republic of China law on population and birth planning. Pop-
 ulation and Development Review, 28(3):579–585, 2002.

Thomas Scharping. Birth Control in China, 1949-2000: Population Policy and
 Demographic Development. Routledge, London and New York, 2003.

Rodney Stark. The Rise of Christianity: How the Obscure, Marginal Jesus
  Movement Became the Dominant Religious Force in the Western World in a
  Few Centuries. Harper Collins, 1997.
Allison T. Thiele and Brendan Leier. Towards an ethical policy for the preven-
  tion of fetal sex selection in Canada. Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
  Canada, 32(1):54–57, 2010.

H. Yuan Tien. Chinas Strategic Demographic Initiative. Praeger, 1991.


                                      32
Shripad Tuljapurkar, Nan Li, and Marcus W. Feldman. High sex ratios in
  China’s future. Science, 267:874876, February 1995.

Yi Zeng, Ping Tu, Baochang Gu, Yi Xu, Bohua Li, and Yongping Li. Causes
  and implications of the recent increase in the reported sex ratio at birth in
  China. Population and Development Review, 19(2):283–302, 1993.




                                      33
            Table 1: Descriptive Statistics, Variable Means (Fractions)
                                                          At Least One SE Asian Grandparent,
                                                                        Parents
                              4 GPs       1+ GP           Immigrated:          Christian/Muslim:
                              Canadaa SE Asiab 1st genc 2nd gend              Eithere Neitherf
                              (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)
  N                           354,720     64,350      48,920     15,425       13,545     14,805
  Boy ﬁrst                    0.513       0.517       0.517      0.518        0.517      0.516
  Had 2 children              0.611       0.562       0.569      0.539        0.566      0.586
  Boy 2nd, given              0.509       0.516       0.515      0.518        0.521      0.509
     had 2 children
  Had 3 children              0.141       0.115       0.115      0.114        0.130      0.120
  Boy 3rd, given              0.511       0.539       0.539      0.535        0.508      0.583
     had 3 children
  Mother HS dropout           0.324       0.333       0.379      0.182        0.205      0.448
  Mother HS grad              0.467       0.336       0.321      0.386        0.449      0.316
  Mother Post-Secondary 0.209             0.331       0.300      0.432        0.346      0.236
  Father HS dropout           0.364       0.323       0.359      0.203        0.195      0.418
  Father HS grad              0.464       0.325       0.309      0.377        0.439      0.312
  Father Post-Secondary       0.172       0.352       0.332      0.420        0.366      0.270
  Mother up to Age 24         0.311       0.176       0.184      0.150        0.148      0.214
  Mother ages 25 to 29        0.371       0.354       0.371      0.299        0.332      0.398
  Mother age 30+              0.318       0.470       0.445      0.551        0.520      0.388
  Father age up to 24         0.181       0.058       0.051      0.085        0.067      0.056
  Father age 25-29            0.340       0.240       0.243      0.228        0.227      0.285
  Father age 30+              0.479       0.702       0.706      0.687        0.706      0.659
  South Asia, all four GP 0.000           0.315       0.390      0.072        0.144      0.426
  China, Korea, Vietnam, 0.000            0.288       0.349      0.087        0.194      0.403
     (CKV), four GP
  East Asia, except CKV, 0.000            0.137       0.167      0.036        0.235      0.055
     all four GP
  Rest of the World/          1.000       0.260       0.094      0.805        0.427      0.116
    mixed GP PoB
  Vancouver/Abbottsford 0.028             0.220       0.216      0.234        0.175      0.267
  Toronto                     0.046       0.431       0.478      0.280        0.435      0.421
  Mother Other Religion       0.136       0.240       0.229      0.278        0.054      0.406
  Mother Hindu                0.000       0.099       0.122      0.019        0.007      0.182
  Mother Muslim               0.001       0.057       0.067      0.022        0.121      0.000
  Mother Sikh                 0.000       0.138       0.165      0.043        0.004      0.258
  Mother Christian            0.863       0.374       0.311      0.595        0.790      0.000
a
   - All four grandparents born in Canada.
b
   - One or more grandparents born in South East Asia.
c
   - Both parents ﬁrst generation immigrants, at least one grandparent born in
South East Asia.
d
   - At least one parent second generation immigrant, at least one grandparent
born in South East Asia.
e
   - At least one parent Christian or Muslim, at least one grandparent born in
South East Asia.
f
  - Neither parent Christian or Muslim, at least one grandparent born in South
East Asia.


                                      34
Table 2: Son preference by parity, South/East Asian immigrant generation, and
religion
            Second Child            Third Child
            Had       Boy           Had      Boy
            (1)       (2)           (3)      (4)
            First Generation South/East Asian Immigrants
 N          24835     27775         10165    5630

 All Girls   0.022     0.021      0.193      0.084
             (0.005)   (0.007)    (0.015)    (0.020)

 Mix         –         –         -0.040      0.016
                                 (0.012)     (0.019)
             Second Generation South/East    Asian Immigrants
 N           6780    8370        2765        1720

 All Girls   0.008     0.030      -0.053     0.046
             (0.011)   (0.012)    (0.029)    (0.037)

 Mix         –         –         -0.122      0.009
                                 (0.025)     (0.032)
             South/East Asian Christian or   Muslim 2001
             6640    7740        2660        1730

 All Girls   -0.003    0.020      0.050      -0.008
             (0.011)   (0.013)    (0.029)    (0.037)

 Mix         –         –          -0.062     0.009
                                  (0.024)    (0.033)

             South/East Asian Neither Christian nor Muslim 2001
 N           7275    8680        2895      1775

 All Girls   0.020     0.024      0.247      0.123
             (0.010)   (0.012)    (0.028)    (0.035)

 Mix         –         –          -0.016    -0.015
                                  (0.023) (0.035)
Also included: dummies for three education groups for mother and father, three
age groups for father and mother, three city/regions, and a 2006 dummy.




                                     35
Table 3: Son preference across South/East Asian immigrant generation and age
of arrival — families with two or more children
                             Had Third Child               Third Child Boy
                         (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)
 N                       12930    12930     12930     7350     7350      7350

 All Girls             0.146     -0.053    -0.053     0.072     0.043     0.043
                       (0.013)   (0.029)   (0.029)    (0.018)   (0.037)   (0.037)

 Mix                   -0.057    -0.126    -0.126     0.011     0.010     0.010
                       (0.011)   (0.025)   (0.025)    (0.017)   (0.033)   (0.033)

 MomDad1sta            -0.032    -0.132    -0.125     -0.007    -0.018    -0.014
                       (0.019)   (0.028)   (0.031)    (0.027)   (0.037)   (0.042)

 MomDad1st×Girls                 0.249     0.229                0.037     0.005
                                 (0.033)   (0.040)              (0.042)   (0.052)

 MomDad1st×Mix                   0.085     0.082                0.003     0.014
                                 (0.028)   (0.034)              (0.038)   (0.048)

 MomDad18+b                                -0.014                         -0.004
                                           (0.024)                        (0.036)

 MomDad18+×Girls                           0.027                          0.044
                                           (0.033)                        (0.043)

 MomDad18+×Mix                             0.005                         -0.016
                                           (0.027)                       (0.042)
a
  – Both parents ﬁrst generation immigrants.
b
  – Both parents arrived when 18 or older.
Also included: Three region dummies, South Asia (Pakistan, India and
Bangladesh), CKV (China, Korea, Vietnam), East Asia excluding CKV; three
immigration cohort dummies for mother and for father; dummies for three ed-
ucation groups for mother and father, three age groups for father and mother,
three city/regions, and a 2006 dummy.




                                     36
Table 4: Son preference and assimilation across religious groups — families with
two or more children
                       Just         Not              Just         Not
                       Christians Christians         Christians Christians
                       Muslims      Muslims          Muslims      Muslims
                       (1)          (2)              (3)          (4)
                                         Had Third Child
 N                     2660         2895             2660         2895

 All Girls             0.052        0.256           -0.042       -0.125
                       (0.029)      (0.028)         (0.052)      (0.085)

 Mix                   -0.064       -0.012          -0.142       -0.151
                       (0.024)      (0.023)         (0.043)      (0.073)

 MomDad1st             -0.040       -0.100          -0.131       -0.268
                       (0.035)      (0.045)         (0.050)      (0.072)

 MomDad1st×Girls       –            –               0.137        0.420
                                                    (0.063)      (0.090)

 MomDad1st×Mix         –            –              0.115         0.153
                                                   (0.051)       (0.077)
                                         Third Child Boy
 N                     1730         1775           1730          1775

 All Girls             -0.004       0.118           0.000        0.031
                       (0.037)      (0.035)         (0.064)      (0.102)

 Mix                   0.008        -0.018          0.075        0.021
                       (0.033)      (0.035)         (0.054)      (0.090)

 MomDad1st             -0.017       0.033           0.033        0.028
                       (0.048)      (0.063)         (0.065)      (0.088)

 MomDad1st×Girls       –            –               -0.012       0.094
                                                    (0.078)      (0.109)

 MomDad1st×Mix         –            –              -0.105        -0.044
                                                   (0.068)       (0.097)
Also included: The same control variables as Table 3.




                                        37
                                                                                                                  A: Country of Origin                                                            B: Grandparent Origin

                                                                                                          1.90




                                                                                   2.0
                                                                                                                                     1.39                                                                                                                   1.45




                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                                  1.19                                                                                                                 1.21
                                                                                          1.08                       1.08    1.09             1.09                              1.08                          1.13                        1.07     1.11
                                                                                                                                                      1.07             1.05              1.06         1.06
                                                                                                                                                              1.00




                                                                                   1.0
                                                                                          n=                                                                            n=
                                                                                                  5,495             26,280           760              2,755                   106,555                26,280            460                        13,565
                                                                                         18,400           920                6,805           10,720           330     354,720           14,770                4,145                      48,940            1,920

                                                                                                  India          China+, Korea, Vietnam         Philippines             Canada All 4                  S/E Asia 1 or 2                    S/E Asia 3 or 4




38
                                                                                                                 C: Parent Immigration                                                              D: Parent Religion
                                                                                                                                                                                                              95% C.I. extends to 2.37            95% C.I. extends to 2.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2.07




                                                                       Sex Ratio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.98




                                                                                   2.0
                                                                                                                                                              1.50




                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                                          1.32
                                                                                                                                     1.23
                                                                                                  1.14               1.08    1.09                     1.12                      1.13                          1.09                                 1.12
                                                                                          1.07                                                1.07                     1.07                           1.07                                1.08
                                                                                                                                                                                         1.01




                                                                                   1.0
                                                                                          n=                                                                            n=
                                                                                                  4,125             12,880           550              9,815                     3,805                14,805            640                        1,335
                                                                                         15,425           440                3,765           36,030           1,380   13,545             470                  4,270                      4,070              280




     Figure 1: Sex Ratio Among South/East Asian Immigrants to Canada
                                                                                         2nd Generation            1st Generation <18       1st Generation 18+        Christian/Muslim             Non−Christian/Muslim                           Sikh


                                                                                                                      1st child                       2nd child (girl)                           3rd child (girl,girl)
