                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        U.S. TRADE POLICY SINCE 1934:
           AN UNEVEN PATH TOWARD GREATER TRADE LIBERALIZATION

                                         Robert E. Baldwin

                                        Working Paper 15397
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15397


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2009




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Robert E. Baldwin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
U.S. Trade Policy Since 1934: An Uneven Path Toward Greater Trade Liberalization
Robert E. Baldwin
NBER Working Paper No. 15397
October 2009
JEL No. A22,A23,F02,F1,F13,F5,F53,F59

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper presents a comprehensive but relatively brief historical survey of U.S. trade-policy over
the last 75 years. It is aimed at individuals who are not already familiar with the concepts and terminology
used in discussions of trade policy and the domestic and international institutional framework within
which U.S. trade policies are formulated and implemented. Particular attention is devoted to exploring
the underlying economic and political conditions that have shaped U.S. trade policies over the period.


Robert E. Baldwin
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Department of Economics
7321 Social Science Building
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
rebaldwi@facstaff.wisc.edu
                                                                                               1

1. Introduction

         Since 1934 when the Congress transferred much of its tariff-setting powers to the

president, there has been a remarkable decline in the average level of U.S. tariffs on

dutiable imports. This average duty was 51.2 percent in 1931 just after the Smoot-

Hawley Tariff Act of 1930, 26.3 percent in 1946 just prior to the first GATT round of

multilateral trade negotiations, 12.2 percent in 1960 just before the Kennedy Round of

trade negotiations, and 4.8 percent in 2004 during the Doha Round of negotiations.1

What is not fully appreciated, however, is the extent to which this decline has been due

not to tariff-reducing negotiations among nations but simply to the tariff-reducing effects

of rising import prices in conjunction with specific or compound duties, namely, import

duties that are fixed in terms of their dollar amounts per unit of imports or that are a mix

of specific and ad valorem duties. For example, Irwin (1996) estimates that 70 percent

of the 99 percent decline in the average tariff rate on dutiable imports between 1932 and

1954 was due to a rise in import prices (tariff acts constant) and only 29 percent was

attributable to tariff acts alone (import price constant). The tariff reduction over the

entire period that is not attributable to changes in import prices is still very impressive,

however. Moreover, there has been a significant decline in protection from nontariff

measures such as quantitative import restrictions.

         This chapter describes various U.S. legislative and executive branch actions over

the last 75 years that have produced the reduction in protectionism and explores the

underlying economic and political conditions that have influenced these events.

2. Trade Liberalization under the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Program, 1934-


1
    Irwin, 2007, Table 2.
                                                                                             2

     1962

     2.1. The Early Years, 1934-1945

         With Cordell Hull, the Secretary of State in the Roosevelt Administration, taking

the leadership role in advocating tariff reductions and the Democrats gaining control of

the House and Senate, the Congress passed the Trade Agreements Act of 1934. This

legislation gave the president the power to reduce tariffs by 50 percent over a three year

period through reciprocal negotiations with other countries. A major argument used in

seeking passage of this measure was that it would provide an outlet for the disposition of

American surplus products, especially agricultural products. The votes in favor of the

measure were 274 to 111 in the House and 57 to 33 in the Senate. Sixteen trade

agreements with seventeen countries (Belgium and Luxembourg representing one

agreement) were concluded between 1934 and 1937.

         The Trade Agreements Program was extended in 1937, 1940 and again in 1943

without any new tariff-reducing authority. The arguments favoring extension gradually

shifted from being based mainly on domestic policy objectives to being based on foreign

policy goals. In 1937 Secretary Hull argued that not only was the program needed to

alleviate depression conditions but to contribute to world peace in a period of increasing

tensions in international relations. By 1940 President Roosevelt argued in his State of the

Union message that the Trade Agreements Act was “an indispensable part of the

foundations for any stable and durable world peace.”2 In 1943 Administration officials

linked the extension of the program to both wartime and postwar planning. However,

concern on the part of Republicans that the Congress have the opportunity of terminate



2
    Quoted from Wilkinson, p. 16.
                                                                                              3

the program at the end of the War resulted in its renewal for two rather than the usual

three years.

         In March of 1945 President Roosevelt delivered a message to Congress urging

that the Trade Agreements Program be extended for another three years and that further

tariff-cutting authority be included in the legislation. He argued that the continuation of

the program was needed “if the economic foundations of the peace are to be as secure as

the political foundations,” 3 He also pointed out that much of the tariff-cutting authority

granted in the 1934 act had been used up and another 50 percent was needed to carry out

the program effectively. The renewal bill passed in the House by a vote of 258 to 153

and in the Senate by 53 to 21.

     2.2. The Ill-fated International Trade Organization

         In July 1944 delegates from 44 of the Allied Nations met at Bretton Woods, New

Hampshire and established the International Monetary Fund to maintain a stable

international monetary system and the International Bank for Reconstruction and

Development to promote economic growth in both the war-torn developed countries and

developing countries. It was always envisioned that these institutions would be

supplemented by an international trade organization aimed at promoting a more open

trading system, but this objective proved more difficult to achieve. In 1945 the United

States invited its World War II allies to enter into negotiations to establish such an

organization and by 1948 the Havana Charter for an international trade organization was

completed. However, it was never implemented, mainly because of the opposition of the

American business community. This group alleged that the elaborate and detailed rules


3
    Quoted from Woolley and Peters.
                                                                                             4

on such matters as commercial policy, restrictive business practices, international

commodity agreements, international investment, and dispute settlement procedures

contained so many exceptions that most countries could comply with the Charter’s rules

without actually freeing trade from existing restrictions.4

     2.3. The 1947 Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations in Geneva

         U.S. trade negotiators did not wait for an approval or disapproval decision by

Congress on the International Trade Organization before launching new tariff-reducing

negotiations. Instead, using their new tariff-reducing powers under the 1945 extension of

the reciprocal Trade Agreements Program, they invited the world’s major trading nations

to participate in a multilateral round of tariff reductions held in Geneva, Switzerland in

1947. During these negotiations the United States agreed to a 21.1 percent cut in its

average tariff level.5

         The tariff-reducing procedure followed in the 1947 negotiations as well as in the

four rounds that took place between 1949 and 1962, began with an exchange of offer and

request lists. Offers of a tariff concession on a particular product were made to the

trading partner that was the principal or important supplier of the product to the country.

The request list covered those items for which the country sought tariff reductions from a

trading partner where the partner was the principal supplier of the item to the country.

The bilateral negotiations that followed the exchange of offer and request lists aimed at

utilizing each country’s tariff-cutting authority to the maximum extent, subject to the




4
    See Diebold, 1952, for a detailed analysis of why the ITO failed.
5
    Lavergue, 1981.
                                                                                           5

limits imposed by their respective national governments and the constraint that each

country regards the set of final concessions as being balanced.

     2.4. The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)

         A unique feature of the results of the Geneva 1947 Round was that it consisted

not only of schedules of tariff reductions but a set of international rules covering

government behavior in international trade, namely, the General Agreement on Tariffs

and Trade. The rules are essentially those set forth in the commercial policy section of

the Havana Charter. The two key ones are the most-favored-nation and national treatment

rules. The most-favored-nation principle specifies that the lowest tariff rate imposed by a

GATT member on imports of a product from another member must be the rate that this

latter country charges on similar imports from any other GATT member.6 An important

exception to this principle is made, however, with respect to free trade areas and customs

unions. National treatment means that a country’s internal taxes, rules, and regulations

shall not be applied in a manner that affords protection to domestic producers. The initial

membership of the GATT was 23 countries with the Secretariat based in Geneva.

         Two other GATT rules that have played important roles in U.S. trade history

relate to antidumping and countervailing duties. Dumping occurs when foreign exporters

either charge less on the products they sell abroad than they do at home or sell their

products abroad for less than their cost of production. If these actions7 cause or threaten

to cause material injury to an established domestic industry, the importing country can

levy an antidumping duty equal to the margin of dumping. Countervailing duties are



6
    The United State adopted the most-favored-nation principle in 1923.
7
    Anti-dumping legislation was first introduced into U.S. law in 1916.
                                                                                           6

permitted to offset subsidies by foreign countries on the production or export of their

goods.8 Other notable provisions of the GATT are the general elimination of quantitative

restrictions and the escape or safeguard clause which permits temporary increases in

protection on any product being imported in such increased quantities as to cause or

threaten to cause serious injury to domestic producers.

     2.5. Shifts in the Views of Republicans and Democrats toward Trade Liberalization

         When the Republicans took control of both Houses of Congress in the election of

1946, long time Republican opponents of the Trade Agreements Program hoped to bring

an end to the program. However, in the early post-World War II period there were

important changes in the views of both Republicans and Democrats toward trade policy.

The Republican business community realized that the postwar economic dominance of

the United States in most international markets meant it was in their interest to support a

policy of trade liberalization. Moreover, a greater number of Republicans supported the

view that trade liberalization played an important role in promoting world peace. Thus,

the Truman Administration was able to deflect efforts to prevent trade liberalizing

negotiations in Geneva by issuing an Executive Order in 1947 that required the insertion

of an escape clause in all trade agreements permitting the United States to modify trade

concessions that caused or threatened to cause serious injury to domestic producers.

Whether serious injury of the threat thereof exists is determined by the U.S. International

Trade Commission (called the U.S. Tariff Commission until its name was changed in

1974), a six persons government agency whose members are nominated by the president




8
    U.S. countervailing law can be traced back to the Tariff Act of 1897.
                                                                                           7

and approved the Senate. The president need not implement an affirmative decision of

the Commission if he or she believes this would not be in the national interest.

       The Truman Administration was also able to prevent the Trade Agreements

Program from expiring in 1948 by agreeing to a one-year extension that included a so-

called “peril point” provision. Under this provision the U.S. International Trade

Commission held hearings aimed at determining the extent to which tariff rates proposed

for possible reduction in trade negotiations could be lowered without threatening injury to

domestic producers. The House version of the bill also included a provision stipulating

that Congress would have the right to adopt a concurrent resolution of disapproval of any

trade agreement with duty concessions outside the limits set by the Commission.

However, this provision was dropped from the final version of the bill.

       In 1949 the Democrats again obtained majorities in both the House and Senate

and promptly passed the Trade Agreements Extension Act of 1949 which repealed the

Act of 1948 with its peril point provision and extended the program for three years from

its 1948 expiration date. In 1949 the Administration used this authority to undertake a

second round of tariff-reducing multilateral negotiations within the GATT framework.

The extent of liberalization was modest. The average level of U.S. duties declined by

only 1.9 percentage points. A third round of multilateral negotiations followed shortly

thereafter. These negotiations, which were held in Torquay, England, beginning in

September, 1950, also produced only a modest reduction in duties. Average U.S. duties

declined only 3.0 percentage points.

       By 1951 the views of Democrats on both the peril point and escape clauses had

changed significantly. Enough Democrats supported these protectionist provisions that
                                                                                           8

they were included in the bill that passed and extended the program for another two

years. The fact that most of the Democrats voting in favor of these provisions came from

the South or from Border States indicates that increased international competition in

labor-intensive products such as textiles and apparel was a factor in this policy shift.

U.S. trade negotiators had also learned that the existence of these provisions did not have

dire consequences that many had feared.

   2.6. The Eisenhower Years

       With the election in 1952 of a Republican president and Republican majorities in

both the House and Senate, one might have expected a rapid and extensive shift in U.S.

trade policy toward protectionism. Such was not the case, however. President

Eisenhower proposed a one-year extension of the Trade Agreements Act pending a

thorough review of U.S. foreign economic policy by a commission composed of

members of both houses of Congress and private citizens. This action seemed to

undercut the attempt by some Republicans to pass a highly protectionist bill and the

program was extended for another year with only modest new protectionist features.

       A majority of the members of the Randall commission established under the 1953

Extension Act favored a lowering of existing trade barriers through multilateral trade

negotiations. However, the key congressional members of the commission supported

tariff changes that would equalize the price differences in goods produced in the United

States and in other countries. Consequently, a deadlock quickly developed in Congress

when in 1954 the President Eisenhower requested a three-year extension of the

Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act with new tariff-reducing authority. It was resolved by

again passing a one-year extension without any new tariff-reducing authority.
                                                                                           9

        As in 1949, a shift in 1954 in the control of Congress from Republicans to

Democrats was critical for achieving further trade liberalization. In 1955 President

Eisenhower was able to obtain a three year extension with an additional 15 percent duty-

cutting authority. However, the need to satisfy the increasing proportion of Democrats in

both the House and Senate who supported protectionist policies meant that the final bill

contained provisions making it easier to gain import protection under the escape clause

provision and permitting the imposition of import quotas in industries where imports

were threatening an industry deemed essential to national security. Import quotas on oil

were introduced in 1959 under this provision. The Eisenhower Administration also

pressured the Japanese into accepting voluntary restraints on their exports of cotton

textiles.

        In 1955 the United States obtained a GATT waiver covering agricultural products

that effectively removed all trade in these goods from GATT discipline. Article XI:2 of

the original document already permitted countries to introduce import restrictions on

agricultural and fishery products necessary for the enforcement of governmental

measures that operate to restrict the production or marketing of the like domestic product.

The 1955 waiver allows the U.S. to apply import restrictions without regard to whether

measures are in place restricting the production or marketing of such products. Other

countries followed the U.S. in utilizing this waiver.

        President Eisenhower was again successful in 1958 in extending the Trade

Agreements Program, this time for 4 years with an additional 20 percent tariff-reducing

authority. The main concession to protectionist groups was a provision permitting
                                                                                       10

Congress to override presidential decisions on Tariff Commission escape clause decisions

by a two-thirds majority vote in both the House and Senate.

       The Eisenhower Administration used the tariff-reducing authority it obtained in

the 1955 and 1958 extensions of the reciprocal Trade Agreements program to enter into

the fourth (1955-56) and fifth (1961-62) GATT rounds of multilateral trade negotiations.

Both took place in Geneva and like the second and third negotiating round produced only

modest average duty reduction. The average level of U.S. duties declined by only 3.5

percentage points in the fourth round of negotiations and by 2.4 percentage points in the

fifth round.

3. 1962-94, Significant Multilateral Reductions in Tariffs and Nontariff Trade

  Barriers but with Selective Protectionism

    3.1. The Trade Expansion Act of 1962 and the Kennedy Round of Trade

         Negotiations, 1963-67

       The Trade Expansion Act of 1962 and subsequent Kennedy Round of trade

negotiations begins a new period of stand-alone trade-liberalizing multilateral

negotiations that continues to the present time. Under the Trade Expansion Act the

President was given the power to enter into Trade Agreements with other countries

before July 1, 1967 that reduced U.S. duties by up to 50 percent of their 1962 levels. In

addition, tariff levels of 5 percent or less could be cut by up to 100 percent.

       The Kennedy Administration pressed the Congress for this significant new tariff-

cutting authority for both economic and foreign policy reasons. Economic relations with
                                                                                         11
                                           9
the European Economic Community (EC)           , which was formed in 1957, played an

important role in the decision to seek this extensive tariff-cutting authority. Leaders in

both U.S. political parties favored the formation of the EC because it would greatly

reduce the possibility of future military conflicts among its members. Trade officials

recognized, however, that the elimination of duties among its members meant that some

U.S. exports to EC members would be displaced by similar products produced by other

EC members since these products would no longer be subject to import duties.

Negotiating a general decrease in levels of protection would, they argued, reduce the

margin of preference for these members. The benefits of tariff-liberalizing negotiations

in strengthening political ties within the Atlantic Community and in preventing

Communist economic penetration were also stressed.

         Some concessions to protectionist interests were made to help gain the new

negotiating authority, however. In 1962, for example, the United States became a

signatory to the Long-Term Agreement regarding Trade in Cotton Textiles that

established import quotas for this product. President Kennedy also approved affirmative

safeguard decisions by the International Trade Commission on glass and carpets. The

1962 Act eliminated the peril point clause but the Tariff Commission was charged with

advising the President as to the probable economics effects of tariff reductions. In

addition to including a safeguard clause, the Act for the first time also included

adjustment assistance to domestic firms and workers injured by increased imports.

Qualifying firms could receive technical and financial assistance, while workers who

qualified could receive extended unemployment payments, retraining allowances and


9
    The six members were Belgium, France, Germany, Holland, Italy and Luxembourg.,
                                                                                            12

relocation allowances. Shifting the administration of trade negotiation away from the

State Department to a Special Trade Representative located in the Executive Offices of

the President was also regarded as a concession to protectionist interests.

         The Act easily passed in both the House and Senate. The House vote was 299 in

favor of passage and 128 against, while the Senate vote was 78 yeas and 8 nays.

         At the outset of the Kennedy Round negotiations in 1962 there was general

agreement among the major participants that that the item by item approach of earlier

negotiating rounds be replaced by a formula approach to cutting tariffs. As the number of

countries participating in GATT-sponsored trade negotiations increased,10 item by item

negotiations had become increasingly cumbersome and time-consuming. The fact that the

volume of imports for which one country served as the principal supplier to another

country need not match the volume of trade for which the latter country was the principal

supplier to the first country coupled with countries’ objective of achieving an overall

balance of concessions from other countries also limited the extent of the overall tariff

reduction possible. The United States proposed that all tariffs by reduced by 50 percent

with a bare minimum of exceptions. The developing countries were not expected to

provide reciprocity, however. The EC proposed a formula that would reduce high tariff

rates by a greater percentage than low rates. In particular, the EC proposed that duties on

manufactured goods be reduced by 50 percent of the difference between their existing

levels and 10 percent. Duties on semi-manufactures and raw materials were to be cut by

50 percent of the difference between the existing rate and 5 percent and zero,

respectively. Agricultural products were not covered by this proposal. The United States



10
     Sixty-six countries took part in the Kennedy Round negotiations.
                                                                                          13

strongly opposed the EC tariff-cutting rule on the grounds that it would only yield an

average reduction for the main trading nations of about 15 percent and also require a

substantially greater average cut for the United States than the EC.

       After intense negotiations the EC finally accepted the U.S. position that the cuts

be linear and uniform but with the proviso that special rules apply where there are

significant disparities in tariff levels. However, such special rules were never agreed on

by the major trading nations and the EC ended up by simply excluding from linear cuts a

number of items where it believed significant disparities in tariff rates existed.

Fortunately, the number was not sufficiently large to unravel the entire tariff-cutting

exercise. The average reduction in dutiable imports of nonagricultural products for the

U.S., EC, United Kingdom, and Japan was in the range of 36 to 39 percent

       Trade negotiations covering agricultural products proved even more difficult in

the Kennedy Round than those relating to manufactured goods. The main concern of the

United States was that the implementation of a common agricultural policy by the EC

would result in a significant reduction of U.S agricultural exports to Europe. The initial

offers of the EC confirmed this conclusion and a stalemate on agricultural negotiations

ensued that lasted until the end of the Kennedy Round. Bilateral negotiations between

the U.S. and EC finally broke the deadlock with each side backing off their initial

positions. The average tariff reduction on dutiable agricultural imports of the major

industrial countries was 20 percent or considerably less than in nonagricultural sectors.

   3.2. Tariff Preferences for Developing Countries

       A key proposal of the first United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

held in 1964 during the Kennedy Round was that the developed countries should grant
                                                                                             14

preferential tariff treatment to imports of manufactured and semis-manufactured goods

originating in developing countries. The United States was somewhat reluctant to accept

such a recommendation due to its longstanding opposition to discriminatory trading

arrangements but soon followed other industrial countries in providing zero-duty

treatment on imports of most manufactured goods from developing countries. Authority

for doing so has since been regularly included in U.S. trade legislation. Initially it was

necessary to obtain a GATT waiver to grant such preferences but during the Tokyo

Round the so-called “enabling clause” was included in the GATT permitting members to

grant such preferences routinely.

     3.3. Particular Protectionism of the 1970 and 1980s

         Beginning in the late 1960s there was a rapid rise in import penetration ratios in

many U.S. manufacturing sectors.11 The result was a wave of protectionism that

restricted imports from various countries on steel, textiles and apparel, footwear, color

television sets, and automobiles at various times during the 1970s and 1980s. In 1970 a

bill sponsored by Wilbur Mills, the Chairman of the Ways and Means Committee that

would have imposed import quotas on a wide range of manufactured goods passed in the

House. The protectionism of this period was driven in part by a shift in the policy

position of organized labor from supporting trade liberalization to advocating import

restrictions.

     3.4. The Trade Act of 1974 and the Tokyo Round of Trade Negotiations, 1973-79

         A widely held view among business and labor groups in the early 1970s was that

the increased competitiveness of foreign producers was due in no small measure to the


11
     See U.S.Congress, Committee on Ways and Means, 1973.
                                                                                           15

use of unfair nontariff trade measures on their part. It was this view that helped the

Nixon Administration secure passage of the Trade Act of 1974 which directs the

President to undertake multilateral negotiations aimed at harmonizing, reducing or

eliminating nontariff barriers to international trade as well as at reducing tariffs by up to

60 percent. However, the 1974 Act for the first time requires that any agreement reached

with other countries must be approved by a majority vote in both the House and Senate.

Under this so-called “fast-track” procedure or, as it is now called, trade promotion

authority, no amendments to the agreement submitted by the President are permitted by

the Congress. Without this provision other countries are reluctant to agree on a

negotiating package for fear that the Congress will subsequently withdraw some of the

U.S. trade concessions involved in the agreement.

       Another important provision of the 1974 Trade Act, namely, Section 301, permits

the President to take retaliatory actions against a foreign country that “maintains

unjustifiable, or unreasonable” tariffs or import restrictions, engages in “discriminatory or

other acts which are unjustifiable or unreasonable,” or provides “subsidies . . . which

have the effect of substantially reducing the sales of the competitive United States

product.”

       The Trade Act of 1974 passed in the House by a vote of 272 to 140 and in the

Senate by a vote of 72 to 4.

       In the Tokyo Round of trade negotiations that followed passage of the 1974 Trade

Act, the United States negotiated a series of detailed codes covering nontariff measures

that set forth permissible and non-permissible GATT-consistent behavior. The main

subjects covered were subsidies and countervailing duties, antidumping practices,
                                                                                              16

government procurement policies, valuation and licensing practices, and technical

barriers to trade (standards). Signing the codes was made voluntary on the part of the

participants in the negotiations.

         The tariff-cutting formula for industrial products accepted by all participants in

the Tokyo Round negotiations was proposed by the Swiss, namely,

         (1) Z = AX/ (A + X),

where Z is the new tariff rate, A is a constant and X is the current tariff rate. The

constant was set at 14 for the U.S. and 16 for the EC. Thus, a U.S. duty of 20 percent

was reduced to 14x20/ (14 + 20) = 8.23 percent. The United States was somewhat

constrained by this formula in that it could not cut duties more than 60 percent, but it was

able to raise its average rate of reduction to the levels achieved by other industrial

countries by utilizing its statutory power to reduce duties 5 percent and below by up to

100 percent. Taking into account the various exceptions to applying the Swiss formula,

the average reduction in tariffs on industrial product in the Tokyo Round was about 35

percent for both the U.S. and EC.12

         As in the Kennedy Round, reaching an agreement with the EC covering

agricultural products proved to be the most difficult part of the negotiations. An impasse

between the U.S. and the EC over agriculture was not broken until mid-1977 when the

two trading powers agreed to separate agricultural negotiations from other matters and to

engage in bilateral negotiations. The main concession by the United States was to

increase the import quota on cheese, while the main concession by the EC was to increase

the import quota for high quality beef.

12
     Winham, 267. The EC consisted of nine countries by the end of the Tokyo Round with
     Denmark, Ireland, and the United Kingdom becoming members in 1972.
                                                                                           17

         The various codes as well as the tariff concessions were implemented by the U.S.

in the Trade Act of 1979. This Act also extended “fast-track’ authority for another eight

years.

     3.5. The Uruguay Round of Trade Negotiations, 1986-93

         The most successful post-World War II multilateral trade negotiation as measured

by the depth and scope of liberalization was the Uruguay Round (1986-93).13 Three new

subjects not covered in previous negotiating rounds were introduced; namely, trade in

services, trade-related intellectual property rights, and trade-related aspects of investment

measures. In addition, a special effort was made that brought agriculture and

textiles/apparel under GATT discipline. The negotiations also covered such traditional

topics as tariff liberalization, subsidies, dumping, government procurement policy,

technical barriers to trade, dispute settlement and institutional reform.14

         An important feature of the framework agreement negotiated for services is that it

covers not only cross-border trade in services but services supplied by foreign firms

within a country to consumers in that country and services supplied by domestic firms to

nationals of other countries who are visiting the country. The General Agreement on

Trade in Services (GATS) commits WTO signatories to a set of general principles that

includes most-favored-nation treatment, transparency with regard to domestic laws

affecting trade in services, and the progressive liberalization of traded services.

         In fashioning policies covering intellectual property, namely, creations of the

mind such as inventions, literary and artistic works, and symbols, names, images, and

designs used in commerce, society must balance two output-creating forces. One is the

13
     See Preeg, 1995, for a comprehensive analysis of the Uruguay Round.
14
     See Baldwin, 1995, for an economic evaluation of the Uruguay Round Agreements.
                                                                                         18

output gains that that come about from distributing an existing body of knowledge as

widely as possible. The other is the output gains that arise because inventors and other

creators of intellectual property are granted temporary monopolies that prevent others

from copying their intellectual creations before they have had a chance to reap the

monetary gains that make their creative efforts worthwhile. The Uruguay Round

agreement on the trade-related aspects of intellectual property attempted to overcome

some of the drawbacks of the existing system. For example, all countries are now

required to provide copyright, trademark, and patent protection on goods and services for

a specified number of years. However, developing countries and the least developed

countries were given extra time to implement this requirement. In addition, countries are

required to establish civil judicial procedures whereby individuals and firms can seek to

enforce their intellectual property rights. Criminal procedures must also be put in place

to deal with willful trademark counterfeiting or copyright piracy on a commercial scale.

In a notable ruling in 2009, a WTO dispute-settlement panel ruled that China violated

WTO rules by barring copyright protection for movies, music, and books that have not

been approved for publication or distribution in China.

       GATT dispute settlement procedures were notoriously weak prior to the Uruguay

Round. For example, the losing party in the report of a GATT disputes-settlement panel

could block the adoption of the panel’s report. However, as a result of the Uruguay

Round negotiations, formation of panels and adoption of their reports are now all

automatic.

       One of the biggest disappointments with the codes approach utilized in the Tokyo

Round was the failure of many countries to sign some of the key agreements. In an effort
                                                                                            19

to curtail the resultant free-riding and to bring together existing and new trading rules, the

Final Act of the Uruguay Round establishes a new international organization, the World

Trade Organization (WTO), encompassing the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade,

the results of past liberalization efforts, and all the results of the Uruguay Round.

Members are required to accept all its provisions, with the exception of the so-called

Plurilateral Trade Agreements consisting of the agreement on government procurement,

the agreement on civil aviation, the international dairy arrangement and the arrangement

regarding bovine meat.

         As in previous negotiating rounds, differences between the U.S. and EC15 made

reaching agreement covering agricultural products especially difficult. However,

bilateral negotiations held in Washington in the waning days of the Bush Administration

formed the basis of the final agreement in agriculture. In restoring GATT discipline to

this sector, nontariff barriers such as quotas, variable levies, and voluntary export

restraints were converted to tariffs and these tariffs then reduced. Internal support

measures and export subsidies were also reduced.

         The negotiations on tariff reductions in the industrial sector went surprisingly

smoothly. A request-offer format between principal supplying countries for individual

products was followed with the objective of achieving a one-third reduction target. In

addition, there were zero for zero duty reductions in some sectors by the major developed

countries (Canada, the EU, Japan, and the U.S.). The end result was that industrial tariffs

were reduced by more than one-third.

     3.6. Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988

15
     The European Community consisted of 12 countries at the outset of the Uruguay
     Round with Greece joining in 1981 and Spain and Portugal joining in 1986.
                                                                                            20

          This act not only set forth the principal negotiating objectives of the United States

with respect to such traditional subjects as unfair trade practices, safeguards, agriculture,

and developing countries but new negotiating topics such as trade in services, intellectual

property rights, worker rights, foreign direct investment and dispute settlement. In doing

so, it granted the President an additional 50 percent duty-reduction authority and

extended fast-track authority another five years. This authority expired in 1994 after

Congress had extended it for one year in order to approve the Uruguay Round

agreements. An effort in 1998 to pass fast-track authority was defeated in the House by a

vote of 180 to 243 with only 29 Democrats voting in the affirmative.

          The 1988 Trade and Competitiveness Act also increased the authority of the U.S.

Trade Representative to take action under Section 301 against unfair trade practices of

foreign countries in addition to spelling out in more detail the nature of these practices.

4. The Post-Uruguay Round Period: Waning Support for Multilateral Trade

     Liberalization

     4.1. The Trade Act of 2002

          In addition to renewing and expanding the trade adjustment program this

legislation again provided the president with trade promotion authority. The vote in the

House was 215 in favor of passage and 212 against. Twenty-five Democrats voted in the

affirmative and 183 voted in the negative.16 House Republicans favored passage by 190

to 27. In the Senate the bill passed 64 to 24 with 20 Democrats voting in the affirmative

and 29 in the negative. Senate Republicans favored passage by 42 to 5.




16
     Two Independents also voted against passage of the bill.
                                                                                        21

       This new fast-track authority expired in June 2007. However, during this second

period of fast-track authority Congress enacted implementing legislation for the United

States-Chile Free Trade Agreement, the United States-Singapore Free Trade Agreement,

the United States-Australian Free Trade Agreement, the United States-Morocco Free

Trade Agreement, the Doinican Republic-Central America-United States Free Trade

Agreement, the United States-Bahrain Free Trade Agreement, the United States-Oman

Free Trade Agreement and the United States-Peru Free Trade Agreement. The United

States has signed free trade agreementss with Columbia, South Korea, and Panama but

Congress has yet to implement these agreements.

       The United States had long opposed regional trade agreements both on the

grounds that the resulting discrimination among countries had an unfavorable effect on

international political stability and because of the uncertain economic welfare effects of

such agreements. However, this policy changed during the Uruguay Round when the

decision was made to pursue U.S. trade policy objective not only through multilateral

negotiations and unilateral Section 301-type policies but also through regional and

bilateral trade agreements.

   4.2. The Doha Round

       The ninth round of multilateral trade negotiations under GATT/WTO sponsorship

was scheduled to begin in 1999 in Seattle and be known as the Millennium Round.

However, objections by the developing countries over how the agricultural negotiations

were being handled as well as over the efforts of the developed countries to include such

issues as competition and investment policies as part of the negotiations led to a
                                                                                         22

breakdown of the Ministerial Meeting and a postponement of the effort to start a new

round. It was not until 2001 that a new round was successfully launched in Doha, Qatar.

         An important concession made by the European Union (EU)17 that facilitated the

start of these negotiations was a pledge to discontinue all export subsidies by 2013. The

so-called Singapore issues (trade-related investment, competition policy, government

procurement policy, and trade facilitation or procedures and controls governing the

movement of goods across national borders) were included in the work program outlined

in the Ministerial Declaration but negotiations on these topics was scheduled to begin

only after “explicit consensus” by the participants. Discussion of these four issues first

arose in the WTO at the 1996 Ministerial Meeting in Singapore in 1996. Most

developed countries favored negotiations that would introduce antitrust policies into

WTO rules, limit government controls on foreign direct investment, open up government

purchasing to greater competition from private firms, and simplify customs procedures.

Developing countries, on the other hand, generally wanted to retain government controls

over these matters as a means of implementing the type of economic development they

desired.

         Among the long list of other topics included in the Doha Round work program

were agriculture, services, market access for non-agricultural goods, intellectual property

rights, antidumping and subsidy rules, regional trading rules, implementation-related

issues, trade and the environment, and dispute settlement. Each topic included a




17
     The European Union was formed in 1993 out of the institutions of
     the European Economic Community. Its founding members were Belgium,
     Germany, Italy, France, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands. As of 2009, its size had
      increased to 27 members..
                                                                                          23

statement that developing countries would receive special and differential treatment in

the negotiations on the subject.

          Progress in agreeing on the framework for negotiating on the issues covered by

the Doha Ministerial statement proved difficult right from the outset.18 For example, at

the Cancun Ministerial Meeting in 2003, which was called mainly to check on the

progress made to date, it became apparent that the views of developed and developing

countries were far apart on most issues. In particular, they could not agree on whether to

include negotiations on competition policy, trade-related investment issues, government

procurement policy, and trade facilitation. As a result, the meeting ended without a

declaration setting forth a future agenda. It was not until July 2004 that WTO members

agreed on a new work program for the Doha Round. Of the Singapore issues, only trade

facilitation was included as an agenda item.

     4.3. The July 2008 Collapse of the Doha Round Negotiations

          By July of 2008 sufficient progress appeared to have been made in both the

agricultural and non-agricultural negotiations to warrant another Ministerial Meeting that

would resolve the remaining issues in these negotiations. Unfortunately, this meeting

resulted in yet another failure. The key issue was a disagreement between the United

States and India over the extent to which developing countries would be allowed to raise

agricultural duties in response to import surges. India wished to have the unencumbered

right to raise duties to the level it deemed necessary to protect the livelihood conditions

of its farmers. The United States was concerned that this freedom of action would lead to

tariffs being raised to levels above those agreed on in the Uruguay Round negotiations



18
     See Baldwin, 2004, for an analysis of key issues facing negotiators in the Doha Round.
                                                                                            24

and thus would represent a step backward from the hard-won liberalization gains of that

Round in agriculture.19

           In an effort to break the resulting deadlock that arose at the July 2008 Ministerial

over this issue, WTO Director-General, Pascal Lamy, proposed as a compromise that pre-

Doha tariff rates could be exceeded only if the increase in imports in the current year was

at least 40 percent greater than the average for the preceding three years. Susan Schwab,

the U.S. Trade Representative, accepted this figure as a compromise point, but Kamal

Nath, the Indian Commerce and Industry Minister summarily rejected it with the remark:

“I reject everything. I cannot put the livelihoods of hundreds of millions of people at

risk.”20

           The prospects for a successful conclusion of the Doha Round are uncertain, but

world political leaders are urging the resumption of negotiations. For example, at their

meeting in July, 2009 the G-8 industrial countries together with the major developing

countries included in their final declaration that they “ . . are committed to an ambitious

and balanced conclusion of the Doha Development Round in 2010.” They also directed

their respective trade ministers to explore all possible avenues for direct engagement in

the WTO and to meet prior to the G-20 Summit in Pittsburgh in September, 2009.

           There has clearly been a shift in negotiating power within the WTO away from

the developed countries and toward the developing countries as the latter countries’ share

of world exports has increased. This share rose from 17 percent in 1990 to 27 percent in



19
   See Baldwin, 2009, for a more detailed analysis of the cause of the 2008 collapse in the
negotiations.
20
   See Blustein, 2008, 9. This is an especially valuable account of the December 2008
breakdown because Blustein interviewed key participants in the negotiations and had
access to their notes on the meetings.
                                                                                           25

1999 and then to 38 percent by 2008.21 The rapid growth in trade and gross domestic

product levels of India and China coupled with the accession of China to the WTO in

November, 2001 has been crucial in this power shift. These countries as well as most

other developing countries do not have a long tradition for the type of trade liberalizing

policies that the developed countries have implemented within the WTO/GATT

framework. They are wary of both the domestic economic adjustments these policies

involve and the nature of the economic development they encourage. Consequently, the

developing countries are using their increased influence in WTO trade negotiations not

only to block market-opening negotiations on such matters as government procurement

policy, foreign direct investment, and competition policy but to slow down the pace of

traditional liberalization for agricultural goods and in the services sector. This shift in the

power structure involved in trade negotiations coupled with the increased resistance to

trade liberalization within the developed countries in recent years means that the

prospects for significant trade liberalization in future years are not very favorable.

5. Some Conclusions about the Varying Forces Shaping U.S. Trade Policy

       5.1 The President and the Congress

         Since the Trade Agreements Act of 1934, there have been two main direct

decision-making centers with respect of U.S. trade policy, namely, the president or

Executive Branch and the U.S. Congress. These decision-making units have, in turn,

been influenced by the policy positions and relative political power of the Democrat and

Republican parties and individuals within these parties, the policy stances and relative

political power of various other non-governmental organizations such as labor unions,



21
     Based on trade data collected by the WTO.
                                                                                           26

business organizations, professional organizations and individuals within these groups,

the policies of other governments, and perceptions about the views of the general public.

          In making trade-policy decisions, the president and Congress are motivated by

both U.S. domestic and foreign policy goals. Their decisions include such diverse actions

as providing domestic producers with expanded export opportunities by reducing foreign

trade barriers to preventing income declines for particular domestic groups by raising

levels of protection on imports that compete with domestic production. Their decisions

also affect the manner in which the country interacts with other countries politically,

socially and militarily. Reducing U.S. trade barriers may, for example, strengthen the

ability of foreign governments to resist regime changes that lead to governments hostile

to the United States. Frequent exogenous changes in underlying economic and political

conditions change the mix of trade policies appropriate for implementing the domestic

and foreign policy goals of policymakers.

     5.2. The Trade Agreements Program as a Means of Protecting Members of Congress

       while Making the President Responsive to Congressional Protectionist Wishes

        The stage for a significant shift in U.S. trade policy in the early 1930s was set by

the passage of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act of 1930 that raised import duties to heights

that were unprecedented, by the worldwide collapse of economic activity, by the

subsequent sharp increase in trade barriers against U.S. goods and by the capture by the

Democrats of both houses of Congress as well as the presidency. Democrats traditionally

preferred lower tariffs than the Republicans but, as Irwin argues22, the U.S. depression

precluded a unilateral reduction in trade barriers. By tying reductions in U.S. tariffs to


22
     Irwin, 1998.
                                                                                          27

reciprocal cuts in the import duties of other countries, Cordell Hull, the architect of U.S.

trade policy in the Roosevelt Administration, was able to argue that the U.S. could

dispose of its surpluses of goods without changing overall employment conditions

significantly and without increasing import prices relative to export prices.23 As Destler

argues24, by granting the president the power to reduce tariffs by up to a certain

percentage for a given time period, members of Congress were able to protect themselves

from the direct, one-sided pressures from protectionist interests but still have

considerable power over the nature and extent of import protection.

     5.3. The Importance of Foreign Policy Goals and of the Role of the President

         Trade policy decisions have frequently been motivated by foreign policy

objectives. This was particularly true during the early years of the Cold War. Presidents

Truman, Eisenhower, and Kennedy all argued that a liberal U.S. trade policy by

expanding the markets for foreign goods increases the ability of other countries to resist

the spread of communism. One of the stated purposes of the Trade Act of 1962 is, for

example, “to prevent Communist economic penetration.”

         A historical survey of trade policy also reveals the importance of the president’s

role in shaping the nature of trade policy. For example, at the outset of his

Administration, President Eisenhower appeared to be only mildly supportive of the


23
   For a theoretical analysis of reciprocal trade agreements driven by terms-of-trade
effects, see Bagwell and Staiger, 1999.
24
    Destler, Chp. 2.
.
                                                                                           28

Reciprocal Trade Agreements program and played a rather passive role in the one year

extensions in 1953 and 1954. However, in 1955 the expression of strong support for the

program by his Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, and other cabinet officers played a

significant role in obtaining a three-year extension. The vigorous efforts by President

Kennedy and key members of his Administration to build support for the Trade

Expansion Act both within the Congress and among the general public stand out as

another example where the role of the president was important in shaping trade policy. A

more recent illustration where the president played a crucial lobbying role in obtaining

trade liberalizing legislation was the passage of the Trade Act of 2002 during the

administration of President George Bush.

  5.4. The Importance of the Political Division of Congress between Democrats and

   Republicans

       For much of the period covered by this study, the most important determinant of

trade policy has been the percentage division of members of Congress between the

Republican and Democrat party. In the 1930s most Republicans still believed that U.S.

manufacturing needed to be protected against foreign competitors who often engaged in

unfair trade practices such as dumping and government subsidization. They, therefore,

opposed tariff reductions even on a reciprocal basis. However, by the early post-World

War years, Republican opposition to any trade liberalization had eased as the

international demand for U.S. goods increased sharply. But they still were fearful that

reductions in U.S. manufacturing tariffs would not infrequently result in import increases

that seriously injured particular industries. They, therefore, sought escape clause and

peril point provisions in U.S. trade legislation.
                                                                                          29

           Democrats in the 1930s maintained that high tariffs raised the prices of goods to

factory workers and farmers and reduced their living standards. But, by the 1950s they

too were concerned about the possible injurious effects of tariff reductions and supported

the inclusion of the escape clause in U.S. trade legislation. The import surges of the late

1960s further increased these concerns and by the 1970s a major force in the Democrat

party, namely, U.S. labor unions, began to oppose trade liberalization. Non-union

supporters of the Democrat party also became more concerned about the effects of trade

liberalization in reducing the real wages of unskilled workers. Indeed, by the late 1990s

votes in the House reveal that a majority of Democrats opposed such trade-liberalizing

legislation as the North American Free Trade Agreement (1998), fast-track extension

(1998) and the Trade Act of 2002. The failure by Congress to implement the free trade

agreements negotiated by the Bush Administration with Columbia, Korea, and Panama

indicates that support for trade liberalization is weak among members of both political

parties.

           The various restraining actions taken by Congress over the years such as imposing

time limits on the trade-liberalizing powers of the president, introducing safeguard rules

and the peril point clause into U.S. trade law, shifting the main trade policy powers from

the States Department to the Office of U.S. Trade Representative, providing for unilateral

actions against other countries under Section 301, and requiring trade agreements to be

approved by Congress before taking effect can all be viewed as successive efforts by

Congress to make the president more responsive to the wishes of Congress. None of

these measures seem to have completely satisfied the Congress however, and now

members seem reluctant even to grant trade promotion authority to the president.
                                                                                         30

Although President Obama has indicated his support for concluding the Doha Round in

2010, it is not clear that he has the political power to ensure congressional approval of an

agreement acceptable to the developing countries.

          .
                                                                                        31

References

Baldwin, Robert E. 1965. “Tariff-cutting techniques in the Kennedy Round.” In R.E.

Baldwin et al, Trade, Growth, and the Balance of Payments: Essays in Honor of

Gottfried Haberler.” Chicago: Rand McNalley and Company.

Baldwin, Robert E. 1979. “The Multilateral Trade Negotiations: Toward Greater

Liberalization?” Special Analysis. No. 79-2. Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise

Institute.

Baldwin, Robert E. 1995. “An Economic Evaluation of the Uruguay Round

Agreements.” In S. Arndt and C. Milner (eds.). The World Economy: Global Trade

Policy 1995. Blackwell Publications, 155-172.

Baldwin, Robert E. 2009. “The Botched Doha Round Negotiations on a Special

Safeguards Mechanism.” http://VoxEU.org, March 11, 2009.

Bagwell, Kyle and Robert Staiger 1999. “An Economic Theory of GATT,”

American Economic Review 80: 2155-248.

Blustein, Paul. 2008. “The Nine-Day Misadventure of the Most Favored Nations: How

the WTO’s Doha Round Negotiations Went Awry in July 2008,” Brookings Global

Economy and Development. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.

Diebold, William, Jr. 1952. The End of the I.T.O. Essays in International Finance, No. 16.

International Finance Section. Princeton, N.J. Princeton University.

Lavergne, Real P. The Political Economy of U.S. Tariffs. University of Toronto, Ph.D.

Thesis.

I, M. Destler. 2005. Americn Trade Politics, Fourth edition. Washington, D.C.: Institute

for International Economics.
                                                                                       32

Irwin, Douglas. 1998. “Changes in U.S. Tariffs: The Role of Import Prices and

Commercial Policies. “ American Economic Review 88: 1015-1026.


Preeg, Ernest H. 1970. Traders and Diplomats: An analysis of the Kennedy Round of

negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. Washington, D.C.: The

Brookings Institution.

Preeg, Ernest H. 1995. Traders in a Brave New World: The Uruguay Round and the

Future of the International Trading System. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

U.S. Congress. House Committee on Ways and Means, prepared by the staff of the U.S.

Tariff Commission. 1973. Comparisons of ratios of imports to apparent consumption,

1968-72. Washington, D.C.: GPO.

Winham, Gilbert R. 1986. International Trade and the Tokyo Round Negotiation.

Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Woolley, John T. and Gerhard Peters,. The American Presidency Project [online]. Santa

Barbara, CA: University of California (hosted), Gerhard Peters (database). Available

from World Wide Web: http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=1659.
