NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MUSIC FOR A SONG:
AN EMPIRICAL LOOK AT UNIFORM SONG PRICING AND ITS ALTERNATIVES
Ben Shiller
Joel Waldfogel
Working Paper 15390
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15390

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2009

We thank the Mack Center at Wharton for financial support. Tom Holmes provided helpful comments
on an earlier draft. We are also grateful to seminar participants at Kellogg, Ohio State, Michigan,
the NBER 2008 Summer Institute IO group, QME, INFORMS in Washington, and ZEW in Manheim
for comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Ben Shiller and Joel Waldfogel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Music for a Song: An Empirical Look at Uniform Song Pricing and its Alternatives
Ben Shiller and Joel Waldfogel
NBER Working Paper No. 15390
October 2009
JEL No. L12,L82
ABSTRACT
Economists have well-developed theories that challenge the wisdom of the common practice of uniform
pricing. With digital music as its context, this paper explores the profit and welfare implications of
various alternatives, including song-specific pricing, various forms of bundling, two-part tariffs, nonlinear
pricing, and third-degree price discrimination. Using survey-based data on nearly 1000 students’ valuations
of 100 popular songs in early 2008 and early 2009. We find that various alternatives – including simple
schemes such as pure bundling and two-part tariffs – can raise both producer and consumer surplus.
Revenue could be raised by between a sixth and a third relative to profit-maximizing uniform pricing.
While person-specific uniform pricing can raise revenue by over 50 percent, none of the non-discriminatory
schemes raise revenue’s share of surplus above 40 percent of total surplus. Even with sophisticated
pricing, much of the area under the demand curve for this product cannot be appropriated as revenue.

Ben Shiller
University of Pennsylvania
bshiller@wharton.upenn.edu
Joel Waldfogel
Business and Public Policy
University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School
1400 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6372
and NBER
waldfogj@wharton.upenn.edu

The prominence of the iTunes Music store, where until recently all songs sold for
$0.99, has focused attention on uniform pricing and its alternatives. Economists have
well-developed normative theories that raise questions, at least in theory, about the
wisdom of uniform pricing. Alternatives to uniform pricing include song-specific
pricing, various forms of bundling, two-part tariffs, and nonlinear pricing. Many of these
approaches are well understood in theory.1 But determining the amount of additional
profit or consumer surplus available from using alternatives to uniform pricing is an
empirical question in each context where it might be applied.
Quantifying the surplus foregone by uniform pricing is a matter of current
practical as well as academic interest. Apple has now sold over 6 billion songs at iTunes,
over 2 billion in 2008 alone (Christman, 2008; Musgrove, 2009), until recently using only
uniform pricing. During the summer of 2007, some record labels declined to renew their
contracts with Apple out of a desire for more flexibility in pricing.2 In September 2007,
Amazon launched a music downloading service featuring, among other things, songspecific, or “variable” pricing.3 Earlier this year Apple moved toward song-specific
pricing with a three-tier pricing structure. Nokia implements a different alternative, pure
bundling, with unlimited song downloads on phones sold with a “Comes with Music”
surcharge.
In general, it is hard to know how much money uniform pricing leaves on the
table because the data needed to evaluate this question – the full distribution of
reservation prices across buyers and products – are hard to come by. Usually, researchers
1

See Stigler (1963), Adams and Yellen (1976), Schmalensee (1984), Armstrong (1999), Bakos and
Brynjolfsson (1999) and others discussed below.
2
David Carr, “Steve Jobs: iCame, iSaw, iCaved,” New York Times, section C, page 1, September 10, 2007.
3
Amazon’s service also features music without digital rights management. See Ed Christman, “Amazon:
Keeping it on the Down Low,” Billboard, October 6, 2007.

2

estimate some sort of demand system allowing inference about individuals’ valuations of
various quantities of various products.4 If one could directly observe buyers’ reservation
prices for products, some sophisticated forms of pricing would be easily implementable.
This paper pursues this goal using survey-based direct elicitation of students’ valuations
of 100 popular songs at iTunes during January 2008 and January 2009.
The effect of sophisticated pricing on revenue has implications beyond pricing
strategy. The welfare economics of imperfect competition depends crucially on the
extent to which the social benefit of a product – the area under the demand curve – can be
captured as revenue for the seller.5 It’s obvious that the producer surplus under singleprice monopoly can fall short of fixed and variable costs even when the joint surplus
would exceed costs. Hence, the market can fail to provide goods with benefit in excess
of costs. Of course, whether sellers can capture surplus as revenue depends on the
effectiveness of price discrimination. Perfect first degree price discrimination eliminates,
or at least substantially mitigates, the underprovision problem.6 But we do not know
what share of surplus is appropriable as revenue in practice. One of this paper’s
contributions is to show the share of surplus that is appropriable in one context.
The paper proceeds in five sections. First, we briefly discuss the pricing problem,
along with the relevant theoretical and empirical literatures on various kinds of pricing.
In section 2 we discuss our data collected from two surveys in 2008 and 2009. Section 3
discusses our parametric approach to characterizing the valuation distributions needed for
our pricing exercises. Section 4 presents our results on revenue and the distribution of

4

See, for example, Chu, Leslie, and Sorenson (2007) and other studies discussed below.
See Spence (1976ab), Dixit and Stiglitz (1977), and Heal (1980) for elaboration of these arguments.
6
See Edlin, Epelbaum, and Heller (1998) for a discussion of how price discrimination can bring about
efficiency.
5

3

surplus available under various pricing schemes, including revenue-maximizing uniform,
song-specific pricing, two-part tariffs, nonlinear bundle-size pricing, pure bundling,
(simple versions of) mixed bundling, and individual customer-specific pricing. Section 4
also presents bootstrap-based evidence on the precision of our estimates. Section 5 finds
Pareto-improving pricing schemes that deliver at least the levels of consumer and
producer surplus achieved under profit maximizing uniform pricing. A brief conclusion
follows.
Because our songs and respondents are not representative, we cannot prescribe an
optimal pricing policy (or pass judgment on the wisdom of, say, a $0.99 uniform price).
But we can compare the breakdown of the area under the demand curve into producer
surplus, consumer surplus, and deadweight loss under different pricing schemes. We find,
for example, that revenue-maximizing uniform pricing collects just over a quarter of
surplus as revenue, while leaving almost 45 percent of surplus as consumer surplus and
the remainder as deadweight loss. Using revenue-maximizing uniform pricing as the
benchmark, we find that various alternative schemes such as pure bundling and two part
tariffs could raise revenue by about 17 percent in one sample and by about 30 percent in
another. While none of the self-selecting schemes can raise revenue much beyond a
third of total surplus, person-specific third degree price discrimination can raise producer
surplus by more than 50 percent over its level under uniform pricing, allowing sellers to
appropriate over half of surplus as revenue. Third degree price discrimination based on
observables, by contrast, has very little effect on producer surplus.

I. Theoretical Setup and Literature Review

4

1. Setup
Each consumer i has a reservation price for each song s ( Vis ). These reservation
prices, in conjunction with the pricing schemes, determine whether the individual
purchases 1 or 0 units of each song (and we assume resale impossible). Consumers
evaluate bundles of songs by adding their valuations of each of the songs included in
bundles.
The seller’s problem is to choose a vector of prices P for the songs, or groups of
songs, to maximize his profit. For example, if the seller is a uniform single-price
monopolist selling 50 different products, then he chooses only one price, and the price of
each bundle depends proportionally on the number of songs on the bundle. That is, if
bundle k contains 5 songs, and p is the single price per product, then Pk=5p. With other
pricing schemes, the P vector becomes more complicated. If the seller engages in
component pricing, with a potentially different price for each song, then the bundle price
is the sum of the prices of each of the elements of the bundle. If the seller employs a two
part tariff, the first song purchased has one price, while each additional song has another.
If the seller engages in “bundle size pricing,” then Pk simply depends – generally
nonlinearly – on the number of elements in the bundle purchased, so there are 50 separate
prices to set. If the seller engages in mixed bundling, then each combination of products
can potentially have its own price. With n products, there are (2n – 1). With 3, this
amounts to 7. With 50 products, the number of combinations is about a quadrillion.
With pure bundling, the seller sets a single price for the entire bundle of 50 songs.
Finally, under person-specific pricing, and extreme form of 3rd degree price
discrimination, the seller sets a (potentially different) price for each consumer.

5

Define Vik as individual i’s valuation of song bundle k. (The bundle could be an
individual song, or any combination of the 50 songs available). Each consumer’s problem
is to maximize Vik  Pk by his choice of k, or which product (or bundle of songs) to
consume.
Given a pricing scheme along with consumers’ valuations of products, a computer
can mechanically determine how much revenue each scheme would collect. For some of
these schemes – notably, nonlinear pricing and mixed bundling – the number of possible
pricing schemes is large so that even a fast computer can examine only a limited range of
schemes (in particular for nonlinear pricing with more than about 5 separate prices, and
for mixed bundling just a few products).

2. Related Literature
The textbook theory of single price monopoly (see, for example, Pindyck and
Rubinfeld, 2006) provides a guide to profit-maximizing uniform pricing. The simplest
alternative to uniform pricing (UP) is song-specific, or component pricing (CP).
Analytically, it involves the same apparatus as UP, albeit with a single separate price per
song. Song-specific pricing is currently employed by digital music sellers Amazon as
well as Aimee Street.com, and many observers consider Apple’s recently abandoned
practice of uniform pricing a blunt instrument for revenue maximization.7

Because UP

is a constrained special case of CP – with equal prices for all songs – UP cannot produce
more revenue than CP, and CP would in general be expected to produce more.

7

The puzzle of uniform prices arises in other product markets, for example in movie theater pricing. See
Orbach and Einav (2007).

6

There is a substantial theoretical literature on sophisticated alternatives to uniform
pricing. This body of work provides guidance about how pricing schemes other than
uniform pricing can be expected to affect profits and other aspects of surplus. Stigler
(1963) presented a two-product example showing that bundling could produce more
revenue pricing the products separately when consumers’ valuations of the products are
negatively correlated. Adams and Yellen (1976) introduced mixed bundling (MB) with
examples where mixed bundling produced more profit than either pure bundling (PB) or
product-specific pricing. Schmalensee (1984) shows that PB can be more profitable than
product-specific pricing even when the correlations of consumer valuations are positive.
McAfee, McMillan and Whinston (1989) show that mixed bundling (MB) always beats
pure bundling although – again – it results in complex pricing schemes.
A few recent papers outline the situations in which a firm can extract surplus by
selling large multiproduct bundles. Bakos & Brynjolffson (1999) show that if the
valuation of a large bundle is more predictable than the valuation of individual products,
then as the number of products grows large, pure bundling extracts the entire surplus as
revenue. Fang and Norman (2006) obtain related results with finite numbers of products.
Armstrong (1999) also shows that when tastes are correlated across products – for
example because of income differences across consumers – a menu of two-part tariffs is
almost optimal.8
A few papers use characterizations of demand to create pricing schemes. Chu,
Leslie, and Sorenson (2007) estimate demand for eight plays at a Palo Alto theater using
data on purchases of individual play tickets as well as bundles. They use their estimated

8

Sundararajan (2004) develops a model of optimal pricing for large bundles when there are costs of
administration.

7

model to create profit-maximizing pricing schemes under uniform pricing, component
pricing, pure bundling, bundle-size pricing, and mixed bundling. Relative to uniform
pricing, component pricing raises revenue 1.4 percent, bundle size pricing raises revenue
2.3 percent, and mixed bundling raises revenue 4 percent, but none of the alternatives to
uniform pricing raises revenue by more than 5 percent.9 McMillan (2007) estimates a
model of demand for soft-drinks at a grocery store which he uses to calculate that
uniform pricing would cost the store $60 in profit (on revenue of roughly $10,000).
Crawford (2008) estimates a model of demand for cable television bundles which he uses
to simulate effects of adding channels to available bundles. He estimates that bundling
an average top-15 special interest cable network gives rise to a 4.7 percent increase in
profit, a 4.0 percent decrease in consumer surplus, and a 2.0 percent increase in total
surplus.

II. Data

1. Sources and Validity
The basic data for this study are drawn from two surveys, each of about 500
Wharton undergraduates, performed in January of 2008 and January of 2009. In the 2008
survey, undergraduates – mostly freshmen – at Wharton were required to fill out an
online survey which presented them with the top 50 songs at iTunes (as of January 11,
2008). Students were given instructions and paper worksheets in class on January 16 and
17. For each song, students were told to listen to a clip to remind themselves of the song,
then to write down the maximum amount they would be willing to pay to get the song
9

They emphasize that bundle size pricing achieves 98 percent of the revenue of mixed bundling. Said
another way, bundle size pricing achieves 60 percent of mixed bundling’s improvement over uniform
pricing.

8

from the sole authorized source. Completion of the assignment was necessary for
problem set credit to motivate students to participate carefully.
In particular, students were given the following instructions:
Imagine that, unlike in current reality, there is only one authorized source for each song. Put aside
what you know about prices at existing outlets because for this survey we’re pretending that they
don’t exist.
For each song listed in the survey, indicate the maximum amount you would be willing to pay to
obtain it from the sole authorized source. For this exercise, I’m asking you to report what it is
worth to you, not what price you think would be fair or what price you are accustomed to
paying. That is, I’m asking you to indicate the maximum amount you would be willing to
pay to obtain it from the authorized source.
For example, if you already purchased it, then at the time you bought it, you were willing to pay at
least the price you paid but you might have been willing to pay more. If you would prefer not to
have it even if it were free, you would indicate 0.
On the following pages, you will be presented with a list of songs and artists. In the space
provided for each song, enter the maximum amount you are willing to pay for the song (for
example 1.75, NOT $1.75). You must enter a dollar amount for each song.

The resulting 2008 dataset includes 23,150 observations on individual-song valuations
for 463 people, as well as a small amount of information on the respondents: age (mostly
18-20), gender, race, self-reported level of interest in music (not interested, somewhat
interested, very interested), and the size of their music library.
The 2009 data, which includes 21,650 observations from 433 respondents, differs
in two respects. First, rather than the top 50 songs at iTunes, the 2009 data include the
top 25 songs at iTunes, along with 10 songs that were the top 10 songs 6 months earlier,
and 15 songs drawn randomly from those ranked between 26 and 100 at the time of the
survey. The goal of the different sampling scheme is to explore if the effectiveness of
alternative pricing schemes in the 2008 data arises from the narrow choice of songs. A
second difference in the 2009 data is that respondents were asked not only their valuation

9

of each song but also whether they possessed the song and, if so, whether they had
purchased or obtained it via file sharing.
One concern with valuation data drawn from surveys is that respondents would
anchor on prices they know to be charged at actual websites, for example the well-known
$0.99 iTunes price employed when the data were collected. We are not interested in the
students’ beliefs about current pricing; we are interested in their maximum willingness to
pay.
This leads us to visual inspection of the data, and nearly all of the valuations are
“reasonable”: 98 percent of valuations fall on [0,10], and 86 percent fall on [0,2]. There
is some clustering at the familiar price around $1 but not substantially more than the
clustering on other multiples of $0.25. Of nearly 24,000 responses for 2008, there are
7257 zeroes. Data for 2009 are similar (see Figure 1).10 The clustering of valuation
responses at round and focal numbers (notably, zero, multiples of $0.25, $0.99, and
$1.99) gives rises to plateaus on the demand curve that create “sawtooth” spikes in the
relationship between revenue and price. If we believed that the reported valuations were
literally true, we could use the raw data to find optimal pricing schemes. Instead, as we
explain below, we will fit the data to some parametric distribution. (The four panels of
Figure 1 cover data for 2008 and 2009, both raw – top – and fit to a parametric
distribution – bottom – via a process we describe below at III.)
It is prudent to ask whether surveys can elicit meaningful valuation information.
It is well known that question wording affects responses. In earlier work on music
valuation, questions asking for willingness to pay tended to elicit much lower valuations
10

Another test of reasonableness, pursued below, is whether optimal prices charged to these valuations are
close to actual prices. Of course, such a test involves the joint hypothesis of “reasonable” data and profitmaximizing pricing decisions.

10

than questions asking for amounts required to give up music (Rob and Waldfogel, 2006).
This is the familiar endowment effect (Knetsch and Sinden, 1984). Sensitivity of results
to question wording has led some researchers to be skeptical of survey responses
(Diamond and Hausman, 1994). One response to this concern stems from the fact that
the profit-maximizing prices implied by buy-based valuations in Rob and Waldfogel
(2006) – similar to those used here – tend to be close to observed prices while those
implied by sell-based valuations are far off. We find that below as well, providing some
assurance that the survey wording gets at the valuations relevant to the pricing decision.
A second response is that here, people are valuing familiar items rather than, say, pristine
Alaskan wilderness they have never seen.
Our 2009 data allow a more direct test of reasonableness. We need to be able to
rely on our reported valuations to make statements about which songs – and bundles of
songs – respondents would purchase when facing various prices. Because the 2009 data
include information on whether the respondent possesses the song, we can perform a
simple check on the data: do respondents actually possess the songs that they report
valuing at or above $0.99? Because it is easier for the respondent to accurately report
whether he or she has a copy of a song than to accurately report the valuation he or she
attaches to the song, this check can validate the valuation responses.
Each observation is a song-respondent pair. Recall that respondents report
valuations for each song, along with whether they possess the song. For examining the
relationship between valuation and ownership, we discard song-respondent observations
that the respondents obtained via file sharing, since obtaining a song without payment is
consistent with low or high valuation. With the remaining data we ask whether the

11

probability that the observations in each valuation range are owned relates to the reported
valuation.
Figure 2 summarizes the relationship between valuation and purchase, and it is
clearly positive. The data are divided into 50 equal-sized groups, ordered by valuation.
In each cell, we compute the probability that song-respondent observations are owned.
The horizontal axis records the logarithm of the cell’s average song valuation, while the
vertical axis indicates the probability that the song is owned. As the valuations rise, the
probability of purchase rises as well, to about 20 percent for average valuations near – but
below - $0.99. When the average valuations reach $0.99 – and the log valuation
approaches 0 – the probability of ownership jumps to about 50 percent. As the average
valuation continues to increase, so does the probability of ownership. Figure 2 shows that
valuation information is predictive of purchase behavior.
A related check on whether the data are reasonable is whether the songs for which
respondents frequently report high valuations are also the songs with higher sales among
buyers generally. Although we cannot observe song sales directly, we have two indirect
measures of sales. The number of weeks a song has been on the “Billboard Hot Digital”
chart, along with its peak single chart position, provides indirect measures of its
cumulative sales.11 A regression of the share of respondents reporting valuations of at
least $0.99 on these two sales proxies (for the 2008 data) yields:

11

The Billboard Chart, “Hot Digital Songs,” is available at http://www.billboard.com/bbcom/charts,
accessed March 14, 2008. The Hot Digital Chart, unlike many other charts, reports sales of singles,
regardless of whether a CD version of the single exists.

12

share (V  $0.99)  0.352  0.0033 * (chart _ weeks )  0.0044 * (chart _ peak ) , where
(0.052) (0.0017 )

(0.0015)

chart_weeks indicates the number of weeks the song had been on the Billboard chart as
of March 8, 2008; and chart_peak indicates the song’s peak chart position. Standard
errors are in parentheses, and the R-squared from this regression is 0.34. Results support
the notion that the data are reasonable in some rudimentary sense: Songs on the chart
longer have a higher simulated sales penetration in this sample, and songs with a lower
chart peak (a higher peak rank) have higher penetration.
Our survey approach to eliciting reservation valuations has antecedents in the
marketing and operations literatures. Hanson and Martin (1990) employ direct elicitation
of reservation values for an exercise reported in their study. Kalish and Nelson (1991)
explore direct elicitation along with preference rating and ranking measures and find that
reservation values do well in terms of fit while the other measures are superior in
predicting choice on a holdout sample. Venkatesh and Mahajan (1993) survey
respondents on their willingness to pay for performances of Indian music. The authors
calculate revenue under component pricing, pure bundling, and mixed bundling. Jedidi,
Jagpal, and Manchanda (2003) estimate an empirical model of survey respondents’
reservation values of individual goods and bundles of two. While Jedidi, Jagpal, and
Manchanda (2003) observe that self-stated reservation prices are subject to measurement
error, especially for infrequently purchased products, the songs in our survey are familiar
and commonly purchased.

2. Data Summary

13

Table 1 reports the average valuations per song in the 2008 sample, as well as the
median, 25th, and 75th percentile valuations. The most highly valued songs on the list
have average valuations over $2.00. They include “Stronger” by Kanye West,
“Apologize” by Timbaland (feat. One Republic), and “The Way I Are” by Timbaland
(feat. Keri Hilson & DOE). The lowest valued songs, with mean valuations below $0.7,
are those targeted at consumers younger than our college-student respondents. Examples
include artists such as Alvin and the Chipmunks and Disney artists such as the Jonas
Brothers and Miley Cyrus. The 25th percentile valuation for most songs is around $0.10,
and the 75th percentile valuation is typically over $1.5. To conserve space, we do not
report the analogous table for 2009, but like 2008 the 2009 data displays substantial intersong variation.
Valuations vary substantially both within and across respondents. Figure 3
characterizes the distribution of cumulative valuations (e.g. how highly a respondent
values his top 10 songs, for example). This figure shows that the median valuation of
(each individual’s) top 10 songs among these 50 in the 2008 sample is about $20, while
the 75th percentile valuation is about double that ($40), and the 25th percentile valuation is
around $15. Valuations in the 2009 sample are lower: for example, the median person’s
valuation of his or her top 10 is around $15. The flattening of each of these curves
indicates substantial difference between the valuations of the most highly and least highly
valued songs. Analyzed a different way, the valuation data indicate that the vast majority
of the variation in the reported valuations arise across individuals, as opposed to songs.
A regression of 2008 (2009) valuations on song fixed effects yields an R-squared of 4.0

14

(5.9) percent. The R-squared from a regression on only individual effects is 40.2 (31.5)
percent, and the R-squared with both individual and song effects is 44.2 (37.4) percent.
The correlations of song valuations across persons help to determine the extent to
which non-uniform pricing schemes can capture additional revenue. For example, a
common intuition from bundling theory is that bundling raises revenue more as products’
valuations are less positively correlated. Song valuations in our datasets are positively
correlated. With 50 songs there are 1,225 pairwise song correlations. The mean
correlation is 0.37 for the 2008 sample and 0.25 for the 2009 sample. Figure 4 shows the
whole distribution of pairwise correlations for each year.
Because the two samples are made up of different groups of songs (by vintage and
ranking), it is interesting to explore the cause of the lower correlation among songs in the
2009 sample. Each of the samples contains the top 25 iTunes songs at the time of the
survey. When we restrict attention to these songs, the pairwise correlations average 0.40
for the 2008 sample and 0.26 for the 2009 sample. Hence, the lower correlations in the
2009 sample are not attributable to the latter sample’s wider breadth in popularity and
vintage. Whatever the cause of the lower correlation, we can expect bundling to raise
revenue more for the 2009 songs.

III. Characterizing the Valuation Distributions
In order to implement pricing schemes we need a characterization of the
distribution of reservation prices across persons and products. Given the nature of our
data – based on direct elicitation of each person’s valuation of each product – one
approach is obvious: use the observed valuation responses directly. The major

15

shortcoming of this approach is the irregularity of the resulting revenue functions and
surfaces arising from the spikes in the top panel of Figure 1. This irregularity strains
credulity if we think that underlying utility functions are smooth; such irregularity also
makes it hard to efficiently identify revenue-maximizing solutions. An alternative that
allows for smoother revenue functions is to fit the valuation data to a parametric
distribution.
We explored the multivariate normal, and while the approach has the appeal of
simplicity, we are concerned about various aspects of fit. First, the probability of having
a positive valuation appears not to be governed by the same underlying index that
generates the positive valuations. Second, the positive values appear to be better
described by a lognormal than a normal distribution. Accordingly, we employ a “zeroinflated multivariate lognormal” model.
That is, we assume that positive valuations are distributed multivariate lognormal.
Thus, individual i’s log valuation of song (s) is

. The parameter

standard deviation of log valuations for song (s). Finally,
valuations between song (s) and song (t). We estimate
valuations of song (s). We estimate

is the

is the correlation of
and

using the positive

directly using logs of valuations for individuals

who report positive valuations for both songs (s) and (t).
We then estimate the probabilities that respondents report positive valuations
using the following model:

where y is binary: it equals 1 if the valuation is

positive and 0 if the reported valuation is 0. The standard deviation is unity by
construction. By estimating this equation for two songs at a time, we obtain estimates of
the correlation between the tendencies for each pair of songs to have positive valuations

16

. The parameters

and

are unconstrained, so the probability that respondents report

positive valuations for a song can be correlated with the average value that respondents
report, but we treat and as uncorrelated.
We then simulate valuations by first simulating multivariate lognormal draws
according to our estimated values of , , and . We exponentiate the resulting log
valuation estimates. We then simulate the process generating zero valuations by
simulating the indices of y using our estimates of

and

. We “zero-out” the

simulated valuations for observations where the probit predicts a zero valuation. This
gives us a simulated dataset generated by underlying distributions that are smooth. We
then apply pricing algorithms outlined below to these data. For each dataset, we create
valuation data on the 50 songs from 5000 simulated individuals. An appendix reports
selected pricing exercises on raw data. Figures 1, 3, and 4 include sub-figures with both
simulated and raw data, allowing visual comparison.
For each pricing scheme, the optimal price generated by the process is a statistic
subject to sampling variation. For the pricing schemes that allow quick calculation of
optimal prices, calculating optimal prices from simulated data resulting from bootstrap
re-estimation of the parameters { , , ,

,

} using 500 repetitions and re-sampling

on individuals.

1. Raw Data or Parametric Estimates
A natural interpretation of the bunching of reported valuations at multiples of
$0.25 is that respondents tend to round their reported valuations, in particular that
respondents often report, say, $1.25, when their true valuation is between $1.125 and

17

$1.375. In such rounded data, the implied quantity sold at a price of $1.25 overstates the
quantity of songs for which respondents actually value at or above $1.25 because the
quantity of songs with reported valuations at or above $1.25 includes songs with
valuations as low as $1.125. Likewise, the implied quantity sold at $1.20 is overstated,
because some valuations that are truly below $1.20 are rounded up to $1.25 in the
observed data. In contrast, the implied quantity sold at $1.26 will be understated, because
the quantity of songs reportedly valued at $1.26 excludes some songs that are truly
valued between $1.26 and $1.375. This sort of bunching gives rise to plateaus on the
demand function and ensuing spikes on the revenue function. Thus the raw data will
exaggerate the revenue available from uniform pricing at multiples of $0.25 and values
slightly below these multiples, and understate the revenue available at prices slightly
higher than a multiple of $0.25. If the spikes are sufficiently large (i.e. when rounding is
common), the estimated maximum revenue available will exceed the true maximum
revenue available even if the true optimal price is slightly higher than a multiple of $0.25.
Optimal bundle prices depend on individuals’ valuations of bundles of songs.
Valuations of bundles of songs are sums of the often-rounded-to-the-nearest-quarter
valuations of particular songs. The process of summing valuations will tend to average
out the rounding error in particular songs, removing misleading spikes from the bundlepricing revenue functions. Thus, bundle pricing on (sums of) raw data will not overstate
the profit available from offering a bundle at any particular price.
Uniform pricing provides the benchmark we use to evaluate other pricing
approaches. The use of raw data and its resulting spiky revenue functions overstates the
maximum revenue available with uniform pricing and therefore understates the benefit of

18

pricing techniques that involve individuals’ valuations of bundles (bundling, two-part
tariffs, and nonlinear pricing). Hence, we believe that the raw data provide misleading
answers, and we focus on estimates using the parametric approach throughout the paper.

IV. Results Using Different Pricing Schemes

1. The Single-Price Monopoly Baseline
The four panels of Figure 5 show the empirical demand curves, treating all songs
as a single good (music), using both raw and parametric approaches, and using 2008 and
2009 data. The raw data, in the top two panels, produce demand curves with noticeable
plateaus, while the parametric approach produces smooth demand curves. Given that
marginal cost of digital music is zero, the surplus at stake in this pricing problem is the
entire area under the raw-data demand curves, or $60.34 per person in 2008 and $43.56
per person in 2009. 12
We can calculate the profit-maximizing price – and breakdown of the available
surplus – with a simple manipulation of the valuation data. We order the valuation data
from highest to lowest among the n (song x individual) valuations: V1,…Vn. Because n
songs are sold when the price is Vn, we can calculate the revenue when we charge Vn per
song as n* Vn. Figure 6 shows the empirical revenue functions relating n* Vn to n for the
various approaches.

12

Music selling has three parties: the artists, their labels, and the retailer. At the time of the surveys, Apple
reportedly paid a flat rate of $0.7 per song. Analysis of the retailer’s pricing decision could then take the
marginal cost to be $0.7. We will instead treat the problem as if the three parties acted collectively to
maximize the pie that they split. To that end we treat the marginal costs as its technical value, zero.

19

The revenue functions based on raw data have various local maxima, confirming
our concerns about the revenue overstatement due to bunching (the highest of which
occurs at a price of $1.99 in the 2008 data and at $0.99 in the 2009 data). The data from
the parametric estimates give rise to smooth, single peaked revenue functions, and the
revenue-maximizing uniform prices from the parametric approaches are $2.30 in the
2008 sample and $1.46 in the 2009 sample. We discuss the precision of these estimates
at section IV.8 below.
Table 2 summarizes the breakdown of total surplus into its constituent parts under
uniform pricing with the 2008 and 2009 data, respectively. Based on the 2008 parametric
estimates, uniform pricing allows producers to captures 27 percent of surplus, while
consumers get 44 percent of surplus, and the remaining 29 percent of the area under the
demand curve is deadweight loss. Using the 2009 data gives nearly identical results.
We put the uniform pricing results to two uses. First, they are interesting on their
own. Because we don’t normally have data on the full distribution of valuations, we
cannot generally calculate the shares of surplus accruing to different parties. Instead, we
typically appeal to functional form assumptions on the demand curve itself. For example,
with linear demand and zero marginal cost, under uniform pricing PS is half of total
surplus, while CS and DWL are each a quarter. Because the demand curves here (in
Figure 5) are far from linear, results are quite different. Second, and more important, the
uniform price results provide the benchmark we use for evaluating more sophisticated
pricing approaches. For each approach below, we can ask how the components of
surplus grow or shrink relative to their values under uniform pricing.

20

2. Song-Specific “Component” Pricing
A conceptually simple alternative to uniform pricing across all songs is
component pricing (uniform pricing within songs). It might be complicated in practice
because it requires song-specific valuation information, but putting this practical
complication aside, we can implement this with our data by simply calculating maximum
revenue for each song as we calculated maximum revenue overall above. Figure 7 shows
histograms of resulting optimal song prices from the two years’ samples. The median
optimal song price for the 2008 sample is $2.28, and the inter-quartile range runs from
$1.94 to $3.00. For 2009 the median is $1.20, and the inter-quartile range extends from
$0.98 to $1.52.
Interestingly, in light of the clamor to convince Apple to employ song-specific
pricing at iTunes, component pricing – using 50 prices rather than one – has little effect
on the components of surplus. It raises PS by 3 percent in both the 2008 and 2009 data
based on parametric estimates. Component pricing reduces CS by 6 percent in the 2008
sample and raises CS by 5 percent in the 2009 sample. DWL under component pricing is
6 percent higher than the DWL under uniform pricing using the 2008 sample and 11
percent lower using the 2009 sample. It is notable that component pricing’s benefit
remains small even with the 2009 sample and its inclusion of older and less popular
songs. It should be noted that these estimates of the benefit of component pricing, while
small, overstate the practical benefit of song-specific pricing since in actuality sellers
would need to set prices for songs in advance of knowing each song’s realized demand.

3. Pure Bundling

21

Another simple alternative to uniform pricing is “pure bundling” (PB), in which
the entire group of songs is offered, as a group, for a single price. Since Stigler (1963)
and Adams and Yellen (1976), economists have understood the intuition that negative
correlations in valuations allow a seller to capture more revenue by bundling products.
As we have seen, sample song valuations are positively correlated across individuals, and
the correlation is higher for the 2008 than the 2009 data. Schmalensee (1984) shows that
bundling can increase revenue even with positive correlations of valuations.15 And as
Bakos and Brynjolffson (1999) and Armstrong (1999) argue, as the number of products
grows large, PB will approach perfect price discrimination as long as consumers’ tastes
aren’t too highly correlated across products. How does pure bundling affect surpluses in
our context? And how does this vary with the size of the bundles?
To calculate the optimal full (50-song) bundle price we sum the song valuations
across songs within each individual to arrive at that individual’s valuation of the entire
bundle. We then calculate the revenue-maximizing bundle price, as we would under
single price monopoly. The optimal 50-song bundle price is $74.25 using the data
derived from the parametric approach for 2008 and $36.84 for the 2009 data. Pure
bundling raises revenue substantially, by 17 percent relative to uniform pricing with the
2008 sample and by 29 percent using the 2009 sample. These gains to consumers come
partly at the expense of consumers: CS under bundling is 15 percent below its value
under uniform pricing in the 2008 sample and 5 percent below for the 2009 data. While
pure bundling improves revenue – and substantially more than component pricing – the
resulting revenue falls far short of the perfect price discrimination revenue predicted by
some theoretical models. The reason for this failure is that tastes are correlated across
15

Fang and Norman (2006) demonstrate similar results.

22

products, which arises, as Armstrong (1999) notes, “because of income or other
systematic differences across consumers.”
We also explore how the effect of pure bundling on revenue varies with the size
of the bundle, by calculating the maximal revenue for random song bundles, with 500
draws for each of the following bundle sizes: 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, and 25. See Table 3. Each
column corresponds to one of the sample years and either the raw or parametric
approach.
Using the 2008 sample, bundles of 2 raise revenue 5 percent relative to uniform
pricing. As bundle size increases, the benefit of bundling increases. More than half of
the benefit is achieved with bundles of 5. Similar results hold using the 2009 sample.
While larger bundles raise revenue, the rate of increase declines as bundle size increases.
If the flattening continues, it appears that there would not be much more revenue benefit
available to bundles larger than 50 (so that 50 is a “large” number, in the sense of the
theory) and that most of the revenue benefit of large bundles is achieved with 5-song
bundles.

4. Two-Part Tariffs
Another scheme we can explore is the two part tariff with a hookup fee (T)
independent of the number of songs purchased and a per-song price (p). We have already
explored two of its special cases: When p=0, this is pure bundling, and when T=0, this is
uniform pricing. We explore this family of schemes as follows. Try a pair (T, p). Given
the p, each individual would purchase some number of songs and would have some level
of consumer surplus from the songs with valuations at or above p. If the individual’s

23

total consumer surplus exceeds T, he would pay the hookup fee, and then the revenue
from that individual would equal p*(number of units purchased) + T. If T exceeds his
consumer surplus, by contrast, then he would make no purchase.
Our goal is to find values of (T, p) that maximize revenue. If the revenue function
were well-behaved, we could enlist hill-climbing algorithms to find the revenuemaximizing price pair. Despite our parametric estimation and its attendant smoothing,
resulting functions remain irregular. There is a multitude of substantially different,
though functionally related, two-part pricing schemes that yield similar revenue. The hill
climbing program is generally unable to find, or come close to finding, which of these
many functionally related pricing pairs maximizes revenue. To approximate the best
price pair we begin our maximization with a rather fine grid, searching over 161 values of

p {0, 0.05, 0.1,…, 8} in conjunction with 1000 values of T {0, 0.1, 0.2,…,100}. We
then use the per unit price and fixed fee from each of the top ten revenue generating
prices from this grid search as starting points for a hill-climbing program.
Using the 2008 data, the best two-part schemes identified involve (T, p) =
($52.31, $0.48). Using the 2009 sample, the best tariff is ($21.19, $0.37). It is
interesting to examine the top 10 tariffs – and the top 1 percent of tariffs – among those
identified by the grid search, along with the best identified. Figure 7 shows these tariffs,
and the top tariffs lie along a downward-sloping line between a high unit price with a low
hookup fee and a much lower unit price with a higher hookup fee. The two-part tariff
achieves results very similar to those achieved with pure bundling - PS, CS, and DWL
are almost identical under two-part pricing and bundle pricing.

24

5. Nonlinear “Bundle Size” Pricing
Two part tariffs are a special case of more general nonlinear prices that vary with
the number of units purchased, what Chu, Leslie, and Sorenson (2007) call, “bundle size
pricing.” As outlined in Wilson (1993), calculating a nonlinear tariff is straightforward
in principle. Provided that the tariff crosses each individual’s demand curve only once,
from below, the nonlinear tariff can be calculated as a sequence of optimal prices, for the
first, second, and nth units, in this case for n up to 50. When we perform this exercise
with our data, however, the resulting tariff has some problems. First, the optimal prices
do not decline monotonically. Second, and more important, the number of buyers of
successive numbers of units does not decline monotonically. Indeed, the number of
persons buying, say, the 3rd unit exceeds the numbers of buyers of the first unit. Single
crossing does not hold, and as a result, the simple method cannot be employed for
calculating the nonlinear tariff in this context.
Without a workable simple algorithm for determining the exact tariff, we are left
with some other alternatives for computing an approximate nonlinear tariff, including a
simple parameterization of the tariff and grid search. Given the computational cost of a
fine grid search for a pricing scheme with more than a few prices, we turn to a
parameterization.
Prices must be non-increasing in the number of songs purchased, and prices must
be positive. This suggests some restrictions. If t is an index for a song’s position in the
sequence, then a simple parameterization is p(t )   * e t , where α >0, β<0. We perform
a grid search over α  {0.25, 0.5, 0.75,…, 100}, β  {-2,-1.95,…,0} to find the revenuemaximizing tariff in this family, using each of the four data sets. The parameters that

25

maximize revenue using the 2008 and 2009 data, respectively, are α=(12.0, 10.75) and
β=(-0.15, -0.25). The associated tariff for 2009 is illustrated in a budget constraint in
Figure 9. The prices of the first ten songs are, in order: $8.37, $6.52, $5.08, $3.95, $3.08,
$2.39, $1.87, $1.45, $1.13, $0.88, $0.67. The per-song price reaches about $0.10 by
about the 30th song in the 2008 data, and by about the 20th song in the 2009 data. The
total price of all 50 songs in both datasets is slightly higher than the respective bundle
price. Not surprisingly, as Table 2 shows, the nonlinear tariff performs very similarly to
pure bundling and two part tariffs: it does slightly better than pure bundling and not quite
as well as the two part tariff.16

6. Comparing Mixed Bundling with Alternatives
One of the goals of this paper is to determine what share of the area under the
demand curve can be appropriated as revenue with sophisticated pricing. Each of the
schemes we have considered so far is a special case of mixed bundling (MB), which is
known to produce the most revenue. To see how much revenue can be obtained, we need
to explore mixed bundling. We do this in two parts. We first explore general mixed
bundling (with 2n-1 prices) for small bundles and using coarse grids for search. We then
explore a practical specific form of mixed bundling: selling with a bundle price alongside
a uniform à la carte price.

A Simple Implementation of General Mixed Bundling

16

In principle a nonlinear tariff can reproduce the two part tariff as a special case, so nonlinear pricing
should produce weakly better results than the two part tariff. Our restrictive parameterization of the tariff is
likely responsible for the nonlinear tariff producing less revenue than the two part tariff.

26

Because of the large number of bundles, mixed bundling is difficult to implement
with 50 products. For this reason, we examine the simpler problem of finding optimal
mixed bundling pricing schemes for a much smaller set of products, 3. Even with 3
products, there are 7 bundle prices. To keep the problem manageable, we search over the
following grids among prices between 0 and 3 in increments of 0.25 for one song
bundles, between 0 and 6 for two song bundles, and between 0 and 9 for three song
bundles. We employ a 10% sample of the 2009 parametric dataset to speed computation.
In the course of searching for the best mixed bundling schemes, we also find the
best UP, CP, PB, 2-part, and BSP schemes on this coarse grid. This allows us to compare
the performance of MB with all other schemes. Because each other scheme is special
case of MB, we expect MB to provide the most revenue.
We want systematic insight into the relative performance of each of the pricing
schemes, so we need to perform the 3-song analysis repeatedly, on different randomly
selected groups of three songs. We repeat the analysis 5 times, and Table 4 reports
average results. Results on schemes apart from mixed bundling largely reflect what we
have found so far. Component pricing generates a bit – 3 percent - more revenue than
uniform pricing. Bundling, two-part tariffs, and nonlinear pricing generate substantially
more, at 10, 12, and 13 percent more revenue than uniform pricing, respectively. Mixed
bundling is better still. On average, MB generates 15 percent more revenue than uniform
pricing.
The glass is both half empty and half full. MB achieves more relative to UP than
the next-best schemes. MB raises revenue 20 more than its next best alternative. But
even with mixed bundling, revenue’s share of surplus reaches an average of only 34

27

percent of surplus across the 5 song groups in Table 4 (compared with 29 percent for
profit-maximizing uniform pricing).

Bundling alongside à la Carte Sales
We have analyzed pure bundling as though the à la carte option ceased to exist. It
seems entirely possible that bundling, if pursued, would be added alongside existing à la
carte sales. This possibility suggests a number of alternative pricing schemes to explore
that constitute simple versions of mixed bundling. Consider a family of two parameter
pricing schemes where pA is the uniform à la carte price and pB is the bundle price.
One question is, what unconstrained combination of {pA, pB} maximizes
revenue? A second question is, what pB maximizes revenue, given that pA is constrained
to some value, such as its profit-maximizing uniform price.
The question of the best bundle price to complement an existing à la carte scheme
is interesting in contrast to the question surrounding current policy debates concerning
cable television.17 Bundling is the default in that circumstance, and various
constituencies are advocating à la carte pricing as a complement. Of course, the optimal
values of pA and pB are related, so it may be difficult to change one without affecting the
other.
As Table 5 indicates, when pA and pB are unconstrained, the revenue-maximizing
combination using the 2009 data is a bundle price of $37.30 with a single song price of
$7.50. With prices chosen to maximize revenue, the introduction of an à la carte option
does not bring about a low à la carte price. Bundle sales generate the vast majority of
revenue (99 percent), and few songs are sold à la carte. Revenue is slightly higher than it

28

is under pure bundling without à la carte sales: Revenue in this case is 29.1 percent
above revenue under uniform pricing (compared with 28.8 percent for pure bundling).
Our second exercise is the determination of an optimal bundle price when the à la
carte price is constrained to its current level of $1.46. Given this constraint, the best
bundle price is $31.05, and bundle sales generate just over two thirds of revenue. This
scheme generates 14.5 percent more revenue than uniform pricing, only half the
improvement over uniform pricing produced with either pure bundling or unconstrained
simple mixed bundling. That is, maintaining the à la carte price at $1.46 significantly
handicaps the ability for bundling to raise revenue.

7. Third Degree Price Discrimination
One class of pricing schemes we have not yet explored is schemes that treat
people differently according to exogenous characteristics (as opposed to endogenous
behavior of how many songs to buy, given the schedule). Examples of these could, in
principle, include price discrimination by race, gender, geography, or income. It should
be noted that many such forms of price discrimination are both illegal and, at times,
morally questionable. Our exploration of this class of pricing schemes is merely aimed at
determining what classes of pricing schemes could, in principle, fulfill non-uniform
pricing’s promise of making surplus appropriable.
Before proceeding further it makes sense to note that the vast majority of the
variation in valuations occurs between individuals as opposed to between products
(within individuals). This suggests that schemes that can divide consumers according to
their valuations will be able to extract more of their valuations as producer surplus.

29

A conceptually simple scheme is person-specific pricing. Third-degree pricing
schemes – price discriminating by type of person – are special cases, so this will give an
upper bound on the effect of such schemes on the distribution of surplus. To calculate
the person-specific profit-maximizing price, we create person-specific demand curves,
ordering their valuations from highest to lowest. We then find the maximum revenue.
The valuation associated with maximal revenue for each person is the person-specific
revenue-maximizing price. Because our parametric estimates do not include person
characteristics, we can only implement third degree price discrimination based on
observable characteristics using the raw data. Table 6 reports results for various kinds of
third degree price discrimination.
Revenue-maximizing person-specific pricing gives rise to substantial variation in
prices. Using the 2008 data, the inter-quartile price range runs from $0.56 to $2.78.
Using 2009 data, it runs from $0.61 to $2.15.
Person-specific pricing gives substantially more benefit to producers than do the
non-discriminatory schemes explored above. They raise revenue by two thirds using the
2008 sample and by half using the 2009 sample. This benefit to producers comes at
substantial cost to consumers: CS falls by a third relative to its value under uniform
pricing in the 2008 data and by a quarter in the 2009 data. The gains to producers under
person-specific pricing outweigh the losses to consumers, so deadweight loss falls using
both samples.
Person-specific pricing may be difficult to implement if it’s hard to know each
individual’s demand curve a priori. This raises the question of what revenue
improvement third degree price discrimination schemes based on observable

30

characteristics can achieve. To this end we use the raw data to explore schemes based on
the scant observables in our data, using the raw data: gender, ethnicity, whether a
respondent is a resident alien, and age (whether under 20). As with the parametric
approach, the raw data allow large increases in producer surplus with person-specific
prices: 81 percent for 2008 and 68 percent for 2009. But the effects of price
discrimination based on observables are small: none raise revenue more than 6 percent,
and most accomplish less. Despite the large revenue enhancing effects of individually
customized uniform prices, forms of third degree price discrimination that might more
feasibly be implemented produce only negligible revenue improvements.

8. Precision
The results that are the main focus of this paper – the shares of surplus going to
producers and the portion foregone as deadweight loss, along with the changes in these
shares with alternatives to uniform pricing – are each statistics subject to sampling error.
This section explores the precision of our estimates.
As mentioned above, our calculated optimal prices (and other ensuing statistics,
such as the PS shares under various pricing schemes) are each functions of the estimated
parameters of our basic statistical model (the zero-inflated multinomial lognormal
model). To get estimates of the precision of our estimates, we have re-estimated the
basic model 500 times. For the pricing schemes that allow quick calculation of optimal
prices (uniform pricing, component pricing, bundling, and person-specific pricing), we
can then calculate revenue-maximizing pricing schemes for each set of parameters.

31

Table 7 reports estimated standard errors for both the surplus shares (CS, PS, and
DWL) and the percent change in these shares relative to uniform pricing based on the 500
bootstrapped parameter estimates. The top and bottom panels report 2008 (2009)
estimates, and the surplus shares are estimated precisely. For example, the standard error
of the CS share under uniform pricing (roughly 44 percent of surplus) is 1.41 percentage
points, while the standard error of the PS share (just over a quarter) is 0.33 percentage
points.
The latter columns report the standard errors for the percent changes in surplus
components relative to uniform pricing. As Table 2 indicated, component pricing raises
2008 PS by 2.65 percent. Table 7 indicates that the standard error for this PS
improvement is 0.33 percent. Bundling raises 2008 revenue by nearly 17 percent, and the
standard error for this improvement is 4.87 percent. Similar patterns hold for 2009.
Improvements in PS are all large relative to their standard errors. The same cannot be
said of the changes in CS and DWL.
Table 8 focuses specifically on the improvement in PS under each scheme,
reporting the 5th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 95th percentiles of the distributions of percentage PS
improvements relative to uniform pricing. For example, the table shows that in the 2008
sample, the 5th percentile increase in PS under component pricing is 2.47 percent, while
the 95th percentile improvement is 3.59 percent. The table shows that the PS increases
are rather precisely estimated.
Although we are unable to calculate standard errors for measures surplus shares
under nonlinear pricing and two-part tariffs, we note that these schemes yield surplus

32

shares – and improvements over uniform pricing – that are very similar to those achieved
by bundling, for which we can calculate measures of precision.

V. Pareto Improving Pricing Schemes
Within each family of prices (e.g. single price uniform pricing or two part tariffs),
each particular scheme gives rise to particular values of consumer and producer surplus.
For example, when p=0 under uniform pricing, then the entire surplus is distributed to
consumers. By contrast, as p rises, consumer surplus falls as producer surplus rises, at
least to a point. The CS and PS resulting from various uniform prices define a frontier in
PS-CS space.
For schemes that raise PS relative to uniform pricing – bundling and related
schemes – we can look for ranges that raise both consumer and producer surplus, relative
to their values under uniform pricing. Pure bundling, which produces results nearly
identical to two part tariffs and nonlinear pricing, provides a ready example. Using the
2009 sample, we have shown that we can raise PS by 29 percent while reducing CS by 5
percent. Figure 10a depicts a locus of possible changes in PS and CS, relative to their
values under profit maximizing uniform pricing. For example, it is possible to raise PS
nearly 30 percent while holding consumers – as a group – harmless. By contrast, with a
lower bundle price, aggregate consumer surplus rises. Indeed, it is possible to raise
consumer surplus by over 50 percent while maintaining revenue at its maximized level
under uniform pricing (with a bundle price of $16.95, compared with its revenuemaximizing value of $36.84).

33

While it is interesting that there exist bundle pricing schemes that could raise PS
while holding overall CS constant at its level under revenue-maximizing uniform pricing,
this is arguably the wrong Pareto-improvement calculation. Apple Corp. derives revenue
from selling hardware to individuals whose surplus from music buying is sufficiently
large to make the complementary hardware attractive. What matters is therefore not
aggregate CS but rather the number of persons who find their CS sufficiently large to
induce hardware purchase.
For each potential bundle price, we can determine the share of consumers
experiencing higher CS than they would under revenue maximizing uniform pricing.
Figure 10b depicts the relationship between the percent improvement in PS (relative to
uniform pricing) and the share of consumers better off. Each point along the curve
represents a different bundle price. As the bundle price falls, producer surplus initially
rises, until we reach the profit-maximizing bundle price. As the bundle price continues to
fall below the profit-maximizing bundle price, more consumers obtain higher surplus
with the bundle than they would under uniform pricing. The revenue maximizing pure
bundling price (which lowers CS by 5 percent) makes roughly two thirds of consumers
worse off relative to their well-being under uniform pricing. But lower bundle prices,
which generate less PS, make higher shares of consumers better off. At the extreme,
nearly 80 percent of consumers could be made better off than under uniform pricing
while holding producers harmless at their uniform pricing PS. With a bundle price of
$28.55, half of consumers would be better off than under profit-maximizing uniform
pricing, and revenue would be 24.6 percent above its uniform pricing maximum. Thus,
alternatives to uniform pricing can make both sellers and most consumers better off.

34

VI. Conclusion
Using survey data on individuals’ valuations of popular songs in 2008 and 2009,
we are able to directly calculate the revenue – and overall division of surplus – from
various pricing schemes. We have two major results, one positive and one negative.
First, various alternative schemes – including simple schemes such as pure
bundling and two-part tariffs –raises producer consumer surplus by about 17 percent in
one sample and by about 30 percent in another.
Uniform pricing delivers about a third of surplus as revenue, and while various
alternative pricing schemes can raise revenue substantially, none of the self-selecting
schemes raise revenue’s share of surplus above 37 percent. Although individual-specific
pricing – an extreme form of third degree price discrimination – raises revenue by 50
percent or more, third degree price discrimination based on available observable criteria
raises revenue very little. Hence, results based on these data indicate that even with
sophisticated pricing, much of the area under the demand curve for this product is beyond
the reach of appropriation by sellers. For products with substantial fixed costs, this
leaves open the possibility of inefficient under-provision.
We are aware that this analysis covers a particular product and a small and
potentially unrepresentative sample of consumers. Further study with other samples and
other products can help clarify our understanding of both pricing strategy and surplus
appropriation in product markets.

35

Table 1: Survey Songs and their Valuations, 2008 Sample
Song name
Apologize (feat. OneRepublic) - Timbaland
Big Girls Don't Cry (Personal) - Fergie
Bubbly - Colbie Caillat
Clumsy - Fergie
Crank That (Soulja Boy) - Soulja Boy Tell 'Em
Crushcrushcrush - Paramore
Cyclone (feat. T-Pain) - Baby Bash
Don't Stop the Music - Rihanna
Feedback - Janet
Hate That I Love You (feat. Ne-Yo) - Rihanna
Hero/Heroine (Tom Lord-Alge Mix) - Boys Like Girls
Hey There Delilah - Plain White T's
How Far We've Come - Matchbox Twenty
Hypnotized (feat. Akon) - Plies
I Don't Wanna Be In Love (Dance Floor Anthem) - Good
Charlotte
Into the Night (feat. Chad Kroeger) - Santana
Kiss Kiss (feat. T-Pain) - Chris Brown
Love Like This - Natasha Bedingfield
Love Song - Sara Bareilles
Low (feat. T-Pain) - Flo Rida
Misery Business - Paramore
No One - Alicia Keys
Our Song - Taylor Swift
Over You - Daughtry
Paralyzer - Finger Eleven
Piece of Me - Britney Spears
Ready, Set, Don't Go - Billy Ray Cyrus feat. Miley Cyrus
Rockstar - Nickelback
S.O.S. - Jonas Brothers
See You Again - Miley Cyrus
Sensual Seduction (Edited) - Snoop Dogg
Shadow of the Day - Linkin Park
Sorry - Buckcherry
Start All Over - Miley Cyrus
Stay - Sugarland
Stop and Stare - OneRepublic
Stronger - Kanye West
Sweetest Girl (Dollar Bill) [feat. Akon, Lil Wayne &
Niia] - Wyclef Jean
Take You There - Sean Kingston
Tattoo - Jordin Sparks
Teardrops On My Guitar - Taylor Swift
The Great Escape - Boys Like Girls
The Way I Am - Ingrid Michaelson
The Way I Are (feat. Keri Hilson & D.O.E.) - Timbaland
Through the Fire and Flames - Dragonforce
Wake Up Call - Maroon 5
When You Were Young - The Killers

36

mean
$2.37
$1.16
$1.47
$0.78
$2.00
$0.58
$1.29
$1.40
$0.63
$1.30
$0.77
$2.02
$1.41
$1.15

25th pctile
$0.59
$0.08
$0.08
$0.04
$0.28
$0.01
$0.08
$0.11
$0.01
$0.10
$0.02
$0.15
$0.10
$0.06

median
$1.39
$0.53
$0.68
$0.29
$1.01
$0.13
$0.56
$0.63
$0.11
$0.55
$0.26
$0.94
$0.69
$0.48

75th pctile
$2.67
$1.22
$1.73
$1.01
$2.10
$0.71
$1.45
$1.44
$0.57
$1.47
$1.00
$2.02
$1.47
$1.12

$1.06
$1.49
$1.45
$1.04
$1.02
$1.60
$0.69
$1.59
$0.81
$1.22
$1.11
$0.77
$0.59
$1.39
$0.68
$0.68
$1.18
$1.24
$0.64
$0.47
$0.64
$1.05
$2.79

$0.06
$0.09
$0.12
$0.06
$0.05
$0.11
$0.01
$0.13
$0.01
$0.05
$0.03
$0.01
$0.00
$0.06
$0.01
$0.00
$0.04
$0.07
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.07
$0.87

$0.47
$0.71
$0.85
$0.43
$0.37
$0.88
$0.17
$0.83
$0.12
$0.47
$0.34
$0.11
$0.09
$0.50
$0.15
$0.09
$0.29
$0.52
$0.13
$0.08
$0.10
$0.44
$1.74

$1.20
$1.53
$1.70
$1.06
$1.07
$1.93
$0.90
$1.86
$0.80
$1.12
$1.17
$0.85
$0.58
$1.47
$0.76
$0.59
$1.07
$1.23
$0.76
$0.32
$0.59
$1.10
$3.04

$1.79
$1.37
$0.94
$0.92
$1.11
$0.91
$2.24
$0.73
$1.55
$1.61

$0.14
$0.13
$0.04
$0.01
$0.05
$0.02
$0.42
$0.00
$0.17
$0.17

$0.88
$0.78
$0.39
$0.17
$0.44
$0.26
$1.13
$0.11
$0.87
$0.90

$1.98
$1.58
$1.00
$0.93
$1.25
$0.97
$2.61
$0.90
$1.92
$1.98

Witch Doctor - Alvin and the Chipmunks
With You - Chris Brown
Won't Go Home Without You - Maroon 5

$0.69
$1.34
$1.43

$0.00
$0.08
$0.17

$0.08
$0.49
$0.86

Notes: The list is the top 50 songs on iTunes January 11, 2008. Respondents indicated
their maximum willingness to pay for each song from its hypothetical sole authorized
source.

37

$0.43
$1.14
$1.57

Table 2: Alternative Pricing Approaches using Parametric Estimates
Pricing Method

PS
share

CS
share

DWL
share

Uniform
Component
Pure Bundling
Two-Part Tariff
Nonlinear

27.0%
27.7%
31.5%
31.8%
31.8%

44.2%
41.7%
37.6%
39.2%
38.3%

28.8%
30.6%
30.9%
28.9%
29.9%

Uniform
Component
Pure Bundling
Two-Part Tariff
Nonlinear

28.4%
29.2%
36.5%
36.9%
36.6%

42.4%
44.7%
40.3%
43.1%
39.5%

29.2%
26.1%
23.2%
20.0%
23.9%

%
ΔPS
2.65%
16.61%
17.97%
17.72%

2.90%
28.81%
30.30%
29.04%

%
ΔCS
-5.70%
-14.87%
-11.27%
-13.28%

5.42%
-5.00%
1.55%
-6.83%

%
Δ DWL
6.27%
7.27%
0.45%
3.79%

2008
2008
2008
2008
2008

-10.66%
-20.68%
-31.63%
-18.26%

2009
2009
2009
2009
2009

Note: We calculate the profit-maximizing scheme in each pricing family (uniform,
component, etc.). The first three columns show how the total area under the demand
curve is divided among producer surplus (PS), consumer surplus (CS), and deadweight
loss (DWL). The next three columns show how the components fare under each pricing
scheme, relative to profit-maximizing uniform pricing. All exercises are performed on
simulated data based on the parametric zero-inflated multivariate lognormal model. See
text for details.

38

sample

Table 3: Bundle Size and Effect on Revenue Relative to Uniform Pricing
Bundle
Size
2
3
4
5
10
25
50

2008,
parametric
4.9%
7.6%
9.3%
10.6%
13.6%
15.9%
16.6%

2009,
parametric
7.0%
11.1%
14.3%
16.4%
21.6%
26.6%
28.8%

Note: table reports average percent change in revenue by
selling via pure bundling with bundles of different sizes.
Each entry for bundle sizes below 50 is based on 500
random bundles drawn from all possible bundles.

39

Table 4: Performance of Mixed Bundling and other Schemes Relative to Uniform
Pricing
Uniform
Component
Pure Bundling
Two Part
Nonlinear
Mixed Bundling

PS
1.00
1.03
1.10
1.12
1.13
1.15

CS
1.00
0.90
0.91
0.99
0.97
0.87

DWL
1.00
1.16
1.06
0.87
0.90
1.08

Q
1.00
0.92
0.49
1.22
1.23
1.17

Note: Based on 10 groups of 3 songs. For each group of songs and each pricing scheme,
we calculate profit-maximizing pricing on a coarse grid of possible prices that allows us
to find the best schedule for mixed bundling. We then average the results across the 10
groups of 3 songs. See text for details.

40

Table 5: Simple Mixed Bundling
Revenue share
Scheme
Uniform Only
Pure Bundling
Bundling with Fixed á la Carte
Price
unconstrained

PA

% above uniform

PB

á la carte

Bundle

PS

CS

DWL

1.46

36.84
31.05

100.0%
0.0%
27.6%

0.0%
100.0%
72.4%

28.8%
14.5%

-5.0%
20.9%

-20.7%
-44.5%

7.50

37.30

1.4%

98.6%

29.1%

-5.7%

-19.9%

1.46

Note: The first two rows repeat the profit-maximizing schemes under uniform pricing and
pure bundling, respectively. The latter two rows explore simple mixed bundling. The
third finds an optimal bundle price, given an á la carte pricing fixed at the profitmaximizing uniform pricing value. The last row finds unconstrained optimal á la carte
and bundle prices.

41

Table 6: Third Degree Price Discrimination
PS rel to
uniform
65.7%
48.0%

CS rel to
Uniform
-32.8%
-26.2%

DWL rel to
uniform
-11.3%
-8.6%

person
gender
ethnicity
Resident alien
age

81.3%
0.4%
5.9%
1.7%
1.0%

-50.3%
27.0%
5.1%
33.6%
-2.6%

person
gender
ethnicity
Resident alien
age

67.9%
0.0%
1.6%
0.0%
0.4%

-55.8%
0.0%
-5.2%
0.0%
0.6%

type
person
person

approach

sample

parametric
parametric

2008
2009

-13.8%
-41.4%
-14.3%
-52.9%
2.8%

raw
raw
raw
raw
raw

2008
2008
2008
2008
2008

43.8%
0.0%
15.1%
0.0%
-3.1%

raw
raw
raw
raw
raw

2009
2009
2009
2009
2009

Note: The first two rows are based on exercises in which each consumer is charged his or
her profit-maximizing price, based on the data simulated from the parametric estimates
for 2008 and 2009, respectively. The remainder of the table explores third-degree price
discrimination using the raw data to allow differential pricing based on observable
characteristics of consumers.

42

Table 7: Precision of Estimates of Surplus Shares and Percent Increase under
Alternative Pricing
Standard error of
Standard Error of
Percent of Surplus
Percent Increase
relative to UP
Pricing scheme
uniform
component
bundling
person-specific

PS
0.33
0.34
1.54
1.57

CS
1.41
1.13
2.86
0.98

DWL
1.53
1.29
3.19
2.08

uniform
component
bundling
person-specific

0.47
0.49
1.37
0.67

0.96
0.54
2.21
0.76

1.07
0.7
2.26
1.25

PS

CS

DWL

0.33
4.87
7.06

2.7
7.28
2.99

3.79
10.26
8.5

sample
2008
2008
2008
2008

3.76
9.14
5.18

2009
2009
2009
2009

0.41
4.27
3.14

2.23
5.43
2.17

Notes: Standard errors are calculated from 500 optimal pricing schemes resulting from
500 bootstrap estimates of the parameters of the zero-inflated multivariate lognormal
model.

43

Table 8: Bootstrap Distribution of Improvement in Producer Surplus Relative to Uniform
Pricing

component
bundling
person-specific
component
bundling
person-specific

Distribution of PS Percent Improvement
5th
25th
median
2.47
2.73
2.95
9.65
12.93
15.66
57.32
63.4
68.48
2.37
19.36
44.36

2.7
23.52
47.06

2.94
26.4
49.34

75th
3.19
19.04
73.58

95th
3.59
25.24
80.62

2008
2008
2008

3.27
29.37
51.29

3.75
33.59
54.74

2009
2009
2009

Notes: Standard errors are calculated from 500 optimal pricing schemes resulting from
500 bootstrap estimates of the parameters of the zero-inflated multivariate lognormal
model.

44

References
Adams, W.J. and J.L. Yellen (1976): “Commodity Bundling and the Burden of
Monopoly,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90, 475-98.
Armstrong, M. (1999): “Price Discrimination by a Many-Product Firm,” Review of
Economic Studies, 66(1), Special Issue: Contracts, 151-68.
Bakos, Y. and E. Brynjolfsson (1999): “Bundling Information Goods: Pricing, Profits and
Efficiency," Management Science, 45(12), 1613-30.
Christman, Ed. “Dollars and Cents: iTunes Store.” Billboard Magazine. March 15, 2008.
(accessed at http://www.billboard.biz/bbbiz/content_display/magazine/upfront, March 14,
2008).
Crawford, G.S. “The Discriminatory Incentives to Bundle in the Cable Television
Industry” “Quantitative Marketing and Economics, v6n1 (March 2008), 41-78.
Crawford, Gregory S. and Joseph Cullen. “Bundling, Product Choice, and Efficiency:
Should Cable Television Networks Be Offered à la Carte?” Information Economics and
Policy, vol 19, issues 3-4, (October 2007), 379-404.
Chu, Chenghuan Sean, Phillip Leslie, and Alan Sorenson. “Nearly Optimal Pricing for
Multiproduct Firms.” Working paper, 2007.
http://www.stanford.edu/~pleslie/bundling.pdf .
Diamond, Peter A and Jerry A. Hausman. “Contingent Valuation: Is Some Number
Better than No Number?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol 8, number 4, fall 1994,
pp 45-64.
Edlin, Aaron S.; Mario Epelbaum; Walter P. Heller, “Is Perfect Price Discrimination
Really Efficient?: Welfare and Existence in General Equilibrium.” Econometrica, Vol.
66, No. 4 (Jul., 1998), pp. 897-922.
Fang, H. and P. Norman (2006): “To Bundle or Not to Bundle,” RAND Journal of
Economics, Winter 2006.
Geng, X., M.B. Stinchcombe, and A.B. Whinston (2005): “Bundling Information Goods
of Decreasing Value,” Management Science, 51(4), 662-67.
Hanson, Ward and R. Kipp Martin. “Optimal Bundle Pricing.” Management Science. Vol
36, no. 2. February 1990, 155-174.

Heal, Geoffrey. “Spatial Structure in the Retail Trade: A Study in Product Differentiation
with Increasing Returns.” Bell Journal of Economics, Autumn 1980. Vol. 11, Iss. 2; pg.
565.
Jedidi, K., S. Jagpal and P. Manchanda (2003): “Measuring Heterogeneous Reservation
Prices for Product Bundles,” Marketing Science, 22(1), 107-30.
Kalish, Shlomo and Paul Nelson. “A Comparison of Ranking, Rating, and Reservation
Price Measurement in Conjoint Analysis.” Marketing Letters 2:4 (1991): 327-335.
Knetsch, Jack L & Sinden, J A, 1984. “Willingness to Pay and Compensation Demanded:
Experimental Evidence of an Unexpected Disparity in Measures of Value,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol. 99(3), pages 507-21, August.
Leslie, P. (2004): “Price Discrimination in Broadway Theater,” RAND Journal of
Economics, 35(3), 520-41.
Long, J.B. (1984): “Comments on Gaussian Demand and Commodity Bundling,” The
Journal of Business, 57(1), S235-S246.
McAfee, R.P., J. McMillan and M. Whinston (1989): “Multiproduct Monopoly,
Commodity Bundling, and Correlation of Values,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114,
371-84.
McMillan, R. (2007): “Different Flavor, Same Price: The Puzzle of Uniform Pricing for
Differentiated Products,” Mimeo, Federal Trade Commission.
Musgrove, Mike. “Itunes to Sell Songs Without Restrictions; Four Record Companies
Back Tiered Pricing Plan,” The Washington Post, Financial, P. D01, January 7, 2009.
Orbach, Barak Y. and Liran Einav. “Uniform Pricing for Differentiated Goods: The Case
of the Movie Theater Industry.” International Review of Law and Economics 27 (2007):
129-153.
Pindyck, Robert S. and Daniel L. Rubinfeld, Microeconomics, sixth ed. Pearson Prentice
Hall: Upper Saddle River, NJ. 2006.
Rob, Rafael and Joel Waldfogel. “Piracy on the High C’s: Music Downloading, Sales
Displacement, and Social Welfare.” Journal of Law & Economics (2006):
Schmalensee, R. (1984): “Gaussian Demand and Commodity Bundling,” Journal of
Business, 57(1), 211-231.
Stigler, G.J. (1963): “United States v. Loew's Inc.: A Note on Block Booking,” Supreme
Court Review, 152-7.

46

Sundararajan, Arun. (2004) “Nonlinear Pricing of Information Goods.” Management
Science 50 (12), 1660-1673.
Venkatesh, R. and V. Mahajan (1993): “A Probabilistic Approach to Pricing a Bundle of
Products or Services," Journal of Marketing Research, 30(4), 494-508.
Wilson, Robert B. Nonlinear Pricing. New York: Oxford University Press. 1993.

47

Figure 1: Distribution of Valuations on [0,2]
2009, raw

0

0

2

2

Density
4

D e ns ity
4

6

6

8

8

2008, raw

0

.5

1
Valuation

1.5

0

2

1
Valuation

1.5

2

1
Valuation

1.5

2

2009, parametric

0

0

2

2

4

4

De nsity
6

D e ns ity
6

8

8

10

10

2008, parametric

.5

0

.5

1
Valuation

1.5

0

2

.5

Notes: the distribution of valuations between $0 and $2. The top panels report raw data.
The bottom panels employ the simulated data derived from our zero-inflated multivariate
lognormal estimates.

48

Figure 2: Song Valuation and Ownership, 2009 Sample
Share Purchased

0

Share of Items Purchased
.2
.4

.6

excluding those already stolen

-4

-2

0
2
Log of Average Valuation in Cell

4

Note: Figure excludes songs obtained via file-sharing.

49

Figure 3: Valuations across Individuals and Quantities of Music
2008, raw

2009, raw
Distribution of Cumulative Valuations

0

0

10

20

20

40

30

60

40

80

50

Distribution of Cumulative Valuations

0

10

20

Songs

30

40

0

50

10

20

30

40

50

Songs

25th Percentile
75th Percentile

25th Percentile
75th Percentile

50th Percentile

2008, parametric

50th Percentile

2009, parametric
Distribution of Cumulative Valuations

0

0

20

20

40

40

60

80

60

Distribution of Cumulative Valuations

0

10

20

Songs

25th Percentile
75th Percentile

30

40

0

50

10

20

30

40

50

Songs
25th Percentile
75th Percentile

50th Percentile

50th Percentile

Notes: For any number of songs x, the figures depict the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentile of
the distribution of the valuations of the x songs that the individual respondents value most
highly. The top panels are based on raw data. The bottom panels are based on the
simulated data derived from our zero-inflated multivariate lognormal estimates.

50

Figure 4: Pairwise Correlation of Song Valuations
2008, raw

2009, raw
Correlations of Song Valuations

0

0

1

1

D e ns ity

De nsity

2

2

3

3

Correlations of Song Valuations

0

.2

.4
Correlation

.6

0

.8

2008, parametric

.2

.4
Correlation

.6

.8

2009, parametric
Correlations of Song Valuations

0

0

1

1

D e ns ity
2

De nsity
2

3

3

4

4

Correlations of Song Valuations

0

.2

.4
Correlation

.6

0

.8

.2

.4
Correlation

.6

.8

Notes: Figures report the distribution of pairwise correlations in valuation for the 50
songs. Each histogram contains 1225 (50*49/2) correlations. The top panels are based on
raw data. The bottom panels are based on the simulated data derived from our zeroinflated multivariate lognormal estimates.

51

Figure 5: Overall Demand Curve
2009, raw

20

2008, raw

0

0

5

5

V alu a tio n
10

Va lua tion
10

15

15

20

Demand Curve

0

5000

10000

15000

20000

0

25000

5000

Quantity

2008, parametric

10000
Quantity

15000

20000

2009, parametric
Demand Curve

0

0

5

5

Va lua tion
10

V alu a tio n
10

15

15

20

20

Demand Curve

0

50000

100000
150000
Quantity

200000

0

250000

50000

100000
150000
Quantity

200000

250000

Notes: Figures report the demand curves constructed by ordering individual song
valuation observations from highest to lowest. The top panels are based on raw data.
The bottom panels are based on the simulated data derived from our zero-inflated
multivariate lognormal estimates.

52

Figure 6: Single-Price Revenue Function
2009, raw

0

0

2 000

20 0 0

R e v en ue
40 0 0

Re ven ue
4 000
6 000

60 0 0

8 000

80 0 0

2008, raw

0

5000

10000

15000

20000

0

25000

5000

Quantity

15000

20000

2009, parametric

0

0

2 000 0

20 0 0 0

Re ven ue
4 000 0 6 000 0

R e v en ue
40 0 0 0

60 0 0 0

8 000 0 1 000 00

2008, parametric

10000
Songs

0

50000

100000

150000

200000

0

250000

Songs

50000

100000

150000

200000

250000

Songs

Notes: Figures report the revenue functions curves constructed by ordering individual
song valuation observations from highest to lowest, defining V(n). The maximum
revenue available for selling any quantity n is then nV(n). The top panels are based on
raw data. The bottom panels are based on the simulated data derived from our zeroinflated multivariate lognormal estimates.

53

Figure 7: Distribution of Song-Specific Revenue-Maximizing Prices
2008, raw
2009, raw
Song-Specific PS-Maximizing Prices

0

0

1

.1

2

.2

D e ns ity
3

De nsity
.3

4

.4

5

.5

Song-Specific PS-Maximizing Prices

0

5

10
price

15

.5

20

1

1.5

2

price

2008, parametric

2009, parametric
Song-Specific PS-Maximizing Prices

0

0

.2

.5

D e ns ity

De nsity
.4

1

.6

1. 5

.8

Song-Specific PS-Maximizing Prices

1

2

3
price

4

.5

5

1

1.5

2

price

Notes: Figures report the distribution of song-specific revenue maximizing prices. The
top panels are based on raw data. The bottom panels are based on the simulated data
derived from our zero-inflated multivariate lognormal estimates.

54

Figure 8: Top Two-Part Tariffs

30

Hookup Fe e (T)
40
50
60

70

Ranges of 2-Part Tariffs by Revenue, 2008

0

.2

.4
.6
Per Unit Price (p)
Top 10

.8

1

Top 1 percent

15

20

Hookup Fe e (T)
25
30
35

40

Ranges of 2-Part Tariffs by Revenue, 2009

0

.2

.4
.6
Per Unit Price (p)
Top 10

.8

1

Top 1 percent

Notes: The figures report the best 10, and the best 1 percent of two-part tariffs identified
by grid search.

55

Figure 9: Budget Constraint with Nonlinear Price Schedule (2009 sample)
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50

Note: The figure depicts a budget constraint with an endowment of $60. The vertical axis
shows dollars, while the horizontal axis shows the number of songs the individual can
purchase.

56

Figure 10: The Tradeoff between CS and PS Improvement in Bundle Pricing
(2009 Sample)
10a
Pareto-Improving Bundling

0

% C h a n g e in P ro d u c e r S u r p lu s
10
20
30

2009 Parametric

-20

0

20
40
% Change in Consumer Surplus

60

Note: Figure shows the frontier relating producer and consumer surplus across pure
bundling schemes differing in their price. The vertical line identifies the profitmaximizing scheme. As the price declines, the PS improvement declines, and CS
improvement increases.
10b
PS Improvement vs Share with Higher PS

0

% P S I m p ro v e m e nt re l t o U P
10
20

30

for pure bundling

.2

.4
.6
Share of Consumers Better Off

.8

Note: Figure shows the frontier relating total producer surplus with the share of
consumers better off under a bundling scheme (relative to uniform pricing) across pure
bundling schemes differing in their price. The vertical line identifies the profitmaximizing scheme. As the price declines, the PS improvement declines, and the share
of consumers better off under the bundling scheme increases.

57

Appendix
Table A1: Alternative Pricing Approaches using Raw Data
Pricing Method

PS
share

CS
share

DWL
share

Uniform
Component
Pure Bundling
Two-Part Tariff
Nonlinear

30.6%
32.0%
30.8%
32.3%
30.9%

41.8%
49.0%
53.5%
53.0%
53.5%

27.6%
19.0%
15.7%
14.7%
15.6%

Uniform
Component
Pure Bundling
Two-Part Tariff
Nonlinear

36.4%
37.2%
38.3%
38.9%
38.3%

47.9%
43.5%
41.3%
39.9%
41.2%

15.7%
19.4%
20.4%
21.2%
20.5%

Table A3: Bundle Size and Change in PS, Raw Data
Bundle
Size
2
3
4
5
10
25
50

2008,
raw
-3.3%
-3.9%
-3.6%
-3.1%
-1.1%
0.7%
0.6%

2009,
raw
-1.9%
-1.9%
-1.6%
-1.3%
0.4%
3.1%
5.3%

58

%
ΔPS
4.60%
0.62%
5.50%
1.06%

2.13%
5.26%
6.90%
5.25%

%
ΔCS
17.19%
27.82%
26.80%
27.83%

-9.30%
-13.87%
-16.77%
-13.99%

%
Δ DWL
-31.19%
-42.91%
-46.79%
-43.42%

2008
2008
2008
2008
2008

23.46%
30.15%
35.22%
30.55%

2009
2009
2009
2009
2009

