                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   ARE HARD PEGS EVER CREDIBLE IN EMERGING MARKETS? EVIDENCE FROM
                    THE CLASSICAL GOLD STANDARD

                                        Kris James Mitchener
                                        Marc D. Weidenmier

                                        Working Paper 15401
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15401


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2009




We thank Scott Potter, Julie Van Tighem, and Mindy Ngo for research assistance; Cristián Echeverría,
Aldo Musacchio, Luciano Pezzolo, Matias Morys, Cristian van Rysselberghe, and Gail Triner for assistance
with data; and the National Science Foundation for financial support. We also thank Brock Blomberg,
Richard Burdekin, Fabio Ghironi, James Nason, Helen Popper, Angela Redish, Hugh Rockoff, Tom
Willett, and conference and seminar participants at the ASSA meetings, the Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta Monetary History Workshop, Cambridge University, Stanford University, and the Political
Economy of International Finance Meetings for comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Kris James Mitchener and Marc D. Weidenmier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Are Hard Pegs Ever Credible in Emerging Markets? Evidence from the Classical Gold Standard
Kris James Mitchener and Marc D. Weidenmier
NBER Working Paper No. 15401
October 2009, Revised November 2012
JEL No. F2,F33,F36,F41,N10,N20

                                             ABSTRACT

We test whether fixed exchange rate regimes are ever credible in emerging markets by analyzing the
behavior of short-term domestic trade bills across countries during the classical gold standard period,
the most widely used hard peg in modern financial history. We exploit the fact that global capital markets
were unfettered in order to identify the currency-risk component using uncovered interest parity for
17 of the largest emerging market borrowers for the period 1870-1913. We show that five years after
a country joined the gold standard, the currency risk premium averaged at least 285 basis points for
emerging market economies. We estimate that investors expected exchange rates to fall by roughly
28 percent even after emerging market borrowers joined the gold standard. Positive currency risk premiums
that persisted long after gold standard adoption suggests that hard pegs for emerging market borrowers
may never be fully credible.


Kris James Mitchener
Department of Economics
Leavey School of Business
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA 95053
and NBER
kmitchener@scu.edu

Marc D. Weidenmier
Robert Day School of Economics and Finance
Claremont McKenna College
500 East Ninth Street
Claremont, CA 91711
and NBER
marc_weidenmier@claremontmckenna.edu
    Are Hard Pegs Ever Credible in Emerging Markets? Evidence from the
                         Classical Gold Standard

     At the time of adoption of a single currency for much of Europe, many policymakers
believed that exit from the Euro would not only be politically difficult, but also undesirable in
the sense that the new hard peg would confer greater benefits than costs. Recently, however,
rising sovereign spreads and the prospect of disorderly default among some of its members has
suggested to some market participants that the best long-term option for highly-indebted
countries such as Greece may be an exit from the Euro zone. The ratings agency Moody’s
recently declared that “a disorderly default would also increase the likelihood of Greece exiting
the euro area, accompanied by a return to a deeply devalued national currency. Whilst such an
event is not Moody's central scenario, the probability of it occurring is rising. In that event, the
ability for Greek borrowers to repay their debt would weaken significantly, beyond that already
assumed. Even taking into account the low likelihood of this scenario, its effect would be such
that Moody's has concluded that the rating for any Greek covered bond could not be higher than
B1.”1
     The turmoil in European sovereign debt markets has rekindled interest in understanding how
market participants perceive the durability of hard pegs and the extent to which the adoption of
hard pegs enhances credibility. Proponents of hard pegs argue that credible commitments to
fixed exchange rates significantly reduce the premiums that emerging market countries pay to
borrow in international capital markets. For example, countries may be able to borrow at lower
rates if the adoption of fixed exchange rates confers credibility. Establishing regime credibility
may be particularly important for emerging-market countries since their borrowing rates tend to
be higher than those for high-income countries. Lower interest-rate spreads for emerging-market
countries can in turn stimulate investment and economic growth (Berg and Borensztein, 2000;
Schmukler and Serven, 2002).
        The analysis of yield spreads is thus central to the debate about exchange-rate regime
choice. In well-functioning capital markets, two of the most important risk premia for a country


1
 Moody’s press release from January 23, 2012 as quoted in Simone Foxman, “Moody’s: Odds Of A Greek Debt
Default Disaster And Exit From The Euro Are On The Rise,” Business Insider online.




                                                1
are: (1) country risk and (2) currency risk.2 The country risk premium represents the risk that a
country will default on its debt obligations while the currency risk premium represents the
compensation that an investor receives for an adverse movement in the exchange rate
(Domowitz, Glen, and Madhavan, 1998). The currency risk premium is particularly relevant for
the debate over exchange-rate regime choice. Advocates of hard pegs argue that they reduce the
currency risk premium, and if perfectly credible, may even eliminate it altogether and hence
lower borrowing costs.3 On the other hand, if financial markets do not consider the peg to be
perfectly credible, however, then the currency risk premium will remain positive (Schmukler and
Serven, 2002).
         In this paper, we empirically examine whether hard pegs are ever credible. We take
advantage of a unique historical setting provided by the classical gold standard era to measure
currency risk. The classical gold standard has several features that make it particularly suitable
for our objectives. First, the period from 1870-1913 was one of unfettered capital markets. The
absence of capital controls (as well as the absence of the threat of capital controls) in the
classical gold standard era enables us to identify and accurately measure currency risk based on
interest-parity conditions. Second, the pre-World War I gold standard is considered by many
economists to be the canonical case of a widely-used hard peg.4 Third, the financial press
published high-frequency data for a large number of emerging market borrowers, permitting us
to conduct empirical tests. Fourth, the gold standard period may have been a more credible hard
peg (compared to modern hard pegs) because governments and the monetary authorities faced
little political pressure to pursue countercyclical economic policies (Eichengreen, 1997).
         To measure currency risk, we hand collected a large, new data set of monthly and weekly
short-term interest rates from the period 1870-1913 for 21 countries. We then employ uncovered
interest parity (UIP) to examine the interest rate differential between the UK and these 21



2
  There is a large empirical literature in international and development economics on the country-risk and/or
currency-risk components of yield spreads for emerging market debt. For example, see Edwards (1984, 1986) and
Sturzenegger and Powell (2003).
3
  Additionally, fixed exchange rates that are credible may reduce the probability of speculative attacks and
contagion.
4
  Eichengreen (1996) suggests that one reason the classical gold standard may have been more credible peg than
later fixed exchange rate systems was that central banks were able to attach priority to defending fixed exchange
rates rather than pursuing countercyclical monetary policy. Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995) argue that modern hard pegs
are unlikely to be credible because central banks will generally succumb to political pressure and not defend the peg
when there is a sustained increase in interest rates (that lowers investment and output).


                                                     2
borrowers to measure currency risk.5 Our results suggest that joining the gold club did not
eliminate the interest-rate differential between short-term, gold-denominated, domestic UK trade
bills UK and the trade bill of a typical emerging market borrower. For emerging market
borrowers, we find that interest differentials persisted. Five years after a typical emerging market
economy country joined the gold standard, the currency-risk premium averaged at least 285 basis
points.
          The existence and persistence of large currency risk premiums suggests that financial
markets believed that these hard pegs were not fully credible. Our calculations suggest investors
still considered devaluation and departure from gold a high probability event in “emerging
market” economies around the world and, on average, expected exchange rates to fall 28 percent
even after gold standard adoption. Data on long-term government bonds displays similarly large
currency risk premia, suggesting that investors bid this risk into a wide variety of financial
contracts.
          The next section of the paper discusses our theoretical approach and the data we use to
implement it. Section III measures currency risk premiums for the classical gold standard era,
describes their time series properties, and calculates expected devaluations for emerging market
countries. Section IV provides a robustness check based on long-term, sovereign bond data. The
final section of the paper discusses the implications of our findings as they relate to the
credibility of fixed exchange-rate regimes in general.


II. The Gold Standard and Currency Risk


A. Theoretical Approach


          Bordo and Kydland (1995) provide an interpretation of the role of the gold standard as it
relates to the literature on rules for policymakers. They argue that being on the gold standard tied
the hands of the fiscal and monetary authorities of a country, and that a monetary rule like a

5
  Previous studies examining the gold standard have focused on country risk rather than currency risk. Bordo and
Rockoff (1996) and Obstfeld and Taylor (2003) find that the gold standard lowered sovereign risk by approximately
30-40 basis points. Flandreau and Zumer (2004) find that the gold standard had no effect on sovereign yields once a
broader set of economic and political variables controls are considered. Ferguson and Schularick (2006b) find that
the gold standard effect disappears once the sample of sovereign borrowers is expanded to include the universe of
debtors on the London market.


                                                    3
fixed exchange rate could serve as a credible commitment mechanism for solving the classic
time-inconsistency problem (Kydland and Prescott, 1985). Government policy is said to be time
inconsistent when a policy plan that is determined to be optimal and to hold indefinitely into the
future is subsequently revised. For example, suppose that a government sells debt to finance a
war. From an ex ante perspective, it is optimal for the government to service its debt obligations.
However, once the bonds have been sold, it is optimal for the government to default unless there
is a commitment mechanism that ties the hands of the fiscal and monetary authorities. In the
absence of a commitment mechanism, it is time inconsistent for the government to repay its debt
obligations. Private agents will anticipate the government’s incentive to default and they will not
buy bonds, forcing the government to rely on taxes or money creation. Overall, the existence of
an enforcement mechanism, such as a credible threat to deny the government access to
borrowing in the future, means that a socially optimal, but time inconsistent policy of borrowing
can be supported as an equilibrium outcome.
       Bordo and Kydland (1995) also argue that the gold standard had an escape clause.
Countries could suspend specie convertibility in the event of a war or a fiscal emergency;
however, after the war or extraordinary event ended, it was well understood that a country would
return to specie convertibility at the pre-war parity. Generally, resumption occurred after a
“reasonable” delay period during which a country would impose deflationary policies to retire
fiat currency printed for war or emergency finance. The United States and France provide
examples of the use of escape clauses. They fought wars in the 1860s and 1870s and issued large
amounts of irredeemable paper currency and debt. At the conclusion of these wars, both
countries imposed deflationary policies to restore convertibility, and both had returned to a
specie standard by 1880.


B. Testable Implications


       Using the theoretical insight that a fixed exchange rate regime represents a commitment
rule, we examine the behavior of interest rates during the classical gold standard era in order to
assess the credibility of hard pegs for emerging market borrowers. In particular, our research
breaks new ground by calculating and analyzing the currency risk premium for the classical gold
standard era. Previous research on the gold standard has focused almost exclusively on country



                                             4
risk (also called “political risk”) using long-term bonds; this measure provides an assessment of
the default risk for an emerging market borrower.6 Alternatively, our paper measures the
currency risk premium, which provides an estimate of the compensation that bondholders
demand in the case of an expected devaluation.
        To understand how the currency risk premium relates to anticipated changes in the
exchange rate, we define I t ,k as the annualized (gross) yield (i.e., one plus the interest rate) at

time t of risk-free short-term interest rates.7 Let k denote the maturity of short-term interest rates.
We define I tUK
             , k as the risk-free interest rate. The total yield differential can then be written as:


         I t ,k       I t ,k I t*,k
(1)               =                   .
         I tUK
            ,k        I t*,k I tUK
                                ,k


        We can express the difference between the short-term gold interest rates between two
countries as the sum of two risk premiums. Setting it ,k equal to the natural log of I t ,k , we find

that


( 2)     (it ,k − itUK
                    , k ) = (it , k − it , k ) + (it , k − it , k ) .
                                       *           *        UK




The first-term on the right hand side equation (2) is the currency risk premium and the second
term is the country risk premium. The country risk premium (or political risk) represents the risk
that a country will default on its debt obligations. We set the second term in equation (2) equal to
zero under the assumption that default risk for the short-term interest rates is the same for the
two countries.
        We now show that the currency risk premium represents the compensation that an
investor requires due to the possibility of a movement in the exchange rate. First, we define the
exchange rate, S t , as the amount of local currency per unit of foreign currency. Assuming risk-
neutrality, arbitrage implies that uncovered interest parity holds, such that




6
  See Bordo and Rockoff (1996), Obstfeld and Taylor (2003), Ferguson and Schularick (2006a) and Flandreau and
Zumer (2004).
7
  Our derivation follows Schmukler and Serven (2002).


                                                                        5
                                1/ k
                 ⎡E S ⎤
(3) I t ,k   = I ⎢ t t +k ⎥
                *
                t ,k                   ,
                 ⎣ St ⎦
where Et S t + k is the expectation at time t of the exchange rate at time t+k. Taking natural
logarithms of the interest parity condition, we can rewrite the first term in equation (2) as
( 4)     (it ,k − it*,k ) = Δste,k ,

                   1 ⎡ Et S t + k ⎤
where Δste,k =      ln ⎢          ⎥.
                   k ⎣ St ⎦

        Equation (4) is an uncovered interest parity (UIP) condition where the currency risk
premium equals the expected rate of change in the exchange rate under the assumption that the
short-term debt instruments have zero default risk. Hence, if a country made a completely
credible, non-contingent, and permanent commitment to join the gold standard, then the
probability of a devaluation of the exchange rate would be zero (Obstfeld and Taylor, 2003).
That is, for a country that credibly committed to the gold standard, the interest-rate differential
between a country’s open market rate and British trade bills should be zero. On the other hand, a
persistently large spread between these two short-term interest rates once the the gold standard is
introduced, would suggest that financial markets did not view the commitment to the fixed
exchange rate peg as a credible.
        Although using interest-parity conditions to identify the currency risk premium is
conceptually straightforward, it is often empirically difficult to implement. For example, the
presence of capital controls (or the expectation of capital controls) can drive a wedge between
the price of short-term trade bills trading in local and foreign markets. Indeed, the widespread
use of capital controls after the 1930s, has made it challenging to measure currency risk as we do
here. By contrast, the classical gold standard era had unfettered capital markets that were largely
free of government intervention (Eichengreen, 1996, IMF, 1997), making our period of analysis
particularly well suited for testing the credibility of hard pegs.


C. Implementation


        To analyze the effect of the gold standard on interest rates, we assembled a new database
of high-frequency, short-term interest rates for 21 countries, roughly 250,000 observations.



                                               6
Much of our data is hand-collected from contemporaneous financial publications.8 The database
includes the universe of domestic trade bills reported in The Economist from November 5, 1870
until June 30, 1914.9 We supplement data from The Economist with short-term interest rates
from The Commercial and Financial Chronicle, the Manchester Guardian, and Global Financial
data. Domestic trade bills were the modern equivalent of bankers’ acceptances, which have
interest rates that approximate the yields on risk-free US Treasury bills in financial markets.
Trade bills were short-term accommodation paper used to finance domestic commerce and
domestic trade during the gold standard period (Neal and Weidenmier, 2003). The credit
instruments were payable in domestic currency and issued in the leading money centers
throughout Europe and the rest of the world, implying that the domestic trade bill is payable in
gold if a country’s currency is convertible into gold. On the other hand, if a country’s currency
was not backed by gold (i.e. it was not on the gold standard), then trade bills were payable in
domestic currency (i.e., paper money if the country had fiat money or silver if a country’s
currency was convertible into silver). The short-term bills bills were widely regarded as liquid
and risk-free or low risk debt instruments during the classical gold standard period. For countries
that lacked trade bills, we use the bank rate following Bordo and Flandreau (2003). The bank rate
is the short-term interest rate used by the central bank to discount trade bills for a given country.
Our use of the central bank discount rate is based on the fact that central banks’ discounted large
number of domestic trade bills; hence, these instruments were highly liquid. Moreover, default
risk associated with central banks is likely to be very low. All short-term financial instruments in
our sample have 90 days maturity. The interest rates reported by the Economist for these 90-day
instruments, however, are annualized. Appendix 1 provides details on the particular short-term
interest rate used for each country.
         For each country, we collected monthly or weekly quotes, whichever is the highest
frequency reported by the financial press. For all non-UK countries in the sample, we use the
lowest interest rate reported in the financial press for a given emerging market country to provide

8
  With the exception of India, British colonies are also not included in the sample. Ferguson and Schularick (2006a)
argue that the British government guaranteed the debt obligations of its colonies so that a currency risk premium
computed for these places would be downward biased and not reflect the actual premium in the absence of support
from the UK.
9
  There are a few gold standard adopters for which we lack data on short term rates (Costa Rica, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Nicaragua, Peru, and Turkey). Since these countries were located on the periphery and experienced
trouble staying on gold, their omission means that our average estimate of currency risk for emerging market
countries is likely a lower bound.


                                                     7
a lower bound estimate of the currency risk premium.10 By using the lowest reported interest
rate, we account for the impact of the bid-ask bounce on short-term interest rates that might
increase the size of the currency risk premia because of an illiquidity premium.11
         Convertibility under the gold standard was established by law or executive decree,
although in some countries, such as France, maintenance of convertibility was left at the
discretion of central banks rather than the sovereign or legislature. Table 1 presents a timeline of
gold standard adoption for every country that joined the gold standard in the period 1870-1914
and had short-term interest rates. Column 1 lists the dates of gold standard adoption, defined as
the date that a monetary authority for a given country initiated or resumed specie convertibility.
Column 2 shows the period of gold standard adherence for the 21 sovereign borrowers. By
confining our analysis to countries or colonies that remained on the gold standard for at least two
years, we provide a lower bound estimate of currency risk.12 Appendix 2 provides further
information and sources for gold standard adoption dates.


III. Measuring Currency Risk Premia


         To measure the currency risk premia, we calculate the interest-rate differential on short-
term debt instruments by subtracting the UK trade bill from a given country or colony’s interest
rate on domestic trade bills. The UK serves as the base country in our sample since it is widely
considered to be the leading economic and financial power of the late nineteenth and early
twentieth century. Table 2 presents descriptive statistics of currency risk premia. Panels A and B
report average interest-rate differentials (in basis points), for the entire period and for 10-year
windows and four-year windows (or the largest available window if a country was on the gold
standard for less than four years). For each country, the windows are positioned relative to the
date of gold standard adoption. The fourth column of the table also displays the change in the
risk premia, comparing the two-year or five-year period before adoption with the two-year or
five-year period after joining gold. These windows are designed to measure long-run adherence
10
   Corwin and Schultz (2012) report that low (prices) interest rates are almost always sell trades. This means that the
currency risk premium calculated using the lowest reported interest rate provides a lower bound estimate.
11
   This also assumes that the spread on the short-term interest rate for the UK, our base country, is very small or
zero. The spread of the UK trade bill is averaged about 12 basis points during the classical gold standard period.
12
   The two-year decision rule eliminates short-lived attempts by Argentina, Brazil, and Greece to join the gold
standard during the late nineteenth century. The estimated average currency risk premium for emerging market
borrowers would be higher if these were included.


                                                      8
to the gold standard, noting the conclusion from theory that, after adoption, these should be
approximately equal to zero if the peg is perceived by markets as credible. Figures 1 and 2 show
10-year windows (or largest available sample period) for our sample of 21 borrowers centered
around the adoption date of the gold standard with weeks (or months) from that date shown on
the x-axis. 13
         Panel A of Table 2 shows that the currency risk premium for France was slightly negative
and hardly different from the rate on British trade bills (-9 basis points) five years after the
country joined the gold standard. Panel B shows similar results for the four year window; after
adoption, the currency risk premium averaged -15 basis points. The data for France suggest that
markets viewed this peg as credible. Borrowing rates for Germany averaged 10 basis points in
the five years after adoption. Markets also appear to have assessed a few other pegs of Western
European countries as fairly credible. The currency risk premium for Belgium and Netherlands
averaged 33 and 30 basis points, respectively, five years after they adopted the hard peg. The
four-year windows paint a similar picture: the mean currency risk premium averaged 25 basis
points for Belgium and 47 basis points for Netherlands in the two years after joining the gold
standard. On the other hand, despite its level of development, our findings suggest that financial
markets viewed the United States differently; its currency risk premium averaged more than 200
basis points in the five years after the United States joined the gold standard.14 Even if we extend
this analysis to cover the entire gold standard up until the outbreak of World War I, the currency
risk premium for the United States averaged more than 150 basis points.
         The rest of Continental Europe exhibits sizable currency risk premia. Austria’s currency
risk premium averaged a little more than 200 basis points in the five year window after the
country joined the gold standard in August 1892. For Italy, the currency risk premium averaged
slightly more than 150 basis points in the five years after it joined the gold standard. The
currency risk premium was similar for Switzerland. For the Scandinavian countries, currency
risk premia averaged more than 140 basis points for Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden
five years after a country joined the gold standard.
13
   Officer (1996) estimates that the costs of importing gold were 0.69 percent of parity and 0.61 percent of parity for
gold exports between the United States and the United Kingdom during the classical gold standard period. The cost
of transporting gold between two countries is a transactions cost that limits interest parity from holding precisely
during the period 1870-1913.
14
   Lothian and Wu (2005) point out that the short-term interest rate for the United States during the classical gold
standard period is the commercial paper rate, and that it might contain a credit premium . The presence of a credit
premium would increase the currency risk premium for the United States.


                                                      9
         Exchange-rate risk was also sizable in Eastern and Southern Europe. Markets asked for
an additional 443, 263, and 121 basis points, respectively, for Bulgaria, Greece and Rumania in
the two-year period after they adopted gold. Their premia seem to persist as well, respectively
exhibiting 384, 232, and 241 basis points of currency risk five years after joining gold.
         Countries in other parts of the world also show considerable currency risk after gold
standard adoption. For Argentina and Japan, their currency risk premia averaged more than 400
basis points in the two-year and five-year windows after they adopted the gold standard. It was
more than 700 basis points for Chile’s three years on the gold standard. The currency risk
premium averaged 270 basis points for Russia in the two and five years periods after the country
joined the gold standard in 1897.
         Table 3 shows the average currency risk premia for seven countries on the gold standard
for which we have data both on the central bank discount rate and the domestic trade bill market.
For each country, we then compare the currency risk premia computed using central bank
discount rates with those using domestic trade bills. As shown in Table 3, the currency risk
premium averaged nearly 100 basis points using the two different methodologies as a measure of
the currency risk premium.
         Overall, the time-series evidence suggests that the gold standard was likely credible for a
small set of core European countries that included France, Germany, and the United Kingdom,
the Netherlands, and Belgium. These countries had high standards of living (measured by GDP
per capita) and were leading financial centers of the nineteenth century. A very different picture,
however, emerges for other countries in the sample. Outside the core countries, the currency risk
premium averaged more than 285 basis points five years after a country joined the gold standard
with a standard deviation of 163 basis points.15 These new estimates of currency risk appear
consistent with descriptive accounts of the operation of the gold standard on the periphery, which
suggest that it may have been more difficult for these countries to adhere to policies set by the
core countries of the gold standard. (Bordo and Kydland 1995, Eichengreen 1996).
         To provide some additional statistical evidence on the credibility of the pegs for the non-
core, we regress the interest rate on the British trade bill in period t on the short-term interest rate
of country i in period t and a constant term. The sample reflects the period in which the country


15
  Adding the U.S. to the set of “core” countries has the effect of raising the average for emerging market borrowers
from 285 to 290 basis points.


                                                    10
was on the gold standard and the frequency is as listed in Table 1 as noted earlier. For our
purposes, the key coefficient is the constant term which, according to theory, ought to equal zero
if the country’s peg is credible.
       To run these tests, we first explore the time series properties of the data. As Table 4
shows, using DF-GLS tests we can reject the existence of a unit root in nearly all the countries in
our sample at standard confidence intervals. For those few that do not pass the unit root test, we
find additional evidence of a co-integrating relationship, suggesting stationarity in all the data
series we consider. Table 5 shows that the estimated coefficients on the constant terms
(measured in percentage points) are large and statistically significantly different from zero at the
one-percent level in all regressions. The constant is more than 200 basis points for all countries.
Argentina and Chile have constants greater than 900 basis points, while the intercept for Greece
and Japan is more than 600 basis points. Finland, Norway, Rumania, Russia, and Sweden have
estimated currency risk premia greater than 400 basis points. The estimated intercept for Austria,
Denmark, India, and Italy is between 300 and 400 basis points. Switzerland and the United States
are the most credible hard pegs among emerging markets, with respective currency risk premia
of 290 and 227 basis points. The estimated coefficients on the intercept term provide further
evidence that, outside the core countries of Western Europe, market participants did not perceive
the gold standard as credible.


IV. Implied Devaluations for Gold Standard Adopters


       An alternative way of assessing the credibility of the hard pegs is to consider whether
investors believed that countries would devalue after gold standard adoption. If the size of an
anticipated devaluation were close to zero, this would indicate that investors viewed the pegs as
fully credible. However, if the expected devaluation deviated significantly from zero, this would
indicate that markets did not expect the pegs to last.
        In this section, we follow the methodology proposed in Schmukler and Serven (2002),
and estimate the size of the anticipated devaluation for our sample of 17 emerging market
economies. We primarily focus on emerging market currency risk for two reasons: (1) emerging
market countries historically have had large currency risk premia; and (2) prior research on the
gold standard has largely focused on the risk premia of core countries (Bordo and MacDonald,



                                             11
2000). Using our assumption of risk neutrality and the definitions from Section II of the paper,
we can rewrite the currency risk premium as the likelihood of an exchange rate devaluation, p,
multiplied by the size of the expected devaluation, d te :


(5) (it ,k − it*,k ) = pd te .


Dividing the currency risk premium by the probability of a fall in the exchange-rate yields the
anticipated size of the devaluation:


(6) d te = (it ,k − it*,k ) / p.


         Table 6 shows the expected size of the devaluation for each of our 17 non-core
economies. The cells in the table provide country-specific estimates of the size of the expected
decline in the exchange rate based on varying the probability of a hypothetical devaluation. By
employing Bordo and Murshid’s (2006) estimates of the likelihood of a global financial crisis
during the gold standard era, it is possible to further narrow the range of the size of the
anticipated decline in the exchange rate. Their research suggests that the probability of a global
crisis during our sample period was somewhere between 10 and 14 percent. If we assume that
each country’s probability of a fall in the exchange-rate is equal to the probability of a global
crisis and we use the lower end estimate of a global crisis of 10 percent, then across all emerging
market economies the data suggest that markets anticipated that exchange rates would fall by an
average of more than 28 percent (Column 1, Table 6). The size of the decline in the exchange
rate varies significantly across our sample of 17 gold standard countries given that the standard
deviation of the currency risk premium is 16 percent. We estimate expected devaluations of more
than 20 percent for countries such as Argentina, Austria, Bulgaria, Chile, Greece, India, Japan,
Mexico, Norway, Rumania, Russia, Sweden, and the United States.
         It is certainly possible that the probability of a crisis for a particular country is higher than
the incidence of a global crisis. For example, domestic economic and political factors may
influence a country’s willingness and ability to maintain a fixed exchange rate regime. Trade
shocks are one reason why individual country crisis’ probabilities could differ for small, open



                                                12
economies. Since emerging market economies experienced greater terms of trade shocks during
the classical gold standard era than core countries (Williamson, 2011), we therefore consider an
alternative benchmark – that the probability of a financial crisis in a given country is more than
double the probability of a global crisis or 25 percent. This number is based on the fact that the
volatility of terms of trade shocks is approximately two and a half times greater for emerging
markets than core countries (Williamson, 2010). Based on equation (6), the average maximum
implied devaluation is then roughly nine percent. Here again, there is considerable variance
across our sample. For countries like Austria, Brazil, Italy, and the United States, the maximum
implied decline in the exchange rate was less than 10 percent; for other countries, it ranged from
12 to 55 percent.


V. Robustness Checks


        The analysis of short-term data provides evidence that the hard pegs of the classical gold
standard era were not credible for emerging market economies. To test for the external validity
of our findings, we consider whether this lack of credibility was priced into other assets such as
long-term sovereign bonds. We created a new, high-frequency database of sovereign bond yields
for nine of the largest (non-colonial) sovereign debtors: Argentina, Austria, Brazil, Chile, India,
Italy, Mexico, Russia, and the United States. In 1913, these nine borrowers constituted roughly
60 percent of the world’s outstanding external debt.16 We use weekly data for all but Brazil,
Chile, and Italy for which monthly data are employed. The database on long-term bonds contains
more than 3,100 observations. In our sample, the gold and paper bonds trade on the same
domestic or international exchange, except for Chile, where the paper bonds trade on the home
market (Valparaiso) and the gold bonds on an international financial market (London). Appendix
3 provides information on the long-term gold and paper debt issues for each country in our
sample.
        Our data set is unique in that, for each of these countries, it contains bond yields for both
home-currency (paper) denominated bonds as well as gold- denominated bonds. Having gold and

16
  The five largest emerging market borrowers as of 1913 that were not included in our sample are Australia, Japan,
Turkey, Canada, and Egypt. Australia and Canada joined the gold standard prior to the start of our sample period.
We were unable to locate paper bonds for Japan, Egypt, and Turkey. Our sample of nine emerging market borrowers
that joined gold between 1870 and 1913 is identical to what appeared in the seminal paper on country risk by Bordo
and Rockoff (1996).


                                                   13
paper bonds for each country allows us to compute a measure of currency risk for long-term
assets. The bonds in the sample all have a duration of at least 10 years17. Other than the maturity
of the assets, the key difference in the analysis in this section is that we are comparing two bonds
for the same country rather than a benchmark country; this is critical because, in using long-term
bonds, we might otherwise be concerned about country risk. By using a gold bond and a paper
bond for the same country to calculate currency risk, we eliminate the country risk in long-term
sovereign debt obligations. Since we are focusing on the interest-rate differentials between two
bonds of the same country, where the primary difference between the obligations is their
currency denomination, our analysis is simpler than those interested in understanding country
risk: we largely eliminate the need to control for observed and unobserved differences in
sovereign-specific fundamentals.18
         As previously noted, theory predicts that a country has a credible peg if the currency risk
premium is zero.19 However, as shown in column 3 of Table 7, five years after adoption the
average currency risk premium for these nine borrowers was 415 basis points. As was true with
short-term debt obligations, this provides evidence that the hard pegs of the classical gold
standard period were not credible for countries on the periphery.20
         While the descriptive statistics are informative, they only present average yield spreads
before and after a country joined the gold standard. It may be the case that yield spreads declined
between the pre- and post-event period, but a movement in the underlying trend is masked by
using average interest-rate differentials. To provide some perspective on this question, Figures 3
and 4 show time-series plots of the currency risk premium for our sample of nine emerging
market countries The vertical line in each figure denotes when a country joined the gold
standard.


17
   The sovereign debt issued by Argentina, Chile, and Mexico also contain sinking funds with lottery provisions.
This might create some challenges in measuring the current yield which we will address below by comparing
expected devaluations (calculated from the current yield) with data on actual devaluations.
18
   Empirical studies of sovereign risk during the gold standard have found the ratio of debt-to-revenue, budget
deficit, and exports per capita to be important determinants of yield spreads (Ferguson and Schularick, 2006a;
Flandreau and Zumer, 2004).
19
   Our analysis also suggests that the currency risk premium is also capturing a factor that is largely distinct from the
determinants of country risk, given that the correlation between the change in the currency risk premium and the
country risk premium is less than 0.20 for the seven emerging market countries with both paper and gold (sterling)
bonds.
20
   The average currency risk premium for the nine sovereign borrowers declined roughly 73 basis points in the “on-
gold” period of the 10-year window and more than 43 basis points in the four-year window after a country adopted
the hard peg.


                                                      14
         Figure 3 still shows large currency risk premia. In particular, the currency risk premium
for Argentina, one of the largest sovereign borrowers of the late nineteenth century, declined in
the years leading up to the country’s adoption of the gold standard in October 1899, but it
remains at approximately 1,000 basis points after the country adopted the gold standard. As
shown in Figure 3, although exchange-rate risk declined Austria around the period of adoption,
the currency risk premium averaged approximately 120 basis points in the five-year period after
the country joined the gold standard in 1892. Figure 3 also indicates that India had a sizable
currency risk premia: the interest-rate differential between the paper-rupee-denominated bonds
and the gold-rupee-denominated bonds averaged 240 basis points in the five years after the
British colony joined the gold club. The interest-rate differential between Mexico’s home
currency bonds and sterling-denominated bonds declines substantially prior to adoption, but the
currency risk premium for Mexico averaged almost 500 basis points in the five-year period after
the country joined the gold standard (Figure 3). For Russia, the currency risk premium shown in
Figure 3 is large and appears to have changed very little over the 10-year window, averaging
more than 800 basis points before and after adoption of gold in 1897. Figure 3 also shows that
the currency risk premium for the United States averaged approximately 100 basis points over
the entire 10-year sample period.21
         Figure 4 shows the currency risk premium for Brazil, another large Latin American
borrower. Currency risk rose from a little under 50 basis points to around 100 basis points at the
time of adoption and remained at approximately 100 basis points after the country joined the
gold standard. Figure 4 presents the evidence for Italy, another European emerging market
economy. As it moved toward adopting the gold standard, Italy’s currency risk premium
declined; however, it remained between 40-60 basis points five years after adoption. Chile was
on the gold standard for a shorter period compared to other countries in our sample (it joined the
gold standard in 1895 and abandoned its hard peg in July 1898).22 The currency risk premium


21
   For the United States, we used both the 4.5 percent gold bonds (due in 1891) and the 4 percent gold bonds (due in
1907) to calculate the currency risk premium. We spliced the two bond series together by subtracting 30 basis points
off the 4.5 percent bonds in the period when data on the 4 percent gold bonds was not available. The 30-basis-point
difference is the average yield spread differential between the 4.5 percent gold bonds and the 4 percent gold bonds.
22
   Bordo and Rockoff (1996) discuss the relationship between Chilean internal peso bonds and its sterling
denominated external debt, but do not interpret the interest-rate differential as a measure of the currency risk
premium and its implications for the credibility of the hard peg. Chile also briefly joined the gold club in the early to
mid 1870s. However, we were unable to locate any domestic paper bonds to test the credibility of this earlier
episode of gold standard commitment.


                                                      15
averaged more than 583 basis points while it was on the gold standard (Figure 4). This large
interest-rate differential suggests that investors likely never perceived its peg to be very
credible.23
         Table 8 estimates the expected size of the devaluation of each for each of our nine
emerging market borrowers using the same methodology described in Section IV. The size of the
decline in the exchange rate varies significantly across our sample of nine emerging market
countries. Investors anticipated that exchange rates would fall by less than 13 percent for
countries like Austria, Brazil, Italy, and the United States, but would decline by more than 30
percent for countries such as Argentina, Chile, India, Mexico, and Russia. As before, our
alternative baseline takes into account the possibility that domestic factors may make the
probability of a crisis for an emerging market borrower higher than the probability of a global
crisis. Using the alternative baseline, for countries like Austria, Brazil, Italy, and the United
States, the maximum implied decline in the exchange rate was less than 10 percent; for other
countries, it ranged from 12 to 55 percent. Hence, even when we use long-term bond data, we are
finding substantial evidence that market participants did not view long-term commitments to the
gold standard as viable.
         We can take the empirical analysis of the short-term and long-term bonds one step further
by investigating whether actual devaluations map into expected devaluations for many of the
large emerging market borrowers. Doing so provides a useful validity check on the modeling
assumptions and the outcomes generated from the model. We are able to make this comparison
since most of the countries in our sample either left the gold standard or issued paper currency
that traded alongside money that was explicitly or legally backed by gold. Table 9 compares the
actual devaluations to the expected devaluations. Chile and Italy left the gold standard in July
1898 and May 1894, respectively. In the year following its departure from the gold standard,
Chile’s exchange rate was, on average, 28 percent lower against the U.S. dollar in comparison to
the period when it was on the gold standard. As shown Table 6, the 28 percent depreciation is
almost exactly equal to the expected depreciation. For Italy, the lira fell percent approximately 8
percent against the French franc in the six months after it abandoned specie convertibility in the
summer of 1893. Fratiani and Spinelli (1990) and Tattara (2003) show that movements in the

23
  Differences in liquidity are too small to account for the large currency risk premia. Appendix Table 4 uses relative
bid-ask spreads to compare the liquidity between gold and paper bonds. The analysis shows that the difference in
bid-ask spreads is approximately 25 basis points for the nine countries in our sample.


                                                     16
lira/franc exchange rate mirrored the ratio of Italian domestic to foreign prices of rendita debt.
Italy’s actual depreciation is slightly larger than the expected depreciation shown in Table 5.
       Argentina issued paper pesos that could only be exchanged for gold pesos at the rate of
2.27 to 1 based on the Conversion Law of 1899 (Williams, 1920). This implies that paper pesos
traded at a 127 percent premium, which is consistent with more than a 100 percent devaluation.
The large currency-risk premium calculated using paper and gold bonds and the observed paper-
gold exchange rate suggest that Argentina’s hard peg was not credible.
       Austria joined the gold standard in August 1892. As pointed out by Flandreau and
Komlos (2008), the Austrian exchange rate fluctuated within a narrow band around the country’s
mint par ratio. Indeed, the Amsterdamsch Effectenblad generally quoted paper florin trading at
par with gold florin up until the outbreak of World War I except for the first couple of years after
the country joined the gold standard in 1892. Financial markets expected Austrian currency to
devalue approximately six percent prior to the outbreak of World War I, which is greater than the
actual devaluation of zero percent.
       Brazil established a government exchange bureau to oversee exchange-rate fluctuations
after the country joined the gold standard in 1906. Shortly thereafter, the government bureau ran
out of gold to redeem the paper notes and the currency began to fluctuate on the open market. On
December 31, 1910, the President of Brazil issued a decree that paper notes would be converted
into gold at the new rate of 16 pence per milreis instead of 15 pence per milreis (Commerce
Reports of the United States, 1910). The nearly seven percent depreciation in the milreis is
consistent with the expected depreciation estimated for Brazil shown in Table 6, where the
assumed probability of devaluation is 10 percent.
       Mexico joined the gold standard in 1905, but continued to issue and use silver and gold
coins while on the gold standard. In 1905, the government altered the mint par ratio between
gold and silver by reducing the value of silver by 50 percent. This decision temporarily stabilized
the peso, improved the country’s trade balance, and promoted capital inflows as shown by the
large decline in the country’s currency risk premium. On the other hand, the 50 percent decline
in the gold value of the silver peso demonstrated a willingness of the Mexican government to
debase its currency, a decision that ultimately created inflationary pressure and contributed to the
downfall of Porfirio Diaz (Hart, 2010).




                                            17
       India joined the gold standard in 1897. Paper notes issued by the government were
largely backed by silver rather than gold. This accounted for India’s large currency risk
premium. The interest-rate differential between paper and gold bonds began to disappear only
after the British government agreed to guarantee the conversion of Indian silver into gold
(Appleton’s Encyclopedia, 1900; Keynes, 1913). At this time, India’s exchange rate is no longer
an emerging market currency given that its commitment to the gold standard was backed by the
British government and their sterling reserves. The fact that the British government was willing
to step in and support Indian currency suggests that England was concerned about the exchange-
rate risk associated with holding paper rupees.
       Russia issued paper and gold bonds that traded on the Amsterdam exchange. The
Amsterdamsch Effectenblad occasionally printed price quotes for the paper-gold rouble exchange
rate. Based on these data, paper roubles traded at a 50 percent discount relative to the gold
rouble, a figure that is consistent with the expected depreciation calculated in Table 6 (using the
assumption of a market-based probability of a devaluation between 10 and 25 percent). Finally,
the United States also issued gold and paper bonds during the classical gold period. The
existence of a positive currency risk premium reflects “silver risk” – the possibility that the
United States would adopt a bimetallic standard during the period 1870-1896. Calomiris (1988,
1992) and Hallwood et. al. (2000) find that expectations of a depreciation of the US dollar were
quite small during the early to mid-1890s.


VI. Conclusion


       Are emerging market pegs ever credible? Our contribution is to examine this question in
a historical setting that permits identification and testing of exchange-rate regime credibility.
Between 1870 and 1913, the gold standard was widely adopted, even by countries on the
periphery. Given its global reach, the classical gold standard thus represents the most widely
used peg in modern financial history. Previous studies have noted that the regime appeared
credible, at least among core countries, but prior research has largely ignored whether the system
was credible on the periphery. Though previous scholarship has examined country-specific risk,
it has not explicitly tested for currency risk. As we demonstrate, currency risk provides a




                                             18
straightforward way of capturing the markets’ beliefs as to whether a country will maintain its
pegged exchange rate.
       We take avantage of the fact that from 1870-1913 capital markets were unfettered. Since
governments did not impose capital controls, we are able to identify currency risk premia using a
straightforward methodology based on interest parity conditions. Under the assumption that UIP
held for this period, short-term interest rate differentials between an emerging market economy
and the UK indicate the presence of currency risk.
       Using a new database of weekly and monthly short-term domestic trade bills, we analyze
the currency risk premium for a sample of 17 emerging market borrowers during the gold
standard period. The empirical analysis suggests that the currency risk premium averaged more
than 285 basis points in the five-years after a country joined the gold standard for non-core
countries. The large and persistent currency risk premium for emerging market countries implies
that markets expected their exchange rates to depreciate on average by approximately 28 percent.
We find that there are large currency risk premia regardless of whether we use domestic trade
bills or central bank discount rates. We further tested the external validity of our findings by
considering a second market – long-term sovereign bonds – and verify (using a unique database
of gold and paper bonds) that large currency risk premia exist for a sample of nine, large
sovereign borrowers. Our findings that expected devaluations largely map onto actual
devaluations suggests that our empirical estimates of currency risk appear to match market
beliefs: financial market participants appear to have believed that emerging market pegs were not
credible during the classical gold standard period.
       Scholars have noted commitments to exchange rate pegs were perhaps easier to maintain
during the classical gold standard period than later international monetary regimes since
domestic policy goals like full employment were more easily subverted to the maintenance of
external balance (Eichengreen, 1997). Monetary and fiscal policy could be used to reinforce the
commitments to pegs. Given the political pressure that most governments face today to respond
to business cycle downturns with countercyclical monetary and fiscal policy, our results suggest
that hard pegs are likely to be even less credible today.




                                             19
References
Berg, Andrew and Eduardo Borenzstein. (2000). “The Pros and Cons of Full Dollarization.” IMF
       Working Paper 00/50 (March).
Bloomfield, Arthur I. (1959). Monetary Policy under the International Gold Standard: 1880-
       1914. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Bordo, Michael D. and Finn Kydland. (1995). “The Gold Standard as a Rule: An Essay in
       Exploration.” Explorations in Economic History 32: 423-464.
Bordo, Michael and Hugh Rockoff. (1996). “The Gold Standard as a Good Housekeeping Seal of
       Approval.” Journal of Economic History 56: 389-428.
Bordo, Michael and Antu Murshid. (2006). “Globalization and Changing Patterns in the
       International Transmission of Shocks in Financial Markets.” Journal of International
       Money and Finance 25(4):655-74.
Bordo, Michael and Ronald MacDonald. (1997). “Violations of the Rules of the Game and the
       Credibility of the Classical Gold Standard.” NBER Working Paper 6115.
Calomiris, Charles. (1988). “Price and Exchange Rate Determination during the Greenback
       Suspension.” Oxford Economic Papers 40: 719-750.
Calomiris, Charles. (1992). “Greenback Resumption and Silver Risk. The Economics and
       Politics of Monetary Regime Change.” NBER Working Paper 4166.
Corwin, Shane and Paul Schultz. (2012). “A Simple Way to Estimate Bid-Ask Spreads from
       Daily High and Low Prices.” University of Notre Dame Working Paper.
Del Mar, Alexander. (1903). A History of the Monetary Systems of France, and Other European
       States. New York: The Cambridge Encyclopedia Co.
Della Paolera, Gerardo and Alan M. Taylor. (2001). Straining at the Anchor: The Argentine
       Currency Board and the Search for Macroeconomic Stability, 1880-1935. Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press.
Dollarization.org. (2005). Currency Boards and Dollarization. www.dollarization.org
Domowitz, Ian, Glen, Jack, and Ananth Madhavan. (1998). “Country and Currency Risk Premia
       in an Emerging Market.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 33: 189-216.
Edwards, Sebastian. (2003). “Exchange Rate Regimes, Capital Flows and Crisis Prevention.” In
       Martin Feldstein (ed.) Economic and Financial Crises in Emerging Market Economies.
       Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 31-78.



                                          20
Edwards, Sebastian. (1986). “The Pricing of Bonds and Bank Loans in International Markets.”
       European Economic Review 30: 565-89.
Edwards, Sebastian. (1984). “LDC Foreign Borrowing and Default Risk: An Empirical
       Investigation, 1976-1980.” American Economic Review 74(4): 726-34.
Eichengreen, Barry. (1997). Globalizing Capital: A History of the International Monetary
       System. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ferguson, Niall and M. Schularick. (2006a). “The Empire Effect: The Determinants of Country
       Risk in the First Era of Globalization.” Journal of Economic History 66(2): 283-312.
Ferguson, Niall and M. Schularick. (2006b). “The Thin Film of Gold: The Limits of Monetary
       Commitments.” Harvard Business School Working Paper.
Flandreau, Marc and Frederic Zúmer. (2004). The Making of Global Finance. Paris: OECD. Data
       from http://www.eh.net/databases/finance/
Fratianni, Michele and Franco Spinelli. (1997). A Monetary History of Italy. Cambridge:
       Cambridge University Press.
Gallarotti, Giulio M. (1995). The Anatomy of an International Monetary Regime: The Classical
       Gold Standard, 1880-1914. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gunasekera, H.A. (1962). From Dependent Currency to Central Banking in Ceylon: An Analysis
       of Monetary Experience, 1825-1957. London: London School of Economics.
Hallwood, Paul, Ronald MacDonald, and Ian W. Marsh. (2000). “Realignment Expectations:
       Was there a Peso Problem?” Journal of Monetary Economics 46(3): 605-20.
International Monetary Fund. (1997). “Globalization in Historical Perspective.” World Economic
       Outlook: Annex Washington: IMF.
Investor’s Monthly Manual. (1898). Available at <http://icf.som.yale.edu/imm/downloads.php>.
Kemmerer, Edwin W. (1944). Gold and the Gold Standard. New York: McGraw Hill.
Kemmerer, Edwin W. (1916). Modern Currency Reforms. New York: Macmillan Press.
Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott. (1977). “Rules Rather than Discretion: The
       Inconsistency of Optimal Plans.” Journal of Political Economy 85: 473-92.
Monetary Systems of the Principal Countries of the World. (1913). Treasury Department, Bureau
       of the Mint, Washington: Government Printing Office.
Mitchell, Wesley C. (1898). “Resumption of Specie Payments in Austria-Hungary.” Journal of
       Political Economy 7:106-13.



                                          21
Morys, Matthias. (2007). “Emergence of the Classical Gold Standard.” Oxford University
       Working Paper.
Neal, Larry D. and Marc D. Weidenmier. (2003). “Crisis in the Global Economy from Tulips to
       Today.” In Globalization in Historical Perspective. Edited by Michael D. Bordo, Alan M.
       Taylor and Jeffrey G. Williamson. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.473-514.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. (1995). “The Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates.” NBER
       Working Paper.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan M. Taylor. (2003). “Sovereign Risk ,Credibility and the Gold
       Standard, 1870-1913 versus 1925-1931.” Economic Journal 113: 1-35.
Officer, Lawrence. (1989). “The Remarkable Efficiency of the Dollar-Sterling Gold Standard,
       1890-1906.” Journal of Economic History 49(1): 1-41.
Schmuckler, Sergio and Luis Serven. (2002). “Pricing Currency Risk under Currency Boards.”
       Journal of Development Economics 69(2): 367-391.
Pick, Franz and Rene Sedillot. (1971). All the Monies of the World, New York: Crown
       Advertising Press, Inc.
Powell, Andrew and Federico Sturzenegger. (2003). “Dollarization: The Link Between
       Devaluation and Default Risk.” In Dollarization: Debates and Policy Alternatives
       Eduardo Levy-Yeyati and Federico Sturzenegger eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. (2008). “Globalization and the Great Divergence: Terms of Trade
       Booms, Volatility, and the Poor Periphery.” European Review of Economic History 12:
       355-91.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. (2011). Trade and Poverty: When the Third World Fell Behind.
       Cambridge: MIT Press.
Young, John Parke. (1925). Central American Currency and Finance. Princeton: Princeton
       University Press.




                                          22
                       Table 1
      Timeline of Gold Standard Adoption and Adherence
  Country          Date of Adoption   Dates of Adherence
 Argentina         October 31, 1899   10/31/1899-8/2/1914
  Austria           August 2, 1892    8/2/1892-8/4/1914
  Belgium          November 5, 1878   11/5/1878-1914
   Brazil         December 22, 1906   12/22/1906-12/12/1914
  Bulgaria        November 24, 1902 11/24/1902-10/10/1912
   Chile             June 1, 1895     6/1/1895-7/11/1898
 Denmark             May 27, 1873     5/27/1873-12/1914
Netherlands          June 6, 1875     6/6/1875-7/31/1914
  Finland           January 1, 1878   1/1/1878-8/1914
   France          November 5, 1878   11/5/1878-8/5/1914
 Germany           October 19, 1871   10/1/1871-8/ /1914
   Greece           March 19, 1910    3/19/1910-12/1914
   India            January 1, 1898   1/1/1898-9/5/1914
    Italy           March 1, 1883     3/1/1883-12/22/1894
   Japan            October 1, 1897   10/1/1897-1914
  Mexico             May 1, 1905      5/1/1905-1913
  Norway             June 4, 1873     6/4/1873-8/4/1914
 Rumania            April 14, 1890    4/14/1890-1914
   Russia           January 3, 1897   1/3/1897-7/1914
  Sweden             May 30, 1873     3/30/1873-1914
Switzerland       December 20, 1878   12/20/1878-1914
United States       January 1, 1879   1/1/1879-9/7/1917




                      23
Table 2. Currency Risk Premia
Panel A: 10-Year Windows

Country         Whole         Pre-       On  Change Observations           Data
                Period        Gold     Gold                            Frequency
Argentina        528           633       425  -208           121            M
Austria          145           81        208  127           521             W
Belgium           18             3        33   30            521            W
Bulgaria         407           429       384   -45          521             W
Chile            652           595       744  149           423*            W
Denmark          136           125       147    22           121            M
Netherlands       13            -4        30   34           521             W
Finland          119            84       154   70           521             W
France           -25           -41        -9   32           521             W
Germany           47            85        10   -75           521            W
Greece           243           251       232   -19           121            M
India            320           387       252  -135          521             W
Italy            130           104       156    52           521            W
Japan            444           434       453    19           121            M
Mexico           516           546       468   -78         398**            W
Norway           165           105       225   120           121            M
Rumania          232           223       241   18           521             W
Russia           312           345       270   -75          458             W
Sweden           165           123       206    83           121            M
Switzerland       72            59        82    23           473            W
USA              187           173       201    28           521            W
Average         229.81       225.71    233.9  8.19
M=monthly, W=weekly,*Data sample constrained by adherence to gold standard; **sample size
constrained by availability of newspaper




                                        24
Table 2. Currency Risk Premia
Panel B: 4-Year Windows

Country      Whole          Pre-Gold   On Gold     Change   Observations     Data
             Period                                                        Frequency
Argentina     502              579       428        151          49            M
Austria       133             105        160         56         209            W
Belgium        -3              -31        25        56          209            W
Bulgaria      445             448        443         -5         209            W
Chile         771             727        814         87         209            W
Denmark        53               89        18        -71          49            M
Netherlands    20               -7        47         40         209            W
Finland       201             190        211         21         209            W
France        -61             -107       -15        92          209            W
Germany        62              123         2       -121         209            W
Greece        276              290       263        -27          49            M
India         438             485        391        -93         209            W
Italy          78               55       101         46         209            W
Japan         460              469       452         17          49            M
Mexico        517             596        438        158         209            W
Norway         32              -24        86        110          49            M
Rumania       189             257        121       -156         209            W
Russia        312             441        270        171         209            W
Sweden         69               39        98         59          49            M
Switzerland    73               29       116         87         209            W
USA           188              132       243        112         209            W
Average      226.43          232.62     224.38     37.62
M=monthly, W=weekly


Table 3. Comparing Risk Premia Using Bank Rates and Open Market Rates in the First
Five Years after a Country Joined the Gold Standard


  Country       Open Market            Bank Rate
                   Rate

Austria               208                 170
Belgium                33                  32
Netherlands            30                  23
France                 -9                 -13
Germany                10                  72
Italy                 156                 183
Russia                270                 231
Average               100                 100


                                          25
Table 4.DF-GLS Unit Root Test

Country             Test Statistics
                         (lags)
Argentina                -1.741
                            (1)
Austria                 -2.854*
                           (16)
Belgium                -3.154**
                            (1)
Bulgaria                 -2.131
                            (1)
Chile                    -1.421
                            (1)
Denmark                 -2.739*
                           (15)
Netherlands           -3.884***
                            (6)
Finland                 -2.758*
                            (3)
France                -4.731***
                           (13)
Germany               -5.722***
                           (16)
Greece                    -1.00
                            (1)
India                 -4.047***
                            (2)
Italy                 -3.436***
                            (4)
Japan                    -1.921
                            (1)
Norway                 -3.081**
                            (9)
Rumania                 -2.681*
                            (1)
Russia                   -2.162
                            (1)
Sweden                  -2.670*
                            (4)
Switzerland           -4.623***
                            (9)
UK                    -5.922***
                           (16)
USA                   -4.063***
                           (14)

*denotes significance at the 10 percent level;**denotes significance at the 5 percent level;
***denotes significance at the 1 percent level


                                          26
Table 5. Currency Risk Regressions

Country            Constant         UK Interest Rate        R-squared               Obs
Argentina           9.20***             -0.400***                .150               265
                    (0.192)               (0.054)
Austria            3.001***              0.295***                .231              1117
                    (0.050)               (0.016)
Bulgaria           7.558***             -0.077***                .016               475
                    (0.018)               (0.018)
Chile              9.498***               -0.155*                .023               163
                    (0.153)               (0.081)
Denmark            3.472***              0.268***                .093               487
                    (0.137)               (0.041)
Finland            4.395***              0.168***                .073              1504
                    (0.058)               (0.018)
Greece             6.092***               0.063*                 .061                45
                    (0.150)               (0.037)
India              3.976***              0.424***                .033               835
                    (0.276)               (0.070)
Italy              3.029***              0.342***                .333              1609
                    (0.037)               (0.011)
Japan              6.939***                -0.025               .0005               375
                    (0.165)               (0.049)
Norway             4.441***              0.115***                .023               487
                     (.124)                (.037)
Rumania            4.721***              0.237***                .067              1237
                    (0.093)               (0.030)
Russia             4.643***              0.255***                .091               886
                    (0.101)               (0.030)
Sweden             4.180***              0.180***                .069               487
                    (0.109)               (0.032)
Switzerland        2.906***              0.350***                .284              1828
                    (0.039)               (0.012)
USA                2.274***              0.783***               0.145              2191
                    (0.144)               (0.045)
*denotes significance at the 10 percent level;**denotes significance at the 5 percent level;
***denotes significance at the 1 percent level




                                          27
Table 6. Implied Devaluation of Gold Standard Adopters:
              Assumed Probability of Devaluation

Country        10%     25%      50%          75%     90%
Argentina      42.50   17.00     8.50        5.67    4.72
Austria        20.80    8.32     4.16        2.77    2.31
Bulgaria       38.40   15.36     7.68        5.12    4.27
Chile          74.40   29.76    14.88        9.92    8.27
Denmark        14.70    5.88     2.94        1.96    1.63
Finland        15.40    6.16     3.08        2.05    1.71
Greece         23.20    9.28     4.64        3.09    2.58
India          25.20   10.08     5.04        3.36    2.80
Italy          15.60    6.24     3.12        2.08    1.73
Japan          45.30   18.12     9.06        6.04    5.03
Mexico         46.80   18.72     9.36        6.24    5.20
Norway         22.50    9.00     4.50        3.00    2.50
Rumania        24.10    9.64     4.82        3.21    2.68
Russia         27.00   10.80     5.40        3.60    3.00
Sweden         20.60    8.24     4.12        2.75    2.29
Switzerland     8.20    3.28     1.64         1.09    0.91
USA            20.10    8.04     4.02        2.68    2.23

Average        28.52   11.41     5.70        3.08    3.17




                                        28
Table 7. Measuring the Currency Risk Premium
10-Year Windows
                       Whole      Pre-Gold        On Gold   Observations
                       Period
    Country               (1)       (2)             (3)         (5)
    Argentina           1286.63    1465.26        1107.95       521
     Austria            240.31     260.856        219.649       521
     Brazil*             89.50      79.45          99.67         71
      India             256.47     282.47          245.46       371
      Italy*             89.27     124.19          60.54        111
     Mexico             582.70     709.13          489.38       452
      Russia            820.43     820.02          820.77       510
  United States         102.02      95.46          108.57       521
      Chile*            581.13     580.11          583.19        79
    Country
    Average             449.83     490.77          415.02
Note: * indicates monthly data.




                                             29
Table 8. Implied Devaluations for Gold Standard Adopters
(Percent)
                                            Assumed Probability of Devaluation


Country                                  10%        25%       50%       75%       90%
Argentina                                110.8      55.4      22.2      14.8      12.3
Austria                                   12.6       6.3       2.5       1.7          1.4
Brazil                                    10.0       5.0       2.0       1.3          1.1
India                                     24.5      12.3       4.9       3.3          2.7
Italy                                     6.1        3.0       1.2       0.8          0.7
Mexico                                    48.9      24.5       9.8       6.5          5.4
Russia                                    81.3       40.6     16.3      10.8          9.0
United States                             6.1        3.0       1.2       0.8          0.7
Chile                                     58.3       29.2     11.7       7.8          6.5


Average Size of Devaluation               39.8       19.9      8.0       5.3          4.4


Notes: Under the assumption of risk neutrality, the maximum implied devaluation is
computed by dividing the average value of the currency risk premium in the five-year
period after joining the gold standard by the assumed probability of a devaluation.




                                           30
Table 9. Actual versus Expected Devaluation

Country                              Actual Devaluation          Expected Devaluation
Argentina                                   122                             55.4
Austria                                      0                              6.3
Brazil                                        7                              4.1
India                                       NA                              12.3
Italy                                        8                              3.0
Mexico                                       50                             24.5
Russia                                       50                             41.0
United States                                0                              5.4
Chile                                        28                             29.0

Notes: See the text for calculations used for expected devaluations. For Argentina, actual
devaluation is determined by the 1899 Law of Conversion that legally set the exchange rate
between paper and gold pesos at 2.22 to one. The actual devaluation for Austria, Chile, Italy,
Russia, and the United States is determined by the market exchange rate. The actual devaluation
for Brazil and Mexico is determined by the change in the mint par ratio.




                                           31
                                                                                                                                                           Figure 1
                                                                                                                                         Currency Risk Premium
                                                     Austria                                                                      Netherlands                                                                              India                                                                                      Russia
                500                                                                            300                                                                           1200                                                                                           600

                400                                                                            200                                                                           1000                                                                                           500

                300                                                                            100                                                                            800                                                                                           400

                200                                                                              0                                                                            600                                                                                           300

                100                                                                            -100                                                                           400                                                                                           200

                  0                                                                            -200                                                                           200                                                                                           100

                -100                                                                           -300                                                                             0                                                                                             0

                -200                                                                           -400                                                                          -200                                                                                           -100
                       -250    -200   -150   -100   -50       0   50   100   150   200   250          -250   -200   -150   -100    -50    0     50   100   150   200   250          -250   -200   -150     -100          -50    0    50       100        150   200   250           -250    -200     -150      -100         -50        0         50      100    150



                                                    Belgium                                                                         Finland                                                                                Italy                                                                                    Switzerland
                300                                                                            400                                                                           400                                                                                            400

                                                                                               300
                200                                                                                                                                                          300                                                                                            300
                                                                                               200
                100
                                                                                               100                                                                           200                                                                                            200
B asis Points




                  0                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                             100                                                                                            100
                -100                                                                           -100

                                                                                               -200                                                                            0                                                                                              0
                -200
                                                                                               -300
                -300                                                                                                                                                         -100                                                                                           -100
                                                                                               -400

                -400                                                                           -500                                                                          -200                                                                                           -200
                       -250    -200   -150   -100   -50       0   50   100   150   200   250          -250   -200   -150   -100    -50    0     50   100   150   200   250          -250   -200   -150     -100      -50        0    50       100        150   200   250           -200    -150     -100      -50          0         50        100     150    200    250



                                                    Bulgaria                                                                        France                                                                               Mexico                                                                                            USA
                600                                                                            200                                                                           800                                                                                            500


                500                                                                            100                                                                           700                                                                                            400

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            300
                400                                                                              0                                                                           600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            200
                300                                                                            -100                                                                          500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            100
                200                                                                            -200                                                                          400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0

                100                                                                            -300                                                                          300                                                                                            -100

                  0                                                                            -400                                                                          200                                                                                            -200
                       -250    -200   -150   -100   -50       0   50   100   150   200   250          -250   -200   -150   -100    -50    0     50   100   150   200   250                 -200     -150          -100         -50        0         50         100    150          -250   -200    -150     -100      -50         0        50     100    150   200    250



                                                          Chile                                                                    Germany                                                                           Rumania
                1000                                                                           400                                                                           500

                                                                                               300
                                                                                                                                                                             400
                 800                                                                           200

                                                                                               100                                                                           300
                 600
                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                             200
                                                                                               -100
                 400
                                                                                               -200                                                                          100

                 200                                                                           -300
                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                               -400

                   0                                                                           -500                                                                          -100
                        -250   -200   -150   -100   -50       0   50   100   150   200   250          -250   -200   -150   -100    -50    0     50   100   150   200   250          -250   -200   -150     -100      -50        0    50       100        150   200   250




                                                                                                                                              Weekly Intervals
                                                                                Figure 2
                                                                        Currency Risk Premium
                                    Argentina                                              Greece                                                      Norway
               700                                               400                                                          500


               650                                               350                                                          400

                                                                 300
               600                                                                                                            300

                                                                 250
               550                                                                                                            200
                                                                 200
               500                                                                                                            100
                                                                 150
               450                                                                                                              0
                                                                 100

               400                                                                                                            -100
                                                                  50
Basis Points




               350                                                 0                                                          -200


               300                                               -50                                                          -300
                      -60   -40   -20       0     20   40   60          -60    -40         -20       0        20        40           -60   -40   -20       0    20   40   60



                                        Denmark                                             Japan                                                      Sweden
               400                                               700                                                          400


                                                                 600
               300                                                                                                            300

                                                                 500

               200                                                                                                            200
                                                                 400


               100                                               300                                                          100


                                                                 200
                 0                                                                                                              0

                                                                 100

               -100                                                                                                           -100
                                                                   0


               -200                                              -100                                                         -200
                      -60   -40   -20        0    20   40   60          -60   -40    -20         0       20        40    60          -60   -40   -20       0    20   40   60




                                                                          Monthly Intervals
                                                                                   Figure 3
                                                                   Currency Risk Premium
                                     Argentina                                             India                                                                      Russia
                2000                                         320                                                                     950

                                                                                                                                     925
                1800                                         300
                                                                                                                                     900

                1600                                         280                                                                     875

                                                                                                                                     850
                1400                                         260
                                                                                                                                     825

                1200                                         240                                                                     800

                                                                                                                                     775
B asis Points




                1000                                         220
                                                                                                                                     750

                 800                                         200                                                                     725
                       -200   -100         0     100   200         -100      -50     0      50      100         150     200    250         -100          -50      0       50   100    150         200



                                      Austria                                              Mexico                                                                      USA
                250                                          900                                                                     150

                                                                                                                                     140
                225
                                                             800
                                                                                                                                     130
                200
                                                                                                                                     120
                                                             700
                175                                                                                                                  110


                150                                                                                                                  100
                                                             600
                                                                                                                                      90
                125
                                                                                                                                      80
                                                             500
                100
                                                                                                                                      70

                 75                                          400                                                                      60
                       -200   -100         0     100   200            -150    -100   -50    0      50     100     150    200   250                -200         -100       0     100         200




                                                                     Weekly Intervals
                                                               Figure 4
                                                          Currency Risk Premium

                             Brazil                                 Chile                               Italy
                110                                 800                               175



                100                                 750
                                                                                      150

                90                                  700
B asis Points




                                                                                      125
                80                                  650



                70                                  600                               100



                60                                  550
                                                                                      75

                50                                  500

                                                                                      50
                40                                  450



                30                                  400                               25
                      -40   -20       0   20   40             -25    0      25   50         -40   -20     0     20   40   60



                                                           Monthly Intervals
Appendix 1. Short-term Interest Rate Data from the Gold Standard Era


                       Country            Short-Term Interest Rate
                    Argentina                    Bank Rate
                       Austria               Domestic trade bill
                       Belgium               Domestic trade bill
                     Bulgaria                    Bank Rate
                        Chile                    Bank Rate
                    Denmark                  Domestic trade bill
                   Netherlands               Domestic trade bill
                       Finland                   Bank Rate
                       France                Domestic trade bill
                    Germany                  Domestic trade bill
                       Greece                    Bank Rate
                        India                    Bank Rate
                        Italy                Domestic trade bill
                       Japan                     Bank Rate
                       Mexico                 Commercial Paper
                       Norway                    Bank Rate
                    Rumania                      Bank Rate
                       Russia                Domestic trade bill
                       Sweden                    Bank Rate
                   Switzerland               Domestic trade bill
                  United States               Commercial Paper


Sources: Commercial and Financial Chronicle, Economist, Global Financial Data, and
Manchester Guardian.
Appendix 2. Gold Standard Adoption Dates and Source Information


Argentina – The Law of Conversion was passed on Oct. 31, 1899 restoring convertibility
       (della Paolera and Taylor, 2001, p. 120).
Austria – Joined the gold standard by laws passed August 2, 1892. (Mitchell, 1898).
Brazil – “Under an act which went into effect December 22, 1906, a conversion fund was
       established by means of import duties collected in gold.” (Monetary Systems of
       the Principle Countries of the World, p.8).
Chile – A new conversion law of Feb. 11, 1895 set June 1, 1895 as the day for the
       redemption of notes. This continued until July of 1898. (Bordo and Kydland,
       1995, p. 437-438).
France – Adopted the gold standard on Nov 5, 1878 (Pick and Sedillot, 1971, p. 587).
Greece – Adopted the gold standard on March 19, 1910 (Bordo and Kydland, 1995,
       p.439).
India – Scheme for adopting the gold standard published the week of May 7, 1898.
        (IMM, December, 1898)
Italy- On April 12, 1884, the country adopted the gold standard. By 1894, it was back on
       a paper standard (Fratianni and Spinelli, 1997, p. 439).
Mexico- The enabling act was passed on Dec. 9, 1904, authorizing the establishment of a
       gold standard. On March 25, 1905, a decree promulgated the new system. The
       law went into effect on May 1, 1905 (Kemmerer, 1944, p. 524).
Russia – The country adopted the gold standard January 3-15, 1897 (Pick and Sedillot,
       1971, p. 488).
Sweden – The country signed a convention in December 1872 instituting the gold
       standard (Morys, 2007, p. 41).
United States – Resumed specie convertibility following the Civil War on January 1,
       1879 (Kemmerer, 1916, p. 85).
Appendix 3. Paper and Gold Sovereign Bonds during the Classical Gold Standard,
1870-1913
Panel A. Long-Term Gold Bond Issues
         Issue                    Lottery Provision              Size of Issue    Market for Gold
                                                                    (year)             Bond

Argentina: 4.5% due     Sinking fund of 1% applied by half-       ₤5 million      London and other
within 39 years after   yearly lottery drawings in London.          (1900)       Continental Bourses
they were issued

Austria: 4% gold                          No                     ₤34 million      London and other
perpetuity bonds                                                    (1900)       Continental Bourses


Brazil: 5% Apolices                       No                     105 million     Rio de Janiero and
(gold perpetuity                                                     Mx              Sao Paolo
bonds)                                                              (1900)

Chile: 4.5% sterling    Lottery drawing when the bonds fall       ₤722,200        London and other
bonds                   below par or by a sinking-fund              (1900)       Continental Bourses
                        provision at the rate of .5% per annum
                        that can be changed by the government

India: 3.5% sterling                      No                     ₤63 million          London
bonds redeemable on                                                 (1900)
or after 1931

Italy: 5% gold                            No                     ₤157 million           Paris
perpetuity bonds                                                    (1890)
Russia: (1822) 5%                         No                     ₤4.5 million         London
perpetuity bonds                                                    (1895)

Mexico: 5% external     Cumulative sinking fund with lottery     ₤22 million         Amsterdam
bonds redeemable by     drawings of .62% per annum until 1909.      (1905)
1945

United States; 4.5%                       No                     ₤50 million         New York
gold bonds due 1891;                                                (1880)
4 percent gold bonds
due 1907.


Sources and notes: Economist, Commercial and Financial Chronicle, and the Investor’s
Monthly Manual. Mx is an abbreviation for Milreis.
Panel B. Long Term Paper Bond Issues

        Issue           Lottery Provision    Size of Issue(year)   Foreign Markets for
                                                                      Paper Bonds
                                                                   (primary domestic
                                                                        market)
Argentine 7%          Sinking fund of 1%       $9.58 million        London and other
Cedulas ‘B’           applied by lottery           (1900)          Continental Bourses
Currency              drawings at par.


Austrian 5%                     No              ₤177 million        London and other
Perpetuity                                         (1890)          Continental Bourses
Brazil 5%                       No             Mx60 million         Rio de Janiero and
Apolicies                                          (1900)               Sao Paolo
Chilean 8% Bonos                No            151 million gold         Valparaiso
                                                   pesos
                                                   (1900)
Indian 3.5%                     No                 Rx13                  London
Rupee                                           million(1900)
Italian 5%                      No               Half of all               No
Perpetuity                                   government debt is          (Milan)
                                               in paper bonds
Mexican 5%            Cumulative sinking-       $59 million              London
Internal              fund of .25% by
                      means of half-yearly
                      lottery drawings.
Russian 6%                      No           38.5 million paper        Amsterdam
Internal paper loan                                rubles
                                                   (1895)
United States 6%                No              $64 million                No
                                                   (1879)              (New York)
Sources and notes: Investor’s Monthly Manual, Official Stock Exchange Intelligence, and
Llona (1990). Rx stands for Rupee. Mx stands for milreis.
Appendix 4. Relative Bid-Ask Spreads of Sovereign Bonds during the Gold
Standard
                                 (Basis Points)

Country                    Paper Bond             Gold Bond             Difference in
                                                                         Liquidity
Argentina                       67                     67                      0
Austria                         62                     50                     12
Brazil*                          7                     52                    -45
Chile                          N/A                     61                    N/A
India                           88                     24                     64
Italy                          N/A                    N/A                    N/A
Mexico                          48                     24                     24
Russia                         N/A                    N/A                    N/A
United States**                 30                      4                     26
Average                         50                     40                    13.5

Notes:

*Bid-Ask Spreads for the gold bond only available from October 1906 through June
1910.
**Bid-ask spreads for the first year that the United States was on the gold standard
(Commercial and Financial Chronicle).
