NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DETERMINANTS OF SLAVE AND CREW
MORTALITY IN THE ATLANTIC SLAVE TRADE

Richard

H. Steckel

Richard A. Jensen

Working Paper No. 15140

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1985

We have benefitted from the comments or help of Raymond Cohn,
Philip Curtin, David Eltis, Stanley Engerman, Roderick Floud,
Donald Haurin, Kenneth Kiple, Robert Margo, Jerry Thursby, and
seminar participants at Brigham Young University. Judy Collingwood
and Cheryl Zinker provided valuable research assistance The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Development of the American Economy. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1540
January 1985

Determinants of Slave and Crew
Mortality in the Atlantic Slave Trade

ABSTRACT

This paper measures and. analyzes death rates that prevailed in the

Atlantic slave trade during the late 1700s. Crew members died primarily
from fevers (probably malaria) and

slaves

died primarily from gastrointestinal

diseases. Annual death rates in this activity were 230 per thousand
among the crew and 83 per thousand among slaves. The lack of immunities
to the African disease environment contributed to the high death rates

among the crew. The spread of dysentery among slaves during the voyage
was probably exacerbated by congestion and. poor nutrition. Death rates
differed systematically by region of origin in Africa and. season of the

year. There was little interaction between the incidence of slave and.

crew deaths. The high death rates make the slave trade a demographic
laboratory for study of health and mortality ad an economic laboratory
for study of markets for free labor.

Richard H. Steckel
Economics Department
Ohio State University
Columbtis, Ohio 1132l0

(6lI) 422-50Q8

and

Richard A. Jensen
Economics Department
Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio 132lO
(61)-i.) Li.229339

I NTRODUCTI ON

One of the early political expressions of opposition to slavery occurred
in the late 1700s when Parliament considered proposals to ameliorate condi-

tions in the slave trade. The treatment and mortality of slaves emerged as
central questions in deliberations and the debate led to collection and study
of evidence on conditions in Africa, the middle passage, and the New World.

Legislation in 1788 took the form of limits on the slave—carrying capacity of
vessels; the requirement that slave vessels carry a surgeon who cared for
slaves and who monitored conditions through a journal that noted deaths and
causes of death: and a system of bonuses to ship captains and surgeons.

Controversy over the health and mortality of persons involved in the
slave trade has persisted from the era of the campaign against slavery to the
present.

The debate continues in part because the rhetoric, the charges and

counter-charges, and the tactics of the supporters and foes of the institution
often obscured the underlying realities. More fundamental to modern research,
however, are the facts that substantially limited information on these questions survives to the present and the levels and determinants of health and
mortality are central to larger questions such as the economic costs of the
slave trade to Western Europe, the profitability of slavery and the slave
trade, and the impact

of legislation on the slave trade.

Studies of mortality in the Atlantic slave trade have relied extensively
on data from company records, newspapers, and government sources such as port
records, papers required by legislation monitoring or regulating the trade,
and

the results of special inquiries.' The measure of mortality commonly con-

structed from these

sources is the ratio of slave deaths to the number of

slaves embarked, although some authors have used the ratio divided by voyage

2

length multiplied by 1000.2 The central questions of research have included
mortality differences by region of departure from Africa, the effect of crowding on mortality, voyage length and the probability of death, the secular
trend in mortality rates, and the importance of vessels that had an unusually
high number of deaths.

This paper extends work in the area by analyzing 92 surgeons' logs

required by Dolben's Act of 178R. The ships in the sample originated from the

major

supply regions in Africa and span the years 1792 to 1796. The excep-

tional value of the logs for measuring levels and studying determinants of

mortality

stems from the combination of information on dates of death, causes

of death, and records for slaves as well as crew. Because dates of death and
the number of persons at risk are available, true death rates can be calcu-

lated. The death rates

are relevant for comparisons with the mortality expe-

riences of other populations. The chronological record also permits study of
death rates by day during loading and during the voyage as opposed to study of

the journey as a whole that is common in previous work. Although the diagnos-

tic capabilities

of ship surgeons were primitive by modern standards, the

symptoms of several diseases or disease categories common in the slave trade

were sufficiently distinctive to be useful. This combined with the systematic
enumeration of causes enables a statistical examination of causes of mortality
that

is more detailed then previously undertaken. The mortality records of

the crew furnish a backdrop against which

slave mortality can be compared and

cont rasted.

The analysis begins with death rates by cause of death, The results of

this inquiry suggest a plan of action for study of major causes of death
during loading and during the voyage. The next portion compares the findings

of this paper with previous work, and the last section considers the general-

ity of the results. The analysis generally accepts the data at face value;

3

the hazards of doing this and features of the data are discussed in the appendix.

DEATH RATES BY CAUSE OF DEATH
Construction
The surgeon maintained a chronological journal of loadings and unload—

ings, usually in categories of men, women, boys, and girls, although sometimes

only males and females or men and women were enumerated. Slaves were frequently held on board until departure for the West Indies. Slaves unloaded
include those sold to other vessels and pawns (captives held as security

before transactions were completed) and sick slaves returned to shore.3 Slave
sales or transfers to other ships were extensive on a few vessels. A computer
program written for these data tabulates the number at risk each day from

loading to the final destination in the West Indies.

first

Muster rolls establish the crew size at the time of departure from
England for 45 out of 92 vessels in the sample. Crew size for the remaining
vessels was estimated from a regression of crew size on tons.4 The available
muster rolls show that relatively few crew members left the ship or were taken

on board before the ship reached the West Indies. As an approximation it was
assumed that crew size changed only through deaths. Thus the estimated number
of crew at risk may be inaccurate for particular vessels.

Death rates were

from the chronological record of deaths and

data on the average number of person-years at risk during a particular time

period.5 The tables express results in annual rates per 1000 to facilitate
comparisons with other populations.

Medical Knowledge

The information available on casues of death must be approached cautiously given the rudimentary medical knowledge of the late 1700s.6 The

4

difficulties stem from the lack of a germ theory of disease to guide inquiry
and from the poor state of medical instruments and procedures necessary for

precise diagnosis. In making a diagnosis that would guide treatment the surgeons drew upon visible symptoms of the patient. Unfortunately not all important symptoms of a particular disease were visible, the symptoms may have
changed over time as the disease ran its course, and some diseases with dis-

tinctly different causes have symptoms in common. The problems of identification were compounded if the patient had more than one disease.

Medical diagnosis of cause or causes of death is important for investiga-

tion of socioeconomic and epidemiological factors in mortality. Knowledge of
the disease or diseases involved conveys information about the net influence
of the prevalence or pathogens, mechanisms of transmission, and the suscepti-

bility of individuals in the population. Unfortunately the surgeons recorded
few visible detals and their observations were often grouped under broad head-

ings such as "fevers," "dysentery," and "diarrhea." The fevers no doubt
included

malaria and probably yellow fever and the gastrointestinal diseases

no doubt included shigellosis (bacillary dysentery)and possibly amoebic
dysentery.7 However, fever sometimes acconpanies

gastrointestinal diseases

and

vomiting and diarrhea may acconpany malaria and yellow fever.8 Thus it is

not

safe to conclude that "fevers" were confined entirely to diseases spread

by mosquitoes or that gastrointestinal diseases such as "diarrhea" were con-

fined entirely to diseases spread by ingestion of contaminated matter.
Patterns

Tables 1—4 show the death rates calculated for slaves and crew during

loading and the voyage. Comparisons involving the overall rates given in the
last row of the third column of each table demonstrate that loading and the

5

voyage were extraordinarily hazardous to life. The rates are exceptional when
placed in the proper perspective of the probable age range of the slaves and
crew.

Death rates are

ordinarily highest during infancy, then decline during

childhood and reach a minimum just before or during adolescence, The rates
usually rise gradually for many years beyond the minimum and then accelerate
upwards in the 60s and beyond. Under ordinary circumstances most deaths were

confined to the very young and the old. Typical eighteenth—century Western
European populations in the age range 10—34, for example, probably had average

annual death rates not exceeding roughly 1 percent.9 Furthermore, the upper

limit

of recorded experience for this age group when not living under severe

circumstances such as war or famine is less than 2 percent.10 The slaves and
crew faced death rates several times higher than their contemporaries engaged

in ordinary activities. The slave trade therefore provides a laboratory for
study of health and mortality under extreme circumstances.

The slave trade was relatively hazardous for the crew, particularly

during loading. Compared to slaves the death rates of the crew were more than
5

times higher during loading and nearly twice as high during the voyage. The

absolute

levels of crew death rates were on the low to middle range of magni-

tudes reported by others for European populations residing in western Africa

during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.1' The surgeons logs support
the view that western Africa was the "white man's grave." The extraordinary
death rates for the crew raise interesting questions about the operation of

markets for free labor that engaged in the slave trade, Comparisons of the
slave trade with other types of voyages would add a dimension of perspective
to the slave trade and may provide insights into causes of mortality.
The chances of death changed considerably during the course

of loading

and the voyage. mong slaves the safest period occurred about 3 to 6 months

6

before departure; the death rate at this time was 22.8 per thousand, or in the
neighborhood of twice the rate expected for settled populations not facing

severe circumstances. From this low the rate nearly tripled to 64.5 per thousand during the four weeks before departure, continued to rise during the

part of the voyage, and reached a peak of 145.9 per thousand during days

early

29—42 of the voyage. Slave death rates followed an inverted—U shape during

the voyage and differed by a factor of roughly 2 to 1. Compared to slaves,
crew death rates were less volatile during loading and reached a plateau of
nearly 350 per

thousand in

weeks 5-12. Over three-quarters of

all crew deaths

during the voyage occurred within the first four weeks.

During the operations of loading and the voyage over 60 percent of the
crew

deaths were from fevers and over 40 percent of the slave deaths were frOm

gastrointestinal diseases. The share of crew deaths from fevers was slightly
higher during loading (68%) compared to the voyage (54%). Among slaves thQ
shares of deaths from gastrointestinal diseases were approximately constant
during

loading (38%) and the voyage (41%). Gastrointestinal diseases claimed

16 percent of crew deaths and fevers amounted to 8 percent of slave losses.
The minor causes of slave deaths included respiratory diseases (5%), suicide (3%), scurvy (2%), insurrection (2%), and accidents. Among crew deaths 8
percent involved accidents (primarily drowning), 2 percent scurvy, 1 percent

respiratory, and 1 percent insurrection. The fotheru category includes well—
defined but relatively infrequent ailments such as yaws and dropsy, several

poorly—described

diseases (e.g. sudden death," "sulks," "fits," "delirium,"

and "relaxed"), and many illegible entries. Most of the slave deaths from
respiratory

larly

diseases (89%) and scurvy (88%) occurred on the voyage, particu-

near the middle and the end of the trip, which is consistent with claims

7

and evidence that the voyage was debilitating. The low death rates from
scurvy

suggest that measures sometimes taken as early as the late eighteenth

century to include
have

vitamin C

in the diet through

foods such as lime juice may

been used.12 Information on exact dates of death available in the logs

indicates that slave suicides were concentrated
slaves

during or shortly after

were first loaded and at the time the ship left Africa.

It

is important to note that smallpox and measles were virtually absent

as causes of death in these data. Inoculation against smallpox was practiced
in England as early as the mid 1700s, and the availability of the technology

suggests that it may have been used on slaves.13 It is also possible that
native

Africans practiced inoculation.14 Because the logs pertain to only to

a few years (1792-1796), it is also possible that epidemic conditions for this
disease were temporarily favorable.

Implications
Because the underlying causes and methods of transmission of many
diseases are quite different, the investigation of determinants of mortality

will be undertaken by disease category. The data in Tables 1-4make it clear
that fevers and gastrointestinal diseases should be the focus of attention.

Other causes of death are relevant to the entire picture, but their frequency
of occurrence——even for the most important minor causes such as accidents
among the crew and respiratory diseases among slaves-—is so low that syste—
matic study is not feasible with these data.
The

configurations of death rates by day of loading, day before depar-

ture, and day of voyage suggest that determinants of mortality substantially
involved a time—dependent process. The importance of time is

easily seen for

gastrointestinal diseases involving slaves; death rates more than doubled from

8

the beginning to the end of loading and continued to climb, reaching a peak

during the third to the fifth week of the voyage. The pattern of death rates
resembles the beginning, height, and end of an epidemic.
The concepts of agent, host, environment, and incubation period as
employed by epidemiologists are useful for understanding mortality from dysen-

tery.'5 The spread of an infectious disease depends upon the probability of
contact between an infectious agent and individuals, and the susceptibility of

individuals. The amount of infectious material in the environment is a function of the number of infected individuals or hosts of the agent, the duration
and extent to which infectious material is expelled by hosts3 the rate of survival of the agent in the environment, the route of entry into the host, and

the existence of alternative reservoirs or hosts of the agent. The availability of hosts varies with the mobility and interpersonal contact within the

population group, and the immunityor other means of resistence to the agent
by individuals. The incubation period is the interval of time between contact
with an infectious agent and the onset of illness. Each disease has a characteristic incubation period, which may vary among individuals. The discussion
so far has assumed a situation with case—to-case transmission of disease, but
the concepts can easily be extended to include the spread of infection from a
central source such as contaminated food or liquid.
The epidemiology of malaria and yellow fever involve intermediate hosts.

The parasites responsible for these infections spend part of their life cycle
inhabiting mosquitoes and so the path of transmission is from man (or other
host) in his infectious stage, to mosquito, and subsequently from mosquito to

man. These diseases therefore involve populations of mosquitoes and humans
(or

other hosts), each with its own

set of susceptible and infective hosts.

9

African natives were ordinarily infected with malaria as children, and those
who survived had a limited immunity to further symptoms, but could act as

hosts.'6 Thus malaria was hyperendemic in coastal areas of western Africa,
and the spread of the disease among European newcomers resembled a stochastic

version of contamination from a central source. Unlike malaria, yellow fever
kills the victim within 5 to 7 days or follows by rapid recàvery and life—long

immunity that prevents the individual from acting again as a host. The yellow
fever parasite occasionally died out in parts of .Africa, particularly in iso

lated areas, but the chances of an epidemic increased as the nonimmune population grew and as contacts with the outside carried the disease.

Europeans may

contributed to periodic yellow fever epidemics as noninimune hosts.

have

The spread of infectious disease is a complex process that can be

rized using

summa-

mathematical models.'7 In a simple deterministic model of an epi-

demic, for example, disease spreads by contact between infectives and susceptibles, there is no removal from circulation by death, recovery, or isolation,
and

infections remain contagious throughout the epidemic. The epidemic curve

shows the rate at which
parameters
from

new cases accrue over time under the conditions or

specified by the model.

The time pattern of deaths is derivable

the epidemic curve by incorporating magnitudes for the share of

those

infected who fail to survive and the delay from the onset of symptoms to

death. More complex models can involve infection and removal, intermediate
hosts, geographical spread, stochastic phenomena, latent and infectious peri-

ods, and lost immunity. The a priori formulation of a model appropriate for
slaves or crew would be difficult in part because many conditions relevant to

the model are unknown.

Indeed, the relevant conditions are an important

object of investigation. Nevertheless, an epidemic model is a useful framework for thought. Some of the parameters in such a model were given and

10

others were under the control or influence of slave traders, ship captains,

and surgeons. The extent and nature of control are topics for the next section of the paper.

ANALYSIS OF MAJOR CAUSES OF DEATH
Approach

Given the importance of time in an epidemic process it is fortunate that

surgeons recorded information on a daily basis. The unit of observation
selected for a regression analysis of determinants of mortality is daily

information for a particular ship. We chose a logit model in which the depen—
dent variable takes on the value of 1 if there were one or more deaths from a

particular cause.18 Separate regressions are required for slaves and crew on
the grounds that these groups arrived with substantially different immunities

and lived under considerably different conditions. Because there was contact
with shore and provisions were available from shore during loading but not
during the voyage, it is appropriate to analyze mortality during loading sepa.-

rate from mortality during the voyage.

Loading

The variables available for study of mortality during loading include
region

of origin in Africa, slaves per ton on the ship, seas.on of the year,

and time. These variables are motivated below. Experiments with other varia-

bles are discussed at the end of this section.
Region. Differences in death rates by location could have been caused by

variations in the rate of exposure to pathogens, the number and virulence of
pathogens, and the immunities and other means of resistence by individuals to

disease.

With regard to risks of exposure, the nature of

activities required

11

by the crew while slaving may have differed by region. For example, the distance that the ship anchored from shore, whether the ship anchored along the
coast or in a river or delta, the amount of time spent by the crew on ship
versus the interior, and sources of food and water may have been important

determinants of mortality. kiong slaves the risks of exposure may have been
influenced by the duration of time from inland capture to loading, the loca-

tions of forts or prisons relative to sources of disease, the extent of crowd
ing while being held on shore, and sources of food and water.

It is virtually

impossible to acquire reliable information about the number and virulence of

pathogens that existed in the late eighteenth century. However, it should be
recognized that differences could have existed as a function of climate,
topography, migration, and the extent of adaptation of pathogens to hosts.

The immunities of individuals were influenced by the degree of adaptation to a
diseäseenviroriment.

Thus the extent to which slaves exported frc a particu-

lar port were acquired in regions remote or otherwise differing in disease
environment of the
few

port of exit may have influenced mortality. Excluding the

who had been to Africa or the West Indies previously,

had little or

the crew generally

no resistence to malaria or yellow fever. The general health

and diet of slaves and crew were important particularly for resistence to gastrointestinal diseases; nutrition apparently has little impact on the course

of malaria or yellow fever.19 Therefore the health of slaves at the time of
initial capture, exertions of the journey to the coast, and diet while being
held on the coast or on board ship may have influenced deaths from dysentery.
In conclusion, it should be recognized that the large number of possible

regional determinants of mortality and the lack of information about most of
them will make it difficult to identify specific sources of locational differences in mortality that may be found.

It should be noted that the influence

12

of a particular region on mortality could have changed overtime, but that lack
of data restricts study of this issue.

Slaves per Ton. Gastrointestinal diseases such as shigellosis are often
highly contagious.2° Transmission is common through the fecal-oral route,

usually by way of contaminated hands or food. Shigellosis does not confer
long—term immunity because reinfections are frequent, and the multiplicity of

strains precludes resistence to all varieties. Assuming that all instances of
gastrointestinal diseases were not acquired by contamination from a central
source such as food or water, the spread of these diseases would have varied

with density. Thus slaves per ton may have influenced slave death rates. To
the extent that the crew avoided slaves and slave living areas or had resist—
ence,

death rates of the crew would have been unrelated to slaves per ton.

Season. The number of sites available for mosquito larvae, and therefore
the mosquito population, may have increased during the rainy season.21 In
addition, mosquitoes have may been more active and survived for

in

longer periods

humid as opposed to dry weather. Thus the chances of infection from mala-

ria may have increased during the rainy season. Some observers have noted an
increase

in the incidence of 'fevers" during the rainy season.22 Rain and

high humidity may also have prolonged the survival and increased the probabil-

ity of

transmission of bacteria responsible for gastrointestinal diseases.

Time. The spread of infectious disease inevitably involves time. Factors that may influence the profile of mortality over time include patterns of
activity that affect the chances of exposure to pathogens, the mechanism of
transmission, the incubation period of the disease, and the interval from the

onset of illness to death. Diseases have characteristic incubation periods
and intervals from the first symptoms to death. Given information about

13

causes of death, the time profile of mortality may be informative about the
mechanism of transmission and the patterns of activity that led to disease.

The results involving slaves and crew are given in Tables 5 and 6. Since
the chances of deaths should have been a function of the number of persons at
risk,

the regressions include the number of slaves (or crew) as independent

variables.

The values of -2

log A,

where A is the likelihood ratio, show that

each regression is highly significant. Significance tests for groups of coefficients

are given in

Among

the notes to the tables.

slaves the deaths from fevers and gastrointestinal diseases by

region of origin were systematically higher in the Bight of Biafra, Compared

to

other regions, the probability of deaths among slaves boarded in the Bight

of Biafra was 31 precent higher for gastrointestinal diseases and 58 percent

higher for fevers.23 The Bight of Biafra was also deadly for the crew,
especially for gastrointestinal diseases. However, the chances of crew deatris
from fevers were systematically highest on the Windward Coast and systemati-

cally lowest on the Gold Coast. The highest chances of crew deaths from gastrointestinal diseases occurred in Senegambia.

Crowding, or slaves per ton, was included in the regressions involving
fevers on the grounds that some gastrointestinal diseases may have been mis-

diagnosed as fevers. Because the relationship between crowding and mortality
may have been nonlinear, the regressions include a polynomial in slaves per

ton. The tests reported in the notes to Table 6 show that crowding had no
systematic influence on crew deaths. The explanation for the lack of association is unclear, but if the diet and health of the crew was relatively good,
it

would have imposed a gastric acid barrier to the spread of gastrointestinal

infections. It is also possible that the crew avoided contact and therefore

14

contamination from slaves, or that the crew was largely immune (i.e. the crew
was

the source of slave gastrointestinal infections) to the diseases involved.

The tests reported in the notes to Table 5

establish that slave deaths were

systematically linked to crowding. Figure 1 shows that the chances of gastrointestinal infection implied by the regression increased roughly ten fold as

the ships approached carrying capacity. This pattern is consistent with
higher probabilities of transmitting infection through contact as density
increased.

If some gastrointestinal diseases were misdiagnosed as fevers, it

is not surprising that the chances of deaths from "fevers would have been
related
deaths

to slaves per ton. Figure

1 shows, however, that the chances of

from fevers eventually declined as slaves per ton rose. The reason for

this pattern is unknown, but it

is

possible that some of the fevers were

caused by mosquitoes and that for reasons of safety and control of the cargo,
the ships anchored further from shore at hiijh defisities.

The chances of crew deaths from gastrointestinal diseases were not
systematically related to time as measured by a polynomial in day of loading.
The

day of loading coefficients involving fevers were significantly different

from 0 at .10; deaths were systematically lower early in the loading process,
possibly

because of the delay between infection and mortality for diseases

such as malaria
Slave deaths from gastrointestinal diseases were systematically higher
during

the rainy season (June, July, and August north of the equator and

December, January, and February south of the equator).24 Rain apparently had

no influence on the chances of crew deaths from gastrointestinal causes or on
deaths from fevers. Infective mosquitoes may have been sufficiently prevalent
year-round that the chances of infection varied little by season of the year.

15

It is also possible t:hat infective mosquitoes were more prevalent during the

rainy season and that patterns of activity, such as expeditions to the
interior, were curtailed in ways that offset the greater risk of infection.

Experiments with other variables include a proxy for the price of slaves,
a measure of association between slave and crew deaths, measures of duration

that slaves had been on board, theage and sex ratios of slaves, recent loading of slaves, year of activity, and month of the year. Since bonuses and
other income received by the captain, the surgeon, and the crew varied with
the value of the cargo, there were incentives to improve care as a function of
slave

prices. Unfortunately, reliable annual data on slave prices are lacking

or have not yet been assembled for the late eighteenth century. Experiments

using the price of

sugar as a proxy for

the price of slaves failed

to uncover

any systematic relationship with slave mortality. The incentives at low

pricesmay

have been sufficient to elicit all the care that they were willing

to exert, or were able to exert given the primitive state of health care know-

ledge. The reasons in theory why the price of

slaves and the price of sugar

may not have been highly correlated also suggest that sugar prices may have
been a poor proxy for slave prices; for example, fluctuations in weather could
have changed the supply and therefore the price of sugar in

ways that had

little influence on slave prices.
In an effort to investigate the possible transmission of gastrointestinal

diseases from slaves to the crew and vice versa, dummy variables representing
death of slaves (or crew) from gastrointestinal causes within the previous
week were included as explanatory variables in the regressions for gastroin-

testinal diseases. The results showed that there was no systematic interaction between slave and crew mortality.

16

Because individual slaves were not tagged by date of entry or exit from
the ship, it is impossible to measure accurately the length of time that the

typical slave had been on board. Since life on the ship was probably debilitating, duration aboard may have influenced the incidence and course of

disease. Experiments with measures of average duration constructed on various
assumptions about flows (such as first on, first off and last on, first off)
were unsatisfactory; the procedures sometimes produced impossible results
(negative numbers of slaves at risk on some days, for example) and in those
cases in which the measures could not be rejected out of hand, there was no
systematic association with mortality.

Differential patterns of exposure, immunity, and resistence to disease

may have affected death rates by age and sex. Children, for example, may have

acquired fewer immunities than adults Patterns in African societies of
demand for labor and ccess to food by age and sex and differential treatment
after enslavement could have led to differential mortality for males and

females. In the subset of observations providing the relevant information,
the shares of the cargo enumerated as females and children were included as

explanatory variables. Age and sex composition had no statistically significant influence on fevers, but the chances of deaths from gastromtestinal
causes were systematically higher among females and children.

The chances that someone harbored or transmitted a disease may have
increased with the number of slaves or crew aboard and with the recent addition

of slaves to the ship. Experiments with these variables failed to un-

cover any systematic influences. Quadratic terms in the number of slaves and
number of crew, and the number of slaves loaded within the previous week were
statistically insignificant when included in the regressions for fevers and
for gastrointestinal diseases.

17

Although the data employed in the paper pertain to only 5 years (1792—

1796), it is possible that captains and surgeons adjusted to the incentives of
Dolben's Act in ways that reduced mortality. A linear term in year of the
activity was included in the regressions, and the coefficient was negative and
statistically significant (t=—3.47) for gastrointestinal

diseases but statis-

tically insignificant for fevers. During the voyage the coefficient of the
year

was statistically insignificant in both regressions.

It is possible that

health was improved by methods that applied while loading but not during the
voyage.

The regression models incorporate seasonal phenomena by including a dummy

variable for the

health

rainy season, but in reality seasonal phenomena influencing

and mortality were more complex than this simple dichotorr'. Patterns

of rainfall, food supply, insect vectors, and human activities varied through-.

out the year and by region in ways that make it
influence

difficult

to predict the net

of all relevant factors.25 Empirical investigation of these phenoni—

ena among slaves is restricted by the small

number of deaths that occurred

during loading. mong the crew there is sufficient information to include
dummies in month of loading as regressors in the equation for fevers on ships
that loaded north of the equator.

In these data crew deaths were systemati-

cally lower

during the dry season months of March (t=—2.33) and April

(t=-2. 58).

Captai.ns were probably aware of seasonal patterns because days

loading peaked in March (10.7 percent of all days spent loading) and

spent

were lowest during the summer months of the rainy season.
The Voyage

Although the variables available for study of mortality during the voyage
are similar to those employed for loading, the interpretations may differ.

18

Region of origin, for example, ecompasses only those aspects such as general

health or patterns of activity immediately before departure that continued to
have an influence during the voyage. Thus contrasts between regional effects
during

loading and the voyage may suggest interpretations of the regional

van ables.
Table 7 shows that the chances of slave deaths from fevers were relatively high among ships departing from Sierra Leone, the Bight of Benin, and

Congo-Angola. Senegambia, Sierra Leone, Congo-Angola, and especially the
Bight of Biafra were major sources of slave deaths from gastrointestinal

diseases. The small sample size limited regional comparisons involving the
crew to the Bight of Biafra versus other regions. Companions

of Tables 5-8

show that the Bight of Biafra was deadly for slaves and crew. The negative

coefficient for crew size in gastrointestinal diseases is unexpected. Errors
;n crewsize estimates may have contributed to this result, although it does

not register in this way in other regressions. Perhaps there was specializa-

tion

within the crew in the case of large ships in ways that concentrated

contamination from gastrointestinal diseases.26
Crowding as measured by slaves per ton had no systematic influence on the

chances of deaths for slaves or crew during the voyage. The equations shown
in Tables 7 and 8 include only a linear term in slaves per ton on the grounds
that the range of the variable was small across ships during the voyage; however, a

third degree polynomial in slaves per ton is also statistically insig-

nificant. The lack of association contrasts with the systematic association
found for slaves during loading. Figure 1 shows that the chances of slave
deaths tended to level-off at high densities; thus if the lack of association
at high densities during loading applied to the voyage then the finding may be
an artifact of the limited range of observation during the voyage.

19

Table 8 shows that crew mortality rates from fevers and gastrointestinal
diseases were negatively related to length of loading, but the coefficients
are marginally significant.

If there was a systematic association involving

length of loading and these causes of death, then the interpretation may be

that the level of exposure to disease increased during loading such that those
who survived were more immune to attacks and death during the voyage.
Day of the voyage systematically influenced slave deaths from fevers and

gastrointestinial diseases and crew mortality from fevers.27 The relationships estimated from the regressions are given in Figure 2.

In each case the

estimated probabilities of deaths follow an inverted-U pattern as a function

of time. 4mong slaves the peak occurred about 25 days into the voyage for
fevers and 31 days into the voyage for gastrointestinal diseases.
from

Crew deaths

fevers peaked about 12 days into the voyage. The prevalent and most

deadly forn ofrnalaria in Africa was P. falciparum.28 This form usua!ly has
an incubation period of 10 to 14 days, but may be longer, and may kill up to
25 percent of nonimmune adults within 2 weeks of a primary attack.29
The days

immediately before a ship's departure usually involved considerable loading of
slaves and interaction with

shore. The interaction probably increased the

crew's exposure to infective mosquitoes; this combined with the range of.in—
cubation periods and the delay from first symptoms to death is consistent with

the time profile of crew mortality from fevers. Yellow fever runs its course
within 5 to 7 days, and so it is unlikely that infections received on shore
contributed to the peak observed during the voyage.

However, the putrid

fevers diagnosed by surgeons are consistent with yellow fever, and it is possible that infected mosquitoes taken aboard incubated the virus in ways that
led to deaths from the disease more than one week into the voyage.

20

Compared to the distribution for the crew, slave deaths from fevers

peaked about 2 weeks later and were more concentrated in the upper tail. The
distribution resembles that for gastrointestinal diseases. Most slaves had
probably been infected with malaria prior to capture, while traveling to the
coast, or while being held on the coast.

It is doubtful that slaves with

fever symptoms were loaded. Furthermore, relapses do not occur in P. falci—
parum.30 These considerations combined with the possibilities for misdiagno—

and the sensitivity of deaths from Hfeversu to density during crowding

sis

suggest that a large share of the slave deaths attributed to fevers during
the

voyage may have been of gastrointestinal origin.

The time pattern of deaths from gastrointestinal diseases shown in Figure
2 is consistent with diffusion by personal contact and

a central source.
on

individual ships

the

with contamination from

In the case of personal contact the time pattern of deaths
would have resembled an inverted—U, and in the latter case

incidence of the first death across

ships would have followed the

inverted-U pattern, but deaths on a particular ship should have been bunched
together, differing only by individual differences in the incubation period.
While it is impossible to measure the relative importance of these processes
from the available data, information in Tables 9 and 10 suggests that spread
by

personal contact was a general tendency. Table 9 shows that the average

interval

from the beginnng of the voyage to the first death was 17.1 days,

which is significantly less than the interval of roughly 30 days predicted by
the central source hypothesis. The incubation period for shigellosis ranges
from 1 to 6 days and averages 5 days.31 The fact that

the average intervals

between deaths 1 and 2 and between 2 and 3 exceeded the average incubation
period

casts further doubt on the central source explanation. In addition,

21

the

size and decline of the intervals is consistent with a diffusion by con-

tact process. Table 10 shows that one—half of the ships with 2 or more deaths
from gastrointestinal diseases had average intervals between deaths that

exceeded the upper range of the incubation period of 6 days. Because 10 out

of

26 ships had average intervals under 5

instances

days, however, one cannot rule out

of contamination from a central source.

Indeed, instances of more

complex processes such as spread by contact combined with contamination from a

iit.i a i uur.e ai We i I WI LII III LII SLO UI LF1e UdL.
Experiments conducted with other variables include the ratio of actual to
expected voyage length, dumniy variables representing interaction of slave and

crew deaths from gastrointestinal causes within the previous week, measures of
average duration that slaves had been on board, age and sex ratios, and quadratic terms in crew size and number of slaves. The latter four experiments
were also conducted for loading and the results were similar with the exceptions that death of a slave from a gastrointestinal disease had a marginally
significant (t=1.85) positive influence on the chances of crew deaths and that
the shares of females and children had positive but not statistically significant influences

interaction

on gastrointestinal diseases, Possible interpretations of the

between slaves and crew are that crew health, and therefore

resistence, deteriorated from loading to the voyage, and that the amount of
contamination from slaves was greater during the voyage because slaves ill

with dysentery could not be sent on shore. Females and children vulnerable to
disease while loading may have acquired immunities and possibly more food by

the time of the voyage. With regard to expectations, predicted length was
calculated from a regression of observed length on ship size in tons, region
of origin in Africa, and destination in the West Indies (Jamaica versus the

22

outer

islands).32 The argument for including the ratio of actual to expleted

length is that provisions would have been depleted and death rates should have

risen on unusually long voyages. The ratio of actual to expected length,
interacted with day of the voyage or entered alone, had no systematic
influence on crew or slave deaths from fevers or gastrointestinal diseases.
This

result is not surprising in view of the findings, shown in Figure 2, that

deaths from the diseases in question were concentrated in the middle of the
voyage.
COMPARISONS WITH OTHER RESEARCH

Important topics of earlier research on the Atlantic slave trade include
variations

in mortality by place of origin in Africa, crowding, voyage length,

age and sex ratios,
mortality.

epidemics, and the relationship between slave and crew

The following section compares the finding of this

previous

work in each of these areas.

Location

in Africa

research with

At the outset it should be recognized that mortality comparisons across
regions are hazardous because factors other than region may have been in-

volved. This qualification aside, others have found high rates of mortality.

in routes from East—South Africa (Mozambique) and Biafra.33 Comparisons with
Mozambique are not possible because the data of this study do not include voy-

ages from that area. There are many possible explanations for high death
rates from Biafra, including adverse health at enslavement, poor conditions on
the journey to the coast and while being held for shipment, the exposure of
slaves from remote areas to a new disease environment, and a harsh disease

environment. While high death rates for slave and crew in Biafra (shown in

23

Tables 5—8) could have been the result of the coincidence of different fac-

tors, the poor experience of slaves and crew is consistent with a harsh
disease environment.
Crowding
Although contemporary critics of the slave trade widely regarded crowding
or "tight packing" of slaves as unhealthy, early regulations limited crowding,
and connections between density and mortality are inherently plausible within
a framework of the spread of infectious disease, recent quantitative studies

fail to establish a connection between slaves per ton and mortality.34 This
paper demonstrates that variations in crowding were crucial to variations in
death rates during

loading. The contrasting results are

reconcilable by

Figure 1, which shows that the chances of deaths changed little with increas-

ing density above 1.5 slaves per ton. Admittedly Figure 1 does not extend to
densities in the area of 2 to 3 slaves per ton that prevailed outside the era
of regulation, but findings by others that overall mortality varied little
across voyages within the higher ranges are consistent with the hypothesis

that the relationship changed little across high densities. It appears that
Dolben's Act may have had little effect on mortality because the limits on
crowding were not sufficiently restrictive.

Voyage Length
It

has been widely, though not universally, noted that the share of the

cargo dying increased with time at sea.35 Whether there should have been a
positive relationship has not been

the

debated. Instead

controversy centers on

profile of mortality within the voyage, and specifically on the

importance

relative

of high mortality rates at the beginning as opposed to the end of

24

the journey.

It has been argued that the former would have been associated

with poor conditions in Africa and the latter with poor conditions on the voy-

age, especially near the end of unusually long voyages. Neither of these patterns is supported by this study, at least not for the major causes of death

studied in detail. This research suggests that high density possibly aggre—
vated by poor health before loading and poor nutrition during the voyage led
to high death rates from gastrointestinal diseases near the middle of the voyage.

These results suggest directions for further research. Data on voyage
length and share of slaves who died may be inadequate for measuring the importance of provisioning because the diseases involved are crucial to the argument; specifically, if there was screening before loading one would expect
deaths from epidemic diseases having relatively long incubation periods (such
as smallpox and measles, in which it is about two weeks) to accumulate near
the

end of the voyage. Furthermore, deaths resulting from reduced provisions

need not have been concentrated at the end of the voyage. Delays in voyages

crossing the equator occurred frequently in the doldrums off the coast of

Africa. Ship captains probably adjusted provisions as a function of where the
ship was in relation to where it was expected to be.36 Thus, rations could
have been cut early in the voyage and restored near the end of an unusually
long journey Even with "normal provisions the journey was probably debilitating, and thus the rise in death rates from respiratory diseases and scurvy
reported
ship

in Table 3 is consistent with

the argument that conditions on the

were important to health.37 Third, high death rates early in the voyage

may be consistent with poor conditions in Africa, but low death rates early in
the voyage do not necessarily irrply that conditions in Africa were goodu;

25

captains and surgeons may have avoided areas with epidemics and may have been

successful in screening slaves in poor health. Finally, greater attention
shoud be given to the interaction of conditions in Africa with those on the

One of the contributions of the study of heights has been to alert

ship.

researchers to the nature
and

and extent of interaction among nutrition, disease,

growth.3A Thus, for example, the effects of famines in Africa on mortal-

ity during the voyage may have been a function of crowding, provisioning, and
voyage length.
Age and Sex

Studies examining differential mortality by age have usually found that
rates

were higher for children.39 No systematic pattern has emerged involving

males versus females. Findings in this study that chances of deaths from gastrointestinal diseases during loading were higher for children and females are
generally consistent with previous work.

Epidemics

Although the role of epidemics are difficult to appraise from aggregate
measures such as the share of slaves embarked who died, it is clear from qualitative evidence for the entire slave trade that the spread of infectious
diseases such as dysentery, smallpox, and measles were important in overall

mortality. As many as 20 to 30 percent or more of the ships in some trades,
especially those of the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, had deaths

as a share of slaves embarked in excess of 15 percent.40 In these data the
average share of slaves who died was 2.4 percent, the share exceeded 4 percent
for only 10 out of 92 vessels (the distribution is given in Table 11 of the
appendix)

and the highest share in the sample was 13.8 percent. The favorable

26

record stems in part from the lack of deaths from smallpox and measles.

It

also appears that the spread of dysentery may have been contained in these
data relative to vessels that had high mortality rates; only 60 percent of the
ships in the sample reported one or more and only 33 percent reported two or
more deaths from gastrointestinal diseases.

Slaves and Crew
The issues of slave and crew mortality involve comparative levels and the
extent

of interrelation. The few data available on these questions indicate

that crew mortality exceed that for slaves and that the two were positively,
though, weakly, correlated.41 The fact that slaves and crew tended to die
from different causes would lead one to expect at most a weak positive corre

lation between overall slave and crew death rates. This study suggests that
passage

of gastrointestinal diseases from slaves to crews during the voyage

was a source of that correlation. Though minor in these data, respiratory
diseases and scurvy may have been important causes of death common to slaves
and crew in earlier eras of the trade.
Although the literature on the slave trade seldom includes estimates of
crew mortality, West Africa acquired a reputation among Europeans as the

uwhite man's grave." Crew death rates probably remained high until progress
was made against malaria and yellow fever beginning in the mid—nineteenth

century. Thus the finding in this paper that the annual death rate during
loading

and the voyage combined was 229.5 per thousand for the crew is not

surprising

in light of other studies. The comparable figure among slaves of

82.8 per thousand is surprising for the extent to which it was below that for

the crew. The next section discusses the low death rate for slaves.

27

CONCLUDING REMARKS

Using data giving date and cause of death this study has found that
fevers and gastrointestinal diseases were the major cause of death for slaves
and crew in the English slave trade to the West Indies during the late 1700s.
The crew died primarily from fevers (mostly malaria) contracted in Africa, and
gastrointestinal diseases such as dysentery that spread during the voyage were

the major cause of slave deaths. The chances of slave and crew deaths varied
systematically

by region of origin in Africa, season

of the year, and day of

the voyage; for slaves alone by density on board ship, age, and sex; and for
the crew alone by recent occurrence of slave deaths from gastrointestinal
diseases during the voyage.

The incidence of mortality as measured by the number of deaths as a share
of slaves embarked was low in these data compared to the slave trade in other
times, which raises the question of the generality of these results.

In light

of this study, why might death rates have been higher elsewhere? There are
several possible explanations. First, diseases such as smallpox and measles
that were prevalent in other times were virtually absent from these data.

Inoculation may have been effective in reducing the incidence of smallpox on

the ships of the surgeons' logs. Second, knowledge and experience involving
health and mortality in the slave trade had accumulated by the late 1700s.

Practices at this time were not guided by a germ theory of disease, but presumably trial, error, and observation had eliminated some practices that con-

tributed to deaths. One would expect that the rise in slave prices that
occurred from the late 1600s provided an incentive for innovation in health

care.42 Third, Dolben's Act may have lowered mortality. To the extent that
limits on capacity allowed room for more provisions, health may have

improved.43 The fact that deaths from respiratiory diseases and scurvy were

28

low in these data is consistent with this explanation. In addition, the
incentives of the act may have encouraged surgeons to screen carefully slaves

in poor health. Fourth, conditions on slave ships were unhealthy, and the
less time spent in this environment, the lower the share of slaves who died.

Loading times and voyage length declined from the seventeenth through the end

of the eighteenth century.44 Finally, nutritional and demographic conditions
in Africa could have changed in ways that led to slaves who were in better

health before loading. Additional studies of slave mortality that make use of
data on date and cause of death and conditions in Africa may shed light on
these issues.

Studies of modern labor markets show that workers receive higher wages

for jobs that, other things being equal, are unpleasant or dangerous.45 The
acquisition of crew members for slave ships constitutes an economic laboratory

fr t"j of

employment under very hazardou conditions. Interest'ng ques

tions about this labor market include the size of compensating wage differentials, whether higher wages were received for destinations to the higher mor-

tality regions of Africa, the extent to which prospective crew members were

informed about the risks, and the nature of compensation. With regard to the
last point one might expect that crew members who were knowledgeable about the
risks would have insisted on some compensation in the form of a signing bonus
that was spendable before the hazardous journey began.

Comparative studies of mortality rates on ocean voyages would help to
place the slave trade in perspective and to elucidate causes of mortality on

slave and non—slave voyages.46 Data on non-slave voyages to the U.S. are
available, for example, from passenger lists and from forms required by the Pas-

senger Act of 1819. The agenda for research on these questions should include

the

relationship of health before departure to health and mortality during the

29

voyage, the influence of provisioning on mortality, crowding and mortality,
seasonal patters of mortality, age and sex distributions and mortality, the
course of death rates during the voyage, and the time trend in mortality.

30

Appendix:

Discussion of the Data

Origins
"An act to regulate, for a limited time, the shipping and carrying of
slaves in British vessels from the coast of Africa," also known as flolben's

Act, emerged from the parliamentary debates over the slave trade in 1788.
The act limited vessels to five slaves for every three tons of burden up to
201

tons, and one slave per ton for every ton above 201.48 Ship captains ex-

ceeding this limit were subject to a fine of £ 30 per slave above the limit.
Surgeons on board slave ships were required to maintain a journal encompassing

slave loading, slave and crew deaths, and causes of death. The law specified

that the collector at the port of destination was to administer on oath to the
surgeon attesting the truth of the journal. Captains received £ 100 and surgeons received £ 50 if deaths as a fraction of the largest number of slaves on
board did not exceed 2 percent. The awards were £ 50 and £ 25, respectively,

if the rate did not exceed 3 percent.
Characteristics
An extensive search of the House of Lords Record Office and the Public
Record Office produced 92 surgeons logs that are substantially complete.49
The

typical journal begins with a brief description of the vessel (name, names

of master and surgeon, home port and tonnage) followed by sections on loading
and unloading by day in categories of men, women, boys, and girls: chronological lists of slave and crew deaths; and the oath signed by the surgeon.

The dates of departure from Africa of the ships in the sample span the

period from 1792 to 1796. Roughly one-third of the departures occurred in
1793 and only 9 voyages took place in 1794. The typical vessel loaded for 119
days, (s.d. = 92 days) but the range of experience encompassed 1 to 529 days.

31

Approximately 28,770 slaves departed from Africa, of whom 63.7 percent were

males and 9.6 percent were children. The average ship carried 313 slaves and
had a capacity of 222 tons. All the major regions of supply along the west
coast of Africa are represented in the sample; 3 originated from Senegambia,
11 from Sierra Leone, 2 from the Windward Coast, 13 from the Gold Coast, 7
from the Bight of Benin, 8 from the Bight of Biafra, 18 from Congo—Angola, and

the area of origin for 30 vessels is unknown. The typical voyage took 56 days

15.3 days) and the range was from 23 to 105 days. All the slaves were

(s.d. =

destined

for the British West Indies and three—quarters of the ships went to

Jamai ca.

Bi ases

The

logs of 16 vessels specify the day of arrival at the port

of destina-

tion. Arrival times for 71 vessel were inferred from the day the surgeon's
oath was signed. Arrival information is incomplete or lacking for 5 logs.
Presumably the surgeon ceased to record deaths when the vessel reached port.50
If the oath was administered after the day the vessel reached port, then death
rates calculated for the end of the voyage would be biased downwards because

the number of days at risk for recording deaths

Fortunately

would be overstated.

12 vessels reported the actual day of arrival and have the

In this sample the average lag between the day of the oath and the

oath.

reported

day of arrival is 2.1 days, and the range is

distortion

from 0 to 5 days. The

to calculated death rates is relatively minor if the experience of

these vessels applied to those for which we lack information.
Throughout the period of the slave trade entrepreneurs commonly rewarded
masters, surgeons, and certain members of the crew for efforts to maintain the
health

of the cargo. Bonuses took the form of shares of the sales receipts,

32

head money, and privilege slaves.51 The extent to which Dolben's Act may
have

contributed to total incentives is not clear; entrepreneurs could have

allowed legislated incentives to substitute for their own.
Table 11 shows the frequency distribution of recorded deaths as a share

of slaves exported from Africa. The clusters of observations at or below 2
percent and 3 percent combined with the cut-off point for bonuses under Dol—
ben's Act raise the suspicion that some deaths may
The

observation that death rates in the Atlantic slave trade were rela-

tively low during the
In

not have been recorded.

1790s appears to support the underreporting thesis.52

defense of the data, however, it should be recognized that good reasons

exist for the low death rate (see the concluding section of the
substantial

paper). While

underreporting cannot be entirely ruled out, the favorable situa-

with respect to epidemic diseases of smallpox and measles, for example,

tion

makes the calculated aeath rates plausible.

Even if there was substantial underreporting, the implications for our
understanding of determinants of mortality heavily depends upon selectivity of
underreporting.
conclusions

If

deaths were not reported at random, for example, then many

about regional influences, seasonal patterns, and the course of

events during the voyage remain largely intact.
A selective form of underreporting perhaps worth
end

discussion involves the

of the voyage. The decline in calculated death rates after the middle of

the voyage combined with the chronological organization of the journals sug-

gests that a simple strategy for collecting bonuses under Dolben's Act for
ships that were near the margin for collection was to
near

neglect to report deaths

the end of the voyage. Since all slaves loaded had to he accounted for,

33

this required falsification of loading records. While this form of underreporting may have existed, it is relevant to note that the time profile of
deaths (available for gastrointestinal diseases only) on vessels that exceeded
the 3 percent minimum reached a peak on day 35 of the voyage and then declined
at a rate similar to that for the entire sample shown in Figure 2.

Sample Means

Table 12 lists the sample means of variables employed in the regressions.
These data depict the nature of the sample and are required for calculating
probabilities along the lines of those discussed in the text.

34

FOOTNOTES

1. Mortality in the Atlantic slave trade is the central concern of the following studies: Philip D. Curtin, "Epidemiology and the Slave Trade,"
Political Science Ouarterly, 83 (1968), 190—216; Herbert S. Klein and
Stanley L. Engerman, "Shipping Ptterns and Mortality in the African Slave
Trade to Rio de Janeiro, 1825—1830," Cahiers d'etudes Africaines, 15
(1975), 381-398; "Slave Mortality on British Ships, 1791-1797," in Roger
T. Anstey and P.E.H. Hair, eds., Liverpool, the African Slave Trade and
Abolition (Liverpool, 1976), pp. 113—125; "A Note on Mortality in the
French Slave Trade in the Eighteenth Century," in Henry A. Gemery and Jan

S. Hogendorn, eds., The Uncommon Market: Essays in the Economic History
of the Atlantic Slave Trade (New York, 1979),pp. 261—272; Herbert S.
Klein, The Middle Passage (Princeton, 1978); Johannes Postma, "Mortality
in the Dutch Slave Trade, 1675—1795," in Henry A. Gemery and Jan 5.

Hogendorn, The Uncommon Market: Essays in the Economic History of the
Atlantic Slave Trade (New York, 1979), pp. 239—272; Robert Stein,
"Mortality in the Eighteenth—Century French Slave Trade," Journal of
African History 21 (1980), 35—41; Joseph C. Miller, "Mortality in the

Atlantic Slave Trade: Statistical Evidence on Causality," Journal of
Interdisciplinary History 11 (1981), 385—423; Raymond L. Cohn and Richard
A. Jensen, "The Determinants of Slave Mortality Rates on the Middle
Passage," Explorations in Economic History 19 (1982), 269—282; "Mortality
in the Atlantic Slave Trade," Journal of Interdisciplinary History 13
(1982), 317-329; and David Eltis, "Mortality and Voyage Length in the

Middle Passage: New Evidence from the Nineteenth Century," Journal of
Economic History, 44 (1984), 301-308. See also Philip D. Curtin, The
Atl antic Slave Trade: A Census (Madison, 1969); Richard Nelson Bean, The

35

British Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade, 1650—1775 (New York, 1975); Michael

Craton, Sinews of Empire: A Short History of British Slavery (New York,
1974); Roger Anstey, The Atlantic Slave Trade and British Abolition, 1760—
1810 (London, 1975); Tomri' Todd Hamm, The American Slave Trade with

Africa, 1620—1807 (Ph.D. dissertation, Indiana University, 1975); James A.

Rawley, The Transatlantic Slave Trade: A History (New York, 1981).
2. Miller, "Mortality in the Atlantic Slave Trade," and Eltis, "Mortality and
Voyage Length" employ the second measure.

3. A total of 7 slaves in the sample were returned to shore as sick. These
unloadings were arbitrarily counted as deaths.
4.

The estimated relationship is

Crew = 11.64 + 0. 07956 Tons, N = 45, R2 =
(5.43) (8.46)

.62

T—values are given in parenthesis. Simple non—linear functional forms fit
little or no better than the simple linear form.
5.

The terms "death rate" and "mortality rate" are sometimes used loosely and

interchangeably. According to usage by demographers death rates are based
on the average number of person-years at risk during a time period and
mortality rates are based on the number at risk at the beginning of a time
period.

If there is little change in the number of persons at risk during

the interval, the difference between the measures is small. Given the
loading and unloading of slaves it is approiate to use death rates as op-

posed to mortality rates in this paper. For a discussion of terminology
see Henry S. Shryock and Jacob S. Siegel, The Methods and Materials of
Demography (Washington, 1975), vol. 2, chap. 14.
6.

For discussion of medical knowledge in the eighteenth century see
Christopher

Lloyd and Jack L. S. Coulter, Medicine and the Navy, 1200—1900,

36

vol.

III, 1714—1815 (Edinburgh, 1961), and H. Harold Scott, A History of

Tropical Medicine, 2 vols. (London, 1939).
7.

The potential for contaminated water suggests that typhoid may have

contributed

to deaths from fevers. Typhus is an unlikely cause of fevers

because it is usually associated with blankets and clothing characteristic

of colder climates.
8.

Symptons of tropical diseases are discussed in G.
Hunter's

Thomas Strickland,

Tropical Medicine (Philadelphia, 1984) and Oscar

Epidemiology

Felsenfeld, The

of Tropical Diseases (Springfield, Ill., 1966). R. Hoeppli,

Parasitic Diseases in Africa and the Western Hemisphere: Early
Documentation and Transmission by the Slave Trade (Basél, 1969), p. 62

notes that as late as
to

the early nineteenth century dysentery was thought

be but oneof the symptoms of malaria.

9. Data in B.R. Mitchell, European Historical Statistics, 1750—1970 (New
York, 1975), Table B6 show that crude death rates in European populations

of

the late 1700s and early 1800s commonly fell in

the interval of 20 to

30 per thousand. The model West level 7 life tables of Ansley J. Coale
and Paul Demeny, Regional Model Life Tables and Stable Populations (Princeton, 1966) has crude death rates in the neighborhood of 30 to 35 per
thousand (given reasonable assumptions of the range of European birth
rates), and is a conservative (high mortality) benchmark for these popu-

lations. The average of the age-specific mortality rates for males in the
level 7 table for age groups 10-15 to 30—34 is 10.4 per thousand.

Soldiers not engaged in combat are a reference group against which

the experiences of slaves and crew can be compared. The annual death rate
among Dragoon guards serving in the United Kingdom from 1830 to 1836 was

37

14 per thousand from disease and 1.3 per thousand from suicide, murder,

and accidents (see Parliamentary Papers, Statistical Report on the
Sickness, Mortality, and Invaliding Among the Troops in the United Kingdom
(London, 1839), p. 4).

10. The model West level 1 life table has crude death rates in the neighborhood of 47 to 51 per thousand (given reasonable assumptions about the

range of European birth rates). In this table the average of the age—
specific mortality rates for males in the age groups 10—14 to 30—34 is 18
per thousand.

11. Philip D. Curtin, "The White Man's Grave; Image and Reality," Journal of

British Studies 1 (1961), 94—110; The Image of Africa: British Ideas and
Action 1780—1850 (Madison, 1964); K.E. Davies, "The Living and the Dead:
White Mortality in West Africa, 1684—1742," in Stanley L. Engeman and
.ugene D. Genovese, Race and Si avery in the Western Hemi sphere:
Quantitative

Studies (Princeton, 1975), 83—98; H.M. Feinberg, "New Data

on European Mortality in West Africa:

The Dutch on

the Gold Coast, 1719—

1760," Journal of African History 15 (1974), 357—371.
12. See Lloyd and Coulter, Medicine and the Navy, pp. 293—328 for a discus—

sion of the conquest of scurvy.
13.

Ibid, pp. 348-352. Klein, The Middle Passage, p. 229, notes that inocula-

tion

pervaded the slave trade by the second half of the eighteenth cen-

t u ry.

14. Marc H. Dawson, "Smallpox in Kenya, 1880-1920," Social Science and
Medicine 13B (1979), 245—250; Eugenia W. Herbert, "Smallpox Inoculation in

Africa," Journal of African History 4 (1975), 539—559.

38

15.

Abraham M. Lilienfeld, Foundations of Epidemiology (New York, 1976),
Chap. 3 and Brian MacMahen and Thomas F. Pugh, Epidemiology: Principles
and Methods (Boston, 1970), Chaps. 1—4.

16. Curtin, "White Man's Grave," pp. 95—97.
17. Classic works in the area include Norman 1. J. Bailey, The Mathematical
Theory of Epidemics (New York, 1957) and Hugo Muench, Catalytic Models in
Epidemiology (Cambridge, Mass., 1959).

18. The share of deaths occurring on days in which there were two or more
deaths was so low that it justifies the use of a logit model as an

approximation for calcuating probabilities of death. Only 3.3 percent of
crew deaths from fevers, for example, occurred on days in which there

were two or more deaths. Pmong the eight data sets used, the largest
share of deaths occuring on days in which there were two or more deaths
(12.7 percent) involved slaves dying from gastrointestinal diseases
during the voyage.

19. Strickland, Hunter's Tropical Medicine; Paul F. Russell, Luther S. West,
Reginald D. Manwell, and George MacDonald, Practical Malairology (London,
1963).

20. Strickland, Hunter's Tropical Medicine, pp. 279—282; Felsenfeld,
Epidemiology, pp. 130—134.

21. Leonard Jan Bruce-Chwatt, Essential Malariology (London, 1980) pp. 117—
120;
22.

Russel etal., Practical Malariology, p. 237 and

Joseph C. Miller, "The

pp. 239—240.

Significance of Drought, Disease, and Famine in

the Agriculturally Marginal Zones of West—Central Africa," Journal of
African History 23(1982), p. 23.

39

23. The probabilities were calculated from the regression coefficients and
the logistic function by evaluating other independent variables at their

sample mean. Similar calculations giving relative risks of deaths for
other variables can be done using the sample means given in the appendix.

24. Seasonal patterns of rainfall are from Roland Oliver and Michael Crowder,
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Africa (Cambridge, 1981), p. 43.

25. Kenneth F. Kiple and Virginia Himmelsteib King, Another Dimension to the

Black Diaspora: Diet, Disas, and Racism (Cambridge, 1981); W.B.
Morgan and J.C. Pugh, West Africa (London, 1969); Jean Delmont,
"Paludisme et variations climatiques saisonnieres on savane soudanienne
d' Afrique de l'Ouest," Cahiers d'Etudes Africaines 22 (1982), 117—133.

26. There is evidence that captains assigned some of the ship's crew the only
task

of cleaning the ship. See George Francis Dow, Slave Ships and

Slaving (Salem, Mass., 1927), pp. 82-83.
27.

The last 13 days of observations for voyages going to Jamaica are not
included in the regressions on the grounds that provisions acquired from
a landfall on one of the outer islands may have lessened the comparabil-

ity with non—Jamaica—bound voyages. Thus all voyages "ended" when a
landfall was made.

28. Curtin, "White Man's Grave," p. 95.
29.

Strickland, Hunter's Tropical Medicine, p. 534.

30.

Ibid., p. 523.

31.

Ibid., p. 280. The long incubation period for amoebic dysentery (20 to
90

days) suggests that spread of this disease was not primarily responsi-

ble for the inverted—U pattern. However, poorly-nourished slaves who

40

contracted the disease on shore could have died from it during the
voyage.

32. The regression

is Length (in Days) =

41.11

—0.0227 Tons

(10.2) (—1.42)
+

20. 98 Gold Coast + 23. 70 Beni n + 17.64 Bi afra
(3.42)
(2.02)
(5.04)

+ 11.01 Congo-Angola
(2.85)

+ 12.95 Jamaica, N =

176, R2 = .25.

(5.02)

The omitted variables are Senegambia,

Sierra Leone, and

Windward Coast.

This group of variables was omitted because there was no statiscally sig-

nificant difference in voyage length from these areas. The data source
is the Return to an Order of the Right Honorable the House of Lords dated
the 10th of July 1799, directing that the clerk of the Parliments do
cause to be extracted from the several log books and Journals of Ships
employed in the Slave Trade in each year 1791 to 1797 ..., dated 28 July
1800.

Only those observations from this source having all relevant

information on tons, origin, destination, and dates were used.

33. For discussions of regional patterns see Eltis, "Mortality and Voyage
Length";

Postma, "Mortality in the Dutch

Slave Trade"; Klein, Middle

Passage; Klein and Engerman, "Slave Mortality on British Ships"; Klein
and Engerman, "Shipping Patterns and Mortality"; and Curtin, Atlantic
Slave Trade, chap. 10.
34.

Sanderson, "The Liverpool Delegates and Sir William Dolben's Bill,"
Transactions of the Historic Society of Lancashire and Cheshire 124
(1972), 57—84 discusses the views of contemporaries. Recent quantitative

studies

on this

question include Eltis, "Mortality and Voyage Length";

Postma, "Mortality in the Dutch Slave Trade"; Klein, The Middle Passage;

and Klein and Engerman "Slave Mortality on British Ships"; and "A Note on
Mortality in the French Slave Trade."

41
35.

Investigations of mortality rates and voyage length include Eltis,

"Mortality and Voyage Length"; Cohn and Jensen, "The Determinants of
Slave Mortality Rates"; Miller, "Mortality in the Atlantic Slave Trade";
Postma, "Mortality in the Dutch Slave Trade"; Klein, The Middle Passage;
Klein and Engernian, "Slave Mortality on British Ships;" "A Note on French

Mortality in the French Slave Trade;" "Shipping Patterns and Mortality;"
and Curtin, Atlantic Slave Trade.

36. Dow, Slave Ships, pp. 144—145 discusses problems of adjusting provisions

during the course of the voyage. The questions facing the captain can be
formulated as an optimal control problem. See Morton I. Kamien and Nancy

L. Schwartz, Dynamic Optimization: The Calculus of Variations and
Optimal Control in Economics and Management.

37. By way of perspective on the data in Table 3, relatively few voyages in
these data were unusually long by standards of the entire slave trade
(only 8 percent exceeded 75 days, for example), and limits on slave
capacity under Dolben's Act may have enabled ships to carry additional
provisions.
38.

See, for example, Richard H. Steckel, "Slave Height Profiles from

Coastwise Manifests," Explorations in Economic History 16 (1979), 363—

380 and Robert W. Fogel etal., "Secular Changes in American and British
Stature and Nutrition," Journal of Interdisciplinary History 14 (1983),
44 5-481.
39.

Postma, "Mortality in the Dutch Slave Trade"; Klein, The Middle Passage;
and Klein and Engerman, "Slave Mortality on British Ships."

40. Eltis, "Mortality and Voyage Length"; Postma, "Mortality in the Dutch
Trade"; Klein and Engerman, "A Note on Mortality in the French Slave

Trade;" "Shipping Patterns and Mortality;" Klein, The Middle Passage.

42

41. Klein and Engerman, "A Note on Mortality in the French Slave Trade;"
Curtin, Atlantic Slave Trade, pp. 282—284.

42. Data on slave prices are available in Bean, The British Trans—Atlantic
Slave Trade, p. 76; William Dickson, Mitigation of Slavery (London,
1814), pp. 259—260.

43. Dow, Slave Ships, p. 86 discusses the lack of space for food on slave
ships.

44. The point on voyage length has been made by Raymond L. Cohn, "The Trend
in Deaths of Slaves in the Middle Passage," mimeo (Illinois State

University, 1984). Information on time spent in loading in an earlier
era of the trade is available in Postma, "Mortality in the Dutch Slave
Trade."

45. Robert S. Smith, "Compensating Wage Differentials and Public Policy: A
Reviei,"

Industrial and Labor Relations Review 32 (April

1979k), 33932.

46. Some work has been done in this area. See, for example, James C. Riley,
"Mortality

on Long—Distance Voyages in the Eighteenth Century," Journal

of Economic History 41 (September 1981), 651—656; Raymond L. Cohn,

"Mortality on Immigrant Voyages to New York, 1836—1853," Journal of
Economic History 44
Mortality

(June 1984), 289-300; Farley Grubb," Mobility and

on the North Atlantic Passage: Evidence from Eighteenth-

Century German Migration," mimeo (University of Delaware, 1984).

47. The text of the act is given in Elizabeth Donnan, Documents Illustrative
of the History of the Slave Trade to America (Washington, 1931), vol. 2,
pp. 582—589.
debate.

F.E. Sanderson, "The Liverpool Delegates," discusses the

43

48.

If more thn 40 percent of the slaves were children (defined as no more
than 4 feet 4 inches) then every five children over the 40 percent
counted as four slaves.

49.

Judy Collingwood conducted the search. Logs that failed to give dates of
slave deaths were ignored. Information sometimes missing from the papers

available

to me includes dates of loading (2 logs), crew deaths (27

logs), destination (1 log), causes of crew deaths (5 logs out of the 65
containing crew deaths), and causes of slave deaths (9 logs).

50. There is one known exception. The surgeon on a ship for which the day of
arrival is known continued to record deaths for nearly two weeks after
arrival.

51.

Incentives are discussed in Anstey, The Atlantic Slave Trade, p. 34.

52.

Information on the time trend of mortality is available from Klein, The
Middle Passage; Eltis, "Mortality and Voyage Length"; Curtin, Atlantic
Slave Trade; chap. 10; Cohn, "The Trend."

44

Table 1

Annual Death Rates per Thousand of Slaves During Loading by Cause of Deatha
Days

before

Gastro—

Person—

intest— Respir-

Depar- Years

ture

at Riskb Total FeversC maid

Insur—

Acci—

atorye Scurvy

dent

Not

Suicideg rection Other Given

1—28

1565.65

64.5

10.9

24.3

1.9

0.0

0.6

0.6

1.9

10.2

14.1

29—56

869.66

35. 6

11. 5

14. 9

0. 0

0.0

1.1

2.3

0.0

1. 1

4. 6

bI—i4

bi/.U

ii.!

b.b

1.

1.

U.U

i.I

1.'

i.-

u.u

85—196

701.23

22.8

1.4

8.6

0.0

1.4

4.3

0.0

0.0

1.4

5.7

197+

192.39

52.0

5.2

10.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

26.0

0.0

5.2

5.2

3866.01

45.3

8.3

17.3

1.0

0.5

1.3

2.6

1.0

5.2

8.0

Total

Source: Surgeons' Logs.
a.

Li sted under the first cause of death given if ther wrir1re than one cause.

b. Calculatd as person—days at risk divided by 365.
c.

Includes

fever (66%), malignant fever (9%),

pleuratic fever (6%), bilious

fever (3%), nervous fever (3%), putrid fever (3%), yellow fever (3%),
inflamatory fever (3%), and remittent fever (3%).
d.

Includes flux (51%), dysentery (37%), diarrhea (9%), worms (1%), and
mortification in the bowels (1%).

e. Includes infiamation of lungs (50%), consumption (25%), and decline (25%).

f. Includes drowned (100%).
g.

Includes jumped overboard (80%), and chooked himself (20%).

45

Table 2
Annual Death Rates per Thousand of Crew During Loading by Cause of Deatha
Days
of
Loading

Person-

Gastro—
.
intest- Respir—
at Riskb Total FeversC inald
atorye Scurvy
Years

Acci—

dent

Insur—
Not
Suicide rection Other Given

1-28

148. 12

168.8

144.8

6.8

0.0

0.0

13. 5

0.0

0.0

6.8

0.0

29—56

131.36

342.6

228.4

30.5

0.0

7.6

45.7

0.0

0.0

7.6

22.8

57—84

115.42

346.6

225.3

78.0

17.3

0.0

34.7

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

85-196

256. 09

187.4

140.6

23.4

0. 0

0.0

15.6

0.0

0.0

7.8

3. 9

197+

101.54

187.1

78.8

39.4

0.0

0.0

9.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

59.1

Total

752. 53

237. 9

160. 8

39. 1

2. 7

1. 3

22. 6

0.0

0. 0

5. 3

13. 3

Source: Surgeons' Logs.
a. Listed under the first cause of death given if there was more than one cause.
b.

Calculatd as person-days at risk divided by 365.

c.

Includes fever (60%), putrid fever (26%), bilious fever (5%), remittent fever

(4%), malignant fever (2%), nervous fever (2%), yllow fever (1%), and hectic
fever (1%).
d.

Includes flux. (58%), dysentery (33%), diarrhea (4%),, and inflammation of liver
(4%).

e.

Includes consumption (100%)

f.

Includes drowned (94%), and a fall (6%).

46

Table 3

Annual Death Rates per Thousand of Si ayes During the Voyage by Cause of Deatha
Days

of

Person—
Gastro—
Years
intest- Respir—
at Riskb Total Feversc maid
atorye Scurvy

Voy—
age

Acci—

dent

InsurNot
Suicide rection Other Given

1—14

1098.70

98.7

17.3

32.8

3.6

0.0

0.0

5.5

6.4

20.0

12.7

15-28

1092.11

138.3

25.6

68.7

4.6

1.8

2.7

0.9

0.0

17.4

16.5

29-42

1014.72

145.9

17.7

61.1

10,8

7.9

2.0

2.0

0.0

23.7

20.7

43-56

711.57

98.4

14.1

40.8

7.0

4.2

0.0

1.4

0.0

25.3

5.6

57+

500.12

68.0

12.0

20.0

14.0

2.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

14.0

6.0

4417.22

115.7

18.3

48.0

7.2

3.2

1.1

2.3

1.6

20.4

13.6

Total

Source: Surgeons' Logs.

a. Listedu.nder the first cause of death given if there was more than ,ne
cause.

b. Calculated as person-days at risk divided by 365.

c. Includes fever (59%), nervous fever (14%), bilious fever (9%), yellow fever
(4%), pleuratic fever (4%), putrid fever (2%), malignant fever (2%), hectic
fever (2%), remittent fever (1%), acute fever (1%), and enlarged spleen (1%).

d. Includes flux (53%), dysentery (27%), worms (11%), diarrhea (8%), and dry belly
ache (0.5%).
e.

Includes consumption (41%), peripneumony (16%), inflammation of lungs (16%),
pleurisy (16%), decayed lungs (6%), weakness (3%), and decline (3%).

f. Includes drowned (100%).
g.

Includes jumped overboard (90%), and choked himself (10%).

47

Table 4

Annual Death Rates per Thousand of the Crew During the Voyage by Cause of Deatha

Days
of
Voy—
age

Person—
Years
at Riskb

Gastro—
intest— Respir—

Total FeversC maid

atorye

•

Not

Insur—

Acci—

Scurvy

dent

Suicide

rection

Other Given

0.0 28.8

1-14

69.46

287.9 158.4

57.6

0.0

14.4

28.8

0.0

0.0

15-28

68.50

365.0 175.2

87.6

14.6

0.0

14.6

0.0

29.2

29.2

14.6

29—42

62.82

127.3

15.9

63.7

0.0

31.8

15.9

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

43—56

45.04

111.0

22.2

22.2

0.0

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

22.2

44.4

57+

38. 63

25. 9

25. 9

0. 0

0.0

0. 0

0.0

0. 0

0. C)

0. 0

0. 0

284.45

207.4

91.4

52. 7

3. 5

10.5

14. 1

0.0

7.0

10. 5

17.6

Total

Source: Surgeons' Logs.
a.

Listed under the first cause of death given if there was more than one cause.

b.

Calculated as person—days at risk divided by 365.

c.

Includes fever

(69%), bilious fever (8%), putrid fever (8%),

malignant fever

(8%), nervous fever (4%), and remittent fever (4%).
d.

Includes flux (53%), dysentery (33%), diarrhea (7%), and diseased liver (7%).

e.

Includes consumption (100%).

f.

Includes drowned (100%).

48

Table 5
Regressions of Slave Death per Day While Loading
from Fevers and Gastrointestinal Diseases
on Number of Slaves,
Region of Loading in Africa, Slaves per Ton, and the Rainy Season

Gastrointestinal

Fevers

Coeff.

Variables
Number of slaves

t—value

0.002475

1.06

Seneganibia

Coeff.

t—value

0.001802

1.05

0.03392

0.03

0.1901

0.32

—1.288

—1.73

-0.8971

-1.18

-0.2184

—0.52

Bight of Benin

0.5738

1.07

—0.01123

-0.02

Bight of Bi afra

1.571

2.81

0.8900

1. 87

—1.937

—1.76

—0.2633

—0.67

5.610

1.02

1.858

0.69

(Slaves per Ton)2

—1.858

—0.27

0.1508

0.04

(Slaves per Ton)3

-0. 4410

—0.17

-0.2657

-0.20

0.2654

0.34

1.045

2.94

-6.30

-6.747

-10.84

Sierra Leone
Gold Coast

Congo-Angola

Slaves per Ton

Rainy Season

Constant

—8.768

N = 9,804
Source:

—2 log A = 47. 647

-2 log A = 67.402

Surgeons' logs. Dependent variable = 1 if there was at least one

death froma particular cause in a day on a given ship, 0 otherwise. Significance tests for groups of coefficients:

(a) Fevers, -2

log A = 16.44, d,f. =

5, significant at less than .005 (region); —2 log A = 8.74, d.f. = 3, significant at .05 (slaves per ton); (b) Gastrointestinal, —2 log A = 8.90, d.f. = 6,

significant at .20 (region); —2 log A = 60.96, d.f. = 3, significant at less
than .005 (slaves per ton).
Unknown.

The omitted variables are Windward Coast, and

49

There were no deaths from fevers in Seneganibia and the Windward Coast, and no
deaths

from gastrointestinal diseases on the Windward Coast.

50

Table 6

Regressions of Crew Death per Day While Loading
from Fevers and Gastrointestinal Diseases
on Crew Size,
Region of Loading in Africa, Slaves per Ton, and the Rainy Season

Fevers

t-value

Coeff.

Variables

Crew size

0.02237

Gastrointestinal

1.38

Senegambia

Sierra Leone
Windward Coast

—0.09644

-0.32

Coeff.

t-value

0.09979

2.17

4.980

4.67

0.9252

1.02

1.817

3.05

3.181

3.82

1.873

4.80

Gold Coast

—0.9095

—2.39

Bight of Benin

—0.8399

—1.57

Bight of Biafra

1.097

3.29

Congo—Angola

0.1559

0.55

Slaves per Ton

0. 9898

0.66

2.001

0.43

-0.48

—0.4498

-0.07

—0.5323

—0.19

(Slaves per Ton)2

-1.063

(Slaves per Ton)3

0.4660

0.51

Day of Loading

0.003671

0.51

0.03177

1.54

(Day of Loading)2

-0.3541x104

-0.75

(Day of Loading)3

0.3924x107

0.49

0.1965x106

1.26

Rainy Season

0.04709

0.16

0.2754

0.44

Constant

N =

—5.046

7,790

—.0001544

—8.80

—12.21

—2 log A = 58.557

—1.42

—6.56

—2 log A = 40.959

Source: Surgeons' logs. Dependent variable = 1 if there was at least one

death from a particular cause in a day on a given ship, 0 otherwise. Significance tests for groups of coefficients:

(a) Fevers, —2 log A = 42.30, d.f.

=

51

d.

f. = 6 significant at less than .005 (region); —2 log A = 3.28, d. f. = 3,

significant at .40 (slaves per ton); —2 log A =6.24, d.f. = 3, significant
.10 (day of loading); (b) Gastrointestinal, —2 log A = 31.42, d.f. = 4, sig-

nificant at less than .005 (region); —2 log A.= 1.62, d.f. = 3, significant at
.70 (slaves per ton); —2 log A = 2.48, d.f. = 3, significant at .50 (day of
loading). The omitted variable is region of loading Unknown. There were no
deaths from fevers in Senegambia and no deaths from gastrointestinal diseases
in the Windward Coast,

the Bight

of Benin, and Congo—Angola.

54

Table 8
Regressions of Crew Death per Day During the Voyage from Fevers
and Gastrointestinal Diseases on Crew Size, Region of Loading
in Africa, Slaves per Ton, Length of Loading, and Day of the Voyage

Gastrointestinal

Fevers

Coeff.

Variables

t—value

Coeff.

t-value

Crew Size

0.04128

0.92

—0.1373

-2.46

Bi ght of Bi afra

1.492

3.00

1. 586

2.60

Slaves per Ton

0.9057

0.80

—2.015

-1.46

-0.009305

-1.57

0.98

-0.1091

-0.44

—1.19

0.0100

0.75

—0.007240

Length of Loading

0.1116

Day of Voyage

—0.005679

(Day of Voyage)2

0.3812x104

(Day of Voyage)3

-6.640

Constant

N = 2,596

—1.79

-0.0002102

0.70

1.478

—2.68

-2 log X = 29.405

Source: Surgeons logs. Dependent variable

-1.02
0.47

-2 log A = 24.210

I if there was at least one

death from a particular cause in a day on a given ship, 0 otherwise. Significance tests for groups of coefficients:

(a) Fevers, —2 log A=15.90, d.f.=3,

significant at less than .005 (day of voyage); (b) Gastrointestinal, —2 log
A=6.74, d.f.=3, significant at .10 (day of voyage). The omitted variables are
Senegambia, Sierra. Leone, Windward Coast, Gold Coast, Bight of Benim, CongoAngola,

and Unknown.

55

Table 9

Average Intervals in Days Between Successive Deaths
of Slaves from Gastrointestinal Diseases During the Voyage

Dayof
Voyage

of First
Death

.

Deaths
Deaths

1&2

Deaths

2&3

Deaths

3&4

Deaths

4&5

Deaths

5&6

6&7

ormore

Mean

17.1

6.9

8.3

4.9

3.9

2.9

2.9

s.d.

9.9

6.3

8.6

4.7

5.2

2.0

3.6

N

26

26

Source: Surgeons' logs.

20

15

11

10

41

56

Table 10
Frequency Distribution of the Average Interval Between Successive
Slave Deaths from Gastrointestinal Diseases During the Voyage

1-2
Days

3-4
Days

Frequency

2

8

Percent

7.7

30.8

Source: Surgeons logs.

5-6
Days
3

11.5

7—8
Days

9-10

11 or
more

Days

Days

5

2

19.2

7.7

6

23.1

Total
26
100.0

57
Table 11
Frequency Distribution of Slave Deaths as a
Percent of Slaves Exported from Africa

Intervald

Frequency

0.0

4

0.2

0

0.4

1

0.6

5

0.8

7

1.0

8

1.2

6

1.4

1

1.6

6

1.8

12

2.0

4

2.2

2

2.4

4

2.6

5

2.8

7

3.0

8

3.2

1

3.4

1

3.6

0

3.8

0

4.0

0

over 4.0

10

Source: Surgeons' logs.

a. 0.0 denotes no deaths, 0.2 denotes greater than 0.0 and
less

than or equal to 0.2, etc.

58

Table 12
Sample Means of Regression Variables

Variables

Number of Slaves

Slaves,

Crew,

Slaves,

Crew,

Loading

Loading

Voyage

Voyage

301.8

131.8

24.73

27.45

Crew Size
Senegambia

.0136

.0171

.0167

.0231

Sierra Leone

.1258

.1815

.1068

.1421

Windward Coast

.0351

.0196

.0184

.0092

Gold Coast

.1633

.1983

.1432

.2022

Bight of Benim

.0900

.0760

.0943

.0851

Bight of Biafra

.0337

.0363

.0787

.1090

Congo—Angola

.1715

.1716

.2161

.2092

Unknown

.3672

.2995

.3259

.2200

Slaves per Ton

.5680

.5636

(Slaves per Ton)2

.5306

.5254

(Slaves per Ton)3

.5924

.5920
100.1

Day

,46635x107

Day3

Rainy Season

.1352

26.39
1001

18081

Day2

1.421

.1616

46192

1.442

26.17
996,2

46469

,VV V

V

V

V

.

V.

V
V

V

V

V

V

VV

V

V

V

•..,, .: ..:.....
.-:

V

.

.

-

VV

.

-V

-

-

-

/

--

/

H

-

4-'

-V-V--V-V-V

V

......
-

V

CO

--

V

V

V

/

H

-'

V

-

...

H

-

-

V.

Pi

-V

#U)

..

VV_VVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVV...VVVV...

-V

V-VVVVV VVV-VV VVV VVV

VVVVV

-

U) C)

0-

-

- - V_

V

—

V

VVV-V V-V

N

-V

-V VV

V

-

-

V

--

V

S

-

rO2

Q)

._..

...

-

'I.

V

--

V
V

.

.

.

V

- H0

V

V

V
V

-

'n a0

V

V

-

V

U)
c'J
a)
C)

—
-.

'Li

V

V

H
V

..
I

0

L(\

-V

HO
•

V

-

-

-

V

Cfl

c\J

H

Probability of a Death by Day of the Voyage for Slaves or Crew by Cause of Death

Probabi1i

.

.02.

-

.

Slaves, fevers
01

7iii\
-

005!

Crew, fevers

-

•

•

•
•

0
• Source:—

10

Surgeons

20

.

30

S

IO

50 Day of Voyage

•••

